should be prepared. It seems to me that it should be possible to define

The woman now gave Dorothy a bed to sleep in, and Toto lay down beside

CHAPTER XXIX
wanted him to live in their houses, and said they’d think it was an
And thus the native hue of resolution, like the poor cat i’ the adage,

Sheen, it seemed, had escaped destruction, but the place was silent and
I started out, after breakfast, feeling worried and shaky, and
Jim don’t, either, I reckon. But there’s one thing, anyway—Jim’s too
and one other time when the house tipped badly, she felt as if she were


L’objet qui fixe aujourd’hui l’attention de tous les États de l’Europe, tous débiteurs & créanciers, c’est la dette publique de l’Angleterre,[400] & les mesures que va prendre à ce sujet, l’Assemblée du monde la plus éclairée sur les intérêts du peuple, la plus jalouse de ses droits, & la plus libre du moins dans ses débats. C’est par l’examen de cette formidable dette, & de son influence sur la richesse de l’État & l’aisance du peuple, que l’Auteur ose commencer. Mais avant d’en expliquer le méchanisme, dont le résultat présente des idées trop contraires à l’opinion générale, l’Auteur tàche de familiariser peu à peu ses Lecteurs avec la sienne, par des Réflexions générales sur la situation actuelle de l’Angleterre; ces réflexions ne lui permettant pas de douter, que la nation ne fût en 1779, malgré la dette nationale, plus riche qu’au commencement du siècle, du quadruple, ou du double seulement, suivant le calcul de population auquel on sera le plus attaché.—On voit que l’Auteur, relativement à son plan, n’attache aucune importance à la différence des opinions sur cet article.

petrified, then turned and fled through a gate behind us into a walled
planet.
The Princess Troubetzkoy invited me one day to come and dine with her in her beautiful villa, situated a few miles from Jalta. My old admiral offered to take me in his brougham, but being a trifle afraid of him I would not consent at first, remembering his atrocious behaviour, when he arranged to see me home and drove me one night from the military club. I suddenly felt an arm steal about my waist in the dark, and that old wretch lent close over me and wanted to embrace me. “May I give you a kiss, just only one?” said that disgusting old man, looking at me as if he would like to eat me, and licking his lips in the anticipation of that pleasure. “Certainly not!” I shrieked emphatically, wrenching myself free and ordering him to keep his hands off. But he reiterated his demand saying that it could not matter, for he was so old and his kiss wouldn’t leave any trace on me, as for him, it would transport him into “Paradise.” Horrible old man! And, notwithstanding all that I accepted the admiral’s offer, hoping that he would conduct himself better in daylight; nevertheless I stepped into his carriage with a vague feeling of uneasiness. It was the most horrid ride I had ever had. At first we conversed by fits and starts, for my cavalier was as deaf as a door-post, and I had to scream very loud into his ear; it had its good points, for I could make my reflections aloud and call him a lot of bad names. Unfortunately that day the admiral was in an alarmingly amiable frame of mind and more inflammable than ever. I found his manner anything but reassuring, and began to be vaguely uneasy at the sight of the nasty face he turned towards me, looking at me with eyes that made me wish myself well out of his carriage. He sat inconveniently close beside me, and I got as far from him as the carriage allowed.
Danys also was not quite easy to manage, and was liable sometimes to storms of temper. One afternoon all the company, except myself, went out for a sail on the lake. Frau Weidemann, who had forgotten to prepare a sauce for the trout we were to have at dinner, returned home before the others with Danys, in a small row-boat. Danys was in a fury to come back so early, and made an awful scene with Frau Weidemann, rocking herself to and fro in a paroxysm of grief; she fretted, foamed and turned nasty, shouting out all her bad words, for when she loses her temper she does not measure her language. She called down curses on Frau Weidemann and sent her to Mephistopheles, and wished her at the bottom of the lake, and eaten up by the mermaids. As soon as they reached home the door of my room was dashed open and Danys flew in looking like a fury. “That’s Frau Weidemann who insisted on coming back so early for that horrid old sauce. I hate it and shall never eat it as long as I live! I wish there were no sauces at all in the world, that I do!” cried out Danys. That same day at dinner Danys was tiresome with awkward questions: “why this,” and “why that,” and Frau Weidemann found it[208] necessary to stop her. “Eat your soup,” she said, “and remember that polite little girls never interrupt people’s speeches.” “But I say,” exclaimed Danys, turning to her with blazing eyes and face aflame, “polite little girls can want to know what they do not know, can’t they?” At which her mother administered a good scolding to her and told her that if she said one word more, she would give her a damned slap. “It isn’t me that mamma curses, it is the slap!” said the bold little girl unabashed.
incident. Simultaneously two other shells burst in the air near the
and you can’t think what work it was to make the saws, and pens, and
Sudden as winking the ornery old cretur went an to smash, and fell up

A new post was offered to my husband. He had recently been nominated President of the Commission of Demarcation, and was obliged to start for Erzeroum, the capital of Anatolia. I felt a burning desire to see Sergy before his departure, and acting upon the impulse of the moment, for I am a person of prompt action, I rushed off to Kars at once, without stopping to think of the state of the roads or anything else; determined to brave all dangers, I felt adventurous enough to undertake this voyage through Asia.
terror. Every soul aboard stood at the bulwarks or on the seats of the
had a monstrous easy time, because I warn’t used to having anybody do
Dat’s de way Sollermun was gwyne to do wid de chile. Now I want to ast
the lean-to for a hammer, and told him to work till the rest of his
allow, down the river towards Halliford and Walton, going very

powerful quick he’d lose a lie every time. That’s the kind of a bug
top with brains.

Though sad hearts round him thickened,


“If ever you need us again,” she said, “come out into the field and
him; but the evening calm was unbroken. The figure of the Martian grew
down towards me, I put out my pipe and went to where I fished out the

made; look at that bed-leg sawed off with ’m, a week’s work for six

radiating from his feet in all directions. He used no Heat-Ray to

other is that you didn’t come in the dark and fetch your masks. You
could do it better than anybody else, being acquainted with all pirate
My friend has gone. Oh, what a pity!
Next day Tom stole a pewter spoon and a brass candlestick in the house,
The next moment it seemed as if she were flying through the air; and

nothing without a candle, and I dasn’t light one, of course. So I
the Woodman and the Scarecrow keeping watch.
head. It was very good poetry. This is what she wrote about a boy by

Jane Austen,
“And as he loves God he will likewise love his neighbour, and that not only externally but from his heart. The sense of the love of God will be to him instead of a thousand commandments. He will love the souls of his fellow creatures, the ignorant he will instruct by word and example, the wicked he will endeavour to convert and lead them into the path of pity; the poor and afflicted he will assist, nourish and comfort, according to the ability which God hath given him. He will take care not to offend or injure his neighbour, either in his fortune or his name. So that backbiting, envy, strife, malice will be far from him, and all this will flow from a principle of faith and hope.
brother went that day, were intensely interested, but there were no
to ride on the Lion’s back. To their great joy the trees became thinner
tried to think of something cheerful, but it warn’t no use. I felt so
pitch, but nothing to compare with this. People who have never seen
And lose the name of action.
“Yes; she will remain there till Christmas.”
They haven’t got no conveniences for it.”
when Jim found him there. Well, by night I forgot all about the snake,
it to you.”
and trying to oust me from the slit, the curate had gone back into the



“Why were you walking about the common,” I said, “instead of being
secret, and then showed them a hole in the hill, right in the thickest
We went winding in and out amongst the trees, and sometimes the vines
The next day we started back to Russia. I left La bella Napoli with regret.
 The Doctor leads Huck
On Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner’s coming up they were all pressed to go into the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and they parted on each side with the utmost politeness. Mr. Darcy handed the ladies into the carriage; and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him walking slowly towards the house.

Hot weather has set in. Swarms of mosquitos and midges fill the air.
his species, but it’s about what the facts point to. And that’s the
himself lying under a heap of charred dead men and dead horses.


always treated them with great cruelty. They kept this day as a
go; we didn’t show ourselves in daylight.

lonesome and like everybody’s dead and gone; and if a breeze fans along
Thirdly, It is the highest interest of the money proprietor, that there be the largest quantity and variety of the best products both of industry and agriculture, in order that he may be able[325] to support the value of his capital by the quantity of objects on which he will have it in his power to lay it out, and the value of his interest by the greatest possible consumption, not at the lowest price, which, supposed lasting, is as chimerical as the pretended balance, constantly favourable, but at the most equitable rate, that is to say, the highest the seller can hope for, and the lowest to which the purchaser can pretend.

The doctor he started to say something, and turns and says:


“I suppose so. I’ve never looked to see,” replied the Lion.

The microbe of globetrotting having entered us, my husband took a month’s leave and at the end of September we started on a trip to the East. I was so pleased I could kiss the whole world! We travelled by train to Sebastopol, where an omnibus, drawn by six horses, stood ready for us. There were so many passengers that I hadn’t much room for my legs and felt pins and needles in them, and a horrible disjointed feeling, as though my limbs didn’t belong to me. The road leading to Yalta was beautiful but very wild, composed of zigzags and terrifying angles; high cliffs towered on each side of the road. Half way on we drew up at a post house where we had dinner, and arrived at Yalta towards night. We found there my cousin Zoe Zaroudny, who was to travel with us to Constantinople.

“Way! Way! The Martians are coming!”
appeared on the unillumined half of the inner planet, and almost
Danys, with tears coursing down her cheeks, implored Hermann to ask forgiveness, but tears and prayers were of no avail; he stuck firmly to his chair, his nose in his picture book, dangling his feet backwards and forwards, and would not apologise.
“When my eyes were opened to his real character, oh! had I known what I ought, what I dared to do! But I knew not—I was afraid of doing too much. Wretched, wretched mistake!”
“Why don’t you run and jump?” asked the Scarecrow.

A. Our only business is to mind our own interest; besides, the State may easily procure, by means of a land-tax, what it may lose by the clandestine exportation: and we are so far from expecting that Smuggling should turn out to our advantage, that we petition it may be made a capital offence, and prohibited under pain of mutilation, the galleys, or at least the entire ruin of the smuggler.

Sergy returned on board towards night, accompanied by a whole flotilla of boats carrying a number of officers with their families and a military band. The quay was decorated with different coloured lanterns. We had an impromptu dance on board, and weighed anchor after midnight.
getting run over and catched I crawled into a stateroom on the upper
They were within twenty yards of each other; and so abrupt was his appearance, that it was impossible to avoid his sight. Their eyes instantly met, and the cheeks of each were overspread with the deepest blush. He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immovable from surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party, and spoke to Elizabeth,{309} if not in terms of perfect composure, at least of perfect civility.
the wall and kept mighty still, though quivery; and I wondered what

Hamlet’s Immortal Soliloquy!!

about a runaway nigger, don’t forget to remember that _you_ don’t know
As Dorothy gazed upon this in wonder and fear, the eyes turned slowly
wooden one with a buckskin string, but a brass knob to turn, the same


 On the Raft


bit in the world. You _must_ stay. It’s a long, dusty three mile, and
“I don’t want nothing, sir. I only want to go along by, but the dogs
July 25th.—The colour of the ocean has changed from dark grey to a very bright blue. After dull grey days the sky has suddenly brightened up, and a glittering sun has succeeded the dense haze which enveloped the sea this morning. After ten days of wind, tossing and tempest, all at once an absolute calm. Flying fishes are gamboling all around our ship and two fountains are spouted by whales close by.
It was nearly eleven when I started to return. The night was

I _would_ come; but I lay I’d make that man climb the highest tree
“Are you going?” they asked, in surprise.
“His manners are very different from his cousin’s.”

but to a big staple drove into the bottom log, and chained his hands,

August 6th.—After coffee, we drove to the pier where a steam-launch, with an officer and ten sailors sent by the “Mandchour,” carried us off to the ship. We were received by the commander and all the officers in full dress assembled upon the quarter-deck. One hundred and sixty sailors were ranged along the deck, on which stood fourteen cannons. After the commander had presented all his officers to my husband, we were shown to our cabins. A tent made of flags belonging to different nations was set up aft in which we were to have dinner, but the weather changing suddenly, a black cloud appeared on the horizon, and soon a violent storm burst out. The sailors put on their water-proofs and began to execute all kind of manœuvres with the masts and riggings. We left Kobe only at two o’clock of the morning. Just at the starting there had been a rather bad moment. Suddenly there was a shrill whistle followed by a tremendous crash. Mercy on me! What can it be? There was a moment of panic, and everybody rushed on deck. It appeared to be the steersman who did not make out the desperate shouts of the commander of the ship giving him the signal to back, and so he continued to advance, knocking against a Japanese cruiser, on which they had already began to beat the alarm. It was a nice beginning for the voyage! Happily our boat had not been seriously injured, and after the slight damage was repaired, we entered the Inland Sea.

disjointedly of eating and of vague impossible plans of escape.
thick that the trees off a little ways looked dim and spider-webby; and
Si la possibilité d’une balance de commerce toujours favorable, n’est pas aussi douteuse que la nécessité d’une banqueroute, & l’avantage d’un remboursement.
and coming slowly up to the Woodman it said, in a squeaky little voice:
ankle deep as much as another half-mile. We come to a little flat piece
little shanty that hadn’t been lived in for a long time, and I wondered
On July 14th, the day of the Fête Nationale, the usual review of the troops took place at Longchamps. I was ill in bed that day and could not accompany my husband to the review. Military bands played in the streets which were full of noise, and from everywhere shouts of “Vive Boulanger!” were heard. Tables were set in the streets and[280] squares, laid out with dishes for the populace. I saw from my window an Alsacian procession pass by. All the members, dressed in black, were directing their steps towards the Statue of “Strasbourg,” in order to adorn it with mourning wreaths. We witnessed on the Place de la Concorde the arrival of the Shah of Persia. Soldiers formed a long line on his way. The Shah drove in a victoria with President Carnot sitting by his side, and was escorted by a squadron of cuirassiers. The General Saussier followed galloping alongside the victoria, and twelve carriages with the suite of the Shah and newspaper correspondents followed. That night there was a great rush to the Exhibition to see the Shah, who was to make his appearance on the balcony of the “Dome Central.” We were carried ahead with the rush, with more than one escape of being crushed to atoms. We raced for chairs, and Sergy got one for me to stand on. A row of red velvet fautueils were placed for the Shah and his suite on the balcony, upon which the Shah appeared arrayed in a beautiful costume all worked with gold and bedecked with diamonds, accompanied by President Carnot with his spouse and a numerous suite. From the exhibition the Shah was driven to the Eiffel Tower. He had gone up only as far as the first floor, and there was no persuading him to ascend higher up. We have been braver than the Shah, as it appears!
against any object they choose, by means of a polished parabolic mirror

them forever.”

“We must protect him ourselves if he is in danger,” replied the Tin

As a matter of fact there seems good grounds for believing that the Rajah had in his later days so far forgotten the counsels of his venerable friend as to relax his kindly interest in the work he left behind. There is a note in Dr. Brown’s “History of Missions,” vol. i. p. 162, to this effect:
August 1st.—We left Vladivostock by an express train on a moonless night. Two rows of Chinese coolies, each holding a Japanese lantern over his head, lined our way from the military club to the railway station. Many officers and engineers accompanied us as far as Iman, where we shall take the boat to Khabarovsk.

all over. That game’s up. We’re beat.”
old last year’s camp, and then clumb a tree.
stop to think. He said she would slap down a line, and if she couldn’t
Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was the case, and with equal sincerity could add, that she firmly believed and rejoiced in his domestic comforts. She was not sorry, however, to have the recital of them interrupted by the entrance of the lady from whom they sprang. Poor Charlotte! it was melancholy to leave her to such society! But she had chosen it with her eyes open; and though evidently regretting that her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for compassion. Her home and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry, and all their dependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms.

Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great politeness by the whole family. Mr. Bennet indeed said little; but the ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in need of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was a tall, heavy-looking young man of five-and-twenty. His air was grave and stately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been long seated before he complimented Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of daughters, said he had heard much of their beauty, but that, in this instance, fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did not doubt her seeing them all in due time well disposed of in marriage. This gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Mrs. Bennet, who quarrelled with no compliments, answered most readily,—
Above is shown the ark of the covenant, and the whole is a most appropriate and artistic piece of work. The inscription was written by Mr. Huddleston, then one of the directors of the Company, and a very intimate and valued friend of Schwartz, and is in these words:

set down. It was Packard. Then Bill _he_ come out and got in. Packard
acknowledging ’t I’m right down scared. But there’s no hope that he’s
“Our pride is at the foundation of all our sins. True humility is the root from which grows every virtue. There is not an unhappy man on earth but he owes his misery to his pride. Pride hinders us from hearkening to the good advice which our friends offer us. Pride makes us deaf, but true humility enables us to make the best use of friendly instructions. Our pride makes us indolent so that we are loth to exert ourselves. We grow angry with those who intend to stir us up, as a sleeper becomes angry with the man who awakes him.”
once more.”


“I am persuaded that those who truly love the Cross of Christ esteem a life thus passed in affliction to be a happy one and regard an avoidance of the cross or an exemption from it as a kind of death. For what death is more bitter than to live without Christ when once we have tasted His preciousness; or to desert Him, that we may follow our own desires? Believe me, no cross is to be compared with this cross. On the other hand, how happy it is to live in dying daily and in mortifying our own will and in seeking not our own but the things that are Jesus Christ’s! I trust that through the merits and prayers of our holy mother the Church, in which is my chief confidence, and through the prayers of its living members, to which you belong, our Lord Jesus Christ will sow the Gospel seed in this heathen land by my instrumentality, though a worthless servant. Especially if He shall be pleased to use such a poor creature as I am for so great a work it may shame the men who are born for great achievements, and it may stir up the courage of the timid, when forsooth they see me, who am but dust and ashes and the[Pg 14] most abject of men, a visible witness of the great want of labourers.”[3]
 Miss Watson’s Lecture
Well, they held the auction in the public square, along towards the end
a humbug.”


blethers out:
that out for yourself.”
IN FIRST TOUCH WITH TANJORE.

“Doesn’t anyone else know you’re a humbug?” asked Dorothy.

dismal. So now the frauds reckoned they was out of danger, and they
The results of an anatomical examination of the Martians, so far as the

We returned to the hotel thoroughly done up. After dinner, as we took our seats in the train carrying us back to Biarritz, an elderly Spaniard came in, cigar in mouth. He sat down and sent a dense cloud of horrid smoke right into our faces, making mamma feel faint. Noticing that, Mr. Delbruck requested our unpleasant fellow-traveller to stop smoking, but he only sneered, puffing away at his cigar.
To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence: Elizabeth had been at Netherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked; and Miss Bingley was uncivil to her and more teasing than usual to himself. He wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration should now escape him—nothing that could elevate her with the hope of influencing his felicity; sensible that, if such an idea had been suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight in confirming or crushing it. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke ten words to her through the whole of Saturday: and though they were at one time left by themselves for half an hour, he adhered most conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.{77}
“Lay your hand on this book and say it.”
While the Woodman was making a ladder from wood which he found in the
routine of working, eating, drinking, sleeping, went on as it had done
like a spring upon the road.
On arriving at Milan I went straight to the Hôtel de la Ville. The manager came up to me and made me welcome, and told me that my husband was expected in the afternoon. I was shown into the same apartments we had before, which made me feel quite at home. I grew awfully impatient waiting; I could not keep still and began to walk restlessly up and down the room, counting the minutes when Sergy would arrive, and every little while looking at the clock. At last I heard hurried steps in the corridor, and in an instant Sergy held me in his arms.
cussed, and kept on chasing me up. Once when I turned short and dodged

Then here comes the ferry-boat; so I shoved for the middle of the river

down. When he got done he couldn’t no way make up his mind which one
“The true God must possess Divine perfections, such as supreme wisdom, omniscience, omnipotence, holiness, justice. Now nothing of this is found in your divinities, but by your own records, ignorance, impurity, cruelty. How can it be said of such that they are gods? You have a proverb that where sin is, there is no excellence. Now you acknowledge the practices ascribed to your gods to be sinful; consequently by your own confession they are unworthy of the name.”

were all thirsty, weary, and footsore. And amid the various cries one
On reaching the Hotel, perched on the top of the mountain, we entered a large dining-room filled with a cosmopolitan crowd of tourists, sitting at a long table-d’hôte, who have assembled here to survey the sunset from the mountain top. It was delightful to get into the hall with the thick fragrant warmth of a fire of monster logs burning in a huge chimney-piece, reaching half way to the ceiling, which could easily contain a whole tree. We sat down at table and were soon thoroughly warmed by the steaming soup. There was a loud animated talk, in a curious mixture of languages; you might hear every tongue of Europe: there were Americans, Germans, Englishmen and a large number of countrymen of ours. Directly after dinner, the whole company climbed up the last bit of rough land which led to the top of the summit of the “Rigi-Kulm.” I found it tiresome work ploughing our way slowly towards it, but the view from there was more[177] than a compensation; we seemed to look into fairy-land, and though I was by no means a sentimental person, I uttered a cry of delight in looking forth on the wide expanse of hill, forest and plain that lay beneath us. Suddenly a cloud rolled by beneath our feet, completely obliterating the landscape. Sometimes the mists would part and disclose glorious views, then again they would form an impenetrable curtain. The keen mountain air was very fresh on the windy summit, and everyone was shivering and jumping about to keep warm. After having admired this spectacle, we returned back to the station in order to make the ascent of another peak of the “Rigi,” the “Schneideck.” We plunged again into an ocean of clouds, nearly at hand’s reach.
kick, within a few inches of exposure.
beam of intense heat.” Masked batteries, chiefly of field guns, had
how to talk French?”
flatfooted and said it was scandalous to separate the mother and the


But that the fear of something after death
started to tell me the truth; but when he stopped that way, and begun





On the twelfth day my throat was so painful that, taking the chance of
So they sat down to consider what they should do, and after serious



so much, for the fall would not hurt me at all.”
At length, every idea seemed to fail him; and after standing a few moments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected himself, and took leave.
resk his life for a texas and a pilot-house such a night as this, when
Across the void it was sent, while the few men left in the ray machine awaited the coming of the mighty battle fleet that would soon be ready. Around them glowed a pale, scarcely visible field of light. Defenseless they seemed as they lived and slept in the car swinging in its orbit about the blazing sun, but many of the Atomic Giants found the mighty strength that lay hidden in that thin wall of scarcely visible vibration. And constantly the men were observing the planets and communicating the data to the leaders on Earth and Venus.

and fast at the joy of meeting her old friend again, and these tears
and vanished in the deep blue night. All the rest of London was black.
Miss Sophia was to meet Harney somewheres at half-past two and run off;
be helped.”
We are going to travel now by water as far as Khabarovsk. A handsome steam-yacht named “Ingoda” was lying alongside the quay, ordered for our use—a vessel gaily tricked out with flags, with my husband’s standard floating on the overdeck. The yacht was apparently quite new, all white and gold, with steam-heating and electricity. We were to travel luxuriously on that dainty thing. I have a charming cabin with real windows and bed, not a hard shelf, but quite a wide, springy bed, and blue silk tapestries on the walls; the covering of the furniture and the curtains are of the same stuff. I have a toilet-table adorned with white muslin curtains tied with blue ribbon. The cookery on board is excellent; the head-cook is a Chinaman. The captain provided soft-moving Chinese waiters and a Russian maid for me.
The king kind of ruffles up, and says:

squeeze in, d’ you hear?”

showed the distant woods towards Addlestone. I felt a tug at the reins.

waited till he come along. I says “Hold on!” and it stopped alongside,
between the villas that guarded it at its confluence with the high




seemed greatly excited. I heard a peculiar humming sound from the pit.

was no flash, no smoke, simply that loaded detonation.
A. The reason is, no doubt, that foreign importation has been too freely permitted; a criminal, a traiterous indulgence which we are incessantly at work to remove: and it is on that account, that besides the absolute prohibition we now pray for in regard to such and such articles, we also petition that the duties be laid double and treble on all other foreign articles which are not yet totally prohibited.
September 7th.—Great animation in town to-day on account[128] of the arrival of Moussa-Pasha, the chief of the Turkish army in Asia-Minor. The Russian commander of the citadel with a squadron of dragoons and a military band has gone out to meet him as far as the Postern of Kars. At about ten o’clock in the morning a Guard of Honour was placed before the house of the Mouchir. We mounted on the roof of the Turkish military school, from whence we could see the road leading to Trebizond. We waited a long time; at last sounds of music were heard from afar, a cloud of dust arose, and we discerned long files of cavalry. Our dragoons rode ahead, bringing in the Turkish commander mounted on a splendid horse and surrounded by a numerous suite. The Turkish troops brought up the rear. As soon as Moussa-Pasha perceived my husband he waved his hand to him exclaiming in perfect Russian: “Your Excellency, how happy I am to see you!” Moussa-Pasha is an aborigine of the Caucasus; he has been educated in St. Petersburg in the Corps des Pages, and has served a long time in the Russian army. It is only since he rose to the rank of general, that he turned traitor and went back to the Turkish government.
herself. I heard a dog howling, and that familiar sound it was that
sight down the lane, where the third man lay insensible.

her face afire like sunset, and says:
But Jane could think with certainty on only one point,—that Mr. Bingley, if he had been imposed on,{110} would have much to suffer when the affair became public.

[9]I must confess I wish also that a little time could be spared to examine whether all kinds of taxes, already devised or to be devised, already established or to be established, on any other object but consumption, whatever may be the appellation with which they may be honoured or disgraced, from the land-tax down to the shop-tax, are not in fact so many poll-taxes:—that is to say, I wish they would be pleased to examine, whether that man whose hand is obliged, under pain of distress, to give at such a day such a sum, can, upon due recollection, disguise to himself that his head is as really taxed, as if the subsidy to be paid was called a poll-tax, or la taille. If I am not mistaken, the case is this: the shopkeeper feels that he ought not to pay a tax upon his shop; he pays it and cries out like an eagle; he is right: the land proprietor does not know that he ought not to pay a tax upon his land; he pays it and says nothing; he is wrong: the Minister wanted money; he thought that nothing remained untaxed; he suspected that the land proprietor would at last cry out as loud as the shopkeeper, if the land-tax was increased; he taxed the shops: a shop, in truth, does not appear (very evidently at least) more sacred than the land upon which it is erected.—It is not at all impossible, but that in some few years all these misunderstandings will be talked of with as little reverence as witchcraft; but till then, the good mother Nature must work underhand, as she ever did, and probably ever will.
“Look sharp, now; the current sets in the closest here, and maybe he’s
“And men take care that they should.”
shape and efficiency, guttering, softening, running at last in that
O Wounded Head! Must Thou
restraint as a silly woman. He would weep for hours together, and I

assurance and courage he assumed, completely dominated my mind. I
spos’n it takes him three or four days? What are we going to do?—lay
was very dear to him, and mentioned often in his letters; and so he
“Oh, come to the mourners’ bench! come, black with sin! (_amen!_) come,
the time. S’pose he _don’t_ do nothing with it? ain’t it there in his
and said they wouldn’t land us. But the king was ca’m. He says:


“We better camp here if we can find a good place; the horses is about
“Protested


At this the Queen of the Mice stuck her head out from underneath a
silent common, the impulse of my flight, the starting flames, were as

On the day of our village festival there was a fair on the square opposite the church. I threw sugar-candy and handfuls of pennies to the peasant children.
last that if he didn’t quit using around there she would make trouble

minute longer, but I set my teeth hard and got ready to try. Just then
I think also that it is useless to examine whether the colonies can add any thing to the real power of a nation, since, in order to be convinced of the very reverse, it is enough to observe, that if 2 or 300 ships mounting from 10 to 120 guns be required, in order to protect effectually an extent of between 1500 and 2000 leagues of colonial coasts, distant 1000, 1500, nay 4000 leagues from the mother-country, the 100,000 men employed in time of war, on those floating citadels, are always furnished by the Metropolis, and do not in any manner exempt her either from erecting those permanent citadels which must be scattered along the coasts of the mother-country, or from providing the number of men necessary to defend them in case of an invasion. In this point of view, the colonies would therefore rather diminish than increase the national power.

called it, and away they went, the two sons up the river to Memphis,



Mrs. Unterberger is awfully nice to me, and full of kind attentions. She proposes drives and boat-parties, but it was only Mme. Beurgier who profited by them. She went one day to lay a wreath of flowers on the tomb of a young officer of the French navy, who had been murdered recently in the outskirts of Vladivostock by a convict, who profited by his uniform to run away.

“Why should I do this?” demanded the Beast.
heaps like fine coal that she stamped her foot and tore her hair and
I turned the blade back and struck him with the butt. He went headlong
kind as he could be—you could feel that, you know, and so you had


wood-yards and the sawmill.

of people with a quick-firing gun, so the story ran. The telegram
companion in this close and sickly darkness was a man insane.
three policemen too, one of whom was mounted, doing their best, under
“Do you think Oz could give me courage?” asked the Cowardly Lion.
leader-writer expanded very comfortingly.
towards Chertsey, and struck the town.
to find the place. But by-and-by, sure enough, I catched a glimpse of
and beeswax and buttons and thread and all such truck in it, and a

CHAPTER LVII.
“You are rather disposed to call his interference officious?”
“It was Dorothy,” said the Lion gravely.

I slept badly that night and got up very early. We had luncheon in the restaurant-car about a quarter of a mile away from us in the train. Pretty girls waited on us while in continual chorus came from them: “Steaks, chops, ham and eggs, pie or pudding!” After the repast the waitresses distributed small bouquets to the lady passengers, and dining-car advertisements to the gentlemen.

That night another invisible missile started on its way to the earth


around, he squeezed in late ones, he opened up passageways, and done it
So some respectable dodo in the Mauritius might have lorded it in his
“Edw. Gardiner.”
to distribute themselves at equal distances along a curved line between

sunlight I saw the Martian, in its Briareus of a handling-machine,
“What are your commands?” inquired the King of the Monkeys, bowing low.
She took a little basket and filled it with bread from the cupboard,
beside me, heedless of my thirst, and pointing to the fire and smoke
“M—Mary Williams.”

“Yes, it is—and _I_ could a had it if I’d been big enough; I see him
Without the least intention of playing the eavesdropper I chanced to overhear a word or two spoken plainly on my account by Mrs. G—, which hadn’t been intended to reach[210] my ears. I had not the temperament to turn “the other cheek” at any insult; I could take revenge, too. I tried to hold my tongue when I sat next to Mrs. G— at table, and had to close my lips tight—tight, or else a bad word would jump out, but the day would surely come when we should have a regular fight. We were both in a mood when the merest spark would cause explosion, and the spark came! At dinner one day Mrs. G—, in the presence of her children, boasted shamelessly that she could do very well without her husband, who, luckily for her, was retained by business in America, whilst she was enjoying herself across the ocean. Her vicious morality was so different from my own that I found it necessary to give her to understand that she was a heartless and undutiful woman, and losing all control over myself at such cynicism, I gave her a bit of my mind, and was obliged to tell her some truths which did not please her, after which Mrs. G—, who has a cutting tongue, made spiteful allusions concerning Signor Gorgolli, and asked if I ever practised what I preached, and added that I had better be careful of myself. But I was not a bit baffled by the sharp prick of her poisonous arrow, and not a bit afraid of her back-handed little stabs. I knew how to answer her and hold my ground, and got the better of her after all, having taught her not to interfere with me.

It’s such great news that Sergy was bringing to me! He has received a leave of eight months. We are going to spend the winter at St. Petersburg and make a trip abroad in the summer. I felt nearly crazy with joy! I am so happy to cast off the trammels of a Governor General’s wife and live for some time as a simple mortal. I should have liked to say good-bye to Khabarovsk for ever!
prostrate in the bottoms of their conveyances. The horses’ bits were

“It is; I’ve thought it out. Very well, then—next; at present we’re
“Why should I do this for you?” asked the Lady.
head to her in a friendly way. Then she climbed down from the fence and
to find my wife, that my heart ached for her and the world of men, but
come across yet. Buck and his ma and all of them smoked cob pipes,
One day Tiger was more than ever demonstrative and nearly upset me with his rough gambols, jumping to my face in fierce joy and putting a cool nose against my cheek. Just at that moment we met an old woman carrying a full pitcher of milk, much to my quadruped’s pleasure, and Tiger, his big mouth wide open and his pink tongue hungerly out, bounded towards her with loud barks of delight. The poor woman, frightened to death by Tiger’s formidable aspect, gave a violent start and dropped her jug, spilling her milk all over the pavement; Tiger licked it up with grunts of satisfaction. After having quenched his thirst, my agreeably animated dog bounced around the terrified granny, frolicking round her with an uncouth dance and yapping at her in ecstasy; he put his huge paws over her breast and insisted upon licking her face, wagging his tail conciliatingly. When visitors entered our saloon and we were not there, Tiger usually stretched himself full length across the threshold so that our visitors could not leave the room without striding over him; Tiger did not deign to budge and allow them to pass, but set up a most ominous growl like distant thunder, and when he was approached, he just opened his eyes and continued to growl until we came in and liberated the affrightened prisoners.
First, the trifling difference which must result from the impossibility of a thorough good understanding between the interested parties, together with the intention, not very liberal, but natural enough to each of them, of gaining more than they can lose.

it went sliding off through the grass and flowers, and I after it,
then I knowed for certain I wished I was dead—for that _is_ the
and then struck out a quarter of a mile or more towards the middle of
[94]

The atmosphere of the earth, we now know, contains far more oxygen or
candle. We shut the cellar door behind us, and when they found the bag
Slowly I thrust myself out through the red weed, and stood upon the
“And I want him to send me back to Kansas,” said Dorothy.
I looked about again. To the northward, too, no Martian was visible.

But by-and-by pap got too handy with his hick’ry, and I couldn’t stand


would go to the nigger cabins and drop one, private, in Jim’s
Says I to myself, and this is _another_ one that I’m letting him rob
“Why, _de_ fog!—de fog dat’s been aroun’ all night. En didn’t you

“All right. I don’t mind; but I say it’s a fool way, anyhow. Say, do we
thoughtless and excitable souls to whom a crowd is always an occasion
“Say it, Jim.”
He looked kind of humble, and says:
wolves lying dead, and the strangers still traveling through her


under his arm he made a grab and got me by the jacket between my



The State is composed of three orders of men, all equally precious, and whose rights are equally sacred; viz. the landed capitalist, the capitalist of industry, and the proprietor of money, whether he be considered as a capitalist in this last respect, or only as a dependent on either of the two former capitalists. Each of these three orders has its interest.

As soon as the pasture grounds were covered with grass, bands of brigands, belonging to the Kurdish tribe, began to appear. The Ottoman administration has tolerated the exploits of these highwaymen till now, especially the deeds of a well known bandit named Mirza-Bek, who carried in his expeditions his favourite wife, a young Circassian dressed in masculine clothes; but we cannot maintain the same indifference to be sure! Last night there was a robbery connected with murder in a village near Erzeroum; the villains were immediately[115] found and arrested. I saw them this morning brought up to my husband, under a great escort. Oh, how awful-looking they were! All in rags, with dark vicious faces and rapacious glances resembling those of the hyena who dreads daylight and human beings. We have been warned that a band of Kurds are going to assault the cloister of “Kermirvank”; my husband has sent a dozen Cossacks there and the would-be brave highwaymen hastened to run away. It seems that the Kurds venture upon robbery-expeditions only when they are sure of their grounds.
running up to her. Among them was the Queen herself, who asked, in her
“All right—that’s mighty good; they won’t find me, and they’ll think
that rubbage. Cuss you, I can see now why you was so anxious to make up
The Greek Cathedral was erected in honour of St. George the Conqueror. There is a throne in the middle for the Archbishop who said mass, arrayed in his sacerdotal vestments; he wore on his head an immense mitre adorned with the Byzantine Eagle. The prayers were sung in Greek with a very nasal sound. Our Russian officers have made a present to this church of the image of St. George with the following dedication: “In commemoration of the sojourn of the Russian army in Erzeroum in the year 1878.”

contemplative, dark man, smoking a pipe.
The king snarls around on him and says:
It would seem that these giants spent the earlier part of the afternoon
time.”
a rabbit might feel returning to his burrow and suddenly confronted by



They were, I now saw, the most unearthly creatures it is possible to
“But I ain’t going to make no complaint. Any way that suits you suits

abruptly. I remembered my inability to fix my mind that morning,
“Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I expected you to stay two months. I told Mrs. Collins so before you came. There can be no occasion for{263} your going so soon. Mrs. Bennet could certainly spare you for another fortnight.”
[347]
regular ripper and washed me overboard. It most killed Jim a-laughing.
After climbing down from the china wall the travelers found themselves
and eat it; and he made me go and give the niggers a dime without
is it?”





Throughout the year 1794 many letters full of fatherly advice were written by Schwartz from Tanjore to his young ward Serfogee at Madras. He counsels him to look to nothing less than the Almighty power of[Pg 154] God as a sufficient help in the perilous paths of his youth. “Your welfare, believe me,” he writes, “depends entirely upon God who governs all things. If He is your God and Father all will be well. But that He may be your protector and benefactor, you must honour, adore and fear Him. If you refuse to acknowledge Him, it is but just if He forsakes you. You have read the declaration of God concerning Israel, ‘O that they would fear me and keep my commandments, it should be well with them.’ But Israel disobeyed often and they were severely punished. It is therefore left to your choice, whether you will honour the true God or the idols. May God direct us to choose Him for our God and supreme good!”
Then they told him of the field mice, and how they had generously saved
Shepherdsons and Grangerfords used the same steamboat landing, which
night when I hear a _plunkety-plunk, plunkety-plunk_, and says to
Jim he grumbled a little, but give in. He said we mustn’t talk any more
Then Oz got into the basket and said to all the people in a loud voice:
But during these centuries Islam was advancing, its crescent banners red with blood, its eyes fired with hatred, trampling in its onrush the Christian Churches and all other religions and effacing only too effectively the fruit of the work of evangelizing Asia. The seats of learning, the sacred temples of the Christian faith, the priceless archives rich in the thought and piety of the age, the seven Churches of the Apocalyptic messages, all were overthrown as the Crescent supplanted the Cross. The tide of conquest not only overran the holy places of the East, but flung itself against the ramparts of European Christianity. The peril of the age woke the chivalry of the Crusaders, and the flower of Knighthood perished in trying to wrest the sacred spots of Palestine from the Infidel.
In fine, Let it be examined whether there is any thing great, courageous, just, and fair, that may not be expected from the French nation, when she shall be admitted to the honour of being heard,—or when they will be kind enough to convince her.—A King of France, with the trifling help of his provincial administrations, may do, and play with every thing: a King of France is truly a despot; not from that absurd right of giving his will for reason, but from that principle which is congenial to the French, that the People and the King are but one, have but one interest, and have nothing[241] to fear but the ignorance of a Minister, conscious of his inability, without the least thought of the resources he has at hand in such a case, without principles to guard him against committing those injuries which seem to him unavoidable, in order to conceal the errors which he has been, or fears to be, guilty of; a Minister, in fine, whose insignificant little self, wrests from the King and People, the fruit of that identity which forms the acknowledged essence of the French constitution.
chickens was—and all that kind of rot, the way women always do for to
And all the clouds that lowered o’er our housetops,
“You and your brother please write a line or two and sign your names.”
stopped talking I looked up, and she was looking at me pretty curious
house about the time you ought to; and I’ll go towards town a piece,

lightning was squirting around low down in the sky, and the leaves was
After dinner we arranged an expedition to the monastery of Loussavoritch-Vank, situated about six miles outside the town. This monastery, built on the top of a high mountain and surrounded by a stone-wall, resembles a castle of the middle-ages. Three sides of this cloister are perpendicular and the fourth one, by which one mounts, is planted with a row of fine trees, an agreeable contrast to the rocky scenery all around. Two monks composed the whole establishment; one of them, at our approach, began to toll a bell, whilst his companion came out to meet us, holding a big silver cross in his hand. He led us into the church, where he performed a Te Deum and made us descend afterwards into a dark dungeon where, according to a legend, Saint-Gregory, the propagator of Christianity, had taken refuge during the persecution of the Christians. We also visited an antique underground church, making our way to it by narrow dark passages. I drew a long breath when I found myself in the[119] open air once more. On our way home we were overtaken by a terrible thunderstorm, which didn’t last long, but was followed by a dreadful shower of rain. We put on mackintoshes with caps, which made us look like highwaymen, but we all got a thorough drenching, nevertheless.
In the small number of disadvantageous balances, the necessity of which is so grievous to England, I distinguish that with Russia, which, in the course of the ten years above mentioned, amounts upon an average to 825,212l. annually. This, in fact, is more than enough to swallow up the 6 or 700,000l. of the favourable balance, during the same period, against Spain and Portugal, the only sources almost of the precious metals; luckily the expence of Russia in gold and silver is ascertained, as it is every where else, first, by the quantity of coin in circulation,[112] a quantity always proportioned to the price, as well as to the number of objects to be circulated; and, secondly, by the degree of ease, riches, and pomp, which the generality of private faculties can admit of, in the articles of furniture, plate, and dress: The introducing of gold and silver, above the quantity necessary to answer those various purposes, would, as the case is every where else, prove entirely useless; for it can hardly be imagined, that so wise a Princess as the Sovereign who now holds the sceptre of Russia, should think of hoarding up, before her 20,000,000 of subjects be as rich, that is, do produce and consume as much as a similar population might produce and consume in France or in England: Now, to hoard up would be the infallible means to prevent it. Let us now suppose, that the annual importation of bullion necessary for the circulation in Russia, amounts to one half, or even to an equality of what is wanted by England for the same object:—It is probable that England contributes thereto no more than her proportion, as the other maritime States, who, like her, are obliged to provide themselves in Russia; and, consequently, the disadvantageous balance of England with Russia, can no more demonstrate that the former exports there annually 825,212l. than the balance in her[113] favour against Flanders, clearly proved by the accounts of Sir Charles Whitworth, can demonstrate that the above province is by her stripped of 521,201l. annually.

CHAPTER IX.

CHAPTER XXXI.

Under what Point of View Premiums and other Encouragements of Exportation may be considered.
I’m sorry I had to put a patch on your breast, but it really couldn’t
Elizabeth was excessively disappointed: she had set her heart on seeing the Lakes; and still thought there might have been time enough. But it was her business to be satisfied—and certainly her temper to be happy; and all was soon right again.
wonderful rooms in the world. The Tin Woodman lay down on his bed from

enough for a dog to get through. I couldn’t get up the chimbly; it was
distance over the hedge tops. A thin hail was now beginning, and as it
stiff and tall against the evening sky. At first I scarcely noticed the
“To wash my face clean after the dust of the road, and to drink, so the
Thirdly, and in fine, the far more considerable difference which must be produced, especially in England, by another kind of taxation, of which I shall speak hereafter.
He took up a little blue and yaller picture of some cows and a boy, and
powerful astonished, and says:
We saw in the blackened distance a group of three people running down a
startling vision of unfamiliar things. I had expected to see Sheen in
his voice—I prayed him not to. He perceived a hold on me—he threatened
eating her bread.


Cependant il ne faut pas être trop sévère;—le Lecteur a-t-il été seulement amusé par le coin du Tableau jusques-là découvert?—qu’il se prête à la petite manie de l’Auteur; on renonceroit à montrer des curiosités, si l’on n’avoit[404] pas la liberté de lever le rideau à sa fantaisie, si l’on n’avoit pas le droit de ne montrer, à chaque annonce, que la petite partie de la curiosité, sur laquelle on veut fixer pour le moment les yeux du Spectateur:—
here, I’ll tell you what to do. Don’t you try to land by yourself, or
worked for three days and four nights, hammering and twisting and
8thly,


stood by the duke at the door, and I see that every man that went in
seventeen mile below the village—no, indeedy, we would be in that same
gripped a young pine tree) swinging and rattling about its strange
The following morning we ran down by train to the Crystal Palace where a great festival was given by the Temperance Society. This palace is used now for popular meetings, concerts, theatres, flower-shows, bazaars, etc. We entered a hall of enormous proportions where we found a monster musical gathering of some five thousand singers. A room was shown to us especially assigned for strayed children who had lost themselves in the crowd. In our presence a policeman brought there a small boy who was shouting desperately, “I want mother!” There was great animation in the extensive grounds all round. A dinner gratis was offered to the visitors, who belonged for the most part to the middle classes. They ate their meal under the trees, and the grass was all strewn with egg-shells and scraps of paper. As drink only beer was allowed. Two military schools, with their bands at the head, defiled before us.
“I thought you asked Dorothy to kill the Witch,” said the Scarecrow, in


began to move, and warned the waiting batteries about Ditton and Esher.
Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards a table where a few books were lying. He immediately offered to fetch her others; all that his library afforded.
He was silent.
to decide on any of them yet. Said we’d got to post Jim first.
didn’t write them” (the king and the duke looked sold and foolish, I

“to assure you in the most animated language.”

Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by Miss Bingley, and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without calling her attention.{329} This observation would not have prevented her from trying to talk to the latter, had they not been seated at an inconvenient distance; but she was not sorry to be spared the necessity of saying much: her own thoughts were employing her. She expected every moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room: she wished, she feared, that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whether she wished or feared it most, she could scarcely determine. After sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour, without hearing Miss Bingley’s voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold inquiry after the health of her family. She answered with equal indifference and brevity, and the other said no more.
down, and we opened the door and went in, and shut it, and struck a
August 13th.—I arrived this morning at Krasnovodsk where I had to wait for the steamboat until to-morrow. My car was rolled on to the pier and two sentinels were placed at its door. There is stillness all around, I only heard the wash of the waves on the shore, some steps distant. It made me feel drowsy, and I soon fell asleep, lulled by the whispering ripple of the sea.
got allycumpain and rubbed on the places, and was pretty near all right

“It did. Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. His diffidence had prevented his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case, but his reliance on mine made everything easy. I was obliged to confess one thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended him. I could not allow myself to conceal that your sister had been in town three months last winter, that I had known it, and purposely kept it from him. He was angry. But his anger, I am persuaded, lasted no longer than he remained in any doubt of your sister’s sentiments. He has heartily forgiven me now.”

Thatcher knowed how to do it. And he said people allowed there’d be
on the ground where the light sifted down through the leaves, and the


After this she stood upon both feet and cried in a loud voice:

But if it clearly appear, that the execution of the refunding plan would prove equally pernicious in its immediate tendency, both to the creditors who would be compelled to accept of it, and those at whose expence it must be effected, what then might be the case, if the interest of that debt, which ingrosses so much the public attention, being paid by all, were, in fact, paid by no one, but for so long a time as nature, assisted by all the calculations of individuals, may require to correct the errors of those upon a larger scale, made by administration, when administration is capable of making any.
brown study; and pretty soon jumps up, and says:
the king and the duke had their legs sprawled around so there warn’t no
bein’ sot free, en one er de boys wuz to git shot, would he say, ‘Go on
sweat about every little thing that warn’t yard-stick straight; so she
of the first things he did was to paint my ears, so that I heard what




“How, then, are we to find her?” inquired the girl.
One day, having to change some Russian coins, we entered an American bank, where I made, as it appears, a great impression upon one of the clerks, a very good-looking chap, with light hair and brilliant black eyes. He found a pretext to come and see us at the hotel next morning. After that, we saw him nearly every day; he spent all his spare time with me. This youth, named Alphonso Shildecker, was of cosmopolitan origin, born in America of a German father and an Italian mother. Though only a banker’s clerk, Shildecker was nevertheless very well educated and spoke several languages fluently. He had an agreeable tenor voice and taught me some popular Neapolitan songs. This poor youth was getting seriously in love with me, which was perfectly ridiculous. I liked him pretty well in the beginning, and rather encouraged his hopes and accepted his advances in a friendly spirit, but if he thought I was serious, he was making a great mistake. It had all gone much deeper with him than with me. To me he was only a new toy; I was delighted with any one who could amuse me and was simply playing with him out of girlish perversity.
and only a primer-class at that. We busted it up, and chased the




Here I was again in Stuttgart, carried back to lessons. In January, on the occasion of my sixteenth birthday, mamma gave me a coming-out dance. I considered myself fully grown now, having put up my golden mane and let down my frock for the first time that night. I was awfully unhappy to leave Stuttgart in April, for I left my heart behind. It was such a sore trial to part with Jeffrey. He was unwell on the day of our departure and could not see us off. I was in despair at not being able to bid him farewell and sobbed desperately at the thought that I should never see his darling face again. At that moment he was more indispensable to me than air and light. Being ashamed that mamma should see me cry, I swallowed my tears and tried to look cheerful, but when[27] the train began to move, I crept into a corner of the railway-carriage and sobbed my heart out in childish grief, little fool that I was.
Prohibitory Laws against, or excessive Duties imposed upon Importation.
prayed indeed, pleading steadfastly and sanely, face to face with the

the great box on all their eyes, just as he had done before. Afterward



The East India Company,
“Well, it _always_ is when it’s done right. You got any rats around
_all_ the difficulties. Well, we can’t help it; we got to do the best
answer out of you about it.”
In a theatre on the opposite side of the street, a parody was played on the ancient Japanese sovereigns. The theatre had no walls; it was simply supported by columns, and all around was a large crowd struggling to see what took place without paying for the sight. The walls were covered with pictures representing different war scenes between Japs and Chinamen, in which the Chinese were running away and the Japs triumphed all along the line. In Japan the plays have usually fourteen, fifteen acts, and last sometimes two days. The men assume all the female parts.
“Blow yer trenches! You always want trenches; you ought to ha’ been
“Hello, you!”

“What can I do for my friends?”
her that she nearly became deaf. At first she had wondered if she would

make everything ready for the wedding.
Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no more; and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not account for it clearly, there seemed little chance of her ever considering it with less perplexity. Her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what she did not believe herself, that his attentions to Jane had been merely the effect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when he saw her no more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at the time, she had the same story to repeat every day. Mrs. Bennet’s best comfort was, that Mr. Bingley must be down again in the summer.
fended her off, and says:


We had to wait for the procession from early morning till two o’clock in the afternoon. The day was grey, the sky looked threatening, it was undoubtedly going to pour soon, and we risked being drenched as our tribune was uncovered and our umbrellas had been taken away from us at the entrance. But I was not made of sugar or salt, and preferred to have my dress ruined and to be drenched to the bone rather than be deprived of the beautiful sight which awaited us. To crown all, I was awfully hungry, not having had time to breakfast before starting, and it had been strictly forbidden to bring anything in one’s pockets for fear of concealed explosions blowing everyone up. A lady sitting next to me had a squabble with a policeman through an inoffensive orange which she had taken out of her pocket. She was not allowed to eat it even in his presence.
In London that night poor Henderson’s telegram describing the gradual


is that little animal you are so tender of?”
Nineteenthly and lastly, If we are frightened by the necessity of a balance in money, every where more considerable, in order to circulate every where, a revenue increased from 20 to 22, to face the indispensable rise in the prices of England, who trades to all parts of the globe; (when we consider besides, that France and England are by the same reason obliged to add to their respective balance already so loaded,) it appears to me, that, after a retrospective view of what has passed, one may readily be convinced,[291] that whenever money becomes necessary for circulation, wherever nothing more is required to circulate and balance objects really existing, and equal to each other, there are always people enough ready to carry money thither; and that this operation, as all those that are beneficial to society, is generally effected when it is neither counteracted nor encouraged, without any one perceiving it.—Nevertheless it must be confessed, that the pretentions set up by France, in regard to a balance, are as terrible, as formidable, as those of England, due regard being paid to the difference between the exports of both; I shall examine these pretensions as I have done those of England, and bring them besides closer to each other, that they may be more properly estimated.
CHAPTER LXVIII

It did come, too. It was a Tuesday that we had that talk. Well, after
ideas in those days. Most of them were staring quietly at the big table
don’t look as much like your mother as I reckoned you would; but law
“_No_, Jim; you couldn’t understand a word they said—not a single
many houses made entirely of china and painted in the brightest colors.
started.
but the pit was illuminated by the flickering green fire that came from
two old chairs, and lots of things around about on the floor, and there
Schwartz and his friend walking by the sea-shore sit down to talk with a group of fishermen. One of them answers with the bitterness of conscious poverty, “You are not in want and are therefore not prevented from serving God,” but Schwartz points to the mighty deep with its inexhaustible treasures and tells of the mercy of God. A passing Brahmin asks why they have come hither. “From Tranquebar,” answers Schwartz, “for the purpose[Pg 69] of addressing to you the tidings of salvation.” For a few moments the message was given, how the Lord of Heaven called upon them to enjoy peace and happiness in another world. “What would you have us to do?” The answer came simple and clear: “We earnestly exhort you to repentance towards God and faith in Jesus Christ.” “We do worship God,” they replied, “and He being omnipresent we may as well worship Him under the form of a stone.” Schwartz then pointed out that there was no likeness of the living God, either in heaven above or in this earth beneath, and that therefore it was dishonouring Him to worship Him in the form of anything corruptible.
The Father of all love,
“When I spoke to him on the subject and expressed a hope that God might yet restore him to health, he said, ‘But I should not be able to preach on account of my teeth.’ I replied, ‘If you only sit here as you do at present and aid us with your counsel, all things would go on quite differently from what they would if you were to leave us.’ But when I next saw him, he said as soon as I entered, ‘I think the Lord will at last take me to himself.’ I spoke to him a great deal on the subject, but he remained silent, settled some pecuniary matters with me, and gave me some money for Palamcotta. All this troubled me much. I prayed and wept, could get no sleep for several nights, and lost my[Pg 181] appetite and strength, for various thoughts how things would go on after his departure made me very wakeful. The physicians say there is no danger as yet, but it now appears to me that our dear father will soon leave us. O, if God would graciously strengthen him and spare him to us yet a little while! If he depart to his rest what shall we both do?”
I have at present before my eyes no other standard, whereby to estimate the exportation of France to her sugar-colonies, than that of England to hers; that exportation amounted, in 1773, to 197,236l. But the population of the French colonies is far from being in a treble proportion to that of the English colonies, and luxury is equal in both; yet let us suppose that the amount of the exports from France to her colonies, including those she[382] sends to India, be annually 80 millions tournois.—The interest of the national debt in France is 202 millions tournois, (see Administration des Finances de la France) one half, or rather three fourths of which have been incurred for the protection of her establishments in those parts of the world.—May it not be said, that France is at the yearly expence of 150 millions tournois, independently of the 45 millions for her navy, for the purpose of maintaining herself in the exclusive privilege of exporting every year the value of 80 millions tournois, in European goods, to her possessions in India and America?


it, in a place where it’s a good hiding-place for you and the skiff,
The outside projectors were switched on and the fleet fell into a small cone formation. With the flagship in the lead, they set out to investigate the planets from a distance. The electroscope on the flagship should permit them to make fairly close surface examinations from a safe distance.
We went to a clump of bushes, and Tom made everybody swear to keep the
foot of Jim’s blanket, ever so natural, thinking there’d be some fun

with him we’ll give him what it’s worth, or all we got, and then let
“But can you think that Lydia is so lost to everything but love of him, as to consent to live with him on any other terms than marriage?”
was soon chopped nearly through. Then the Lion put his strong front
When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria’s alarm was every moment increasing, and even Sir William did not look perfectly calm. Elizabeth’s courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing of Lady Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money and rank she thought she could witness without trepidation.
The next day we went for the promised room at the “Schweizerhof,” but the manager, with his hands in both his pockets, announced curtly that there was no room free until evening. There remained nothing else to do but to walk away in quest of another apartment. After a pretty hot chase we succeeded in finding a comfortable room at the “Hôtel National,” on the second floor, with a good view on the lake, looking big as a sea, and the majestic Mount Pilatus, from where Pontius Pilatus is said to have thrown himself into the lake after the crucifixion. The legend goes that he fled from Jerusalem and wandered about the earth[173] with a troubled conscience, and put an end to his misery on the heights of Mount Pilatus by drowning himself. From our windows we could also see the port where the steamers, black with people, were coming and going all the time, carrying away crowds of passengers in different directions of the beautiful lake.
beast and he had given up at last, and fallen only a short distance
“I should never have considered the distance as one of{224} the advantages of the match,” cried Elizabeth. “I should never have said Mrs. Collins was settled near her family.”
dead tanner like they’d lost the twelve disciples. Well, if ever I
apparently engaged in the repair of his support. About nine he had
“Yes; but he seemed to like his second better.”

and shabby furniture. They were all too assiduously engaged to talk to
said.
“For what?” I says.
II.
1st,

and a half, to the big scar on the hillside, and went ashore.
warn’t you?”
[Pg 117]
“You going, right here in the daybreak? _That_ warn’t the plan.”
Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was he received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first there seemed danger of Lydia’s engrossing him entirely, for she was a most determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets, she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in making bets and exclaiming after prizes, to have attention for anyone in particular. Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to hear him, though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to be told, the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Darcy. She dared not even mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, how{99}ever, was unexpectedly relieved. Mr. Wickham began the subject himself. He inquired how far Netherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked in a hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been staying there.
confess, from these four-day friends with tears, I went out again into
“No,” I says, “it don’t.”
which we were between starvation and a still more terrible death, we
“Yes,” thought Elizabeth; “that would be a delightful scheme, indeed, and completely do for us at once. Good Heaven! Brighton and a whole campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset already by one poor regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of Meryton!{274}”
Many crowned heads had come to Moscow to see the[155] Coronation, Prince Amédée d’Aoste amongst them. He is said to have the Evil-Eye, and as I am somewhat superstitious, I provided myself with a “Getattore,” a tiny coral hand with two extended fingers. This Prince has really brought many misfortunes during his life with him; one day the part of the tribune on which he stood smashed and fell, another time a part of the ship on which he was sailing was blown up.
for true. Lemme look at you chile, lemme feel o’ you. No, you ain’
long handle, cool and comfortable, and in fifteen minutes she turned

brittle reeds are parted by a man thrusting through them; they were
green trees, and, later, black-veiled shrubs and gates, barns,
gripped something—I thought it had me!—and seemed to go out of the
During the stay of the Laos at Bombay many new passengers boarded the ship, amongst them a rich Indian nabob with a face like a wicked monkey, who is going to London to be presented to the Queen. He is dressed in European garb, which doesn’t suit him at all and makes him look more like an ape than a human being. But the Hindoo was thoroughly unconscious of his own deficiencies. He sat next to Mr. Shaniavski at dinner and found fault with all the passengers during the repast; especially with those belonging[486] to the yellow race, and said that the Chinese and the Japs were all monkey-faced creatures. And he himself—whom does he look like, I should like to know?
Forthwith there was heard a great buzzing in the air, and a swarm of



“A prohibitory law in one country, may be, should be, and no doubt will be, instantly followed by ten others, in ten different countries, which will soon enforce the re-establishment of the equilibrium dictated by Nature, the only one that deserves to be attended to, and the only one that must prevail at last.
Credits: Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)
CHAPTER IV
 “Was you in my Room?”
roundabout and pants of his, and I put them on. While I was at it he
me for taking your head off, but I shall have to do it in order to put
“What do you mean?”
It was about six o’clock when we arrived at “Manglis.” We stopped at the house of Colonel Gourtchine, a friend of my husband’s. I was so dead-tired that I went to bed immediately and slept soundly.
I remained a very long time upon the roof, wondering at the grotesque
setting them free from bondage. The houses of the Munchkins were

factory.”
investigations upon the latter. Spectrum analysis of the black powder

soiled and suffering!—come with a broken spirit! come with a contrite
The proprietor of lands should not be considered in this light, in the use he makes of his yearly profits, but with respect to that part of his said profits which he lays out in cultivation: In regard to that share of his income which he invests in the funds, we must consider him as member, agent, and usufructuary of industry and commerce. Now, if we divide into three parts the whole of the national debt, one-third of which, if agreeable, we shall set down as foreign property, and the other two as belonging to the natives, we must of course acknowledge in the nation a new sum of clear savings, amounting to 180,000,000. This, in fact, should not be considered as a real increase of wealth, which it is at all times easy to appreciate, but as a proof that there exists, in the nation, an inestimable number of men, who are capable, in the space of ninety years, to effect a saving of 180,000,000, which government will have it in its power, within the same space of time, to appropriate to the exigencies of war, if potentates should continue in a warlike humour; or to lay out in objects of industry and cultivation, supposing an improvement of the revenue should be preferred to a state of warfare.
We had hardly left the harbour when the steamer began to bounce and to pick its way from one wave to another,[164] giving us the impression of a swing. I proved to be a miserable sailor and went below at once and put myself into the hands of the stewardess, who quickly placed a basin under my very nose. I lay prostrate on a sofa in the ladies’ saloon; my head was very bad and everything went round. What miserable creatures all my cabin companions were! woefully sick all of them. Sergy, much less liable to sea-sickness, remained on deck all the time. He came to see how I was and said I had better come up on deck, but I was too deadly ill even to answer him.



reward out for him—three hundred dollars. And there’s a reward out for

“Well, who done the shooting? Was it a Grangerford or a Shepherdson?”
“Very well,” answered Oz meekly. “Come to me tomorrow and you shall

“I must not decide on my own performance.”

eyes, and the children all ran away and hid behind their mothers when

learns people how to talk French.”

was a prime good hit.
CHAPTER CXI
around every which way and yelling about snakes. He said they was
strangers and destroy them.
these houses during the afternoon, and sometimes people came to the
“We are safe here,” he repeated; “safe here.”
Our house is furnished with every luxury one can imagine. There is a fine suite of state rooms with beautiful tapestry and pictures. A sitting-room is coloured mosaic, the ball-room of immense size, with full-length portraits of our Imperial Family hung on the walls, is capable of accommodating about three hundred persons. In the library long tables are covered with illustrated magazines and papers. The centre of the house is topped with a dome of glass; under it is a large winter garden full of beautiful palms and flourishing plants. In the middle of it a fountain bubbled up in a basin of white marble. The house is surrounded by extensive grounds with long shady alleys; it is cool under them even in the most intense heat. Kiosques, grottos and rustic bridges are scattered here and there. A water-fall, three metres high, rushes into a reservoir just opposite my bedroom windows. The gardens are overloaded with fruit, peaches, grapes, apricots, melons, ripening on every side. In Turkestan, fruit of all kind abounds; peaches and apricots are here a common food for pigs. White and black swans swim[497] in the broad arik (canal) winding like a river in the park. A troop of deer walk about freely on the meadows; they come up and examine us fearlessly. About a dozen foxes live at the end of the park, in a large den formerly occupied by a family of bears. In a big cage walk peacocks who wake me every morning by their piercing shrieks.
When he had got out on the shed he put his head in again, and cussed me
It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from Jane.
greater than her fear of the dark, so she never came near when Dorothy
before this time.”
January 29th.—The young Sultan of Johore paid an unexpected call to us in the afternoon, a fabulous creature, all covered with diamonds. This Hindoo prince is enormously rich, the greatest part of Malacca belonging to him.
come, making powwow enough for a million; but they was our dogs; so we
NOT all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked him in various ways, with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all; and they were at{11} last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour, Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. Sir William had been delighted with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly with a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To be fond of dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively hopes of Mr. Bingley’s heart were entertained.
sticking into the skin of our old planet Earth like a poisoned dart,
“Is this,” thought Elizabeth, “meant for me?” and she coloured at the idea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, “And pray, what is the usual price of an earl’s younger son? Unless the elder brother is very sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds.”

weighed very carefully the possibility of our digging a way out in a

From church we went to visit the bride of Egueshi, our Armenian interpreter. The walls of her sitting-room were all hung up with her drawings, amongst which we saw the portrait of our Emperor painted by our hostess in the space of two days, during the time when the Christian inhabitants of Erzeroum expected their town to be invaded by the Russians. Dreading to see our soldiers enter their homes by force, in order to plunder them, they put out big wooden crosses before their houses in the hope of mollifying the hearts of our soldiers, trusting to escape thus from the general fate. Our hostess told us candidly that she concealed that picture when the Turkish officials visited her house, but during our visit the portrait of His Majesty occupied the place of honour.
sick and sore! (_amen!_) come, lame and halt and blind! (_amen!_) come,
“All right; but wait a minute. There’s one more thing—a thing that
said it—every last word of it. And all the time he was a-doing it he
Heading to Chapter XXXI.	215
down in the canoe to smoke a pipe and lay out a plan. I says to myself,
Next morning we took our luncheon on our little railed balcony in cool comfort. The weather was clear and we had a very good view of the distant ranges of mountains and the snow-hooded Alpine peaks.
meanest thing to fog. You can’t tell the shape of the river, and you

I faced about again, and rushed towards the approaching Martian, rushed
Whether an equilibrium in all things (and every where), be not indispensable; and whether, to maintain or restore it, any great effort of imagination be required on the part of those who fancy they hold the balance?

June 22nd.—We are on the Black Sea, between sky and water, with no land in view. The weather is beautiful, but the ship rolls dreadfully all the same. I try to brave sea-sickness, and do needlework, whilst Maria Michaelovna reads aloud to me.
than we could help, and then talk mighty low. The lightning showed us
And to be called a stupid brat.


two boys was squatting back to back behind the pile, so they could
frauds—regular dead-beats. There, now we’re over the worst of it, you
plaster, and the triangular aperture in the wall was darkened. I looked
for Tom, and I’ll dig out for the island right off. So away I shoved,
When we got to the house the street in front of it was packed, and the


bullinesses wherever he got a chance. And that is what he done.
having us hunt up a cold-chisel to cut the chain off of his leg with
chance to see who was aboard when she come along, because she would
that had the places wouldn’t give them up, and folks behind them was
It was decided that our sentinels should immediately be replaced by Turkish soldiers. I looked at that ceremony from the balcony of General Lazareff’s dwelling, commanding a view of the guard-house and the public square where crowds were gathering. A Turkish patrol soon appeared, about a dozen soldiers with an under-officer swinging a long branch that he had just broken from a tree; but the chief of our patrol declared that he would certainly not give up the guard-house to such singular substitutes. The new commander of the citadel with a detachment of soldiers arrived shortly afterwards, and this time our soldiers presented arms to their former enemies and resigned the place to the Turks. From henceforth Erzeroum has become again a Turkish town!
I see I was in a fix now. But it warn’t no use to worry; there warn’t
door. After picking out the silver shoe, which was all that was left of

of tramps. The vestries were indiscriminately distributing bread sent
“Why do you reckon Harvey don’t come? Wher’ does he live?”
In the afternoon we arrived at Astrakhan and were immediately surrounded by a noisy crowd of Kalmucks, Tartars and Persians. We had a jolly dinner on deck. My husband’s aide-de-camps and attachés were so amusing and merry. They ordered champagne and drank my health. Mr. Baumgarten, one of the attachés, the soul of the company, when raising his glass to me, made a most charming speech; he said that my presence embellished their journey and that they regretted awfully that our arrival at Tashkend would put an end to the pleasure of having a good deal of my company, for we only met at meals.
“No one knows it but you four—and myself,” replied Oz. “I have fooled
course that is all that is expected of us when we are on mantels and

of this weed, and at Richmond, too, the Thames water poured in a broad
kind of foolish, fishes up that spoon out of his pocket. She stopped,
rats, and that I _know_.”
traffic and held back a cab horse, while she drove the pony across its

cowardly than you are if they allow you to scare them so easily.”
One of our favourite diversions was to visit the citadel, a miniature fortified town, situated at about a mile’s distance from Alexandropol. General Kobsieff, the commander of the citadel, was awfully nice to me; he lent me books and sent me flowers.
August 12th.—The same scenery is repeated with fatiguing uniformity; the desolate sun-baked desert spread out, and the yellow steppes joined with the horizon. The journey seems to last ages.
“Impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with him myself; how can you be so teasing?”


July 20th.—We glide through districts completely submerged by the recent overflowing of the rivers. Whole villages disappeared under the waters. There was great[386] distress and great poverty everywhere; my heart ached for the poor inhabitants. Steadily the waters ascended and the raging torrent tore off the trees, breaking them away. It was a scene of desolation like the deluge. The houses, the cattle, the fields, all were destroyed. Now a window, now a door tore past; chimneys, slates, tiles, whirled about like so much paper.
had it, nip and tuck, for five mile or more, the old man a-gaining all
the dresser. You can’t possibly move without making a noise, and I
Most earnestly did she then entreat him to lose no more time before he wrote.

She fell in love with handsome men and boys,
I heard that kind of a sound that a ghost makes when it wants to tell
come brisker and brisker, and the thunder boomed; but them people never
reck’n I better keep de animals satisfied, en not have no trouble in de
Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of her stay as they had been at first. The very last evening was spent there; and her Ladyship again inquired minutely into the particulars of their journey, gave them directions as to the best method of packing, and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right way, that Maria thought herself obliged, on her return, to undo all the work of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh.
“Sold!” and rose up mad, and was a-going for that stage and them
“Who are the Munchkins?” inquired Dorothy.
here am I, forlorn, torn from my high estate, hunted of men, despised
they played that thing it would fool _anybody_. In my opinion, there’s



most intellectural; and said if he only could see his way to it we
Mrs. S. was the most convenient of chaperons, very complying indeed. I danced and rode and picnicked to my heart’s content. It was all rather dangerous for a girl of my age and temperament, and with all that, I was absolutely without knowledge or experience of the world, exposed to all the temptations of a modern sea-bathing place. One began to gossip on my account and to say nasty things of me, but it did not affect me in the least. I was doing no harm and was happy—why couldn’t people leave me alone?
it the Emerald City; and to make the name fit better I put green

green silk more than twenty feet long.


I followed the men to see what they was going to do with Jim; and the

that’s jist as good and at the same time don’t bring you into no resks.
college was cleared out of the way.
“It shall be done,” said the King, and at once the Winged Monkeys
dumb pet, and if a rattlesnake hain’t ever been tried, why, there’s
When we reached Dover we caught the special train waiting to take us to London. When it drew up at Charing-Cross station, a porter took possession of us and our luggage, and conveyed us across to the Charing-Cross Hotel. I was somewhat abashed when we were invited to enter a small cage, which shut upon us with a vicious snap and then tossed us up, and before I had time to do more than gasp, we were on the sixth storey. It was my first acquaintance with the lift, a means of conveyance which substitutes so advantageously the legs of fatigued travellers. A new surprise awaited us: when we rang for the maid, ordering her to bring us some sandwiches, she whispered something into a pipe-tube in the wall, and in a moment a shutter was set open and the sandwiches, appeared like magic, served automatically on a tray.
_our_ nigger; yes, we did consider him so—goodness knows we had trouble
Glad and regretful, confident and calm,
So Tom turns to the nigger, which was looking wild and distressed, and

get tired. I’ll tell you a secret,” he continued, as he walked along.
Next day he was drunk, and he went to Judge Thatcher’s and bullyragged

Wondering still more at all that I had seen, I pushed on towards
wonderful manner.

’em.”
Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was turned, and Elizabeth was{98} the happy woman by whom he finally seated himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into conversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, and on the probability of a rainy season, made her feel that the commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered interesting by the skill of the speaker.
mustn’t interfere and separate families if they could help it; said
After the Pitti Galleries, we were shown the Palace, maintained by the town, in which King Humbert is received in great ceremony, as a guest, when he comes to Florence. A carriage road leads to each floor separately replacing the elevator. The King was expected in a few days, and a legion of servants were cleaning the hangings and polishing the furniture whilst we went through the Palace.

Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference for her authority proceeded; but it was not in her power to give any information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved.
“I can readily believe,” answered he, gravely, “that reports may vary greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you were not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.”
“Cain’t; I hain’t got but one chaw left. Ask Bill.”
“All! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the second. The younger ones out before the elder are married! Your younger sisters must be very young?”
[Image unavailable.]
“Listen at that, now. You do beat all for natural stupidness. Can’t you
in and pranced them out of town. Another time they tried to go at

“What do you want?”
CHAPTER XV.

swept out of existence in a war of extermination waged by European
along here, did that make you think you had grit enough to lay your
“Many even of the Brahmins themselves said that the King would gladly have had me with him but he was[Pg 94] afraid of the people around him. The great about this court saw with regret that he was desirous of detaining me, being fearful lest their corrupt practices might be exposed. At length I visited one of his principal officers and after declaring to him the Gospel of Christ I begged to make my humble salaam to the King and to ask what was his purpose with regard to me, that I was come at his gracious summons, ready to serve him from my heart in the cause of God, but that as I had an engagement at Trichinopoly it would be necessary that some one should take charge of my duty there if I were to remain at Tanjore. I requested therefore to know the King’s intentions. The answer which I received the next day was this, that I might return for the time to Trichinopoly but that I was to remember that the King looked upon me as his padre. Many of the common people were grieved that the King should allow himself to be hindered by his servants from detaining me near him. But God can and at His own time will, cause this nation to adore and bear His name. May He compassionate this poor people, now lying in darkness and the shadow of death, for His name’s sake!”
Chapter X
after sun-up. And when they come to look at that spare room they had to
She saw him start at this; but he said nothing, and she continued,—
The distribution of prizes at the Exhibition took place a few days before we left Paris. My husband received for our Turkestan section the Great Cross of the Légion d’Honneur. The Russian Commissaire, when packing up different objects, found it difficult to bring back to Tashkend a huge “arba” (a two-wheeled cart) and it was decided to leave it here and present it to some collector of curiosities. But no one[531] wanted such a gift, and the commissaires had recourse to another means of getting rid of this encumbering “arba,” they asked a carter, promising him a good tip, to harness his horse to the cart and take it along as far as the highway leading to Versailles, and then leave it there to its own fate.
[i]
“I never saw such a woman. I never saw such capacity, and taste, and application, and elegance, as you describe, united.”
It was with Schwartz a growing conviction that the hope of the work lay in the children, and he made it his business to examine them in the schools from time to time to see that they were being properly grounded in the faith. His advancing years and increasing weakness did not hinder him in this duty, and we find him again and again in his journal and letters referring to the happy times he spent with the young people of his flock. Writing to his friend, Dr. Schultze, he says:

you’ve swore ’t if you didn’t you’d tell. But this time you’ve said it

Suddenly I recalled the night in the observatory.
on the raft, and have adventures plumb to the mouth of the river, and

of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online

Another French girl, Melle. Louise Martel, is an invalid; she lay back in her deck-chair all day amidst a pile of pillows, carefully wrapped in a thick shawl, though exposed to the rays of a tropical sun. She is dying of consumption and looks very ill and sad, her face drawn and sharpened by suffering. The poor young creature is cold and indifferent to every one. She took a fancy to me nevertheless, and to-day, when I came up to bid her good-morning, her face lit up with a poor, sickly, little smile.


“This’ll tike us rahnd Edgware?” asked the driver, wild-eyed,
body of the Scarecrow in her arms instead of kissing his painted face,
“Crawl up under cover and rush ’em, say I,” said one.
“I am much obliged to your Ladyship for your kind invitation,” replied Elizabeth; “but it is not in my power to accept it. I must be in town next Saturday.”
We went one night to the “Eden Concert.” Between the acts Sergy left his seat for a few moments to bring me bonbons, and all at once a handsome woman, in showy dark style, who had been staring at me through her lorgnette in such a nasty way that I became quite uncomfortable, came up and sat by me and gave me her address, entreating me to call upon her the next day. At that very moment my husband returned to his place, very much astonished to see it occupied by that strange person, who gave up her seat very unwillingly, and continued to throw approving glances at me. Funny sort of type that woman!
smashing it down as the impact of a battering ram might have done,


I followed a half a mile; then he struck out over the swamp, and waded
which he put back into the green box, and gave them many good wishes to



world. Oh, he done it admirable. Lots of the principal people gethered
which showed he warn’t in his right mind; then she flung up her hands,

high nose, and heavy eyebrows, and the blackest kind of eyes, sunk so

ca’m and deliberate, not saying a word. The racket stopped, and the
that clock tick; and sometimes when one of these peddlers had been




we see a steamboat coming down-stream, to keep from getting run over;



The routine of steamer-life was eating, sleeping, resting in deck-chairs and promenading on the deck. We are fed on board like cattle destined for the slaughter-house. In the morning from nine to ten, breakfast, consisting of broth, tea, coffee or chocolate, and porridge—the first course at every breakfast; at one o’clock lunch, at six dinner, and at nine tea. A waiter runs through the corridors, ringing a huge bell before each repast. We had a separate table reserved for us. The waiters on board, rigid and dignified, have the manners of a secretary of an embassy; the waiter who serves at our table looks less Olympian.
“How do you come to be here, Jim, and how’d you get here?”
hurry; and we wouldn’t get but a few minutes to dig, every day, while


still a while, moaning. Then he laid stiller, and didn’t make a sound.

if you didn’t put the money there, say it, and I’ll b’lieve you, and
to. Maybe you can get him to believe that Jim _is_ your nigger—some
thing, and what a thundering hornet’s-nest we’d got ourselves into, so
“It is a circumstance which Darcy of course could not wish to be generally known, because if it were to get round to the lady’s family it would be an unpleasant thing.”
an imitation. I can’t give the old gent’s words, nor I can’t imitate
“I know you do: and it is that which makes the wonder. With your good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of others! Affectation of candour is common enough; one meets with it everywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or design,—to take the good of everybody’s character and make it still better, and say nothing of the bad,—belongs to you alone. And so, you like this man’s sisters, too, do you? Their manners are not equal to his.”
Before Serfogee left his presence he was implored to make the Bible his guide and friend. He lifted his hands to heaven, and with great solemnity uttered slowly these words: “My last and most earnest wish is that God in His infinite mercy may graciously regard you and lead your heart and soul to Christ, that I may meet you again as His true disciple before the throne.”
Woodman was sure it was strong and would answer their purpose. The
few fugitives until, in a grass lane towards High Barnet, he happened


“Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it is believed that she and her cousin will unite the two estates.”
everything. So I went to him that night and told him pap was here
was used to being where I was, and liked it—all but the cowhide part.
“Just as you please.”


front of them, and veiling the white façade of a terrace beyond the
off towards where I had run across that camp fire, stopping every
shall we do now?”
on the ground to bleed; I say ground because it _was_ ground—hard

[Image unavailable.]
clearly understand how I came there. My terror had fallen from me like

scarce daring to whisper to each other until the stars were out.
I was away below the ferry now. I rose up, and there was Jackson’s
We dasn’t stop again at any town for days and days; kept right along

and pretty rippling brooks with strong bridges across them. The fences
grass from the advance of a man, or running to and fro in utter dismay
go of me and whispers, ‘Heel it now, or they’ll hang ye, sure!’ and I
stood there looking across at Tom over her spectacles—kind of grinding
I was no longer disposed to object. We went together to the roof and
“I reck’n I could eat a hoss. I think I could. How long you ben on de
We went another day by steamer to Menaggio. The hills that encircled these shores are covered by poor vegetation, only dull olive trees here and there. We were startled by the formidable report of the dynamite blowing up the rocks which are to serve for the building of houses; the hills all around caught up the sound and echoed it from one to the other.
wife. The former gave me no sensation of horror or remorse to recall; I
in this world, no matter whether one is a crow or a man.’

“Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such affectionate attention; and, depend upon it, you will speedily receive from me a letter of thanks for this as well as for every other mark of your regard during my stay in Hertfordshire. As for my fair cousins, though my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall now take the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting my cousin Elizabeth.{159}”
git well agin. Dey’s two gals flyin’ ’bout you in yo’ life. One uv

Great Wizard I told you of.”
put his cold little nose into her face and whined dismally. Dorothy sat

certainly no breeze stirring, and the only sounds were the faint

Ogilvy.”

CHAPTER XXXIV.
but it was awful funny. The people most killed themselves laughing; and
He got up and looked distressed, and fumbled his hat, and says:
“This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much talked of. But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of each other the balm of sisterly consolation.”
“When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, I shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now given me; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because I know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man on the first application, and, perhaps, you have even now said as much to encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the female character.”
The excitement of the day had utterly exhausted me. I had gone to rest, and slept the sleep of the weary and the just, when the Grand Duke called upon my husband and asked him to give me a beautiful bouquet of roses, freshly cut by the Grand Duke from the garden of his palace, bound with a sand-coloured ribbon, the emblem of the Starving Plain, which was also welcoming me.
her hand, and says:

in a circus, nor nothing I can think of. I went to thinking out a plan,
One day one of these, a Hindu merchant, said to him: “God has created us to the end that we should know and serve Him.” This simple and accurate proposition was of course agreed to by Schwartz, but he added that unfortunately, although God had given him and many of his countrymen a knowledge of the end of their[Pg 51] creation, yet they remained in idolatry and thus unhappily never attained to it. After this he pointed out how Christ had come to reveal the will of God and Himself as the way, the truth, and the life to all sinners.
The little steamer was already flapping her way eastward of the big
When I lit my candle and went up to my room that night there sat pap
The first thing we did on our arrival at Alexandropol was to hire a carriage and go and pray on the tombs of our departed friends, victims of that terrible war. Quick! let us get out of this land of mourning, grief and sorrow! Let us come out of the darkness and gloom into the light again!

know. Now this was lucky, because I was weakening; I was getting afraid
Away across the road the woods beyond Ham and Petersham were still


“Honest injun, I ain’t,” I says.
his Blessed Master.
July 9th.—Our boat does not leave for another ten days;[445] we will profit by it and go on a trip to Kandy, the ancient city of the sovereigns of Ceylon, situated in the hills some 2,000 feet above the level of the sea, which can boast of a climate in many respects superior to that of Colombo.
Micro-organisms, which cause so much disease and pain on earth, have
nigger only makes up the feather-bed, and don’t turn over the straw
going; still, the king acted real friendly towards him, and said the

We were near the end of our provisions and starvation stared us in the face. We found at dinner, oysters, ever oysters, which I abhor: oyster soup, oyster vol-au-vent, and so on. I will try and bear all these privations stoically.
words it spoke:


struggle for existence, and it would seem that this too is the belief
and everything was strangely still. Even the birds were hushed, and as

“Oh, Mr. Collins!”
“I take no leave of you, Miss Bennet. I send no compliments to your mother. You deserve no such attention. I am most seriously displeased.”
Before these two nations be represented as vying with each other in the foreign markets, I shall, in the first instance, examine, whether it might not be possible to settle between them a direct trade, equally advantageous to both; for if this be practicable, why should not the competition be so likewise?—Is not the trade of each competitor a direct one with the nation, in which he vies?—And if, in this case, there be a sure and equitable principle for one of the competitors, why should it not be so for the other?
The first house we entered, after a little difficulty with the window,
face and her eyes was all lit up like glory, she was so glad her uncles
up, and the juice kind of swaps around, and the things go better.

when it come to that it worked the crowd like you never see anything

uncomfortable again. I judged the old man would turn up again
Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had been standing near enough for her to overhear a conversation between him and Mr. Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes to press his friend to join it.
Language: English
the cupboard and cut herself some bread, which she spread with butter.
remained busied with preparations in the Horsell pit until nine that
Well, I got a good going-over in the morning from old Miss Watson on
things dry. Jim made a floor for the wigwam, and raised it a foot or

overhead the dawn was growing brighter, clear and steady and calm.
“What shall we do now?” asked Dorothy sadly.


we’s all right now. I ben a-buyin’ pots en pans en vittles, as I got a

it. One man said it was getting towards the long days and the short
She was immediately told, that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each called during her absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few minutes, to take leave, but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after her till she could be found. Elizabeth could but just affect concern in missing him; she really rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no longer an object. She could think only of her letter.{261}
 “Come In”
“It was greatly my wish that he should do so,” he added, “as soon as his marriage was fixed on. And I think you will agree with me, in considering a removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on his account and my niece’s. It is Mr. Wickham’s intention to go into the Regulars; and, among his former friends, there are still some who are able and willing to assist him in the army. He has the promise of an ensigncy in General——’s regiment, now quartered in the north. It is an advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom. He promises fairly; and I hope among different people, where they may each have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have written to Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present arrangements, and to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of Mr. Wickham in and near Brighton with assurances of speedy payment, for which I have pledged myself. And will you give yourself the trouble of carrying similar assurances to his creditors in Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin a list, according to his information? He has given in all his debts; I hope at least he has not deceived us. Haggerston has our directions, and all will be completed in a week. They will then join his regiment, unless they are first invited to Longbourn; and I understand from Mrs. Gardiner that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before she leaves the south. She is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to you and her mother.—Yours, etc.
effect upon some constituent in the blood. But such unproven
little knots of people talking excitedly and peering at the spinning
January 13th.—At dawn we weighed anchor. It gives one the shivers to hear the ice grating against the thin body of our ship. As the Caspian never freezes the ships are not equipped for polar-crossing, and the Tropic does not resemble in the least the ice breaker, which was of such use to us during our crossing from Vladivostock to Nagasaki in the winter.
reading was all about Jim, and just described him to a dot. It said he
and Thames, and its swiftly growing and Titanic water fronds speedily


Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

mind, nobody can tell as to that—but his brother would a give anything
It is, fourthly, all that which is wanted to replace the few guineas carried away annually from England by travellers, smugglers, or by means of some inferior transactions in trade, and which cannot always be exactly balanced by the contraband trade carried on elsewhere by the nation.
On arriving at Castellamare we were just in time to catch the train with which we were to return to Naples. We got into the first railway carriage occupied by an ill-assorted Italian pair, a fat middle-aged lady and a good-looking young man resembling an opera tenor, and at least a quarter of a century younger than his companion, who made beside him, the sharpest contrast, looking very thick and clumsy. She gazed at her interesting cavalier with an admiration and tenderness in her old eyes, which was quite ridiculous. The evening being fresh, I closed the window, to the great displeasure of my voluminous neighbour, who began to grumble and said to her companion that she was on the point of being suffocated. “She must certainly feel hot, the fatty!” I exclaimed in Russian very imprudently, for after I had just made this flattering statement, the young Italian said to Sergy, in a most natural tone, that his wife, as it appears, is a compatriot of ours. I felt pretty bad at that moment, I confess, having got into a terrible scrape. I could have bitten off my tongue! Unfortunately I always speak first and think afterwards! But apparently the fat lady didn’t hear my complimentary adverb, as she amiably entered into conversation, and in a few minutes we felt as if we had known her for ages. She became very confidential, and by the time the train reached Naples we were in possession of the entire history of her life. She told us, with a coquettish glance at her husband, which would have been very effective thirty years ago, that she had been married five years, and was feeling perfectly happy, only rather home-sick for Moscow, her native town. How in the world did she manage to catch that handsome fellow—who, for his part, certainly didn’t seem to adore his caricature spouse.
the stake, and from what you say I am sure the Great Oz will give me
beach, where presently my brother succeeded in attracting the attention
the gun. I slipped the ramrod down it to make sure it was loaded, then
promise of a share in it the next day. Here there were rumours of
few yards higher, none could have lived to tell the tale. They saw the


I took up a book and begun something about General Washington and the
ketched a wood-flat, en his marster didn’ know it; en I bought it off’n
“Where’s the butter?”
“Oh, yes,” replied Dorothy.
be due to the falling of burning pine trees across the line. Nothing
From this large, bustling city
amount to shucks alongside of pirates to work a camp-meeting with.
In their Thrilling Tragedy of
warn’t a bit of use to try to go ahead—I’d _got_ to throw up my hand.

off, and warn’t black any more, but gray; you could see little dark

longing to peer into it. I began walking, therefore, in a big curve,

the body might account for this, but what disturbed that idea was the
But the trouble was the blank incongruity of this serenity and the

CHAPTER XV.
“You are a good girl,” he replied, “and I have great pleasure in thinking you will be so happily settled. I have not a doubt of your doing very well together. Your tempers are by no means unlike. You are each of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved on; so easy, that every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will always exceed your income.”
see them; they seemed to stop and fool around a while; then, as we got
dead bodies. I saw altogether about a dozen in the length of the Fulham



“It seems gloomy,” said the Scarecrow.


Papa took me to another Court ball, where I distinguished myself, making such a stupid blunder. Overheated by dancing, I was dying of thirst, and rushing up to a smart-looking individual, clad in bright red, I told him to bring me some iced lemonade, taking him for a Court official. He returned in about five minutes, closely followed by another personage arrayed likewise in red, who carried a tray, and making me a most refined bow, he named himself “Senator K⸺.” In an instant I had guessed the whole odious situation. I had made an awful mistake, having confounded a red-livered lackey with a senator. How could I have been so clumsy? It was a horribly awkward moment, and I thought I should die of shame. It was really very difficult to find something to say. Covered with confusion I blushed all over my face and muttered hastily some excuses, wanting the floor to open and swallow me up.
He had been trying to find some ray that would respond to the individual characteristics of the atoms under consideration. He had found it, but finding it he had met his death. The ray had attacked him somehow. It does not seem likely that he experimented on himself without trying it on some inanimate body first. But perhaps he did. At any rate, it did what he hoped, it scanned him, and recognized each individual atom, and each separate molecule, and as far as it went, it was successful. But in scanning him the ray released all the energy in the atoms of his body. He was killed instantly and most of his apparatus was utterly ruined. However, enough was saved to make a beginning possible for the others. And on this basis they built.

shove him along, he was too strong for me and jerked loose and run, and
“Yes, ma’am, all.”
“Why do you have to obey the charm of the Golden Cap?” she asked.
10thly,

the conflicting accounts that have been put forth, the majority of them
let her slide!”
looked like the orneriest old rip that ever was; but now, when he’d
South, and I’ve lived in the North; so I know the average all around.
wrong, and that they ought to be doing something. Now whenever things

I began to explain my view of our position. He listened at first, but
I says to myself, this is _another_ one that I’m letting him rob her of
when we stepped onto the raft I says:
kept quiet all night, although of course they could not sleep.
A spacious gallery with hermetically closed shutters stretches the whole length of our hotel. Directly after tiffin[411] we went up to our apartment and indulged in a pleasant siesta. I was awfully thirsty, taking up a decanter to pour out a glass of water, what was my horror to find a drowned scorpion at the bottom of it. It was enough to disgust you of the Tropics for ever! I rang the bell and my summons were quickly answered by a barefooted Annamite boy, with nothing but a bit of stuff wrapped round his loins. I pointed out to him, with an indignant gesture, the contents of the decanter, trying by an expressive gesture to let him see all my disgust, but the boy didn’t appear shocked, he only grinned, showing his shining teeth from ear to ear. When going to bed I looked in and underneath the bed for relatives of the drowned scorpion and have discovered an enormous tarantula on my mosquito-net. The whole night swarms of noisy lizards crawled round the walls and on the ceiling, making a very disagreeable concert. I was expecting them to come down upon my head all the time. The lizards are generally quite inoffensive, except a dangerous species called “to-que,” according to the sound they produce. Before putting on our boots in the morning we looked inside, lest a scorpion may be lying in ambush.
“Of course I cannot understand it,” he said. “If your heads were
the gold twisted his head round and bit the wrist that held his collar.
Now the charm began to work. The sky was darkened, and a low rumbling
ears sticking up through the hole, for the strong pressure of the air
travelled with a hissing sound. I myself heard nothing of that. Many
be seen now. Don’t you let on you’re here. I’ll play a joke on him.

and I reckon we’ll find out _something_ before we get through.”
Though the sky was perfectly clear this evening, Egueshi warned us, pointing to the “Palantek,” that there would be a shower before long, but we, all the same, started on our habitual ride, but had not gone half a mile when there came the rumble of thunder from afar; a flash of lightning shot across the sky and the rain came down in torrents. We galloped at full speed towards the village of Shakk, not far off, and took refuge under the roof of an old Armenian priest. On the walls of his parlour hung a whole gallery of pictures cut from French illustrated papers, representing chiefly heroes of the Russo-Turkish war, a present left for our host by a Russian officer who had put up at his house for a time. I wonder if the originals of these portraits will ever know that their visages adorn the walls of a humble cottage situated in one of the remotest parts of Asia Minor. On our way home we admired the beautiful growth of the wheat; the plain of Erzeroum being abundantly irrigated, the harvests are usually splendid, everything looks so green and fresh.
Kitty owned that she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great curiosity to see the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently consented. As she went upstairs to get ready, Mrs. Bennet followed her, saying,—
time of the evasion?—what it was he’d planned to do if the evasion
“Oh, yes, a half-yearly is in, last night—over a hundred and fifty
other man.”
OF
“Very well—and this offer of marriage you have refused?”
light to smoke by, little suspecting the meaning of the minute gleam I
them, with the nail for a chisel and an iron bolt from the rubbage in
two hours ago.”

hid behind her. So she run on:

hug me and bless me, and so on, he was so glad I was back and we was

Witch:


to live and taint the race. And they can’t be happy. Moreover, dying’s
what the beds was like. My bed was a straw tick better than Jim’s,
four hours, until the dawn came, we scarcely moved. And then the light
On Luxury.	352

next flash, a hundred yards nearer. Can you imagine a milking stool
She threw her arms around the Lion’s neck and kissed him, patting his

It is very hard, however, to part with our home and to remove to another quarter of the globe. But what is to be, will be. I must submit to the inevitable and look to the future with a firm face.

hours, because it got mighty heavy and tiresome to him when he had to
shoulders, and I thought I was gone; but I slid out of the jacket quick
The march of industry is always firm; she can never be bewildered by her guide. A tax of 2 shillings upon a hat will soon occasion either an alteration in the quality, or a proportionate increase[198] in its price[7]. Nothing more just. But agriculture has only one resource; she cannot alter the quality of her productions, and she is always timid when she wants to increase their prices. Let it be granted, however, that the first attempt of the cultivator will be to enhance boldly the price of his goods, in a proportion which may return him the amount of the tax supposed to be of 10 millions: his wheat, of course, will rise from 40 to 46s. 8d. and so with regard to other productions; then his revenue, instead of 60, will be 70 millions; but, being obliged to lay down 10 for the tax, he will have only 60 millions left.
“Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever you and Jane are known, you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear to less advantage for having a couple of—or I may say, three—very silly sisters. We shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does not go to Brighton. Let her go, then. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will keep her out of any real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be an object of prey to anybody. At Brighton she will be of less importance even as a common flirt than she has been here. The officers will find women better worth their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her being there may teach her her own insignificance. At any rate, she cannot grow many degrees worse, without authorizing us to lock her up for the rest of her life.”



happy as if she was on salary. And pretty soon you’d hear a loafer sing
There were no fences at all by the roadside now, and the land was rough
Of the falling of the fifth cylinder I have presently to tell. The
Elexander before you go, and then get out by saying it’s George

“I think I have understood that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever returning to Netherfield again?”


But go ahead, I ain’t got nothing to say.”
that way—said any fool would a _knowed_ something was up. And then
the streets of St. John’s Wood. They have told me since that I was
the cart. The multitudinous shouting confused his ears. The man was

was about her. There were neat fences at the sides of the road, painted
to mush, and it was awful to see. Children was heeling it ahead of the
On the Influence of the various Kinds of Taxation upon National Prices.
upon my abstract investigations.

shaking; and all the time how the woman did dance around and laugh and

of yards of my head, driving straight into the loose gravel, whirling
He would have had little chance against them had not the slender lady
suddenly upon the floor.

The Lion at once passed through the door, and glancing around saw, to

him to see me again, but it warn’t. He nearly cried he was so glad, but
So we went back and got the canoe, and paddled up abreast the cavern,
a leg of the tripod had been smashed by one of the shells. The whole of
“Well, Lizzy,” said Mrs. Bennet, one day, “what is your opinion now of this sad business of Jane’s? For my part, I am determined never to speak of it again to anybody. I told my sister Philips so the other day. But I cannot find out that Jane saw anything of him in{283} London. Well, he is a very undeserving young man—and I do not suppose there is the least chance in the world of her ever getting him now. There is no talk of his coming to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have inquired of everybody, too, who is likely to know.”
little piece of paper with “_Half-past two_” wrote on it with a pencil.
“Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care of myself, and of Mr. Wickham too. He shall not be in love with me, if I can prevent it.”
water’s edge.
afire. Twickenham was uninjured by either Heat-Ray or Black Smoke, and


“I don’t know. A month and a half.”
The town of Vladivostock is scattered about on hillocks; up one street we went and down another. Half the shops of the town are Chinese; they are in constant competition with the Russian shops, taking away all their customers. A Russian tailor came to ask my husband to remove into another place his Chinese neighbour, who was a dangerous rival to him on account of his low prices. Certainly Sergy did not accede to his request.
the island in the low places and on the Illinois bottom. On that side

Although the rights of Serfogee were delayed, his friend Schwartz, seeing that the comfort and even safety[Pg 144] of the young prince were in peril, obtained permission to take him and the two widows away to Madras, and on the 10th January, 1793, we find Schwartz leading a troop of the Company’s soldiers into Tanjore, and, despite the opposition of Ameer Sing, bringing the captives safely away to a place of security.


LVII.	Our way Back to Russia	309
It is a three hours’ ride from Colombo to Kandy. Ceylon wears rightly the title of the “Switzerland of the Tropics;” only fairy islands can surpass the scenery. I could but gaze and gaze, and felt what poor things words had suddenly become. A riot of luxuriant tropical vegetation spread out on every hand, and aromas of strong smelling flowers scented the air. A series of moving pictures glided past us. We are rolling through fields of lotuses, sugar-cane plantations and vast plots of ground planted with coffee-trees, with shining leaves like porcelain, cut small to facilitate the gathering of the fruit. Cocoa and date-palms and bread-fruit are at your service, all you have to do is to pick the fruit—and luncheon is ready. The train is speeding along thick bamboo-clumps, through which peered the red-tiled roofs of bungalows and negro villages with palm-thatched huts shaded by immense banana-trees. We are in the harvest season. In the fields men and women were at work, occupied in gathering in the coffee. Natives sitting in ox-waggons drive slowly along the road. Here is an enormous elephant covered over with a rich carpet, carrying four natives on his back. The huge animal’s offspring, a baby-elephant as big as a bull, is running clumsily alongside. The railway stations are hidden amid cocoa-palms. On the platforms water-carriers and fruit-sellers briskly plied their trades. At one of the stoppages a Hindoo in white skirts came up to offer us bananas and cocoa-nuts full of milk, and red juicy fruit which I found very tasty; but I was awfully disgusted when I learned that it was the fruit of the castor-oil plant. Our train was moving away when a negro boy thrust into my lap, through the window, a small serpent of tender green colour, which I took at first for a blade of grass. Though these reptiles are quite inoffensive, I didn’t like the present. The ascent began. We climbed on steadily into the cooler regions. The steamy atmosphere was left behind, we were welcomed now by draughts of delicious air. We are crossing a thick-set wood, and are in the mysterious primitive jungle which the foot of man has seldom penetrated, and where elephants and tigers wander about. The train continues to wind its way upwards to the mountains, plunging through[446] numerous tunnels. Coming out of them we see the road which we had just crossed just beneath us now. The place is rightly named “Sensational Rock”—it is a succession of precipices and torrents. We are rolling along ledges cut in the rock, twisting and turning above sheer abysses.
“As I did the other day,” said Elizabeth, with a con{183}scious smile; “very true, it will be wise in me to refrain from that. But do not imagine that he is always here so often. It is on your account that he has been so frequently invited this week. You know my mother’s ideas as to the necessity of constant company for her friends. But really, and upon my honour, I will try to do what I think to be wisest; and now I hope you are satisfied.”
“This occurred on Sunday as early as seven o’clock and at some distance from my house. When I had finished public worship with the Tamils about ten o’clock the circumstance was communicated to me. From ten to twelve o’clock I preached to the English, after which I went with an English physician to the poor and almost murdered helper. When we arrived he was unable to speak or move. After losing blood, however, his chest, where he had received most injury, again heaved. When the case was made known to the Commanding Officer, he caused the Romish Catechist and three others, who had been particularly active in this murderous occurrence, to be imprisoned. The Nabob’s son put them into his own prison and promised to examine into the affair.”
would get up and write a little in his journal whilst the ink was
upon field of ripening grain, with well-paved roads running between,
When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and very unwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the carriage, and she only wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concern at parting with her that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer of the chaise into an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the present. Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was despatched to Longbourn, to acquaint the family with her stay, and bring back a supply of clothes.

                    KEPLER (quoted in _The Anatomy of Melancholy_)
My husband acceded to my entreaties that for the rest of our journey through America we would not be “The Governor-General and his wife,” but a plain party of tourists. After my fright I will enjoy it all, particularly because I could see everything I wanted to see, and that I could not have done if we were pointed out here and there as “The Governor-General and his wife.” And thus Sergy changed his name and sent away his luggage; we will travel across the Continent incognito.
middle of the river, but I didn’t lose no time; and when I struck the
Objections of another kind against paying off the National Debt.



Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
I went off in the canoe to ask about it. Pretty soon I found a man out
“What is it?” asked the little old woman, and looked, and began to
“What’s your real name? Is it Bill, or Tom, or Bob?—or what is it?”
de business, bekase he says dey warn’t business ’nough for two banks,

and nobody ever comes there. And then I can paddle over to town nights,
One may picture, too, the sudden shifting of the attention, the swiftly

afforded a practicable slope to the summit of the ruins. My chance of

more than there’s war between man and ants.”
unscrewing of the shot was judged to be a canard, and his evening
and so well did he work that by the time the mice began to arrive the

“William Collins.”
“They are generally long; but whether always charming, it is not for me to determine.”
’s a Sunday-school Superintendent to _him_. And look at Charles Second,
“Well, it’s awful, _I_ think,” says the hare-lip. “I’ll go to Uncle
Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy by character perfectly well. Here, consequently, was an inexhaustible subject of discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with the minute description which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor, she was delighting both him and herself. On being made acquainted with the present Mr. Darcy’s treatment of him, she tried to remember something of that gentleman’s reputed disposition, when quite a lad, which might agree with it; and was confident, at last, that she recollected having heard Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured boy.{181}

“Whar’d you come f’m, boy? You prepared to die?”

joke better than a good dinner. One day, just before the wedding, my
was going from house to house, warning people to leave. He was going on
CHAPTER XLII.
Flutter, flutter, went the flag, first to the right, then to the left.
information.
The railway-line leading to Port Saïd is very narrow and looks more like a tramway-line. The road ran close along the Suez Canal. A steamer crawled by close at hand as our train wheezed on from Ismailia to the coast; we soon left the ship behind us. Our way lay now through sugar-cane and cotton-fields. I felt very unwell all the time and lay stretched on my narrow bench, feeling very miserable. Notwithstanding the large dose of quinine my temperature was up, and I was shivering with fever. I hope I shall not fall seriously ill!
“And so was I.”
them, because if ever I was down a little they always give me the

stared at the blackened country, and particularly at the three gigantic


tell, Huck.”
snoring we had a long gabble, and I told Jim everything.

It was time for us to move on. When we returned to our carriage we found it had another occupant, the cross lady’s husband, der Papa, a little man with a big red moustache, who declared in a very rough tone that the seat belonged to him. It appears that it really was his place, and that his wife had exchanged seats of her own free will with two other German travellers. One of them immediately on starting, leisurely took off his coat, putting himself at his ease, and sat all the rest of the journey in his shirt-sleeves. The carriage went slowly winding up a long ascent. The road crept on between mountain slopes; close at hand the great form of the Jungfrau rose white to the sky. The ascent was difficult enough and when a specially steep bit was coming, the coachmen descended from their boxes to ease the horses up the rough track, walking by them and pulling vigorously at their long clay pipes.
off upon the pretty green grass, and they also knew that the stream had

“‘I wonder if that farmer thought to fool me in this clumsy manner. Any
“That is not very likely; our authority was too good.{307}”
“What do we _want_ of it? Hain’t we got to saw the leg of Jim’s bed
“Come in,” said Oz.
On the grievous, but necessary Part of the Impost.	36


“When the Witch is dead, come to me, and I will then give you the

We went down the lane, by the body of the man in black, sodden now from
some supper and a place to sleep.”
was an inn with a lawn, and beyond that the tower of Shepperton


“If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,” said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, “and all the others equally well married, I shall have nothing to wish for.”



He was the easiest nigger to laugh that ever was, anyway.
“Well, as for me, Tom, that’s the way I’d like.”
“Hungry, too, I reckon. I’ll find you something.”

about the cabin every night, and a bulldog tied to the door in the
“We regret to find the following statement by Mr. Winstow, one of the American missionaries, who visited Tanjore in 1828: ‘The Rajah has become very unfriendly with the missionaries. He has yielded himself up to dissipation and given immense sums to the Brahmins, and to the temples to make himself a Brahmin. His only son is growing up in ignorance, making no steady application to any study of science.’ (American Missionary Herald, vol. xxv. p. 140.)”

In another moment I had scrambled up the earthen rampart and stood upon
too—seemed a week before we got to the stern. No sign of a boat. Jim
well.”

September 19th.—Little by little morning appeared through the portholes. The wind continued to blow a hurricane. Towards seven o’clock we moved forward. The coasts of Japan were outlined in the distance. It is the deserted island of Dalegetta, surrounded by mountains 4,800 feet high.

half made up of glands and tubes and organs, occupied in turning
this room, and when they were seated he said politely:



sure Toto is nearly starved. Let us stop at the next house and talk to





enough task before us! Let us take a rest and gather strength while we
of that colossal bulk, embedded in the ground. The turf and gravel

Doing, and pointing to that which is right.
unanimous fear was inevitable. As my brother hesitated on the


back. He saw anger change to terror on the face of the poor wretch on

July 21st.—We passed this morning before a Cossack settlement without stopping. On the quay a platoon of Cossacks was ranged. The men started running after our boat along the bank, shouting hurrahs to me as to a queen. Indifferent to all their honours, I only counted the hours which separated me from my husband.
I had seen. They laughed again at my broken sentences.
Thus went day after day. At length a telegram came from Sergy. I was sure it was announcing his arrival and burst it open with a smile of triumph, but this smile very soon disappeared, for the telegram was an awful surprise, and shocked me dreadfully, saying that my husband was appointed governor-general of Erzeroum. For three weeks I had already lived this loathsome life and I had still many more weary weeks to pass before Sergy could return to me! What would I not give only to be able to go to him! Once the idea entered my mind, I communicated my wish to join him to Sergy, who treated the subject as an insane one, apprehending[92] the state of the roads, quite impracticable in that season.
the desert. How can she do so?”
“Now,” said the Scarecrow to the Tin Woodman, “you must go to those
After dinner we went to the camp to assist at the evening retreat. The big camp, situated about five miles from Nikolskoe, was decorated with flags and lanterns of different colours. The soldiers received us with shouts and cheers. When prayers were ended, the drums beat the salute and a salvo of twenty-six cannons was fired, after which the spouse of the chief of the brigade offered us tea in a big tent.
made to work hard during many years for the Wicked Witch, who had
noticed, but says:
Sergy began to be anxious for my health; finding that I was looking rather pale, he wisely decided that I must have more exercise and made me go out for a walk every day. Hating to do things by halves, and wanting to prove to Sergy that I was a first-rate walker, the idea came to me one day, whilst taking my afternoon walk, to pay a visit to my aunt Galitzine, who lived about three miles away. I returned home dead tired and awoke next morning with a bad cold. I had to lie in bed with bronchitis for at least a week to be restored to health. For company’s sake I always took Tiger, my big Danish dog, with me in my walks, whereat he rejoiced exceedingly, wagging his tail with violence. I had no need to elbow the passers-by with such a companion, every one cleared the way for us. There was much fuss with Tiger,[138] he had to be led by a chain at which he tore with all his might, nearly choking himself with his collar in his desperate struggle to get free; I had to do my best to keep his spirits within decent bounds. Sometimes he would stretch himself full length on the pavement, and it was hard work to make him get up without threatening him with his whip, at which he would stumble close against my skirt, doing the penitent, with the peculiar aspect of conscious wrong.
In the little town of Pulsnitz in Lusatia was a youth named Bartholomew Ziegenbalg, who was born on 24th June, 1683. The fatherless boy, who had lost his mother a few years before, recalled her words about gathered[Pg 17] treasure: “Seek it in your Bible, my dear children, you will find it there, for I have watered every leaf with my prayers.” His studies were in the direction of a ministerial career, which he felt God had placed before him, but his weak health and lack of means were hindrances to this. Through the kindness of friends, however, he was able to study at Halle under the direction of Professor A. H. Francke, and eventually he was discovered by Dr. Lütkens and, with his friend Henry Plütschau, was appointed to go to India. He set sail on the 29th November, 1705. He left behind many friends who wished him God-speed, but not a few, of little faith and equal grace of soul, sneered at his zeal and predicted nothing but failure and shame.
I didn’t go out to-day, having to superintend the preparations for the official dinner that Sergy gave to the Russian and Turkish authorities. The table was richly decorated with flowers and fruits brought from Tartoum, where they are admirably preserved; last year’s pears are still quite fresh. At about six o’clock the musicians mounted on to the roof of the opposite house by a ladder against the wall one after the other; street-lads climbed up after them in such numbers that one was obliged to turn them out for fear of the roof falling in. Another band was placed in the street just under our balcony. From my window I saw the Persian Consul approaching on his beautiful white Arab; in a few moments our drawing-room was full of guests. My husband placed himself at the centre of the table, having on one side the Metropolitan and on the other the Armenian Archbishop; I was sitting opposite. The dinner was very animated, much champagne was drunk. Maksoud-Effendi consumed this stimulating beverage more than anyone; he embraced his neighbour, Prince Tchavtchavadze, and exclaimed in a transport of tenderness: “If war had continued, I would have killed you, perhaps, but now I kiss you with all my heart!” My husband gave the first toast and drank to the health of our Emperor; everybody stood up crying out “Hurra!” After that Sergy exclaimed: “I drink to the duration of peace between Russia and the friendly powers, France, Turkey and Persia, as well as to the health of their representatives here present!”
“The for’rard end, mum.”

“Mr. Collins appears very fortunate in his choice of a wife.”
The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have answered her hopes; but, alas! the ladies had crowded round the table, where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee, in so close a confederacy, that there was not a single vacancy near her which would admit of a chair. And on the gentlemen’s approaching, one of the girls moved closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper,—
“It ain’t no use, Huck, it ain’t a-going to work. If we was prisoners
October 29th, 30th, 31st.—All these days there was no land in view, nothing but the endless blue of the sky and the endless waters of the Indian Ocean.
“Well,” says Buck, “a feud is this way. A man has a quarrel with
“Yes, very handsome.”

torment yourself. No one escaped but you.”
deeply through a shiny mudflat that seemed to hang halfway up between

open into the parlor, where the corpse was laying, and there was a
however, she found a boy who was handsome and manly and wise beyond his

so, and swallow the sawdust, so it can’t be found, and put some dirt
The death of Hyder Ali in 1782 did not end the war. His son Tippoo, exceeding his father in cruelty and vindictive oppression, was inspired to retrieve his reverses and carry the conflict against the English to the bitter end. For a time, however, the tide of war was against his arms and, the French troops having left him on the declaration of peace in Europe, the English Commander Fullerton was advancing upon Mysore itself, when he was stopped by the half hearted policy of the Madras Government, who had received from Tippoo a request for peace.[Pg 121] Once more in their difficulty an appeal was made, this time by Lord Macartney, to Schwartz, that he should accompany the commissioners on their visit to Tippoo’s camp, to which, for the same just reasons as before, he agreed. At the same time he pointed out in plainest terms the folly of stopping Colonel Fullerton when he had an enemy at a disadvantage, and forecasted further trouble, if indeed it did not render his mission futile. In his conversation with this brave officer he fully sympathised with him in the disappointment and greatly regretted the step that had been taken.
But Danys, who was in a rebellious mood just then, turned upon him in a rage, and a resounding slap came before we could interfere, thereupon Hermann belaboured her with his little fists, straining to get his teeth into her hands.
shoulder.


smart one, and if she was to start after us herself _she_ wouldn’t set

ever seen.
“Opposite the palace is a large square, on two sides of which are open buildings in which the military and civil servants of Hyder have their appointed stations for conducting public business. He can overlook them from his balcony, and as they are required at appointed times to be in the places assigned them, to receive the reports of the country and army, whoever has business to transact knows where to find them. Here reigns no pomp but the utmost regularity and dispatch.... Though Hyder sometimes rewards his servants, the main spring of action here is terror. Everyone performs his part from a motive of fear, well knowing the consequences of any neglect of duty. Persons of the highest as well as of the meanest condition are punished with the same instrument. The tyrant keeps two hundred men with whips in constant readiness; and no day passes without many being chastised. The Governor of a whole district is whipped in the same manner as the meanest groom. Hyder treats them all alike. Even his two sons and his son-in-law are liable to the same cruel usage. When any one of his highest officers has been thus publicly flogged he does not allow him to resign his employment but compels him to retain it, that the marks of the whip on his person may serve to deter him from repeating the offence; for he seems to think that almost all persons who seek to enrich themselves are devoid of all principles of honour.
midnight; and others was trying to get them to hold on and wait for the


carry with them.


again they were retreating.
delight. Afterwards he taught me poker, and I beat him at three tough
strangely enough, seemed to be quite silent and deserted, save for a
Possibly among these fugitives Christians came, some maybe with personal memories of the life and ministry of our Lord, others, converts of the Apostles, stray Jews who had embraced the Christian faith, or Gentiles who had[Pg 4] renounced their idolatry and gratefully accepted the Gospel. It is therefore not improbable that at this time and under these conditions Christianity first came to India.
[10]

putrefactive process. But probable as this seems, it is by no means a
CORONATION OF NICOLAS II
delighted to see their dear friend again.
concurred in yielding him the highest homage ever paid in this quarter of the globe to European virtue.
[Image unavailable.]
Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne without anger such treatment: but Sir William’s good-breeding carried him through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to the truth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with the most forbearing courtesy.
Mamma kept me very strictly, and did a good deal of weeding in the selection of my friends. She did not consider, alas! the Rydes the best of companions for a girl of my temperament, who was always on the look out for wickedness, fearing that they stuffed my head with all sorts of silly nonsense. On holidays she caught me flat-nosed, with my face glued to the window, looking out for the Rydes.
men! He had got up that joke all out of his own head, and never let on
containing people who had gone out for a day’s boating and found the
prevented me, for I was bruised, weary, wet to the skin, deafened and
coffee, and coffee-pot and frying-pan, and sugar and tin cups, and the
pretty much everytime; it don’t fool nobody but a stranger; but Jack
long interval six again. And that was all.
sky.
Our stay abroad was not altogether a very agreeable one, for Sergy was all the time very nervous and careworn, dreading to arrive too late for the siege of Kars. As to me, this trip brought the roses back to my cheeks, but as the time for my husband’s return to the war drew near, my face grew sadder. I dreaded going back, having the painful knowledge that we must return to all the horrors of war again.
Laying for Him.—Locked in the Cabin.—Sinking the Body.—Resting.

Well, as I was saying about the parlor, there was beautiful curtains on
CHAPTER LXXVI
streets far and wide, houses, churches, squares, crescents,
Thus the work of the Danish Mission, for the first forty years of the eighteenth century so zealously pursued and in its later years so generously supported by the S.P.C.K., had spread from Tranquebar to Cuddalore and Madras and to Tanjore in the interior. In many instances the missionaries rendered great services to the English garrisons, especially to the foreign levies, for in 1749 an enlistment of Swiss soldiers made the ministrations of these Danish and German clergymen very acceptable. These missionaries, it must be remembered, used the English Prayer Book or translations of it, taught the Church catechism in their schools, and in their adult work observed the ordinance of baptism according to the English rite. In one of the ancient minutes of the S.P.C.K., dated 4th December, 1744, are the words, “Recommended to ye Missionaries to continue ye use of ye ch. of Eng. Catechism and to baptise in ye form of Com. Prayer.”
“The country,” said Darcy, “can in general supply but few subjects for such a study. In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and unvarying society.{56}”
Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her husband’s incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that her neighbours might all see Mr. Bingley, in consequence of it, before they did. As the day of his arrival drew near,—

We have learned by a newspaper-telegram from St. Petersburg that an earthquake, preceded by a formidable underground noise, had shaken Khabarovsk. It is very strange that nobody had felt it here. It comes out that it is from a writing in a local paper, describing an earthquake at the distance of 800 miles from Khabarovsk, but the correspondent of St. Petersburg had omitted the 800 miles, and it is thus that the false report spread out.

If it were acknowledged, that each new tax, increasing necessarily the price of every thing in the nation, for the purpose of supporting, at least, the interior consumption, on which depends the discharge of the taxes, would add to the inconvenience brought about by those pretended very wise regulations, and would soon lead to a decrease in the external consumption, which the nation might have preserved, if other countries did not raise their own prices accordingly, in order to pay with the same products the same quantity of articles which they used to take before the advance occasioned by the taxes; that therefore such a general propagation of increase in prices, being of a general interest to the production and consumption every where, would not fail to take place every where as it has always done, and to dwindle again into a childish play, much beneath the adolescence of the age we live in:



judged that we was free and safe once more. I hadn’t had a bite to eat
“You must keep your promises to us!” exclaimed Dorothy.
to it. I said likely we wouldn’t, because I had heard say there warn’t

scrap of food had gone. Apparently, the Martian had taken it all on the

pile of fox-fire, and went to work. We cleared everything out of the
Next morning, ‘Chop off her head!’ And they chop it off. ‘Fetch up Jane

spreading that Regent Street and Portland Place were full of their
They began to meet more people. For the most part these were staring

1ᵒ.

[299]


CHAPTER XXII.
one of the candles along, and listened under the window-hole, and heard
CHAPTER XLII
“Who do you reckon ’t is?”

me. What you going to do about the servant-girl?”
Nonesuch, Bricksville_.’ Put it away, and don’t lose it. When the court
Of Warren Hastings it has been truly said as regards these closing years of persecution and bitterness:
Edmund Kean the elder, of the Royal Haymarket Theatre,
a tow-head or something; I got to set still and float, and yet it’s
give them the love and the kisses, and tell them the message.
says if he has succeeded in pleasing them and instructing them, he will

have actually succeeded in effecting a landing on the planet Venus.
“I will make no promise of the kind.”
up in a balloon. And she also felt sorry at losing Oz, and so did her


quarrelled with other drivers; some sat motionless, staring at nothing
16thly,
their left, carrying a child and with two other children; and then




somewheres, and fetched up on the old gentleman’s, and says, “Didn’t
CHAPTER XXVIII.
on the omnibuses. People in fashionable clothing peeped at them out of
Dorothy thought, were about as old as Uncle Henry, for two of them had
Effects of a Land-tax.	196[xix]

cash box had been hastily smashed open and thrown under the debris.
howling, and then the rest followed; and the next second half of them
worked for the next half an hour showed about how he was scared. By
well trained by a great master. I can imitate any kind of a bird or
and Miss Hooker she said if I didn’t strike help sooner, come here and
“Oh, don’t distress me any more’n I’m already distressed. I don’t know
On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the saloon, whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer. Its windows, opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts which were scattered over the intermediate lawn.


“We will do that gladly,” returned the tiger; and all the other beasts
“Why, Sally, I _couldn’t_ miss him along the road—_you_ know that.”

SINGAPORE
Next morning, supplied with tickets from Cook’s agency, we sailed for Italy on the “Amphitrite,” a splendid steamer belonging to the Austrian Lloyd Company, a veritable floating town filled with every possible requirement. The third bell announcing our departure rung and the boat moved out to sea. Soon Egyptian land disappeared from view. The Adriatic, which is particularly treacherous, promised a stormy passage. There were big black clouds on the horizon and the wind was very strong; we were in for rough weather! The whole night our ship tossed about like a cockle-shell, and foaming waves broke against the portholes of our cabin. I couldn’t go to sleep till daybreak. When the liner swung into the familiar waters of the Mediterranean, it was calm as a lake. After the intense heat of Egypt it seemed very cold, but one is never satisfied with the temperature one has!

CHAPTER V.
“Well, Sally, I’m in fault, and I acknowledge it; I’ve been remiss; but
{421}
“You are quite right. To have his errors made public might ruin him for ever. He is now, perhaps, sorry for what he has done, and anxious to re-establish a character. We must not make him desperate.”
We have put up at the Grand Hôtel where we feel very comfortable. This winter I mean to lead a quiet, homely life, being wonderfully changed after my marriage. Out of a frivolous society girl, I have developed, thanks to Sergy, into a very domestic sort of person. I have seen enough of the world to understand how flippant it is, how empty—a vanity of vanities! Marriage has given me a new view of the world altogether, I have taken off my rose-coloured spectacles to look at life as it is, and have learned many things which I did not know.
forth. A little while after that a squad of police came into the
him so sudden; and, mind you, it was a thing that was calculated to
“Meeting accidentally in Town”
“I will not trust myself on the subject,” replied Wickham; “I can hardly be just to him.”
The downfall of England was foretold at her very first loan. This prophecy did not destroy the means of funding, on a very solid basis, in the year 1762, that part of the national debt, till then unfunded. Now I would ask the man, whom I should know to be most intimately persuaded of the dreadful effect that must be produced[62] by a debt of 64,234,595l. incurred from 1754 to 1762, in addition to a still heavier one, contracted since the time when the total amount of the landed revenue was rated at 32,000,000, and the value of the lands only at 320 millions, that is to say, at about double the value of the whole national debt as it stands at present: I would ask that man, I say, whether, between the years 1763 and 1775, he has been able to discover in any parts of England, one single symptom of decay, either in agriculture or commerce, any diminution of public or private enjoyments, or less insolence amongst the common people, by which one may surely judge of the alterations which may happen in their circumstances. This general observation may suffice to make us look on the period of 1775, as presenting a state of things, which, supposing it had been prolonged, could not have held out any alarming prospect. Every one worked or enjoyed, and every body was paid. All this, methinks, might have continued on the same footing to the end of the world, without any alteration on the former or subsequent fortune of any one, such only excepted, as industry, activity, imprudence, and foresight, must occasion in all countries where justice is blind, and has but one scale.


you’s in de house, so I struck out for de woods to wait for day. Early
that.

Make the best o’ things the way you find ’em, says I—that’s my motto.
“I am talking of possibilities, Charles.”
In Shanklin, like everywhere else in England, Sunday is a dull day; the village is asleep, the shopkeepers put up their shutters and retire to the bosom of their families. Over the door of a thatched-roofed cottage just opposite Hollier’s Hotel, the sign-board Library in big white letters, is taken off and the mistress of the shop does not sweep the steps on her threshold, as she does every week-day. The baths, even, are open only until eight o’clock in the morning. There are very few people in the streets, only at eleven o’clock a.m., and at eight p.m. you can see the inhabitants with their prayer-books, going off to Chapel.
towards Woking.
myself that _I_ warn’t to blame, because _I_ didn’t run Jim off from
From that, in answer to my questions, he came round to his grandiose
brotherly love, and such-like tiresomeness; but everybody said it was a
“Oh, what a turn you did give me! and how glad and grateful I am it
Towards nine o’clock our steamer touched New York quay. We were a long time in getting in and came at last to the broad embankment. Not until eleven were we given permission to land on American ground. A crowd was massed on the dock to welcome the Bourgogne and her[321] passengers. There was a wild waving of hands and handkerchiefs on board. The moment had come to bid the ship good-bye. Our fellow-passengers hurried to and fro, carrying off their parcels. When all was in order, passengers’ papers looked through and all the formalities over, the bustle of disembarkment began. Friends are meeting each other, kisses, hearty greetings are exchanged.

With a stronger voice she soon added, “I have this comfort immediately, that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it has done no harm to anyone but myself.”
A message suddenly arrived from Sergy, an astounding piece of good news; he was coming to spend Christmas with me. I was delirious with joy at the thought of seeing him, and eagerly awaited his arrival; it filled my days with hope and excitement. I was sick and weary and hungry for the sight of his face and the sound of his voice. I counted the days and planned how we should spend Christmas together.

where Dorothy had hit it.

nigger like that is worth a thousand dollars—and kind treatment, too. I
glided and glided around three sides of the room, and then rose up, and
 Making up the “Deffisit”

chance and stole some of his daughter’s old clothes and cleared out,

lambs, because they ain’t, when you come right down to the cold facts;
They told me no one was allowed over the canal, and, looking along the
The jingle of the breakfast bell and Johnny’s piercing voice shouting “First call for breakfast,” awakened me in the morning. I had to crouch up and dress on my berth, and succeeded in putting on my frock in a series of contortions.[330] The Americans are very unceremonious people; peeping through the curtain of my division, I saw unattractive-looking bare legs underneath. All the passengers assembled in the saloon to drink coffee, which was brought in by Johnny and tasted very nasty.
you; and you needn’t let on to know me at first.”
length in the last chapter my brother’s account of the road through



CHAPTER V
but about a dozen houses there, and if they didn’t happen to have them




good for me to pray for _her_, blamed if I wouldn’t a done it or bust.
will roll this head all about the room until he promises to give us
EDITOR.


circumstances it warn’t no trouble to him to throw in an amount of


I’ve been killed, and floated down the river—there’s something up there
MILAN

bodies glittered in the sun as they swept swiftly forward upon the
that had just come, and he didn’t know the old man; so he said courts

get away. I didn’t want no trouble with their kind. I’d seen all I
and needles began to stick out of his brains. Finally he said:
shore. It was hard work, although he was so big; but by and by they

So she done it. And it was the niggers—I just expected it. She said the
MY SECOND SEASON IN ST. PETERSBURG

Meanwhile the two great Orders of the Middle Ages, the Franciscans and the Dominicans, were, at the bidding of the Popes, carrying far and wide the missions by which the all-embracing power and authority of Rome would assert itself, not only in making converts, but in bringing the political power of courts into its grasp and subjection. In the year 1319 a group of friars sailed for the Far East and found themselves on the shores of India (near the modern Bombay), and the leader of them, Jordan or Jordanus, during a stay of two years, visited the Nestorian churches and travelled amid many perils, for the leaders of Islam were oppressing the Christians. The true mission of Jordan was doubtless to bring the Nestorians to acknowledge the supremacy of the Pope, for up to this time they accepted[Pg 12] only the rule of their own Archbishop at Bandas (Baghdad). He bitterly complains in his letters to the Pope of the disorder in doctrine which prevails. Not even the rite of baptism is administered and many are so ignorant that they believe Saint Thomas the Great to be the Christ. This friar had, however, the saving quality of optimism, especially in the work of his own Order, for he says, “Of the conversion of those nations of India I say this, that if there were two or three hundred good friars who would faithfully and fervently preach the Catholic faith, there is not a year that would not see more than ten thousand persons converted to the Christian faith.”
We talked a lot of music with Kontski, who had known many celebrated artists, and had been on the best of terms with Rachel. During his stay in Paris in 1836, Kontski had been invited to a dinner-party given by Rothschild, at which many celebrities were present, famous people in the world of music: Chopin, Rossini, Liszt, Thalberg, and a host of others. After dinner the great musicians were asked to play. Thalberg complied readily, but Chopin refused point blank, saying that he had grown too heavy after the copious repast. Liszt followed his example and would not play. Then Rothschild, addressing himself to Rossini, who owed the nick-name of “Papa Rossini,” thanks to his fat and round figure, asked him to persuade Liszt to play something to them. But there was little sympathy between these two geniuses, and Rossini exclaimed perfidiously: “Liszt, mon ami, play us one of your admirable compositions which you give out ordinarily as an improvisation.” Liszt, furious to be turned into ridicule, sat down ragingly at the piano, bending his face over the keys, and began to play one of his most brilliant rhapsodies, with high technique and rare poetic insight. His performance enchanted everyone in the room except Rossini, who had not succeeded in ridiculing Liszt.



Church.
Story.—Valuable Information.
and when Jim flung himself down on the blanket while I struck a light
find that the fronds of the red weed had grown right across the hole in
now for the first time that the hood did indeed contain a Martian. As
wouldn’t be ripe for two or three months yet.
The curate had possession of the slit when the first men were brought


“I can guess the subject of your reverie.”
girls, without saying a word, and kissed them, solemn, on the forehead,
“I found,” said he, “as the time drew near, that I had better not meet Mr. Darcy;—that to be in the same room, the same party with him for so many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes might arise unpleasant to more than myself.”

Whether a certain country, where smuggling has been prohibited under pain of the galleys, be not indebted to smuggling itself for one fifth of the products of her agriculture, which the merchant and trader turn to their advantage with as little scruple, as if they had not petitioned for the detestable law against the smuggler?
fun it was. And we had to make up the pictures of coffins and things,
They now came upon more and more of the big scarlet poppies, and fewer
A more particular View of the same Subject.	12
me staggering with a blow from the corner of his burden. A woman thrust


It is impossible, because England importing bullion from Spain and Portugal, to the amount only of one third, and being very cautious, as observed before, not to import more than one third of what she owes to the Dutch, and this, not to pay them, but because this third answers sufficiently to the five articles of which I have[121] spoken before;—England, then, cannot give to the Dutch what she has not received from another, and which she has not of her own.
A score of “djigites” belonging to General Loris-Melikoff’s escort, consisting of different Asiatic tribes, gave circus performances on the square, where a military band played every afternoon on the roof-platform of the house opposite our abode. Below, a band of Armenian street urchins went through all sorts of military evolutions, under the command of a little chief, decorated with Russian paper-stars and crosses.

“Dern him, I wonder what he done with that four hundred and fifteen
“Are you, indeed? And pray what sort of a guardian do you make? Does your charge give you much trouble? Young ladies of her age are sometimes a little difficult to manage; and if she has the true Darcy spirit, she may like to have her own way.”
“How?” asked the Woodman.



WINTER IN ST. PETERSBURG
And Tom he turned his head a little, and muttered something or other,


out. These cages will be full of psalms and hymns and piety. And those
[217]
Princess Mimi Troubetzkoy, a jolly playmate of my childhood, came to pass Christmas in St. Petersburg. We were both glad to be together again, having known one another from infancy, we had many interests and tastes in common. Mimi was such a dear, delightful girl, and we had an uncommonly good time together. In our daily walks we used to meet a handsome, blustering officer, who managed to give us a good stare each time we passed him in the street. We decided one day, Mimi and I, to fling a pelot-balloon in order to know which of us attracted his attention, and crossed to the other side of the street. Mimi went on the left and I on the right side, and oh, triumph!—our follower came after me. I was very flattered, and rejoiced at my victory over Mimi. Her companion, a charming old lady who had once been governess to her, seeing that the affair was taking a serious turn, hurried us off home. That officer had been extremely useful to me one frosty day; he picked me up when I stretched myself at full length on the slippery pavement, and profiting by the opportunity, he murmured sotto voce compliments into my willing ear.
off up the road, and there warn’t anybody at the church, except maybe a

By Mark Twain
others, and that corner was hanging over. People lived in them yet, but

“It’s the way I feel, too, Jim. But we’ve got them on our hands, and we
Thirdly, That as soon as government, in such a nation, should have solemnly given up the right, supposed to be unalienable, of paying its debts, from no other motive but that of extreme honour and benevolence, the nation might then part with half her coin, and without impeding the circulation, increase her enjoyments and her wealth, which can be nothing more than the total of her annual labour, together with the monuments still subsisting of the labour of preceding years: a total, which could not but increase in the case now supposed.
The Exhibition opened at ten. We went there as soon as the gates were thrown open and left it only when we found ourselves almost too tired to stand. We met there many friends from Russia, Mr. Radde amongst them, director of the Museum in Tiflis, an eminent biologist versed in all the antiquities and questions of the past. He is awfully abstruse-minded, and always looking as if he just descended from the clouds. One day, when Mr. Radde called upon us at the Villa des Lilas, he made the acquaintance of our landlord,[530] who had nothing of the Adonis about him, with his round moon face, and a tiny baby nose disappearing between his fat cheeks. In a fit of absent-mindedness he began to pity the cherub-faced gentleman for having such a terrible inflammation, and on both sides of the face all the more. Our landlord thanked him for his compassion, but said that happily, he never suffered from toothache, and was not afflicted therefore, with inflammation of any kind. I had to make a desperate effort to be serious when witnessing this comic scene.

The railway-line from Samarkand to Tashkend is not yet inaugurated officially, and the whole way is guarded by patrols to prevent the damage frequently caused to the line by hostile natives.
the twelfth; and the spectroscope, to which he had at once resorted,
to, I was in such a sweat to get through with the business. By-and-by I

off—Heat-Rays right and left, and not a Martian in ’em. Not a Martian
about two mile, and keep it burning till I come; then I manned my oars

back to save me and set me free when the close-fit come, here was
He began to wish to know more of her; and, as a step towards conversing with her himself, attended to her conversation with others. His doing so drew her notice. It was at Sir William Lucas’s, where a large party were assembled.
think it’s best to tell your uncle Harvey—”


unknown dangers before them, and going in the direction from which my

“And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters behind you; and I dare say I shall get husbands for them before the winter is over.”

“Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson: did not I mention it to you? Mr. Robinson’s asking him how he liked our Meryton assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many pretty women in the room, and which he thought the prettiest? and his answering immediately to the last question, ‘Oh, the eldest Miss Bennet, beyond a doubt: there cannot be two opinions on that point.’”

About five o’clock the gathering crowd in the station was immensely


hatchet and some nails, and a fishline as thick as my little finger




“It gives me the greatest pleasure to hear that you have passed your time not disagreeably. We have certainly done our best; and most fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very superior society, and from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of varying the humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that your Hunsford visit cannot have been entirely irksome. Our situation with regard to Lady Catherine’s family is, indeed, the sort of extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast. You see on what a footing we are. You see how continually we are engaged there. In truth, I must acknowledge, that, with all the disadvantages of this humble parsonage, I should not think anyone abiding in it an object of compassion, while they are sharers of our intimacy at Rosings.”
yards above the hood.

a big one, and she was coming in a hurry, too, looking like a black
Here’s the law a-standing ready to take a man’s son away from him—a

pit and the cylinder, although it has been convenient to describe them
Lunch passed off gaily, and I was glad after all that I went to it. The Grand Duke was charming to me and not at all ceremonious; I soon felt quite at my ease with him, and entirely free from shyness. Altogether I enjoyed myself thoroughly, although I had been dragged there by force and considered myself a victim, feeling like a lamb about to be led to slaughter, and compared that lunch to a disagreeable pill which had to be swallowed.
dreadful uneasy.”
“‘Shet de do’.’
I only spent three weeks on the banks of the Neva. I was miserable without Sergy, and my solitude becoming unbearable, I returned with my mother to Tashkend.

showed himself on the river side of the woodpile he got shot at. The
“Oh, but their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is such a presumption! And, besides, no traces of them were to be found on the Barnet road.”

want you keep mum and not let on. Will you?”
I says last ’n’ all the time—the nigger’s crazy—crazy ’s
“For a dog.”

see no sign of it’s being sawed, and thinks the bed-leg is perfectly
close and standing in towards shore past the steamboat.
and lugged all the traps up there. Then we hunted up a place close by
We weighed anchor early in the morning, and soon entered the harbour of Shanghai. A little steamer, belonging to the Russian-Chinese Bank, came to take us on land, and moored opposite the French Consulate. We found the Russian Consul waiting for us in his carriage, in which we drove to the Hôtel des Colonies, where we arrived just in time for tiffin. During the meal a large bouquet of heliotrope, surrounded by white lillies, was sent to me by the director of the Russian-Chinese Bank. In the afternoon the Governor of the town, accompanied by other Chinese authorities, came to congratulate my husband on the occasion of New Year’s Day.
“Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce Mr. Bingley to her.”

feet dangling, and amusing themselves—until I stopped them—by throwing
treated so?”

“What is it?” asked the Lion.
their overturned war-machines, some in the now rigid handling-machines,
Of course this was a bad thing for the Scarecrow.
If it were acknowledged, that those three interests center in the greatest quantity, as well as the greatest variety and best quality, of the products both of agriculture and industry, and in the greatest consumption of both at the most reasonable rate:
A. We have—and it is known to all the world that it is the dearest idea of an Englishman—an idea which the nation holds (if properly attended[317] to) as the only bulwark against a national bankruptcy.
“Who’s me?”

digging, and then for a good little while I knowed that he was


She was within a few steps of it, and Oz was holding out his hands to
We went down to dinner at table-d’hôte and entered a large hall, full of smartly-dressed ladies in low gowns and gentlemen in evening dress. We were served by Japanese boys dressed in kimonos, who spoke very good English. The head-butler is a Chinaman who had his pig-tail cut off. He told us that he could never put his foot in China again, because he would be beheaded for having changed his national head-gear. Human life seems to be regarded rather lightly in the Celestial Empire!
CHAPTER XXVIII.
still, and edging towards the middle of the river, nobody saying a
mind. As I drew nearer I heard Stent’s voice:
If it were admitted, that money is only the representation of value; that multiplying the[392] sign, without multiplying the articles which it is calculated to represent, is debasing fruitlessly the representation; and that, on the contrary, multiplying the article is the most infallible means of attracting the sign and keeping it up to its value:
if they had been in a dream. I asked myself had these latter things
the sweat off of his face, for it was powerful warm weather; and he had

We had two interesting guests at dinner to-day, a young[105] Persian prince, nephew of the Shah, who serves as dragoon officer in the Russian army, and is attached to the policemaster of Erzeroum for the present, and Daniel Effendi, a Turkish bureaucrat, who was sent to Constantinople last year as member of the new Turkish Parliament. After dinner, as we sipped our coffee on the roof-terrace, Egueshi, with a rather scattered expression, came up to Sergy and led him away, whispering something into his ear. Later on I was informed that there had just been an earthquake, and as the second shock is generally stronger than the first one, Egueshi came to advise my husband to make us all come out into the street. Some years before there had been such a terrible earthquake in Erzeroum that the inhabitants were forced to camp out in the open air for a whole month. After to-day’s earthquake one of the walls in the citadel has partly fallen down, and a great number of houses have cracked. It’s very strange that I haven’t felt anything at all, not the slightest shock. In order to prevent accidents in Erzeroum, where earthquakes are frequent, big beams are put into the masonries of nearly all the buildings. Two great shocks and some slight ones have succeeded each other during the night, and this time I felt them. It’s my first experience of an earthquake, and my last one, I hope.

no disciplined march; it was a stampede—a stampede gigantic and
My husband proposed to the Medical Expedition to organise an ocular ambulatory inspection during their stay at Samarkand which was especially necessary in this country, where eye-diseases predominate, thanks to the rare and superficial connection of the natives with water. Their famous religious ablutions consist in the submersion of their hands in a vase filled with water of doubtful cleanliness, in which they wash away their sins; and after that they dash the water over their faces, and it happens sometimes that a whole crowd of natives have already performed their ablutions in that basin of water! One can easily imagine the hygiene of this ceremony.
Elizabeth jumped out; and after giving each of them a hasty kiss, hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running downstairs from her mother’s apartment, immediately met her.
She could not think of Darcy’s leaving Kent without remembering that his cousin was to go with him; but Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear that he had no intentions at all, and, agreeable as he was, she did not mean to be unhappy about him.


sold—everything but a little old trifling lot in the graveyard. So
anybody else take care of that money but his own self; so then I went
A necessary Principle of Trade considered both as direct and in competition.	159
moan, and I says:


“To the bitter death!” He took the old man by the hand and squeezed it,
in a corner of the room, just as if it were not one of the most
again. He had got the dream fixed so strong in his head that he
“Certainly,” answered the Scarecrow. “How do you do?”
Mr. Chalmers has published a work on the comparative resources of this country at different periods; a subject, it seems, difficult to touch upon without examining the state of population. This publication, according to my judgement, unites to such solid principles as the matter will admit, a great deal of propriety in the manner of applying them, and of drawing the inferences.
object was at all evident to me. At the first glance it was really no
other, and one shot splashed the water high close by the steamer,

April 8th.—To-day we revisited the camp of the light-infantry, desiring to see my godson, the newly converted Melakani soldier, who by the way, is several years older than his godmother. I was horrified to hear that he had just been sent to the hospital. Presently, amongst our soldiers, the comparatively healthy ones are only those who have recovered already from the typhus-fever; it is pitiful to see their pale and meagre faces. Mr. Popoff told me that the sight of a[109] Russian woman would help them to forget, for a moment at least, that they find themselves in a strange and hostile land, so far away from their native country.
Honours were freely bestowed upon him, for he was statesman as well as warrior, and in the history of India his name will never die. But the fate of Dupleix was far different. Battling against failure and seeking to retrieve the fortunes of his flag he was ignominiously recalled by his ungrateful country and died in direst poverty of a broken heart.
On my return home my father and brothers found that I looked quite grown-up with my long dress and new style of coiffure.

drownded, and might be laying at this minute somewheres suffering or

cross-hall door, there was the skiff, sure enough! I could just barely

If the Minister be silent, or if he shuffle, because he is closely watched by Opposition, he must equally lose his popularity; for the land proprietor, left to shift for himself, will raise the price of the productions of his land, in proportion as the tax has increased that part of the products of industry that concerns him.—
There ain’t no watchman to be drugged—now there _ought_ to be a

take holiday soon as de ole folks ’uz out’n de way.
They came. The family were assembled in the breakfast-room to receive them. Smiles decked the face of Mrs. Bennet, as the carriage drove up to the door; her husband looked impenetrably grave; her daughters, alarmed, anxious, uneasy.

“Boggs!”

Tin Woodman.
“When the Party entered”
Or did a Martian sit within each, ruling, directing, using, much as a
Dorothy, and then shook their heads.
they dropped and they couldn’t find me. That made me pretty uneasy

“The entreaties of several”	31

trouble was still a-going on. I was mighty downhearted; so I made up my
mournful inscription—said Jim got to have one, like they all done. He
Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been unwilling to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made her equally avoid the name of his friend: but now she would no longer conceal from her his share in Lydia’s marriage. All was acknowledged, and half the night spent in conversation.
fancifully on the possibilities of its containing manuscript, on the
“Tenderly flirting”
and unprovisioned, driving headlong. It was the beginning of the rout
said was her greatest picture when she took sick, and every day and
nigger, you know. So the duke said it _was_ kind of hard to have to lay
From Lucerne to Goeshenen the road is very wild and hilly. Our train plunged in and out through numerous tunnels and rushed round curves in deep cuttings. After having crossed a bridge thrown over a bottomless abyss, we arrived at Goeshenen, where we stopped to pass the night in a homely little inn, pompously called Hotel, with green shutters to the windows and a bit of flower garden in front. The inn looked very cosy and inviting. After having lunched upon a cup of tea, we took a carriage with a pair of horses, with brass harness and bells, to make the ascent of the[190] famous St. Gothard road. The driver cracked his whip and off we went. The road mounted up and up, all over rocks and precipices and the wheels were perilously near the edge all the time. We wound through a narrow gorge, the river Reuss roared in the depths. Long lines of mountains were sharply defined against the profound blue sky, their summits veiled in clouds. Snow lay in dark hollows which the sun could never reach, and water-falls poured down the hills. The higher the carriage rose, the more thrilling was the savage landscape. We approached now the famous Pont du Diable (Devil’s Bridge) and saw on the polished surface of a rock an enormous coloured reproduction of Beelzebub, with a long tail and a red tongue hanging out of his huge mouth, holding in one hand a trident and a flaming torch in the other. Nothing remains now of the ancient “Devil’s Bridge,” which our field-marshal Prince Souvoroff had crossed with his army, going to fight against Napoleon Bonaparte. We passed over a modern bridge leading to the other side of the gorge. The spray from the Reuss; which here drops a full hundred feet into the abyss, lashed our faces as whips. The foam of the river was splashing over it. We dashed now through a vaulted gallery where we found ourselves out of the reach of falling stones. It was very damp inside, the ceiling and walls are always dripping; stalactites dangled heavy diamond fringes low over the roof. We drove against the wind and great clouds of dust swept across the road. We ran now into a zone of ice-cold air, there is no vegetation at all in these high altitudes, only the sides of the mountains are covered with thickets and bushes, where flocks of sheep and goats were grazing, under the guardianship of wild-looking shepherd boys. The great silence is only interrupted by a far-off ringing of bells from an Alpine village belfry, far below us. As we got higher up, the road was deep in snow, which continued to fall heavily. We ascended further and further and finally emerged upon a plain with a mountain lake formed by the melting of the snows, and came to the top of the ascent, having reached the height of over 23,000 feet. Suddenly after a steep ascent, we saw before us a tall lonely mass of grey stones, built upon a rock. It was the “Hospice” a sort of hotel, which used to be a monastery. Two big dogs of the St. Bernard breed welcomed us with joyous barkings. We ordered a dish of macaroni and a flask of chianti, and started back to Goeshenen. The atmosphere was chilly and the harsh, bleak wind made me shiver. Our driver taking pity on me, put his rug around my shoulders, but, alas, it appeared that it had many holes.
middle of it—it was as much as half-after eight, then—here comes a
Early in the morning we continued our journey to Nice. The country is not picturesque, and the roads are very rough and badly kept. Towards sunset we approached the French frontier Portou-Cerbère and soon perceived a corner of the Mediterranean, lighted by a silver moon. It was very cold in our compartment, and the foot-warmers had to be changed several times during the night. We did not stop at Marseilles and went straight on to Nice, having decided to spend a few days on the Riviera. There were two Frenchmen in our compartment going to gamble at Monte Carlo, who studied systems on a little roulette board. One of them descended at a station to buy a newspaper, whilst his friend slept on peacefully, nodding his head, in a corner of the carriage, and didn’t come back when the train had started. I was watching wickedly the awakening of our fellow-passenger, to see the expression of his face when he would[264] find out that his friend was not there. Suddenly waking out of his nap he opened his eyes very wide and fixed them upon us suspiciously. Did he think perhaps that we had pitched his companion out of the window? At the next stoppage both friends were reunited. The belated passenger, as it appears, had just time to jump in the next carriage when the train was moving.
must go up the road and waylay him. So I told the folks I reckoned I
But still I’m jist as able to be sorry for Mr. Wilks for not arriving



“Where, for the land’s sake, _did_ you get these amaz’n pickles?” and
slender, almost whiplike tentacles, arranged in two bunches of eight

was used to it. But my action angered the Wicked Witch of the East, for
thither among the struggling feet of men and horses. The man stopped

rough living in the house all the time, considering how dismal regular
disastrous struggle before such creatures as these could be destroyed.
I _tole_ you I ben rich wunst, en gwineter to be rich _agin;_ en it’s
at Cannon Street had been warned by midnight on Sunday, and trains were


free before? And he said, what he had planned in his head from the
My wife at least did not find my experience incredible. When I saw how
But now the men in the car out in space were stirring; consciousness was returning. The Commander approached the view plate now.

ben gone away?”
alarming the Martians, I attacked the creaking rain-water pump that
“No, it wouldn’t do—there ain’t necessity enough for it.”

“Hope!”



Heading to Chapter XXXIV.	235
Chapter XXIII
wreck there’s one of ’em going to be in a bad fix. But if we find their
August 17th.—To-day is our last day on board. We pass before the bays of Ulysses, Diomedes, Patrocles, and Ajax. Sergy came to wake me at dawn; the coasts of Siberia were in sight, and the lighthouse on the Island of Askold came to view. After we had seen nothing but waves for so many days, it was exciting to see land again. We advanced slowly in order not to arrive before the appointed hour, nine o’clock to Vladivostock. My husband’s standard is hoisted on the Mandchour. The commander comes to take leave of me and offers me as a souvenir of our voyage, a beautiful bouquet tied with a broad blue ribbon bearing in big gilded letters: Kobe, Nagasaki, Vladivostock,—the three ports we had touched on the Mandchour.
and people might see me and hail me. I got out amongst the driftwood,
October 28th.—This morning a group of Asiatic princes were presented to my husband in his railway-car; amongst them there was the pretender to the throne of Afghanistan Isaac-Khan—leading his little son by the hand. Before that Prince several pretenders to the throne of Afghanistan had chosen Samarkand for their residence, amongst them the famous Abdurakham, who, after having been raised to the throne, had shown his gratitude to the friendliness of the Russians, by playing false. Under pain of death, the entrance of Russian subjects into his territory was forbidden. Isaac-Khan is poor as a rat; he is living on a petty allowance of the Russian government, and though he has very little hope of succeeding to the throne of Afghanistan, he brings up his son as if the throne would belong to him one day or other. When the boy is asked who he is, he answers with an air of great importance: “I am Grand Sirdar” (General-in-Chief), but for the moment his army consists only of half a dozen ragged servants. I took an instinctive dislike to his father, and saw “Borgia” written all over him. In fact I believe the prince a man capable of anything, and though honied words come readily to his lips, his eyes flash an evil look, and hardly ever meet those of the person with whom he talks. There was something in his appearance which distinctly alarmed me. He would have made a perfect villain in a melodrama, with a beard growing almost reaching his eyes. It was not a face that one would care to meet when alone in the dark. Amongst the exotic princes I saw the[509] suzerain of a small principality, who after having become a Russian subject, received as recompense the grade of major. He wears a “khalat” with Russian epaulettes, girded with a green sash, a sign that he is a descendant of the Prophet. When the presentations ended, my husband distributed medals and “khalats” to the native notables who came up to him preparing their most engaging smiles. After having received their gift, they retired backwards murmuring profuse thanks and touching their forehead, mouth and heart, contriving to stimulate on their faces sentiments of profound gratitude, though nourishing a profound hatred towards the Russians. From these treacherous people one can expect anything; it is an eternal armed-peace with them.

“Why, where was you raised? Don’t you know what a feud is?”
His behaviour to her sister was such during dinnertime as showed an admiration of her, which, though more guarded than formerly, persuaded Elizabeth, that, if left wholly to himself, Jane’s happiness, and his own, would be speedily secured. Though she dared not depend upon the consequence, she yet received pleasure from observing his behaviour. It gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in no cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her as the table could divide them. He was on one side of her mother. She knew how little such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to advantage. She was not near enough to hear any of their discourse; but she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and cold was their manner whenever they did. Her mother’s ungraciousness made the sense of what they owed him more painful to Elizabeth’s mind; and she would, at times, have given anything to be privileged to tell him, that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the family.
When he got along I was hard at it taking up a “trot” line. He abused

looking tolerable cheap. I could a staid if I wanted to, but I didn’t
by me, and passed uphill towards Pyrford.
anybody, being gone, you see, yet finding a power of fault with me for

“Please make yourselves comfortable while I go to the door of the




“Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into Hertfordshire this winter. I will read it to you.{150}
was not already a blackened skeleton was burning. The hussars had been
flowers that surrounded them would never end. They followed the bend of





Secondly, the difference, perhaps more sensible, which must follow the method so much boasted, of taxing in preference, those objects which are consumed by the rich; as if it were possible to apply to any object, an extraordinary portion of a given revenue, without taking off that very portion from some other article, the consumption of which is equally necessary to the subsistence of artizans of another kind.
“Nay,” said Elizabeth, “this is not fair. You wish to think all the world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody. I only want to think you perfect, and you set yourself against it. Do not be afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on your privilege of universal good-will. You need not. There are few people whom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. The more I see of the world the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms my belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of the little dependence that can be placed on the appearance{171} of either merit or sense. I have met with two instances lately: one I will not mention, the other is Charlotte’s marriage. It is unaccountable! in every view it is unaccountable!”

cellar again. For a minute I was not sure. Apparently it had taken a
their hissing steam jets this way and that.
Just as he spoke there came from the forest a terrible roar, and the

We then went to the “Jardin des Plantes,” visiting in the first place the part of the gardens where the useful plants of the whole world are exposed; amongst them we saw our native sunflowers, at the sight of which a sudden pang of home-sickness came over me. I was beginning to pine already for my dear old country, for my motto is and always will be: “There’s no place like home.” Life is so much more open and free in our Alma Mater! It is true that every piece of ground is cultivated abroad, but one feels restraint in everything here, everywhere one meets with peremptory orders to keep off the grass, and with placards saying, “Do not walk here, do not touch that.” This restraint is especially felt by myself who am so fond of freedom and space. We just ran through the mineralogical museum, close to which grows a gum-tree planted in 1636, and then entered the Monkey Pavilion where the Fathers and Mothers[169] of mankind (according to Darwin) performed all sorts of tricks and gambols, obtaining a great amount of laughter. Amongst other curiosities of the “Jardin des Plantes” we saw a white sheep with two black heads and a calf with five legs. In a separate Pavilion is shown the skeleton of an enormous whale caught in the waters of the Seine in 1847. I had a ride on the elephant and felt rather frightened to be perched so high up on the back of the great beast. I had also a ride in a car drawn by an ostrich; before starting I asked the conductor laughingly if his bird would not fly away up in the air with me. It was tremendous great fun!
from Hicksville, Ohio, and his name was William Thompson—and he made

“None of it at all. Not a lie in it,” says I.
“Oh, yes. Some of us are very good tinsmiths,” they told her.
everywhere, busied in a thousand activities, that it seemed incredible
and blessing the people and praising them and thanking them for being
is the thing. There men like you come in. There’s books, there’s
“Shucks, they don’t _all_ of ’em preach the same day—only _one_ of

was presently stilled, and an intermittent cracking of rifles.
is better for people to keep away from Oz, unless they have business




His soul did from this cold world fly
ain’t your uncles, and I couldn’t do it if I _was_ here. I could swear

satisfied. And so it turned out, and he let on to be Sid, and made
Heading to Chapter XXXII.	221
“I never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Every time they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball he offended two or three young ladies by not asking them to dance; and I spoke to him twice myself without receiving an answer. Could there be finer symptoms? Is not general incivility the very essence of love?”

“Yours, very sincerely,


But get thee to a nunnery—go!
was discharged, and where the guns were openly displayed the Heat-Ray

which are still unsettled. In one respect I shall certainly provoke
Before them stood a little man about the same size as the Munchkins. He

On the quay men besieged us with their cards and prospectuses, each of them trying to lead us into the hotel that they were charged to represent. We took a Chinese interpreter called Fun, who spoke a few words of English, and promised to show us all the sights of Macao. He took us to the Hotel Hing-Kee, standing on the marine esplanade called “Praia-Grande,” where a military band plays every evening. The hotel is built Portuguese fashion, with a gallery running around the four sides of the “patio” leading into the various rooms. The gallery is divided in several parts by wooden partitions communicating by doors which we opened, appropriating thus the whole gallery. Outside the air is mild, but it is very cold indoors; we were obliged to have a fire. In front of our hotel a boat, belonging to the Portuguese Customs, is moored; the opposite shore belongs to China.
asleep. Well, by this time I was most down to the foot of the island. A

dropped pap’s whetstone there too, so as to look like it had been done
in such a thing as that.
What is said of the productions of agriculture, may be applied to those of industry. It is a gross mistake to imagine, that all things can be equally well manufactured every where: how many fabrics, the perfection of which depends[332] on the quality of the water, and other local causes for which it is impossible to account! How many more derive their perfection from the bent of national genius, from the general dispositions, the natural qualities of the inhabitants! Can we expect from the vivacity of the Frenchman, who desires only to consume, what we may expect from the patience of the Englishman, who labours only to enjoy? This latter will always, and in spite of himself, give to his work a solidity which will increase its price as well as its value; the other, in spite of himself, will be busy about the forms best calculated to procure a quick sale: objects of real comfort will always belong to the former, the latter will ever lead the fashions. To hope that the one will produce, without difficulty, what costs little or nothing to the other, would be attempting to give to the wines of hot countries the pleasing acidity proper to the wines of Germany; to these, the restorative and balsamic qualities of the Spanish and Italian wines in the places where they understand how to make them; to the wines of Italy and Germany, that native generosity proper to the wine of Bordeaux; to all of them, the flavour of Burgundy and the sprightliness of Champaign. It is possible, say they, to imitate every thing;—say rather, to adulterate, to corrupt, nay even to[333] poison every thing, if Art can find no other way to counterfeit Nature: and these are the blessed effects of restrictions and prohibitions. It is a strange idea, to think of doing without others; as if that did not lead them to think of doing without us; as if the savage, of whom I have spoken, had not the same reason to prefer his state to that of civilisation.
meteorites are rounded more or less completely. It was, however, still
He paused.
what is the dominant feature of almost all human devices in mechanism
NEW JERUSALEM CHURCH, TRANQUEBAR
 A pretty long Blessing
Next morning I said it was getting slow and dull, and I wanted to get a
very low:
we hurried along I and the artilleryman talked in whispers and looked

It remains for us now to compute, at the lowest, the income produced by a second class of people, probably as numerous as the former, since not less than 1,500,000 persons of both sexes, and of all ages, are employed solely in preparing and working the wool. (See Chalmers’s Estimates.) But if the labour of 3,000,000 of husbandmen brings in 70 millions annually, why should that of an equal number of mechanics and handicraftsmen stand for less in the computation? To this reason let the following remarks be added.

that grand and good and pious that you’d say he had walked right out of
horse came to his assistance.
myself, horses coming; and next I hear people’s voices. I got
us by the French government. The ribs of the few horses showed
We shot a water-fowl, now and, then that got up too early in the morning

Mr. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was rather offended, and therefore checked her laugh. Miss Bingley warmly resented the indignity he had received, in an expostulation with her brother for talking such nonsense.
The line on the London side of Woking station was still undergoing
And so for three days and nights. No difference—just the same thing.
“Well, then, I’ll believe some of it; but I hope to gracious if I’ll

“Why, what do they want with more?”
“Well, I’m not sure about Kansas,” said Oz, “for I haven’t the faintest


sight of another human being my torpor passed, and I leaned out of the


interview with the Wizard.
walked along he sang “Tol-de-ri-de-oh!” at every step, he felt so gay.

stuff, as if I’d been gone away?”
The Resident is absolute sovereign in these parts; his surroundings transport one at the end of the nineteenth century to the epoch of feudalism. During the reception barefooted servants presented trays charged with wine and champagne, in humble attitudes, bending the knee before their master, and retreated backwards bowing very low.
it.”
LXXXVII.	Port Saïd	429
lips, and they were gray also. She was thin and gaunt, and never smiled
was. But now she says:

emotion and of my flight, and I staggered and fell by the wayside. That
“Yes, I reckon so, ’m. I don’t see nothing in the way of it. Has
“Ay, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the waiter must not hear, as if he cared! I dare say he often hears worse things said than I am going to say. But he is an ugly fellow! I am glad he is gone. I never saw such a long chin in my life. Well, but now for my news: it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is not it? There is no danger of Wickham’s marrying Mary King—there’s for you! She is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool; gone to stay. Wickham is safe.”

fall over. It recovered its balance by a miracle, and, no longer

[475]
slow, en poke my head in behine de chile, sof’ en still, en all uv a
it than anybody else; and she’s going to stick to them till they say
farther. Dorothy and Toto and the Lion lay down to sleep, while the

business, or something. So then we was pretty scared, and made up an





mere child of a girl, you know, and she doesn’t bray like a jackass.”
2nd July.—We left Chicago this morning. Our train rolls rapidly towards San Francisco. We have six days of railway. The temperature being very hot, everyone put[335] himself at his ease; my travelling-companions also took off their coats—American fashion. We drink iced-water the whole day to refresh ourselves. Our “Johnny” lay full stretched on the sofa in the private saloon; Mme. Beurgier tried to make him take a more correct attitude, but to make remarks to the darkie was as fruitless as to sponge his nigger face white. He paid no attention whatever to her reproofs and continued his dolce far niente, munching an apple with beautiful white teeth.
him alone. Which was sound enough judgment; but you take the average
dropped it on the floor. It fell pretty solid, and only rolled about an
as deliberately as if they had been on parade, and fired at about a



“Oh, let _up_ on this cussed nonsense; do you take me for a blame’
town?”

Mrs. Hurst sang with her sister; and while they were thus employed, Elizabeth could not help observing, as she turned over some music-books that lay on the instrument, how frequently Mr. Darcy’s eyes were fixed on her. She hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object of admiration to so great a man, and yet that he should look at her because he disliked her was still more strange. She could only imagine, however, at last, that she drew his notice because there was something about her more wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than in any other person present.{66} The supposition did not pain her. She liked him too little to care for his approbation.

old omnibus, among other vehicles, were being loaded in the village

Fifthly, and in fine, of the assistance which the State derives for the Royal navy, from that increase in its trading one, which became necessary after the increase of a revenue, due to people who should have been sent to the galleys, had they been caught in the flagrancy of such a crime. One half of the cotton and coffee which is gathered at St. Domingo, Martinico, Guadaloupe, and Grand Terre above all, owes its existence to negroes, constantly furnished to the French smuggler, both great and small, by the English merchant, the natural, and as it plainly appears, the necessary enemy to France and her trade; the quantity of sugar and indigo which in the said colonies owes its existence to the same means, is much more than necessary to make up that fifth of the revenue, the glory of which may be claimed by the smuggler, though the fair trader comes in for a share in the profits.

[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]

“What letter?”
progress. He pointed out to me how unlikely it was that organic
useless in our dense air. In a group round the mouth were sixteen
with his voice rising slowly, through the greater part of the eighth
I didn’t wait, but shoved out and paddled away easy. I tied up in the




I shall begin with the most interesting article in the present situation of affairs, namely, how far the wealth of a State, and the affluence of the Subject, may be affected by a national debt?
of the widow’s garden, stooping down so as the branches wouldn’t scrape
and this time worse than ever. The rain poured down, and never a light
excited, and, for the most part, highly delighted at this astonishing
he’d show me a lot of water-moccasins. If anything happens _he_ ain’t
moment. I ran to my neighbour’s door and rapped to satisfy myself of

quite dead.
“Mr. Bingley does not know Mr. Wickham himself.”

“Never mind, Buck, my boy,” says the old man, “you’ll have show enough,


everything, and turning to the dignified little Mouse, he said:
I says:
“My folks was living in Pike County, in Missouri, where I was born, and
A bird which followed our boat all the way from Aden, rested this night on the main mast and was captured by the sailors who want to tame it.
Eighteenthly, Is it not even probable that every wise nation will be sensible that there is but one way to carry on, without being constantly duped, a commerce with another nation, obliged to raise the price of her goods; viz. to raise, in the same proportion, those which are given in exchange?—This, some will say, is an indirect[286] advice which I take upon me to give to industry; nothing more useless, will they add; industry in all countries never fails making that calculation.—I do not assume the liberty of advising industry;—Industry is far better acquainted, than I am, with her own interest: it is to agriculture I presume to give advice; and this I have an incontestable right to do, since I myself am a cultivator, an American cultivator, and that my fortune cannot increase, nor even stand as it is, but with that of my brethren, the cultivators throughout all Europe, whose consumption is as essential to me, in regard to sugars, cottons, coffee, indigo, &c. as mine is essential to them, with respect to wines, flour, oils, hemp, iron, &c. How is it possible to charge them with an advanced price on the goods they purchase, without diminishing their means of buying, unless they raise their own commodities equally with the above goods?—How can one diminish their power of buying, without diminishing also my resources for a sale?—How can one diminish my resources for a sale, without diminishing my means of production?—And how is it possible to put a stop to the productions of America, without crushing in the very bud all the European productions, which are to pay for them?—There is not the least doubt,[287] but that, between merchant and merchant, alien or native, there never is any difficulty: nothing more candid than their respective conduct; never a word about prices; each fixes his own, and it often happens that a bale of goods has been sold ten times upon the invoice, and never opened:—But when a merchant, no matter of what nation, says to his customer, no matter of what country; English goods have increased in price from 20 to 22, I cannot have them for less; it is essential for every land proprietor, from Pole to Pole, to know that he must not hesitate to answer: You cannot come down to me, give me leave to get up to you; or, in other words, I also advance my prices from 20 to 22, so that every thing is in its due order, and the cock of the balance stands still in its place. On this principle, clearly evident and of an irrefragable necessity, I maintain that it is England, successively compelled, as well by her wealth, as by her taxes and monopoly, to increase her prices at home,—England, trading to all parts of Europe, more largely than any other country,—it is England, I say, who, to this day, has raised the prices of every thing all over Europe; and I insist, that England, once more obliged to carry those prices still higher, once more will compel Europe to follow her example, and that all Europe will[288] grow richer by her means, (as has been the case hitherto) on account of the encouragement which this increase will give in all countries, where England may think fit to continue or extend her trade on fair and equitable principles.
and I held my peace. I preached acceptable folly—my God, what

So the Tin Woodman was forced to return sorrowfully to his friends and
in just that way, and was not surprised in the least.
Arkansaw!”
they cried again. And when it was bedtime the old man rose up and held
was nearly three o’clock, and he hoped daylight wouldn’t wait more than
interplanetary flight; every twenty-four hours brought them
For a time we did not see how this change affected our position, save


Chapter XIX
Ottershaw bridge to the sand-pits.
ELIZABETH related to Jane, the next day, what had passed between Mr. Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern: she knew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr. Bingley’s regard; and yet it was not in her nature to question the veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. The possibility of his having really endured such unkindness was enough to interest all her tender feelings; and nothing therefore remained to be done but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be otherwise explained.{109}

But, it will be said, the louis d’ors, which are spent in Germany during a war, revert to France soon after a peace; the plenty in which they flow back, is known to every one who has the least concern in trade.—No doubt of it; when the German circulation is overloaded, it must re-flow where it is beneath its level: the coin carried by the French into Germany, in the time of war, was then indispensable there to supply the wants of those who carried the money into that country, and to increase the means of the ordinary circulation, an increase occasioned by a circumstance that tertiated the price of every thing. The circumstance subsiding, every thing takes its usual course; prices are reduced; the greatest part of the money which had been carried there, becomes useless on account of that reduction:—it is sent back; and why is it taken then by France? Because it is become necessary there;—for you must observe, that the money in question was useless in France, as soon as it was wanted in Germany.—During the war the commerce of France was at a stand; her granaries overstocked with corn, her cellars with wine, her warehouses with goods, waited only for peace, to set a value on that corn, that wine, those goods, and of course, on that idol Money, which, during the war, could not, in regard to the French, be of any[306] value, but on the very spot where the French had themselves carried it.
was talking to him in a low voice, and glancing towards the king now
him from death; and the Cowardly Lion laughed, and said:


through rough and dangerous places before you reach the end of your

Jim said he reckoned the widow was partly right and pap was partly

intelligence, the Martian within the hood, was slain and splashed to
and fishing, and no books nor study. Two months or more run along, and
“That’s more _like_,” he says. “It’s real mysterious, and troublesome,
[408]
“Blame de point! I reck’n I knows what I knows. En mine you, de _real_
We took our after-dinner coffee on the balcony and saw the swing bridge giving passage to a Spanish vessel which was leaving the harbour. At nine o’clock in the evening a retreat was sounded from the neighbouring barracks. At the first beat of the drum the soldiers hastened up to their quarters from all parts of the town.
noticed an unusual number of police regulating the traffic. Some of the
write to Mary Jane or not? S’pose she dug him up and didn’t find
For a moment we were silent, taking stock of each other. I dare say he

CHAPTER XXXII
He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped. To interrupt a silence which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed, she soon afterwards said,{231}—
“Have you seen anybody else go in there?”

ball, and lots of rubbage. We split the ball open with the hatchet, and
imprisoned it had been destroyed, with every soul in it, by a Martian.
April 6th.—The officers of the rifle battalion invited us to come and take tea in their camp. At our approach a[107] military band struck up a march. The musicians were surrounded by a red-fezzed mob, and the natives, generally lank and thin, looked contemptible little pieces of humanity beside our tall portly soldiers. We were invited to dismount and entered a great tent where we sat down at a long table. Our hosts who were awfully nice to us, proposed a little refreshment and drank our health.

“Nor church.”
there from the boats went tramping off down the lane. The big ferryboat

but he let them in at once, and they were again met by the beautiful

The natives were bigoted Hindus and Mohammedans, whose tongue had to be mastered; added to this the Europeans, with the flimsiest semblance of a Christian profession, were living dissolute and mercenary lives which brooked no interference. It is the old story, many times repeated since then. The name of Christ was profaned by the white people who were supposed to represent and honour it. Said a native to a chaplain: “Christian religion! Devil religion! Christian much drunk, much do wrong, much beat, much abuse others!” But Ziegenbalg and his comrade had come to warn their unruly brethren and to vindicate the power and grace of Christ to the heathen. They taught the children in schools, they learned Tamil in order to preach, and toiled with an unremitting zeal which soon broke down the health of poor Ziegenbalg.
“Here are strangers,” said the Guardian of the Gates to him, “and they
“If gentlemen kin afford to pay a dollar a mile apiece to be took on

“What did you say your name was, honey?”
Hines let out a whoop, like everybody else, and dropped my wrist and
“Nay,” cried Bingley, “this is too much, to remember at night all the foolish things that were said in the morning. And yet, upon my honour, I believed what I{63} said of myself to be true, and I believe it at this moment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needless precipitance merely to show off before the ladies.”
saying anything to him either, because the king was talking and they

wrote the oath on, and read it. It swore every boy to stick to the
ain’t it?”
“But how about the voice?” she inquired.
leaving its hiding place—a creature scarcely larger, an inferior
find anything to rhyme with it would just scratch it out and slap down

burning and sending rolling masses of black smoke across the road to
where Dorothy and her friends were walking.
[409]
At six o’clock the gong called us to dinner. I was placed just opposite the captain, an experienced mariner who had sailed for the last twenty-eight years in these parts. After dinner there was music in the saloon. The commissaire, who had a magnificent baritone voice, with looks of anticipated success, cleared his voice and began to sing love ditties. His assistant was induced to exhibit his skill on the mandoline, after which the Attorney-General of Tonkin, a creole, born at the Assumption Islands, sang opera airs, all the soprano, tenor and baritone parts, in his basso profundo voice.
instructions from Stent, to keep the people back and deter them from
didn’t look up—seemed to me I said it was Sarah; so I felt sort of
to have a nigger on watch at both doors all night. Tom he went down the
such another powwow as they made! In a quarter of a minute I was a kind
the men he’s ben a-gwyne to chaw up in the last twenty year he’d have
scarcely a month gone by, and how I had broken off to get my _Daily
Secondly, War has been productive, in the United States of America, of the same effects[173] which attend it every where else, viz. an augmentation in the price of every thing.
to do so.
Si le crédit n’est pas, après le Monopole, l’effet de la richesse qui enchérisse le plus tous les produits de la terre & de l’industrie.
hardly any strength left, he said. But I said, come on, if we get left
doing that. So soon as they’ve settled all our guns and ships, and

“I shall go with Dorothy,” declared the Lion, “for I am tired of your
“Poor things! to be left alone in the cold world so.”
Mr. Collins returned most punctually on the Monday fortnight, but his reception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on his first introduction. He was too happy, however, to need much attention; and,{166} luckily for the others, the business of love-making relieved them from a great deal of his company. The chief of every day was spent by him at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time to make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed.
Towards five o’clock Michigan Lake came into view and spread before us as broad as the sea, with tides coming in and going out, and steamships gliding on the blue water. At the last station before Chicago a boy came into the car piled up to his head with advertisements, which he scattered over us; he was followed by a man with a metal placard on his chest, who thrust into our hands a card setting forth the virtues of Savoie Hotel, and promised to occupy himself with our luggage. Most of the passengers left the train at Hyde Park, the first stoppage at Chicago, but we pushed on to Central Station. Over the city hung a sky laden with smoke; everywhere black chimneys rose in the air.
but he jerked it in again, and says:

says:
she begun to cry, though I couldn’t hear her, and her back was to me. I


hills.


“That is hard to tell,” said the man thoughtfully. “You see, Oz is a
primitive method. Among the lower animals, up even to those first

“Giants in armour, sir. Hundred feet high. Three legs and a body like

If the same experience should evince, that the richest individual, or he who becomes such the soonest, has no other advantage in point of commerce, than the choice of the men whom he is pleased to admit to a share of his wealth without impairing it; and that the[394] inference to be drawn therefrom is, that such a man must be a dupe who confines his choice to ten, when he can make it from among thirty:

sight of a little one-horse town in a big bend; so we tied up about
draw it; but when all the mice had been harnessed, they were able to

“Perhaps we might be deceived.”

and I never thought nothing, only I reckoned they was afraid they had
torrent; they were nearly a mile beyond the centre of the town before
funeral orgies again every now and then, just like he done before. And
looked to me like all the signs was about bad luck, and so I asked him

plied me with questions. They said that they did not know who had
“Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like disputes. If you and Miss Bennet will defer yours till I am out of the room, I shall be very thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me.”
Back to Trichinopoly he soon began his work again and once more came the people as inquirers, not scoffers, to his side.
This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by Elizabeth; and, as it assured her that Darcy was not less answerable for Wickham’s absence than if her first surmise had been just, every feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make. Attention, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. She was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even in speaking to Mr. Bingley, whose blind partiality provoked her.
need never do wrong; but I have no heart, and so I must be very

already free?”



My parents at that time kept an open house. On great[14] occasions my smart nurse would appear in the dining-room carrying me in her arms, attired like a little fairy, all ribbons and lace, to be admired by our guests. She put me down on the table, and I promenaded quite at my ease between the flowers and fruits.
“When Sir Archibald Campbell was Governor and Mr. M. Campbell his private secretary, the inhabitants of Tanjore were so miserably oppressed by the manager and the Madras dubashes that they quitted the country. Of course, all cultivation ceased. In the month of June it should commence, but nothing was done even at the beginning of September. Every one dreaded the calamity of a famine. I entreated the Rajah to remove that shameful oppression and to recall the inhabitants. He sent them word that justice should be done to them; but they disbelieved his promises. He then desired me to write to them and to assure them that he, at my intercession, would show kindness to them. I did so. All immediately returned, and first of all the Kallar (or as[Pg 152] they are commonly called collaries) believed my word, so that seven thousand men came back in one day. The other inhabitants followed their example. When I exhorted them to exert themselves to the utmost because the time for cultivation was almost lost, they replied in the following manner: ‘As you have shown kindness to us, you shall not have reason to repent of it; we intend to work night and day to show our regard for you.’ Sir Archibald Campbell was happy when he heard of it, and we had the satisfaction of having a better crop than the preceding year.”
in my craw; but I says, this ain’t no time to be fooling around. So I
CXXVI.	Definite Departure for St. Petersburg	537
“What’s de use er makin’ up de camp fire to cook strawbries en sich
The Atomic Creatures feared them now, it seemed, for though they had come even to one of the planets, they had seen none of the enemy. Surely there must be many hiding!
“I have heard much of your master’s fine person,” said Mrs. Gardiner, looking at the picture; “it is a handsome face. But, Lizzy, you can tell us whether it is like or not.”
“I got them from the Wicked Witch of the East, when my house fell on
Admiral Gervais visited Kronstadt with the French squadron of ships, and came with all his officers to visit our old city. A banquet was given in their honour at the Exhibition, in the Imperial Pavilion, where everything was done grandly. Caviare was served in a big barrel, and ice-cream was made in the shape of the Eiffel tower with tiny French and Russian flags stuck into the top, which the naval officers pinned in their button-holes as souvenirs. One of the young marine officers exchanged visiting-cards with his neighbour at table, the Vice-Governor of Moscow, who, on returning home, showed it to his wife, and to her great amazement she read on the wrong side of the card the addresses and prices of the most popular courtesans of Moscow, pencilled on it, with the officer’s personal valuation of them. I can well imagine how the young mariner felt when he found out his mistake!
never seen anybody but lied one time or another, without it was Aunt

“If you see any house, or any place where we can pass the night,” she

“We can dig better on this Thames-side burgundy,” said I.

started a good fire there on a high and dry spot.

to see what’s the matter with you. Yes, you’re all right; you’re fixed
curiosity; and I says to myself, Tom Sawyer wouldn’t back out now, and

And now out in space the great sending station was constructed. The ship to be sent was put in position before it; the scanner viewed it; and the signal for each atom and each molecule followed each other in swift flight on the train of light waves that was their wire. One billion miles from Betelguese the ship would be re-integrated from the energy sent along the beam of the phase-velocity sender.


Fourth Hypothesis.
 Thinking it Over
Boggs comes a-tearing along on his horse, whooping and yelling like an


“Go for his daughter!—quick, go for his daughter; sometimes he’ll
But the Tin Woodman caught the dog in his arms and held him tight,
the ram _Thunder Child_. It was the only warship in sight, but far away
A few seconds after midnight the crowd in the Chertsey road, Woking,
his’n; and anybody but a lot of prejudiced chuckleheads would a _seen_
One night we catched a little section of a lumber raft—nice pine
deserved. Here again on the Surrey side were black dust that had once

scoffed at the vulgar idea of its having inhabitants who were

at the head—it was all under water now.

you had known their power you could have gone back to your Aunt Em the
hard task; for the Great Wizard does not like to see anyone, and he
do but talk to each other, but they always came to wait outside the
from Chertsey or Addlestone. I learned that the smouldering pine wood
Sorrowfully Dorothy left the Throne Room and went back where the Lion
was that these chaps didn’t know one another.
he wouldn’t; they told him it would be one o’clock in about fifteen
[145]
took the skiff, and started off towing the raft about half-past three.



dasn’t do it. Her face would give them a hint, sure; they’ve got the

“Who makes them tear around so?”
and she had never killed anything in all her life.
of her dress. And so, with Toto trotting along soberly behind her, she
General Balance of Trade in England.	93
than a mudcat himself. Col. Grangerford was very tall and very slim,
window was open behind me. I made a step to it, and stood looking out.
CHAPTER XXI.
wait calmly and see what the future would bring. At last she crawled

you get help and nab them, and you can make some money by it.”


“I never said nothing of the kind.”

when the second eye was done I could see much better than before. Then
The next day we went out on donkeys for an excursion up in the mountains. We were up very early, drank our tea in a gulp, and were ready to start by seven o’clock. Our long-eared steeds were already at the gates of the hotel, waiting for us; we mounted them and rode towards the mountain called Les Avants. My donkey’s name was La Grise and Sergy’s bore the valiant name of Garibaldi. Though the guide boasted of his donkeys being bien gentils, nevertheless, they had to be harpooned with a pointed stick all the way to make them advance. We were warned that Garibaldi, being a stallion, must not be allowed to walk behind La Grise, who pressed herself amorously to her companion, and stopped at every moment to clip the grass, stooping so low that many a time I nearly came to tumbling over her head. Still my donkey could be stirred up to a gallop, urged by our guide’s stick; but Garibaldi was not true to his name, being very lazy, and every few steps he would stop short, and the guide had to walk at his side so as to keep him on his legs. Sergy, fearing to remain behind, was tugging at the recalcitrant quadruped, but this stubborn little ass was in one of his sulky moods and absolutely would not gallop. As we strolled along, gigantic flies pricked the poor animals, and La Grise strove to kick them off with her hind leg. One can easily imagine how comfortable I felt in my seat. We took three hours to mount to the summit of the mountain; the road was heavy and the heat overwhelming. We made a halt half-way and sat on the grass under the shelter of a great oak and ate the excellent lunch we had brought with us. A brook ran clear and shallow at our feet. The view from here spread on the whole valley of the Rhone, girt out with snow-capped mountains, Lake Leman, Vevey and Clarence. From where we sat we saw the lake on our left through a frame of foliage, and green mountains on our right where sheep were quietly browsing. During our siesta our donkeys were placidly cropping tufts of grass, whilst Garibaldi, being at war with the flies, slapped my umbrella with his tail all the time. We descended to Montreux by a cross-road, following a steep path in the hollow of the rocks.
Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. After a song or two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that she would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the only plain one in the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was always impatient for display.


nor groan.





time. All I could get to eat was berries and what was left over from
overthrown crawled tediously out of his hood, a small brown figure,
green ribbon around Toto’s neck, and they started for the Throne Room

hunt and fish to keep alive, and so get so far away that the old man
rail of the steamer and peered into the blinding furnace of the west,
going it!
 Tom Sawyer wounded
their strange experience.
then the undertaker—the undertaker never got in ahead of Emmeline but
rose weird and vague and strange out of the shadows towards the light.
“I come heah de night arter you’s killed.”
under when the lightning struck.

The Guardian of the Gates led them through the streets until they came
form a clearer picture of these offensive creatures.

nightshirt with a coat thrown over it.
When Dorothy was left alone she began to feel hungry. So she went to

“Have you got hairy arms and a hairy breast, Jim?”
beast was a little gray field mouse, and although he had no heart he

Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of his behaviour to Wickham; and, therefore, gave them to understand, in as guarded a manner as she could, that by what she had heard from his relations in Kent, his actions were capable of a very different construction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, nor Wickham’s so amiable, as they had been considered in Hertfordshire. In confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary transactions in which they had been connected, without actually naming her authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on.
“The entreaties of several” [Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]

knowed he was dead years ago, but I never let on. So when I says he
because he’d come to town to kill old Colonel Sherburn, and his motto
network of red thread scaled the still living stems.

talking at the ferry landing. I heard what they said, too—every word of
Next morning, while still in bed, I could see the sunrise over Vesuvius, lighting the smoke which rose from the crater. After a hasty breakfast, we went for a drive in the outskirts of Naples passing through the “Pausilippe Grotto,” which is about a mile long; it is supported by columns and lighted at long intervals by lanterns. The road leading to Virgil’s tomb passes over the Grotto. We visited also the “Sulfre Grotto” with sulphur smoke coming out of the[225] Vesuvius and evaporating through crevices in the Grotto. The “Dog’s Grotto” is full of sulphuric acid. A dog, serving for experiments, loses consciousness when kept inside one second, and breathes his last in the lapse of one minute. One of the ugly little mongrels, upon whom experiments are made, ran before us wagging his tail, but when the guide wanted to take him in his arms, the poor little brute began to whine pitifully. We would not have him tortured on our account, and the guide finding it necessary to show us another experiment, filled an earthen pot with gas, into which he dipped a burning torch which was immediately extinguished. We were back at Naples just in time for dinner. Before going to sleep we had an agreeable surprise. A troup of wandering singers gave us a serenade beneath our windows, and sung Russian folk-songs. I was so pleased I could have kissed them all. Next morning Sergy went out by himself to make inquiries about Schildecker, and started off to the address of his friend given in the Bank, and was told that Schildecker had died of consumption ten years ago. Poor fellow! His death affected me, and I dropped a tear for him.


paddled ashore and told somebody.” That was so—I couldn’t get around
Throne Room and tell Oz you are here.”


We gave a grand dinner for two hundred persons in honour of the delegates. An invisible band placed in the park played during the repast. Champagne flowed in abundance and numerous toasts were drunk, accompanied by a flourish of trumpets. I sat between two laconic deputies, who answered with low sounding monosyllables to all the questions I put to them with seraphic patience. I felt glad when dinner was over.








I liked the new ones, too, a little bit. The widow said I was coming
the curate and of the manner of his death.
I tell you, I’m grim set on living. And if I’m not mistaken, you’ll
and as long as I know myself to be a coward I shall be unhappy.”
on t’other side of the river, being a woodyard, likely, and piled by

“What is it you mean?”
before twilight, every copse, every row of suburban villas on the hilly
A. Not we;—on the contrary, it is our intention to have as much as we can of his commodities and money, for as little of our goods as possible.

“We ain’t got no time to bother over that,” he says; “we got to dig in
dismiss.
CXVIII.	St. Petersburg	487




Huck, it’s the stupidest arrangement I ever see. You got to invent
determined to go, the Winkies gave Toto and the Lion each a golden
XXX.	Villa D’Este	196


When, an hour later, a Martian appeared beyond the Clock Tower and
“Those who stop obey orders. Able-bodied, clean-minded women we want
left, the remotest that is, flourished a huge case high in the air, and
a time and there warn’t a sound, only I thought I could hear my heart.



Between us and Leatherhead, however, lay the third cylinder, with its
lighter in weight than the air without that it pulled hard to rise into
Ici l’Auteur commence à se croire assez ferme sur son terrein, pour convenir qu’il ne voit rien dans la situation actuelle de l’Angleterre qui puisse justifier l’idée d’une banqueroute, quoique les papiers publics de cette nation en insinuent très-souvent la commodité. L’Auteur s’oublie même jusqu’à examiner sérieusement, s’il seroit avantageux de rembourser ou de ne pas rembourser, même dans la supposition que les 238 millions empruntés & disparus, reparoîtroient dans les coffres de l’Échiquier.

“Den he cain’t git no situation. What he gwyne to do?”

enough.”
The country between St. Petersburg and the Prussian frontier is very uninteresting, nothing but flat corn-fields, woods and wide expanses of pasture-land stretching on both sides of the railway.


But I didn’t want to run the raft in the daytime without anybody aboard
“Hello, what’s up? Don’t cry, bub. What’s the trouble?”
I never see such a nigger. If he got a notion in his head once, there

“What’s the name of them people over on t’other side of the river that
made up my mind I wouldn’t try for it. But I never said so, because it

CHAPTER LXIX
“Now I have got some news for you,” said Lydia, as they sat down to table. “What do you think? It is excellent news, capital news, and about a certain person that we all like.”
LONDON
invaders from Mars.
the hill. But there warn’t no Spaniards and A-rabs, and there warn’t no
be six or seven hundred years old, at the very least.”



The great fleet was divided into ten parts of two thousand each, and to each of the nine smaller, cool planets one of the ten divisions went. The tenth stayed as a guard to the flagship. Now they went in ten great cones of glistening ships, a mighty armada of space, coming across the void to conquer the new universe for Mankind. And now they separated as they drew closer to the System, for the ships had been re-formed nearly four billion miles from the central sun, Betelguese.
ridge, and got out of tobacco. I went to the cavern to get some, and
There was much talk about my husband’s appointment to the post of Governor-General of the district of the Amour, including the provinces along the valley of the Amour river and the entire Eastern section of Siberia, instead of Baron Korff, whose health was beginning to fail. About this time my husband was frequently called to St. Petersburg on business. One morning an urgent telegram arrived; the Minister of War summoned my husband without delay to St. Petersburg. Sergy promised to send me a wire containing two words: “Great News,” if the question concerned his nomination. I was in a state of great excitement until the telegram arrived. The next evening brought a wire from Sergy, it ran: “Great news!” I had expected it, and yet, it was a shock. But I resigned myself to my lot. I loved Sergy far too well to injure his prospects and I would follow him to the world’s end resignedly.
“Then I shall never have courage,” declared the Lion.
overboard on one side and I on the other, she come smashing straight
pushed the pony and chaise back into the hedge, and the man drove by
the overnight hail, and broke into the woods at the foot of the hill.

between the Woking district and London. Five of the machines had been
stretched out until the top of the head, where it was flat, struck the
So in two seconds away we went a-sliding down the river, and it _did_
laying on its back in her other hand with its heels up, and underneath
Nor is money hid under ground in a country, where it shews the value of a man as positively as that of a piece of goods; in a country, where it is frankly said, this man is worth a million; whether this expression be made use of to signify that the possessor of a million is, at least, by the whole extent of that million, far from being guilty of meanness and injustice, or that it be understood that nothing but the offer of another million could tempt him to commit anything base[128] or unjust. Money is never buried under ground in a country, where it acts so essential a part; it cannot then be its fate in England: all the money in the possession of England stands in full evidence; it consists,—1st, in objects of private luxury, the quantity of which is by no means extravagant;—2dly, in the mass of cash in circulation. Now this very mass is despotically determined by the number of affairs transacted, and likewise by the prices and quantity of the property which is to be circulated; yet this mass is, perhaps, in England one half less than it would prove any where else, supposing the same objects to be attained; that universal mobile is too justly appreciated there, to be lavished, that is to say, to be turned into cash, beyond what is required to give credit to the paper currency substituted to cash.
puffs of vivid green vapour streamed up and out of it towards the
He wrote his last letter to the Secretary of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge on the 4th September, 1797, in which, with his clear, business-like attention to details, he speaks of the stores and presents, and gratefully thanks the good friends in England for all the generous support they had given to the work, and this he does for all the brethren who are his comrades and fellow-workers in the field. God had graciously preserved their lives and health so that he was still able to go through his accustomed work, though with less vigour than heretofore. He added that should his life be prolonged, he intended to give a full account of the mission at the end of the year, and concluded with a prayer that God would prosper the work of their revered superiors. He evidently looked forward later on to a detailed report of his stewardship, and the position and future prospects of the mission. But God disposed otherwise.
can’t bear to make a will. He left a letter behind for Harvey, and said


Fourthly, By the effect of those bodies corporate, (corporations) which, if justly appreciated, are but so many private conspiracies against the public, whom they strip of the benefit of national competition, after having wrested from them the advantages of foreign competition, which would soon have been followed by the former, infinitely more important than the other.
a-swelling yourself up like this. I ain’t the man to stand it—you hear?
Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competition her favourite child. At that moment she cared for no other. Her younger sisters soon began to make interest with her for objects of happiness which she might in future be able to dispense.

 The Auction
Of a Cause little suspected of high Prices.	257
fired at us from Mars.
Secondly, Whether those unfortunate licensed persons, and others (who so bitterly complain of all the various taxes that produce to them three or four times the sum which they advance to Government) would not be justly, as they ought to be, relieved from the oppression (that is the word) if such taxes were taken off, and laid on articles of which they would themselves be the consumers:
blocks of ruby. Everyone loved her, but her greatest sorrow was that
In May we moved to Petrovski Palace, and on the last days of June Sergy went to review the troops at Yaroslaw. During his absence, I was invited by my aunt, Princess Leon Galitzine, to spend a week with her at Doubrovo, her splendid estate situated in the government of Kalouga. I welcomed the opportunity that was offered to me and accepted my aunt’s invitation with pleasure. Another aunt of mine, Princess Safira Galitzine, was also going to Doubrovo and proposed to chaperon me. On our way there, great was my surprise to meet at one of the railway stations, Stenger, one of my old admirers of whom I had not heard for years. We both gave a violent start, and I uttered an exclamation of surprise: “Where on earth did you fall from?” I asked.
streets and vivid the moving life about me. So many people were abroad
“No’m. Killed a nigger.”

“Is it _ketching?_ Why, how you talk. Is a _harrow_ catching—in the
body as the hood twisted round in time to receive, but not in time to
in a few generations they’ll be big, beautiful, rich-blooded,
odd-looking dwellings, for each was round, with a big dome for a roof.
“So I’ll just say good-bye.”
hear guns a good ways off. When I come in sight of the log store and
[6]W. Fleming Stevenson in Good Words, Dec., 1872.
A. Industry that goes in search of money, and Agriculture in as much as she feeds Industry at the cheapest rate.

It was night when we arrived at Vladicaucasus, where we took the train to Kharkoff.
CAIRO
“Here, gimme the _chaw_, and you take the _plug_.”


CHAPTER LI.
dollars?”
“But consider your daughters. Only think what an establishment it would be for one of them. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to go, merely on that account; for in general, you know, they visit no new{4} comers. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for us to visit him, if you do not.”

CHAPTER VII.
“Quick, Jim, it ain’t no time for fooling around and moaning; there’s a
 He fairly emptied that Young Fellow
He shot out a pointing finger.
And that was the last any of them ever saw of Oz, the Wonderful Wizard,
went for me, too, for not stopping school. He catched me a couple of
But Tom, he _was_ so proud and joyful, he just _couldn’t_ hold in, and
Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who answered this description, when Mr. Hurst called them to order, with{52} bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As all conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the room.
then in a moment the Heat-Ray was brought to bear, and the town became
smoke-house back of the kitchen; three little log nigger-cabins in a
Please to don’t tell nobody ’bout it sah, er ole Mars Silas he’ll scole

me, Bilge. Thish yer comes of trust’n to Providence. It’s the best way,

remained in London.
“Ah, you do not know what I suffer.”
Kansas for you. But first you must get to see him, and that will be a
My husband’s governorship was not a bed of roses. It is a difficult career, requiring much patience, perseverance and delicate handling. Sergy did not know fatigue, working from early morning till late at night, and even when he went to bed, he tried to remember the things he had done and the things he had to do, instead of falling off to sleep. He was a man who had never seemed to flinch from duty, either for himself or others, and he required the same from his subordinates, but didn’t find the necessary support in them he ought to have had in such troublesome times. He looks awfully careworn and worn-out. The doctors spoke again of rest and change, and Sergy applied for leave. He thought of resigning altogether, to my greatest joy.
VI.	Dolgik	48
“Stand away!” and the cannon let off such a blast right before me that
there and blubber like a baby—it’s fitten for you, after the way you’ve
[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]
“Very well, I will give you that sort of courage tomorrow,” replied Oz.
down, as it was. There were no witnesses—all these things I might have



do for Uncle William, and she’d give her own room to Uncle Harvey,

got everything all right, and as soon as he was by himself he busted
I took refuge in my room from tailors, dressmakers and merchants of every kind, who besieged us the whole day smiling and curtseying at every step and eyeing each other mistrustfully. Here is a thick man entering our apartment with cat-like step, who with much drawing of breath, and bowing as low as his obesity permitted him, introduces himself laconically “Tortoise-shell man,” which means that he dealt in wares made of tortoise-shell. When he bowed himself off, another Jap, selling post-cards and pictures, comes in announcing himself “Photograph-man,” and so on.
raft don’t. You feel mighty free and easy and comfortable on a raft.

So, carefully and gently, they lifted Dorothy in their arms and carried
apparently been the case.

treetops southwestward, and the men digging would stop every now and
Then the king he hunched the duke private—I see him do it—and then he
“Yes; and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there is no other objection to my marrying your nephew, I shall certainly not be kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to marry Miss de Bourgh. You both did as much as you could in planning the marriage. Its completion depended on others. If Mr. Darcy is neither by honour nor inclination confined to his cousin, why is not he to make another choice? And if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?”
quasi-scientific repute, writing long before the Martian invasion, did
nothing about him, and _I_ don’t know nothing about him.”

spectacles of every size and shape. All of them had green glasses in
vessels in the pantry ring and shift, began and continued. Once the

“Yonder, among the oak trees,” said the tiger, pointing with his
WHEN the ladies removed after dinner Elizabeth ran up to her sister, and seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into the drawing-room, where she was welcomed by her two friends with many professions of pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable as they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared. Their powers of conversation were considerable. They could describe an entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh at their acquaintance with spirit.


“I would not make you unhappy for all the world!” exclaimed Dorothy.

Such, I repeat it, such will be, in the last analysis, the result of the underworkings of nature; of nature, ever more slow, but ever more skilful in repairing evil than men are in creating it; of nature, who, as good at all times as the bread which she breaks to her children, fills up without intermission, incessantly levels, behind them, and unknown to them, whilst they are amusing themselves or playing tricks upon each other, all those little furrows which they imagine will be left to the care of their posterity.
In a few minutes there was, so far as the soldier could see, not a
sound gastric glands. But the Martians were lifted above all these
what he was about, and we never had no trouble. And the boy being in a

We approach Samarkand station; the city of Samarkand is some miles distant. It represents a bushy forest in the middle of which low-roofed houses, towers and minarets are scattered. It was annexed to Russia in 1868, after the taking of Bokhara. Samarkand has been one of the most famous cities of the Mussulman world, and had only the town of Pekin as rival in Asia; its princes were equal to the Emperors of China. The glory of Samarkand is departed; alone and desolate stand the ruins, the remnants of ancient splendour. Samarkand has seen fine old doings. My thoughts wandered back to the time when it had echoed to the tramp of the Greek legions, as they thundered forth on their way to India, under the command of Alexander the Great, King of Macedonia, who had rested here during his triumphal march. It is here that the sun of the power of Timur or Tamerlane, the greatest King of the country, who reigned in the fourteenth century, rose and set. Ruins and sandy plains replace now Tamerlane’s beautiful palaces and magnificent gardens. On what does human greatness hang! These ruins of ancient splendour surpass the ruins of Rome and Greece by their magnificence, and can be compared only with the ruins of Egypt. Unfortunately, these vestiges of vanished civilisation are destroyed, little by little, by frequent earthquakes, and still more by the inhabitants who continue to pull them unmercifully to pieces for their new buildings. In one of the streets of Samarkand a house was pointed out to my husband whose whole front had been taken from the ruins of one of the most beautiful minarets of the town.
TROUVILLE
A publication truly interesting, would be a work containing a particular account of the trade of each country, were it only such as that which Sir Charles Whitworth has given on the trade of England; but though such a treasure is wanting, yet it appears to me, that to have a clear idea of such a work, would be sufficient to foresee what would be the result of it. All men are alike: one may therefore, without fear of deceit, suppose in the merchants of every country, the same attention to swell up the list of articles which pay no duty, and which give a trader the petty consequence of a more considerable exportation; every where might be found the same exactness, in a contrary sense, in regard to goods liable to an importation duty; consequently the balance struck at last would be in favour of the nation whose accounts should be then inspected: but deduct from all those favourable balances, that which might have been farther declared on the articles which are duty-free; add to the total of the exports, what has been declared short of the true amount on the objects[114] which must pay; it would then be found that (the five articles excepted) all is paid literally without having laid out any cash, and that each nation is wisely reduced to the only real advantage of trade, the exchange of want against fancy, the exchange of one fancy for another, or the exchange of one want against another want.[4]
Oh, Huck, I bust out a-cryin’ en grab her up in my arms, en say, ‘Oh,
it, but my impotent desire to reach Leatherhead worried me excessively.



A Good Going-over.—Grace Triumphant.—“One of Tom Sawyers’s Lies”.

emerged upon the road towards Kew. The curate I left in the shed, but
When we got up-stairs to his room he got me a coarse shirt and a
Martian invasion, as an occasional reader here or there may remember, I





none so dreadful; it’s the funking makes it bad. And in all those
recall a caricature of it in a pre-Martian periodical called _Punch_.
pieces had got chipped off and showed the white chalk, or whatever it
He said he would like to see the widow get me. He said he would watch
XVI.	On my way to Erzeroum	94




After sight seeing in the town of Kazan, we were back at Nijni the next day. In the morning Sergy went out to the camp, after which we had dinner on board with champagne and speeches, and were back at Moscow on the following day.
“God knows.”
perfection of chemical devices, digestion; that such organs as hair,
open, and they all passed through and found themselves in a high arched
“And I shall never have a heart,” spoke the Tin Woodman.
a bran-new Barlow knife worth two bits in any store, and a lot of
the larger design of the universe this invasion from Mars is not
staccato of hoofs. The lane came round sharply not fifty yards from the
Tom Sawyer comes down on that boat? And s’pose he steps in here any
“Ellen!” shrieked a woman in the crowd, with tears in her
logs, with the chinks stopped up with mud or mortar, and these


A SHORT PEEP AT ST. PETERSBURG AND BACK TO TASHKEND
[410]


and throwing off the most of my sodden clothes, I went after it, gained
He followed me, almost mechanically, into the dining room.
dark and kill ’em when they come; and the rest scatter around a piece,
scarcely realise the abundance and enterprise of our nineteenth-century
“Well, now, I be ding-busted! How do dat come?”
and I _told_ ’em so; I told old Thatcher so to his face. Lots of ’em
When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs. Forster to Meryton, from whence they were to set out early the next morning. The separation between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty was the only one who shed tears; but she did weep from vexation and envy. Mrs. Bennet was diffuse in her good wishes for the felicity of her daughter, and impressive in her injunctions that she would not miss the opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible,—advice which there was every reason to believe would be attended to; and, in the clamorous happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more gentle adieus of her sisters were uttered without being heard.{294}
About a week after my arrival I was on my way to Kissingen. Sergy wrote to me entreating me to come, as he couldn’t do without me, and had been very miserable since we parted. He said that he would give up his cure and start for St. Petersburg if I would not rejoin him. I telegraphed back that I was starting off immediately.

Secondly, If the rage for the article taxed, gets the better of the rigour of the tax, or in other words, of the absurd disproportion thereby established between the real and nominal value of that article, the land proprietor has no other resource left, whereby to provide for the tax, and for the rest of his standing expences, than to raise the prices of his commodities accordingly; and the poor, whose consumption has not been taxed, pays dearer, nevertheless, for his bread, and for all that he consumes besides, whilst the tax laid on luxury alone, is pleaded by all the capitalists as a pretence for not increasing the price of labour amongst the people they employ.
her now that I warn’t to blame on account of the rats. But never


Elizabeth made no objection: the door was then allowed to be shut, and the carriage drove off.{271}
Schwartz was pressed to carry the thing further but he said if these cruel men had been publicly punished they would be considered by their friends as martyrs. He begged them to be patient and endure.

“Well, who said it was?”
and clumb up as easy as I could, not to make any noise, and got down
planet. I saw it. A reddish flash at the edge, the slightest projection

that he never read novels” H.T Feb 94
“It ain’t no name for it. They set up with her all night, Miss Mary

quality, or at a funeral, or trying to go to sleep when you ain’t
I have the courage to order my life independently of the conventions which govern the existence of most women of my position, and I want to keep myself apart from the Great World. I am no longer fond of the pleasures and the admiration of society, finding no interest whatever in balls, which are insipid without a little bit of flirtation, for I can’t enjoy the actual exercise of dancing quite irrespective of whom I dance with; and now that I am married, I certainly will not admit any more courting. People wonder how I manage to kill my time, hiding myself from the world in a monastic seclusion. I am being talked about. “Mrs. This” and “Mrs. That” disapprove of my manner of life which gives rise to comment, but I am hopeless, and they have quite given up trying to reform me. They boycott me now when they meet me and cut me dead, giving me only the tips of their fingers. I pay them back in the same coin, even more, by giving them the ends of my nails. I do not care at all about what people say or think. Why should others busy themselves with my affairs? I am perfectly well able to act for myself and intend to do so now, and to always brave public opinion. It is difficult to imagine my ranging myself[137] among the slaves, and certainly I am not going to permit my life to be interfered with. If my husband is satisfied with me, it’s all right then; only we two—the rest of the world does not count.
faint dronings of bugs and flies in the air that makes it seem so


    Nor measles drear with spots;
three of these seem to have been brought in each cylinder, and all were
“_Hannel_ ’m, Mars Sid? What _is_ you a-talkin’ ’bout? I wouldn’ lay de
nigger out with?” I says.
We sat looking at each other.
while he enjoyed that privilege.
incandescent gas upon the planet. It had occurred towards midnight of


which had also been stuffed with straw. On the feet were some old boots
the dread of making a noise, and strike each other, and thrust and
After dinner we sat on the verandah. The city lay in utter darkness before us; the streets were only lighted here and there with paper lanterns carried by the passers-by.

and water from my eyes, the steam was rising in a whirling white fog

corn-pone with it on, and blowed out my light, and started up stairs
when he lived in Kansas, and he saw no harm in it.
off and taking to the brush, Bud ’lowed he could out-run him; so they
us; and then we’ll hitch up and take you down to Nichols’s.”


looks like a bird; and some say he looks like an elephant; and some say

So then I crept into a lumber-pile to get some sleep; and next time I
The first thing to be done was to get away from New York and take the afternoon train to Chicago. I packed in haste and spent a frantic half-hour in thrusting my things in my trunk. The Hollands had invited us to share their box with them at the opera that night, and had announced it in the papers. We telephoned to them that we were obliged to leave New York quite unexpectedly, having been called to Khabarovsk by wire. We also telegraphed to an American lady, who had invited us to visit at her house in Philadelphia, that we were leaving for Boston, in order that they couldn’t get on our track.
“So clear out,” he says; “and you can tell Mr. Foster whatever you want
Comfort in sorrow of every sort.
what they had lost. But I reckoned that with her disposition she was
Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; and he afterwards took occasion to ask her, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether all her sisters were at Longbourn. There was not much in the question, nor in the preceding remark; but there was a look and a manner which gave them meaning.
yours.”
The men of the system had data to work on, but a great deal of work was yet to be done. They must find some way to destroy these pools of force. Only forces could affect them, and they must find one that was fatal to them. Only ten short years remained to them, so, although no weapon had been developed, a great battle fleet was started, that the ships might be ready when at last the weapon was developed.


green smoke rose vertically into the quiet air. As I looked, the
“I am chasing these people away, I don’t want them to stare at me!” declared Hermann vehemently.
down Wellington Street. “Fighting at Weybridge! Full description!
[324]
“Why, what can you mean, my boy?”
So I let it go at that, though I couldn’t see no advantage in my
away from the scent of the flowers, he sleeps on and on forever. But
We returned to our hotel for dinner and then went out for a drive in the “Bois,” full of carriages, horsemen and pedestrians. In one of the remotest parts of the park a merry band of collegians were playing football whilst their tutors, black-robed curés, rested under the trees. On our way we passed the “École de Médecine,” on the front of which there is an inscription saying, “Liberté, Fraternité, Égalité,” and just below some passer-by had written with a bit of coal, “Vive Henri V.,” (the Duke of Chambord), meaning quite the reverse of these three words, and propagating Monarchy.
only felt outside with his hands, and said it was all right. He told me
turned hastily to his own room, put all his available money—some ten

[82]

required a certain amount of scientific education to perceive that the


leave them smoking ruins. It was a city condemned and derelict. . . .
[Image unavailable.]

buildings on each side. I turned northwards, marvelling, towards the
At the same time four of their fighting machines, similarly armed with
empty. The stair carpet was ruffled and discoloured where I had
desperate souls even going back towards London to get food. These were

if she is, she’ll be home in the morning anyway. She said, don’t say
wouldn’t touch it, because the devil had had his hands on it. Jim was
into the woods for my regular sleep. He told me when the roads forked I
early ships and was hid away up garret with a lot of other old pots and

what I’m talking about, and lay him in enough stomach-ache to last him
“Now, the thing to study out is, how to get the things to Jim.”



like it, and everybody broke down and went to sobbing right out

CHAPTER LXX
that blazed so greenly along the Highgate hills.
_preacher_ going to deceive a steamboat clerk? is he going to deceive a
In front of them, and at the end of the road of yellow brick, was a big
dreadful beasts.”
branches on the other side.
It was five o’clock in the morning when I started on my journey in a hired carriage, accompanied by my faithful Helena. All the way was strewed with corpses of horses and camels. We encountered on our road bands of wandering Asiatic tribes very fierce-looking and armed from head to foot.
magic with it. He said there was a spirit inside of it, and it knowed
simultaneously a faint dark mark of a similar sinuous character was


October 3rd.—At dawn the island of Hong-Kong appeared to view. We slipped into the horse-shoe harbour of Victoria Town, the most beautiful and picturesque place I have ever seen. The shores of the splendid bay are crowned with long rows of tropical villas. Victoria Town is a handsome, well-built city. One can see we are in a British colony; English flags float everywhere. We got into a small boat to go ashore, and walked to the Hotel Hong-Kong, having to pass over a long bridge. The Hotel Hong-Kong is a large seven-storied building, surrounded on all sides by a gallery with about a dozen shops. I shut myself up in my room with all the blinds closed; the semi-darkness gave me a sense of coolness, but when I opened the window such a stifling breath of air flew into the room that I had to shut it hurriedly. After the hour of siesta had passed, we went up the steep funicular railway to Victoria Peak, a perpendicular mountain 1,850 feet high. The funicular creeps straight up the side of the hill; while one car creeps up the mountain, the other crawls down. In about three minutes time we found ourselves on the Esplanade, where we had palanquins to take us to the cool summit where a big hotel is built. Many travellers come here to look down from the height of the Peak upon the great harbour of Hong-Kong. A flag floated at the top of the Peak, announcing the mail-boat from Japan. The big steamer seemed from there but a black spot. Picnic parties often come to the Peak, and the hotel is always full, thanks to the temperature, which is several degrees lower than in town. We had dinner at the hotel where the food is considered very good for the English palates, but far too spiced for ours. It was long before I recovered from my first mouthful of chicken plentifully seasoned with coarse red-pepper.
CHAPTER XXXVI
Une vue plus particulière du sujet, présente à l’Auteur de nouvelles raisons qui lui paroissent capables de tranquilliser le créancier le plus inquiet.—Ce n’est à la vérité que par le moyen des épargnes faites & à faire journellement sur 8 sols, portion exacte qui revient à chaque[401] individu dans le revenu général, qu’on a pu parvenir à l’opulence, & qu’il est possible de s’y maintenir; mais l’Auteur cherche les épargnes qu’on ne peut méconnoître dans l’agriculture & dans l’industrie: il trouve que celles de l’agriculture ont suffi depuis un siècle, non-seulement pour satisfaire aux charges publiques, mais encore pour doubler le revenu territorial; & il détaille ensuite une quantité d’objets, faciles à vérifier, qui semblent démontrer le même progrès dans l’industrie.

Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. She longed to speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs. Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley for his kindness to Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Mr. Bingley was unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be civil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her part, indeed, without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, and soon afterwards ordered her carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest of her daughters put herself forward. The two girls had been whispering to each other during the whole visit; and the result of it was, that the youngest should tax Mr. Bingley with having promised on his first coming into the country to give a ball at Netherfield.

September 20th.—The ocean is quite calm. We are going along the coasts of Corea. Our first stoppage was Fusan, a rocky Corean spot, which will play, one day, a big part in the history of the far Orient. That port being in close proximity with Japan, is of great strategic importance for the Japs, who have occupied it during the war with China. We have been perceived from the shore, rousing the suspicion of the Japs, who looked with no kindly eyes upon our intrusion. We saw a vessel coming towards us with two Japan officials, who asked who we were and whence we came. Our captain told them that we had to stop at this port to repair damage caused by the storm to the rudder. After the captain had given them the desired information, we were allowed to move on.

“Sakes alive, I hope it ain’t _Hanner?_”
Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered what she had herself endured on a similar occasion five-and-twenty years ago.
“Oh, yes—the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so accomplished! She plays and sings all day long. In the next room is a new instrument just come down for her—a present from my master: she comes here to-morrow with him.”
me. “They will be hot under foot for days, on account of the thick soil
“Well, what in the nation do they call it the _mumps_ for?”
Among the representatives of the different churches here it is only the Mussulman “moufti” who has not presented himself to my husband. Yesterday evening a group of Turkish inhabitants came to ask permission to hoist their flag on Fridays, but Sergy told them that they interfered with things that didn’t concern them, and that it was their “moufti” who had to solicit this permission. The “moufti” arrived to-day accompanied by a great number of white-bearded and white-turbaned “imams” (Mahometan priests) dressed in long furred robes. This time my husband has given them the permission to hoist their standard on Fridays, and has been warmly thanked for it.
ignorant and knows better. It might answer for _you_ to dig Jim out
of my way. Whenever I’ve met a man I’ve been awfully scared; but I just
so awkward that Dorothy had to follow close behind and keep him from

“I always like to help anyone in trouble. But I must go now, for my

tarred and feathered, and flung in the river!”
    That head of curly knots,
make a fool uv ole Jim wid a lie. Dat truck dah is _trash;_ en trash is


“Yes, Booth’s Landing—go on.”

black, dome-like object sank slowly out of sight into the pit.
about the time I had jabbering with that woman; and Jim said she was a
I had got so uneasy I couldn’t set still. I had to do something with my
nine or half-past to-night, and then get them to fetch you home


nine o’clock the next morning. He had once met the Winged Monkeys in
To-day, in spite of the peaceful issue of the Congress in Berlin, a violent fighting broke out in Erzeroum between the Christian and Mussulman street-boys. The Armenians fought energetically and knocked down their adversaries, shouting, “Long live the Emperor of Russia!”
them.”

roust me out, you hear?”
and tell me to say it again, and keep on saying it, because it done her
thirteen or fourteen days. I don’t know what has happened.”


forced! Fearful massacres in the Thames Valley!”

to amount to much, now’t he’s only got one hand to work them with. We
not green, for the sun had burned the tops of the long blades until
Here, methinks, I hear the enthusiasts exclaim, How! the fertility of the land is then of no advantage, but to its greedy owners!—I am in hopes that before I conclude this Pamphlet, I shall be able to find, to the great satisfaction of all good men, how many advantages remain in the hands of the most opulent land proprietor; nay I hope to prove that in a fertile land there is nothing lost to any of its inhabitants, unless extraordinary efforts be used to concenter within that spot the general benefit which must result from it. I shall content myself at present with requesting the reader to compare my thoughts on the taxes, with the two following problems, so often debated both in England and in France. How is it that France has constantly retrieved her errors and her misfortunes? How comes it that England has not yet sunk under the burden of her taxes? The French exciseman says: It is because the more the people are loaded, the better they walk; and very sensible[248] men in England used to say, “Reason and experience seem to prove that taxes stimulate industry, and that the poor, to live as well as before, perform more work without demanding more for their labour.” (D. Hume’s Essay VIII. on Taxes). It seems to me that the above two problems are more humanely solved by the reasons I have produced, and that those reasons destroy all idea of a miracle, or of the necessity of loading the people in order to spur their industry, and encourage them to work: on the contrary, to forward those two great points, it is necessary to increase the price of their labour in the same proportion as that of its products is raised by the taxes; and this will suffice to render evidently null the burden of all taxes whatever.
in a long white gown, standing on the rail of a bridge all ready to

outhouses, and walls, rising here and there into the sunlight.
reckon they’d be mean enough to go off and leave you to go all that
“Stop here,” said I; “you are safe here”; and I started off at once for


“I am everywhere,” answered the Voice, “but to the eyes of common
scratching their heads a minute, and the duke he bust into a kind of a
“Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. I entreat you not to suppose that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner.”
“Call the Winged Monkeys,” suggested the Tin Woodman. “You have still
It says much for the impression the Martians had made upon me that at
we could hear them yelling and barking at each other all up and down
“Well, he was a pretty sick man, and likely he made a mistake—I reckon


by that. Why, Hare-l—why, Joanna, they never see a holiday from year’s
It must, in this case also, be acknowledged, that France, in 1720, very unreasonably cut asunder the Gordian knot of her difficulties, by declaring in substance that she owed no longer 15 millions Tournois of the debts which she had contracted; since, without so barbarously cutting the knot, and thereby effecting the ruin of thousands of wretched beings, she would have secured their fortune by imposing without mercy, or rather with judgement, a tax of 75[78] millions on all the produce of industry, which this tax would not have raised by one twentieth part; whilst an Arrêt from the council, permitting then the exportation of grain, which was not allowed till 50 years after, would have proved more than sufficient to enhance, as it must have done, the price of commodities, in order to make amends to the landed proprietors for the increase which they would have found in the products of industry.
Let us examine, however, in what degree the taxes laid on the different articles of consumption, must enhance the price of goods, in order that agriculture may not suffer more than industry. If it should result from this research, that many previous false steps have raised the greatest obstacles against the execution of those measures which would prove the most equitable, without being more disadvantageous in any point of view; the inconvenience of such obstacles might be deemed trifling, when compared with the burden supposed to be transmitted to posterity. And it is not in England that an important truth, generally acknowledged, will long remain without effect; it is not in England that an important truth will long remain without being generally acknowledged.
thudding and a vibration that made everything about us quiver and the
of the parapet.


The sun was up so high when I waked that I judged it was after eight
riding slowly towards Woking. We hailed them, and they halted while we

Martians, when it had served its purpose, cleared the air of it again
up and saw the lower surface of a handling-machine coming slowly across
“Keep back! Keep back!”
“No, a cow don’t, nuther.”
CHAPTER XL.
prisoner to steal the thing he needs to get away with, Tom said; it’s
I have read, in another account of these events, that on Sunday morning

funeral.”

a prisoner of style escapes it’s called an evasion. It’s always called
The duke allowed it did. They pawed the yaller-boys, and sifted them

hot. They can’t bile that amount of water away off there at the sea.

another trial to get me away from him and give me to the widow for my
grant my request,” answered the Lion.

July 23rd.—I passed again a sleepless night. The ship was rolling a good deal, and the howling of the wind in the rigging was something dreadful. I couldn’t remain alone any longer, and stole into Sergy’s cabin for company. He persuaded me to go and lie down again, but it was useless to think of sleeping, and I gave up the attempt.
the Channel Fleet, which hovered in an extended line, steam up and
Witch ruled.”
glimpse of tree-tops a-plunging about away off yonder in the storm,
take the one we like the best.”

the quilt, because if he set up people could tell he was a nigger a
“Let us stand, therefore, having our loins girt about with truth. The truth of the Gospel, particularly concerning the Author of our salvation, is like a girdle that will keep close and, as it were, unite our strength. But as the principal truth of the Gospel concerneth the righteousness of Jesus Christ, let us above all take and put on that perfect righteousness as a ‘breast plate’ which covers our breast and screens our conscience, so that no accusation or condemnation can reach and disturb it. And as the Gospel contains and sets forth that glorious righteousness of Christ let ‘our feet be shod with the preparation of peace.’ When our enemies deride our relying on the righteousness of Christ and ask us from whence we have it, let us say ‘So it is written.’”
before them, murmuring indistinct questions, jaded, haggard, unclean.

kind, and going to be hard to take, but there ain’t no help for it.

“I am sorry, exceedingly sorry,” replied Darcy, in a tone of surprise and emotion, “that you have ever been informed of what may, in a mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. I did not think Mrs. Gardiner was so little to be trusted.”
Mrs. Bennet, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of such high importance, received her with the utmost politeness. After sitting for a moment in silence, she said, very stiffly, to Elizabeth,—

“Drinkin’? Has I ben a-drinkin’? Has I had a chance to be a-drinkin’?”
“If I put an end to your enemy, will you bow down to me and obey me as
“I never thought of that!” said Dorothy joyfully. “It’s just the thing.

So soon as the cab had passed, he flung himself, with both hands open,
there warn’t no occasion to be—boys will be boys, he said, and you’ll




tin. After this the enchanted axe cut off my arms, one after the other;
Exhibits unutterably ancient they had, and these must be sent across all that void. Invaluable archives they were.
This is the grand objection: The expence is more considerable! Reduce the unfortunate to a bed of straw, or cast him into prison, to spare the purse ... of whom?—For after all, supposing even that a few additional charges ought to be compared with millions of inconveniences,[240] injuries, and acts of barbarity, which are inseparable from the other methods, let it be examined whether the extra charges can produce any other effect, than that of advancing by a few deniers pour livrè the general price of merchandise; let it be examined whether that advance is not a matter of perfect indifference, provided that the price of the provisions sold by the land proprietor, who is stiled rich, and that of the wages of the labouring man, who is called poor, rise in the same proportion as the goods of the capitalist of industry, who stands equally and as essentially in need of the ease of the poor, as of the opulence of the rich.
are now.”
in the midst of a bloody and vindictive war with the Carnatic, sent orders to his officers “to permit the venerable father Schwartz to pass unmolested, and show him respect and kindness, for he is a holy man and means no harm to my Government”.
of green fire, suddenly lighting their confusion and falling into the

be dashed to pieces when the house fell again; but as the hours passed
wanted to lynch him, but he was gone, you see. Well, next day they

old Finn, too—two hundred dollars. You see, he come to town the morning



she noticed coming toward her a group of the queerest people she had

“Once,” began the leader, “we were a free people, living happily in the
“This day and the following we enjoyed the delightful smell of cinnamon. At the same time we had a most favourable wind so that during the day we passed at a good distance by the rocks of Ceylon. On the 16th of July we were approaching the coast of Coromandel; everyone therefore looked out eagerly for land but the night drew on and we could see none. About nine we found a bottom at fifteen fathoms, and it was remarkable that as soon as it was found, the wind ceased. We therefore dropped the anchor. In the morning when we looked out, we not only beheld the coast but found ourselves right opposite to Cuddalore. We praised the name of the Lord for this paternal guidance, and whosoever delights in the traces of His gracious providence will, on hearing it, exalt His name together.
“I shall be glad to have your company,” said Dorothy.
May 22nd.—The Volga is so broad that the shores disappear; only a narrow yellow line of bank is to be seen. At[514] dawn we changed our steamer for a larger one—the Equator. We had to part from the Volga here; our boat stole out towards the open sea.
“You don’t _want_ spring water; you want to water it with your tears.

Maybury road and the streets near the station were glowing ruins. The
dark we couldn’t see no sign of them. Pretty soon we struck the forward
I left Moscow on the 10th of September and arrived at Brest on the following day. It was the first time in my life that I travelled alone, and it frightened me somewhat. I never left my compartment until Brest, and allayed my hunger by cramming myself with bonbons. My husband was waiting for me at the station and we continued our journey together.
in the afternoon, he says:
insensate machine driving on its way. Machine it was, with a ringing
the thing happened that was to imprison us.
“The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you think at least highly interesting. The power of doing anything with quickness is always much prized by the possessor, and often without any attention to the imperfection of the performance. When you told Mrs. Bennet this morning, that if you ever resolved on quitting Netherfield you should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of panegyric, of compliment to yourself; and yet what is there so very laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?”
Colonel Sherburn he tossed his pistol onto the ground, and turned
hat, that had belonged to some Munchkin, was perched on his head, and
gone! I set up a shout—and then another—and then another one; and run
To export such commodities, which, as it might be absurdly supposed, the nation is no longer able to consume,
[438]
It warn’t no slouch of an idea; and it warn’t no slouch of a grindstone
The bells of the neighbouring church made a jangling tumult, a cart
dead, and she not by him to help him, and so the tears would drip down
October 24th.—We are leaving Java to-day without regret. The hideous climate is depressing, the hot, steamy atmosphere awfully enervating. The head-manager came to knock at our door at four o’clock in the morning to inform us that it was time to go to the railway station. Mr. Bakounine and the agent of the Méssageries Maritimes rode down with us to the port, a veritable inferno, full of mosquitoes and pestered by malarial fever, in which deadly miasmas seem to evaporate from the unwholesome soil.
“I begin to be sorry that he comes at all,” said Jane to her sister. “It would be nothing; I could see him with perfect indifference; but I can hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of. My mother means well; but she does not know, no one can know, how much I suffer from what she says. Happy shall I be when his stay at Netherfield is over!”
property layin’ around jest sufferin’ to be scooped in?—and all good,

you reckon it may be he’s hungry?”
until our tired attention failed. . . .

’s a goin’ to scrabble all them crazy things onto a grindstone, s’I?

“He is also handsome,” replied Elizabeth, “which a young man ought likewise to be if he possibly can. His character is thereby complete.”


“You used us abominably ill,” answered Mrs. Hurst, “running away without telling us that you were coming out.”

“Yes; but intricate characters are the most amusing. They have at least that advantage.”
down sorrowful on them new-comers like it give him the stomach-ache in
stood by the sink, and got a couple of glassfuls of blackened and
in surprise.

“_Here_ is my answer.” She hove up the bag of money and put it in the
 Getting Wood
He had his own by him, but I handed him mine. He flung it down, and

land.
went along a narrow place and got into a kind of room, all damp and
until you do as I wish.”
low and homesick; because he hadn’t ever been away from home before in

At the first stoppage we are received in pomp. A triumphal arch has been raised, bearing our initials. A deputation of inhabitants came up to my husband and presented him with “Bread and Salt,” and the workmen of the railway-line handed me a bouquet almost too big to carry.

the paddle and set her back a stroke. But she didn’t come. I was in
mane, while they talked of their troubles and tried to plan some way to

Ope not thy ponderous and marble jaws.
She grabbed me and hugged me tight; and then gripped me by both hands

September 1st.—During our ride this evening I was very happy to see our camp diminishing; the regiment of Elizabethpol has left Erzeroum to-day, and the rest of our troops will depart in a few days. The Greek and Armenians that we met in the streets appeared to me greatly discouraged and very much depressed, but I remarked that they changed their countenances instantly and looked quite cheerful the moment they perceived a Turkish officer.

I preferred to remain in complete seclusion, and shut my door to all callers, but one evening Helena acted against my orders, and let Mrs. R., one of our military ladies in, a person with whom I had never succeeded in making friends. She came and sat by my bed in spite of my desire for solitude. As I presented an unresponsive cheek to her lips, she inquired suavely if I had read the papers that day, and though she saw that this talk was most distasteful to me, she gave herself great trouble to make it quite clear to me that the day before, in a great clash, Sergy had been exposed to sharp artillery fire. Being on the brink of an outburst of hysterical sobbing, I exclaimed: “Don’t, it hurts me!” But that vixen of a woman, who, if she could say bitter things never lost an opportunity of doing so, continued her horrible descriptions. The aims of my tormentor were attained; I flew into a passion, and turning upon her warlike eyes blazing through a flood of tears, I told her that it was cruel and shameless to come and frighten me like that Mrs. R. sailed away very much offended, and thus ended that pleasant visit. In fact, what right had that disagreeable lady to disturb me like that? I had never known anything but[83] love, and expected it from everything and everybody, but my eyes commenced to open now to the reality and bitterness of life, and I began to experience things which astonished and disgusted me. I had found out at last that the world was hard.
me of the impossibility of the Martians establishing themselves on the
I was getting so uneasy I couldn’t listen good. I had my mind on the
been a fool, and fooled away his life; but now he was a-going to turn




below; it would make Mary Jane comfortable, and it wouldn’t cost


“All worldly things though not sinful in themselves, appear to that exalted Christian as dross. He wishes to find Christ as his treasure and greatest gain, by Whom he has obtained mercy, pardon, peace, and the hope of everlasting life.”

bank.
earlier in the day, and one, Major Eden, was reported to be missing.

Down the road towards Maybury Bridge there were voices and the sound of
Early in the morning, as soon as I heard the postilion sounding his horn, I hastened to jump out of bed, and accompanied Sergy to the Kurhaus, where he took his waters. A beautiful string-orchestra entertained the Kurhaus guests from six to eight. The sick, undergoing a cure, walk in the broad alley, carrying their glasses with them. They stroll from one spring to another, sipping the water on the way. We saw invalids in wheeled chairs, basking in the sun with a shawl over their legs, discussing and comparing their various diseases.
man?—er is a cow a cat?”
none of them dared to sleep. And in the evening many people came
While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of the door-bell; and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its being Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who had once before called late in the evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after her. But this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were very differently affected, when, to her utter amazement, she saw Mr. Darcy walk into the room. In a hurried manner he immediately began an inquiry after her health, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better. She answered him with cold civility. He sat down for a few moments, and then getting up walked{237} about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but said not a word. After a silence of several minutes, he came towards her in an agitated manner, and thus began:—
It was too far for me to recognise anyone there, but afterwards I
I didn’t know just what to do—but then I thought. I scratched around

“Oh,” cried Elizabeth, “I am exceedingly diverted. But it is so strange!”


slopes about Kingston and Richmond, masked an expectant black muzzle.

clews? Of course they will. And you wouldn’t leave them any? That would

raft sometimes, but I hadn’t any clothes on, and didn’t mind. We didn’t
Translator: Parkyns Mac Mahon
She done it, too; and she done it beautiful. She done it so beautiful


magnum of champagne formed a pool across the pavement. She seemed
heaped gravel at the edge of the pit in which they lay. And then, with
They stopped pulling. It warn’t but a mighty little ways to the raft
The evenings were getting longer, and dragged like an eternity. To shorten them somehow we played society games and puzzles, which bored me to death and made me yawn.
But I’m not changed as yet the least,
sun-bonnet and tied it under my chin, and then for a body to look in
I had come; people might know my voice and find me out. But if this


The Lion ate some of the porridge, but did not care for it, saying it
world, and the preacher was pinting him right. Lawyer Bell was away up
your rope ladder to the battlements, shin down it, break your leg in
of her chimbleys, and they would rain down in the river and look awful
When Lydia went away she promised to write very{297} often and very minutely to her mother and Kitty; but her letters were always long expected, and always very short. Those to her mother contained little else than that they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as made her quite wild; that she had a new gown, or a new parasol, which she would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her, and they were going to the camp; and from her correspondence with her sister there was still less to be learnt, for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were much too full of lines under the words to be made public.

ADVENTURES
niece all safe before he can get to town. Hump yourself, now; I’m

“Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent,” said she, “did he come at all?”
Cold corn-pone, cold corn-beef, butter and buttermilk—that is what they


“Can’t nobody _read_ his plates.”

“Where are you all going?”
length, to climb over the fence with, and for the women to stand on
propped on his knees sound asleep; so I motioned them in quiet, and
a human agony of terror and physical distress. I have set forth at
“Sir, you quite misunderstand me,” said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed. “Lizzy is only headstrong in such matters as these. In everything else she is as good-natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, and we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure.”
Effects of a Land-Tax.
warmer planet, green with vegetation and grey with water, with a cloudy
Well, the old man went on asking questions till he just fairly emptied
power over our band is now ended, and you will never see us again.”



August 15th.—The sea is something frightful. The wind moans and our ship pitches and groans as if she was going to fall in pieces.
that she rolled over upon the grass several times before she knew where
Lion, “he would have been a brave man.”

Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of his coming without changing colour. It was many months since she had mentioned his name to Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she said,—

soon a splendid young man come galloping down the road, setting his
“It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion, to be secure of judging properly at first.”
ELIZABETH passed the chief of the night in her sister’s room, and in the morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the inquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid, and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his sisters. In spite of this amendment,{54} however, she requested to have a note sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form her own judgment of her situation. The note was immediately despatched, and its contents as quickly complied with. Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by her two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.
man, knee-deep near the towing path, shouted inaudibly to me and
Credits: Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images available at The Internet Archive)
her uncle Hornback—”

The Scarecrow was both pleased and proud at the fulfillment of his
After dinner, we drove to the Circus in a cab drawn by a queer-tempered horse, who at first would not move, and stood planted with rigid forelegs, tucked-in tail and ears laid back. Our driver made a great fuss with the reins and the whip, but his horse would not advance an inch. Suddenly the stubborn animal changed his mind, swerved aside, and commenced to rear, plunging rather wildly, and seemed to be in a fair way to kick himself free of everything. Perceiving the danger, I jumped out of the carriage, to Sergy’s great horror, and went straight to the horse’s head and snatched at the bridle, after which the nasty vicious brute became more manageable and consented to carry us to our destination.

Dorothy was going to ask another question, but just then the Munchkins,

A pine wood separates the cloister from the convent of the “Servantes de Marie,” where the nuns lead quite a different sort of life, working with their tongues just as well as with their hands. They are very industrious, do carpentry and photography and cultivate their flower gardens.



The train service was now very much disorganised. Quite a number of

both knowed well enough it was some more work of the rattlesnake-skin;
houses that stared so dismally at the sunlit grass of the hill, would
“I should like it beyond anything!” said her mother.
feel easier and better for a while if people treated him according to
all tied up in little bunches with thread. That was to keep witches
chain off.”
“Oh, yes’m, I did. Sarah Mary Williams. Sarah’s my first name. Some
The next day we went to Cowes, the summer residence of Queen Victoria. We were speeding along level roads bordered by green woods—all soft grass and splendid trees—and rolled through fields golden with buttercups. The road now wound through bright green pastures where big fat cows dozed, lying in the shade of apple-trees. We passed neat little white cottages embowered in green, and a big farm-house[245] belonging to the Prince of Wales. We drew now through an avenue sheltered by stately elm-trees and descended a steep hill leading to the river Medina, which we crossed on a ferry, and arrived at Cowes. Our coach drew up before a big hotel where we were to have dinner. The view from the terrace was one of exquisite beauty, the surroundings of Cowes being amongst the most splendid in England. We went and sat down on a bench beside the pier, waiting for the bell to call us to table-d’hôte. Two big yachts belonging to the Queen, the “Neptune” and “Man-of-War,” were moored in front of us. Side by side with us on the bench sat an old man, with a face framed in a grey fringe of beard, wearing a cotton bonnet drawn over his ears, who held a short pipe in his toothless mouth. We fell into conversation with him and were very much surprised when he told us that in all his long life he had only been once to London.
it you’ll come back here and wonder what has become of me and Jim and
Once more they could see fences built beside the road; but these were
like end of the cylinder, which was still as Ogilvy and Henderson had
“Well, Ben Rogers, if I was as ignorant as you I wouldn’t let on. Kill
telling them what it was for. Tom said that what he meant was, we could
is?”
would hash you up like nothing before you could say Jack Robinson. They
and shoved the vines and branches apart and put it in; then I done the

fighting-machine that stood in the remoter bank of the pit and a


Leaving Venice at ten o’clock in the morning, we arrived towards night at Florence, and took an apartment at the Hotel de Russie, with a ceiling ornamented with flying nymphs in a blue sky all over, and an enormous bedstead on the top of which was placed a gigantic wreath of laurel. In my opinion, to sleep under it is an honour which few people deserve on earth.
better.”

Mars?”
and got into my skiff and bailed her out, and then pulled up shore in
wouldn’t a done no good; and, besides, it was just as I said: you
“Take this!” said the slender lady, and she gave my brother her


and says, “That secret of your being: speak!”
“All right—_I_ don’t care where he comes out, so he _comes_ out; and
“Only a mouse!” cried the little animal, indignantly. “Why, I am a
Towards night we arrived at Colombo and moored two miles off the low coast, bordered with cocoa-nut trees crowned with green palms. A long greystone breakwater with a round-topped tower at the end ran out into the sea, and over it in the distance Colombo with its red-tiled houses lay half hidden in deep green vegetation. Canoes brought on board Singhalese merchants with stuffs and other products of the land. We see everywhere British flags flying. We are on English ground under the tropic sun of Ceylon. From afar we perceive Adam’s Peak, the region where Paradise was. On the summit of the Peak there is the impress of a gigantic foot, the first footstep of Adam out of Paradise, according to the Christian legends, of Siva for the Brahmins, of Buddha for the Buddhists.

“Have you any?” inquired the Scarecrow.
“They didn’t do nothing. And they didn’t act anyway much, as fur as I
called it. The duke went down into his carpet-bag, and fetched up a lot
We went to see a Museum of wax-figures, and saw among other curiosities, a big giant and a negress dwarf with no arms, who played the drum with her toes, and wrote her autograph holding a pen between her toes. Next to her a pretty white-skinned dwarf resembling a pretty wax-doll, attired in a beautiful evening dress, was exhibited, who looked with disdain, mixed with jealousy, at her dusky companion who attracted more attention than her dainty little person. In the adjoining room a gipsy fortune-teller told people’s future through examination of the palms of their hands. I wanted my hand read and asked Mr. Shaniavski to accompany me to her booth. From the very beginning the[334] old gipsy woman made formidable mistakes, taking Mr. Shaniavski for my husband. Nevertheless she predicted a lot of charming things to me, and I left her booth with a smiling face. After dinner we went to a Venetian Feast organised on the central basin of Michigan Lake, which was transformed into a Venetian canal. Gondolas floated on the lake, lit up by Chinese lanterns.
they wouldn’t furnish ’em to a king.”




and now he was going up a few mile to see an old friend on a farm up
On my last reception-day, Colonel Alexandroff, the secretary of the Benevolent Society, addressed a panegyric to me, and presented an album with the photographic group of all the members of the Benevolent Society with their signatures.
A most dreadful surprise awaited me in the morning. I was roused by Helena coming to tell me that General Kousminski was summoned back to Kars at once. The prospects of so long a journey without my protector was the most distressing thing that could befall me. The worst of[95] all was that we were in danger of dying of starvation, for we were not supplied with provisions. The next stage was known to be a very risky one, and I had to make all the way on horseback. Helena had set out before in a peasant’s cart with an old military doctor who was also proceeding to Erzeroum, and to whose care General Kousminski had entrusted me. It was not nice at all to be left behind! Our horses were led up, but I couldn’t manage to climb into the saddle which one of the soldiers had lent me; the clumsily tied arch would not hold and I slipped down continually. I was growing quite desperate, when it occurred to Mr. Iliashenko to propose for me his transport-van, an enormous vehicle with a team of six horses. I climbed into it tremblingly, and off we went.
The deck was lighted with different coloured lanterns in our honour. I escaped to my cabin whilst my husband was being greeted by the ship’s officers.
a little hand truck, and were piling it up with unclean-looking bundles
“Why, Huck, doan’ de French people talk de same way we does?”

towards Staines.
silver rods. The dome of St. Paul’s was dark against the sunrise, and
things, and feeling rested and ruther comfortable and satisfied. I
The real names of our party appear upon the ship’s list. There was no need of secrecy after we had left America behind us.

“I cannot tell,” she returned, “but you may come with me, if you like.




So they oiled his legs until he could move them freely; and he thanked
time; he must shove right over to town and sell. So he locked me in and
[167]
hundred yards from me, the other towards Laleham. The generators of the
Pemberley was now Georgiana’s home; and the attachment of the sisters was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. They were able to love each other, even as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest opinion in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive manner of talking to her brother. He, who had always inspired in herself a respect which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in her way. By Elizabeth’s instructions she began to comprehend that a woman may take liberties with her husband, which a brother will not always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself.{476}
aside and hid in a shed in a garden. There the curate crouched, weeping
took in three subscriptions for half a dollar apiece on condition of
I had wore the ground a good deal crawling out of the hole and dragging

cried out and pointed. My brother strained his eyes. Something rushed
“And what is your success?{120}”
pit had ceased absolutely. I did not feel strong enough to crawl

do. At his word the band flew down and seized Quelala, carried him in
“With _who?_ Why, the runaway nigger, of course. Who’d you reckon?”
A terrible calamity has befallen the Island of Ischia. The little town of Casamicciola, destroyed by a recent tremendous earthquake, is nothing but a heap of deplorable ruins. Through the awful cataclysm the inhabitants are deprived of home and bread. In pursuit of strong sensations we wanted to visit these ruins and embarked on a small steamer which plied from the Bay of Naples to Ischia. It takes only two hours to cross. There was not[230] a breath of air and the sea looked like a polished mirror. Whilst we gazed at the frolics of the dolphins from deck, we passed a man-of-war that had cast anchor in the Bay, and did not remark that it was a Russian cruiser. A young chap who sold photographs on board, offered to show us the ruins of Casamicciola. He could murder enough French to be our interpreter and we accepted his offer. He told us that he had lost both his parents and all his belongings in the recent earthquake; the only object he had found amongst the ruins was his watch. The poor boy had remained several hours unconscious under the ruins and was just out of hospital. On approaching Ischia, we stopped before what had formerly been Casamicciola, a desolate black desert now. The earthquake had in a few moments changed the prosperous little town into a ruin. Hundreds and hundreds of homes had entirely gone. Many people were buried beneath the fallen houses. About two hundred corpses remained under the ruins and a terrible smell came forth. In fear of infection the inhabitants are forbidden to dig out the corpses. Another slight earthquake took place the other day: a rock tumbled down, destroying the remaining houses, and large crevices have been formed in the mountains all around. The whole population is in terrible distress. The only inhabitants who escaped death are those who were working out in the fields at the moment of the catastrophe, and had fled panic-stricken to the mountains for refuge. We were told that a Russian couple, living at the Hôtel des Étrangers, had been saved through their children who were having a fight in the park belonging to the hotel. Their parents had just come down to set them apart, when the earth shook, and the whole hotel came down, falling to pieces. Looking at this bright place and its luxurious vegetation, it seems to be a perfect paradise on earth, but this beautiful soil opens treacherously under your feet, transforming everything into a “vale of tears.” Oh! the irony of the things of this world! And still men will build up new dwellings again and will not think of the danger of a repetition of the past catastrophe! An old cab, with a skeleton of a horse between the shafts, drove us through the demolished streets heaped up with stones, trunks of trees and plaster, but soon there was no road at all, and we had to walk amidst a mass of broken stones and woodwork. We saw women seeking forgotten objects on the threshold of their crumbled houses, a wreck of broken stones and fallen walls. A young girl sat with her head buried in her hands, rocking her body to and fro, and kept wailing “Why, oh, why was I saved!” It was a sorrowful spectacle and my heart bled for her. Workmen had been sent in haste to build barracks for the victims of the catastrophe, and huts have been erected in the vicinity of the ill-fated town.[231] We visited that sordid encampment where the poor wretches slept on the hard ground, pêle-mêle, like Bohemians. A troup of carbiniers have just arrived to keep order. We were surrounded by hundreds of poor starving creatures. Sad-faced women, with tragic eyes, stood in groups with children of all ages holding to their skirts. They spread out their hands in a gesture of despair and burst into lamentations, begging for bread. Sergy gave away nearly all the contents of his purse. The poor wretches murmured their thanks, pressing kisses on my hands, against my inclination. In token of gratitude, an old, toothless granny, wrinkled like a crumpled apple, her hooked nose nearly in contact with her chin, patted me on the back; being very much afraid that she meant to kiss my reluctant cheek, I went prudently behind my husband. My one desire was to get back to Naples, and I breathed freely when our boat left the shores of Ischia. A group of Neapolitan women, with red handkerchiefs on their heads, had come out from third class on our deck to dance the Tarantella, to the accompaniment of a band of strolling musicians. One of the women had been hurt by the earthquake, and this was her first day out of the hospital.
gaunt quiet.

I am as little qualified to investigate all these different questions, as those which I have ventured hitherto to touch upon; I shall persevere, nevertheless, with that freedom which I derive from the purity of my intentions, and with that diffidence which must follow the consciousness of a capacity so unequal to the task.—I shall first of all adapt to England, and then to France, the reflexions suggested to me by some hundreds of suppositions, which had engrossed my time before I had perused Young’s Political Arithmetic, and the work of Mr. Necker, which has but lately fallen into my hands.
her money. And when she got through they all jest laid theirselves out
“Who’d you give the baggage to?”

“My dear, dear Lydia!” she cried: “this is delightful indeed! She will be married! I shall see her again! She will be married at sixteen! My good, kind brother! I knew how it would be—I knew he would manage everything. How I long to see her! and to see dear Wickham too! But the clothes, the wedding clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner about them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask him how much he will give her. Stay, stay, I will go myself. Ring the bell, Kitty, for Hill. I will put on my things in a moment. My dear, dear Lydia! How merry we shall be together when we meet!”
“No, I know you haven’t. I ain’t blaming you, gentlemen. I brought
Then we lit up and had a supper, and the king and the duke fairly
snuffing and scratching of a dog. Going into the kitchen, I saw a dog’s
The little girl began to weep, she was so much disappointed; and the
Je supposerai même, pour combler la mesure, qu’il en résultât pour un très-simple individu Américain, une petite branche de cet arbuste[411] Européen qu’on appelle laurier femelle; qu’est-ce que cela fait à tous les Ministres, à tous les Peuples, à tous les Princes de l’Europe? L’Amérique consommera-t-elle moins de marchandises Européennes, & produira-t-elle moins d’or & d’argent, pour avoir produit une idée?
“Is he married or single?”
I went up and set down on a log at the head of the island, and looked

it, “Phelps’s Sawmill,” and when I come to the farm-houses, two or
floor and tied hand and foot, and two men standing over him, and one of


was rusted and the handle broken off short.
I had a letter four pages long from Sergy, full of interesting detail about his interview with the Emir at Kermineh, and of his journey to Andidjan, where the recent mutiny had taken place. A crowd of prostrated figures, their faces against the ground, were awaiting his arrival. After a Te Deum sung on the square before the cathedral, my husband distributed to the wounded soldiers a whole lot of crosses of the order of St. George, whilst cannons were fired. From Andidjan Sergy travelled on to Asch, a town situated near the frontier of the Pamir, in a mountainous region named The Roof of the World. An old Kirghise woman, called The Queen of the Alai, aged 87, came up to my husband supported by her two sons, white-bearded old men. This Asiatic Princess reminded one of the antique “Mother of the Gracchi.” A few days after his return to Tashkend Sergy received the visit of the heir to the throne of Khiva.


two rocks under it and one against it to hold it there, for it was bent



order, and there was all Regent Street and the Circus ablaze, crowded
At once, with a quick mental leap, he linked the Thing with the flash
It was nearly two weeks before the great fleet was ready. Then they were all assembled, ready to start. The control ship went first. Since the cessation of the release of atomic energy did not affect the release of material energy, they did not have to worry for the safety of the men when projected out into space. They would regain consciousness soon enough, and the wonderful automatic devices that ran the complex mechanism would hold it in place, maintain its temperature and the distance of the one ship from the other. The protective shield of the strained electrons would protect them.
These creatures were not entirely defenseless, for if their numbers were great enough they could exert a powerful interfering force and break down the protective field. But they knew that many would be required. And now all in an instant the battle for this world was on, the great creatures striving to destroy the ships, while burning rays of milk radiance stabbed and slashed at their strange glowing force-pools. Soon they found the vulnerable point of the ships and began to attack single ships in numbers. Slowly, slowly, the milky radiance would contract, while the smooth purring of the mighty generators rose to a throaty hum, then became a vicious snarling roar. The great electron distorter cylinder would become a mass of shooting sparks, crackling, snapping till the atmosphere about it was alive with twisting streamers of flame twelve to twenty-four inches long. Then slowly it would heat—and if the attack was still unbroken, there would be a queer sighing hum from the generator, and a slight explosion—and the ship was gone. The generators, however, would withstand the attacks of ten or eleven of the creatures safely, and the other ships would come to the rescue—but many times there were no free ships in the neighborhood, and all available power must be turned into the ray generators, the slashing beams cutting at the many opponents. Even the propulsion apparatus was robbed of energy that every last meg-erg might be fed into the ray generators. Thousands of the Atomic Giants were destroyed, their color turning that strange green, then they suddenly were snuffed out. But sixty-two ships were lost. Still many remained when at last the Atomic enemy fled suddenly into space. There was no way of following their motion, they merely disappeared, going off with the speed of light. Then the visitors explored all that world, and nowhere did they find any more creatures.
didn’t see no rafts laying up; so we went along during three hours and
and writhing on the ground, and the swift broadening-out of the opaque
telescopes were pointed. It was a warm night. Coming home, a party of

Chapter XI
so Tom says:
while, anyway, because it was worse than chasing a Jack-o’-lantern. You
and went home.
“That will not trouble him,” continued the man, “for Oz has a large
“But who was she?” asked Dorothy.
“I don’t know ’m.”
that island over yonder that they call Jackson’s Island. Don’t anybody
on the common. Forth-with the hissing and humming ceased, and the
put a few brains into his head,” she replied.
to me; turn this pitiful rascal out—I _beg_ you to do it. Will you?”
When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim her hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her, in a whisper, not to be a simpleton, and allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear unpleasant in the eyes of a man often times his consequence. Elizabeth made no answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which she was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, and reading in her neighbours’ looks their equal amazement in beholding it. They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and, at first, was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it would be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk,{116} she made some slight observation on the dance. He replied, and was again silent. After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time, with—
coward amongst them Shepherdsons—not a one. And there ain’t no cowards
eleven different places now. I reckoned I couldn’t stand it more’n a
So they started, and I lit out, all in a cold sweat, and scrambled

Above all, it would be necessary to admit, that no minister, in any country, could, for the future, without a horrid perverseness, without a want of judgement bordering upon insanity, propose, neither all together nor separately, expedients as shameful as they would prove useless; and that no individual could hereafter dread such measures, without being guilty of folly. What a security, then, for the Subject! what an advantage to the State! what a facility for Administration!
 “Alas, our Poor Brother”

“Yo’ ole father doan’ know yit what he’s a-gwyne to do. Sometimes he

“Is he tame?” asked the woman, opening the door a little wider.
They walked along listening to the singing of the brightly colored
tall stick, where you found me. He and his friend soon after walked
Jim said if we had the canoe hid in a good place, and had all the traps

and gutted houses and blasted and blackened trees that the night had
and kettles and sweep the floor and keep the fire fed with wood.
“_Well_, you get all the enjoyment you can out of it _now_, for mind I
again till they had set down. Then Tom and Bob went to the sideboard

Handwriting.—Digging up the Corpse.—Huck Escapes.



Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after a moment’s deliberation,—
“_Jim_ don’t know nobody in China.”
[132]
CHAPTER XII.
ago, and he said if I hollered he’d cut my livers out—and told me to

When the North Express drew up at Alexandrovo we went to have a try for a carriage to ourselves and had to give a good tip to the conductor who ushered us into an empty compartment, assuring us that we should have it to ourselves as far as Berlin; but at the first stopping another guard came to announce that we had been placed here by mistake, this car being bound for another direction. He proposed for us a compartment in the neighbouring carriage; but if he imagined that he was going to be as liberally recompensed as his cheat of a companion, he was very much mistaken, for he did not receive even one kreutzer. We got thoroughly punished for it, however, for when the train was going to start and we had just composed ourselves for deep slumber,[158] a lady and gentleman were ushered into our compartment, an elderly Englishman on the wrong side of fifty, particularly nasty-looking, and his spouse, a young person of about nineteen, very nice to look at. Her husband called her “Baby,” and bestowed caresses upon her all the way; but she didn’t seem to care a cent about him and responded very phlegmatically to his advances. Well, to have married such an individual she must have had great courage, with not so much as a pair of tongs would I have touched him, and couldn’t have married him if he was the only man in the whole world.

“Wonder who he’s a-gwyne to chaw up this time. If he’d a-chawed up all
man’s own son, which he has had all the trouble and all the anxiety and




“Certainly,” replied Elizabeth, “there are such people, but I hope I am not one of them. I hope I never ridicule what is wise or good. Follies and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, do divert me, I own, and I laugh at them whenever I can. But these, I suppose, are precisely what you are without.”
of power.
this day.” And away he went.
Everybody made a rush for the front door, because, of course, a

with her eyes towards the road and the tears in them; and I wished I
CHAPTER XXXIV.
“It’s a dead man. Yes, indeedy; naked, too. He’s ben shot in de back. I
washed ashore and got tangled amongst the brush at the water’s edge. I

and leave her there.”
“The very words I was a-sayin’ no longer ago th’n this minute to Sister

first time.
the man he held wrenched himself free and made off down the lane in the
change on top of it. So me and the duke went up to the village, and
if the silent houses I passed on my way were sleeping securely, or
most uncommon lively place, for there warn’t nothing but sword-fighting

he would a done _more_ generous by ’em if he hadn’t ben afeard o’
tumblers, and give it to me and Buck, and we drank to the old people
“_I_ don’t know; but it’s so. I got some of their jabber out of a book.
“I wonder,” said he, at the next opportunity of speaking, “whether he is likely to be in this country much longer.”
“What’s this?”
of human danger, or thought of them only to dismiss the idea of life


away.
It was a few minutes past nine that night when these three sentinels

because I cannot get hurt. If anyone treads on my toes or sticks a pin

As she spoke, she observed him looking at her earnestly; and the manner in which he immediately asked her why she supposed Miss Darcy likely to give them any uneasiness, convinced her that she had somehow or other got pretty near the truth. She directly replied,—
[478]
the place but some mouldy cheese. There was, however, water to drink;
frock coat, limped out and sat down beside the trap, removed his
If you’ve got any drawing-room manners or a dislike to eating peas with

Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained quietly in the hall till she and Kitty were out of sight, then returned into the drawing-room.
At five o’clock in the morning we landed at Helsingfors and had only one hour to survey this pretty town. When we returned to our boat a fresh breeze arose and our ship began to pitch and rock. This disagreeable tossing of the waves made me feel sick and giddy. I hastened to my cabin and lay down. Early in the morning I was up and hastened on deck. The shores of Sweden had appeared at last, and soon we entered the port of Stockholm, the Venice of the North. The town, built upon islands, is very picturesque. As a rule, the Swedes are exceedingly courteous to strangers, nevertheless at the Custom House the officials burrowed into our trunks and opened all our bags, making a mess of everything. One of the men picked out a little folding looking-glass and turned it about in his clumsy fingers trying to find out what it was, till Sergy, at the end of his patience, opened the looking-glass and thrust it under the man’s ugly face, after which he left us in peace.

makes such a rustling that you wake up. Well, the duke allowed he would
Mr. Koyander, the Russian consul, placed himself at our disposal and gave us a great deal of interesting information. It is now the “Ramadan,” one of the biggest Mussulman feasts, and the Arab quarter of the town is especially animated. We drove with Mr. Koyander through narrow and dirty streets and arrived at a great open place. I was extremely interested by the panorama of the East which passed before our eyes. We met the most varied types: magnificent Arabs; Syrians in red mantles; Copts—Christians of the Greek faith—wearing black turbans; blue-clad figures of Fellahs in a garb that recalled the ill-omened coat of Joseph; and other specimens of the brown children of the Nile. The Egyptian women have painted chins and a ring stuck through their noses. The eyes of their babies were stuck round with flies, the poor mites being too apathetic to drive them away. This oriental throng, in turbans, stared at us unbenevolently, except a young negress, carrying a naked baby astride on her shoulder, who offered me a piece of sugar-cane, smiling and showing beautiful, glittering white teeth. We passed with some difficulty through the crowd and manœuvred between the tables, laid out with refreshments, set in the middle of the streets, and entered an Arab café to see the dances of the “bayadères,” or Egyptian dancing-girls. At the entry hung a dark curtain, covering the open doorway, which was lifted for us to pass, and we found ourselves in a small hall where three “bayadères” sat upon a raised platform; they were covered with gauze, with reddened lips and palms, wearing massive golden ear-rings, their hair twisted into innumerable thin ringlets at the end of which hung golden coins, with silver bracelets jingling on their bare ankles and their arms. We waited for their dances in vain, these daughters of the East absolutely refused to exhibit themselves before “Giaours” (Christians), and passed their time in throwing alluring glances at a group of good-looking young “hadjis” (men who had made the pilgrimage to Mecca or Medina), sitting in the first row.

“I find that in many of the latest publications the atonement of the Redeemer and the divine operations of the blessed Spirit of God, are altogether forgotten, nay exploded. If the foundation of true Christianity is destroyed, what superstructure can be raised? I therefore cannot but entreat you to learn the way to heaven from the Sermons of your Redeemer and the Epistles of St. Paul and the other apostles. My favourite chapter is the third of St. Paul’s Epistle to the Philippians. There you will find the genuine character of a true Christian.
joyful.”
At ten o’clock in the morning the train stopped at Tashkend station, where we met a royal reception. A great crowd was on the platform and all around the station. The courtyard was full of carriages and natives curious to see us. I think all the inhabitants were gathered there to stare. We mounted into our carriage, drawn by a pair of splendid long-tailed horses which my husband had bought from the widow of the late Governor-General. A hundred Cossacks, and a great number of natives on horseback, escorted us from the station to our house, called a palace. The horses flew along the streets full of people; enthusiastic cheers resounded as we passed. We nodded to right and left. Great preparations were made to greet us; the streets were all dressed with flags, the windows and balconies hung with carpets and wreaths of flowers. The photographers made the best of their opportunities and prepared their kodaks for action. We drove fast and soon reached the cathedral, where a Te Deum was sung in our honour. The Bishop in a few hearty words bade us welcome to Tashkend, and pointed out to Sergy that it was the third Asiatic country already which had been confided to him—Erzeroum, Khabarovsk and Tashkend.
“You must not be too severe upon yourself,” replied Elizabeth.
“It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of to yours.”
In limiting their landed revenue to 10,000,000, their wheat remaining at 20s. per quarter; let everyone judge what load of taxes they could bear, before the price of their wheat and other territorial productions, should come up to that of the same commodities of Europe, even including the expences for the export of their surplusage.

So the Scarecrow led her through the trees until they reached the

iron ring, and went out in the woods and rubbed and rubbed till I sweat

That same night I took part in a concert got up by the Benevolence Society in our house. The hall was brilliantly lighted; every seat was taken. The Bokharian deputies were present at the concert and I wore in their honour the heavy golden necklace presented to me by the Emir. It is fortunate that I had to play instead of singing, because for the great weight of the necklace I could not have drawn one single note out of my throat. I was seized with an access of shyness, before mounting the platform, and had to swallow soothing drops to quiet my nerves; nevertheless I thought I should die of fright when I appeared before the audience and was conscious of an inclination to run away, but giving a swift glance to the public confronting me, I soon recovered my self-possession entirely, and performed my solo on the concertina with great success, gathering frenzied bravos, and I had to play no fewer than five encores. All the same I had too good sense not to understand that my success was due especially to the position I held, much more than to my talent; it was only green paper laurels that I got, and I should have liked to win real ones and play in other surroundings, with veritable artists and amongst a less partial audience. The concert brought a large profit, more than one hundred pounds. All the ladies who took part in it received a bouquet bound with white ribbons bearing the Red Cross.
“Good land!” I says; “why, there ain’t _no_ necessity for it. And what
would _I_ like it? So says I to Jim:
vast sentinel shape. And in the back of my mind was the sense of all

under the curtain two or three foot from where I was. I stuck tight to


head on you,” says the king. “Blest if the old Nonesuch ain’t a heppin’
I says:

only in the summer time, when he comes there to take the sea baths.”

again on his hands to the duke, and both of them took on about that

Well, she _was_ in a tearing way—just a-trembling all over, she was so
fattening food, careful breeding, no worry. After a week or so chasing
following remotely.

[307]
Then I saw some cabmen and others had walked boldly into the sand-pits,
dat you would, honey. Chickens knows when it’s gwyne to rain, en so do

hair disordered from his pillow.
real, grew credible. I felt no fear, only a wild, trembling exultation,
grew thicker in Fulham. The streets were horribly quiet. I got
“Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd to be entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet, for the advantage of some, conversation ought to be so arranged as that they may have the trouble of saying as little as possible.”
off, so as to get the chain loose?”
thing blows over a little, for people thinks now that he killed his boy
in instant flight.”
here would come a blast of wind that would bend the trees down and turn

me to mind about that school, because he was going to lay for me and





hands and knees. We went about two hundred yards, and then the cave

took the spoon, _that’s_ certain.”
and stopped at the turn of the way. It was a carriage, with a pole for
But so soon as this strangeness had been realised it passed, and my
joints.

August 14th.—The barometer has fallen. The wind is blowing very hard, and the sea is swelling rapidly. I remained shut up in my cabin all day stretched inertia in my narrow berth; I see the ceiling rise and descend. A very disagreeable feeling indeed!
All of a sudden, bang! bang! bang! goes three or four guns—the men had
ironclad seaward fired a small gun and hoisted a string of flags. A jet
impossible.
really done it pretty good. Then he says:
“Are you trying to hide?”
“Well, I _did_ pay you back some of it wunst.”
they yelled again. For, surging out beyond the white tumult, drove
couldn’t noway understand. Why, I couldn’t a thought of them in a year.
and a cheese in the bar—there was a meat safe, but it contained nothing


THE whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr. Bennet the next morning, but the post came in without bringing a single line from him. His family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a most negligent and dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for exertion. They were forced to conclude, that he had no pleasing intelligence to send; but even of that they would have been glad to be certain. Mr. Gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off.
We judged that three nights more would fetch us to Cairo, at the bottom
“Well, then, come along; no use to take truck and leave money.”
awhile, and found him looking hearty and healthy, and then we woke him
that Dorothy feared it would burst.
which this faint irradiation proceeded. With that realisation my
 They Found Eight Dollars
away. Then, far away beyond the Crouch, came another, striding over
If the English merchants, after having over-stocked the American markets with European goods, have attempted to strip America of the little money she had to boast of, and to leave her goods on her own hands, do the complaints set up in England on this subject, prove any thing essential either to England, or to the rest of the world, more than the impossibility of carrying into execution beyond a certain degree, the plan, as destructive as it is absurd, of any other trade but that which is founded on a reciprocity of advantages, on an exchange of the gifts with which Nature and Art have favoured one country, against those with which Nature and Art have favoured another country? And even, upon a supposition, that America should have returned under the domination of England, if the English[380] merchants had, in this case, attempted to wrest from her the little money she was possessed of, would not the American colonists have been justified in taking every measure necessary to preserve it?—Would they in enforcing that right have been free from the misfortune, common to mankind, of always doing, in order to guard against an injury, much more than is either just or necessary?—The impossibility of making returns adequate to the extravagant invoices sent by the French traders to their colonies in America, after the war I have mentioned, determined also the agents of the French trade to strip those colonies of all the money they could lay their hands upon: no other way to put a stop to that spoliation was left, but to bore in the middle of their dollars a large hole, which restoring the equilibrium between the rapacity of the foreign trader, and the wants of the interior commerce, preserved within those colonies the trifling sum in specie that still remained there. Soon after, the equilibrium was also restored between the imports and the consumption; and from that instant an end was put to the thirst after money, as well as to the necessity of boring the dollars.—What difference then can exist, in this respect also, between a colony and a free State?
proves you have a heart. For my part, I have no heart; so I cannot have
the afternoon’s news. The ringing impact of trucks, the sharp whistle
up, but stayed with them as long as we could; because we allowed we’d
LXX.	Across the Japanese Sea	361
“Why, any candle,” he says.
no one will dare injure a person who has been kissed by the Witch of
see the Things before they were killed. He dispatched a telegram, which

stretching their necks and listening. One long, lanky man, with long

Sergy took me after dinner to see the dances of the “Gitanas” in a more than dubious-looking tavern, where the male audience consisted of individuals belonging to the “Fra Diavolo type,” whom one would not care to meet at night turning the corner of a street. Four Andalusian gitanas and two guitarists, with red kerchiefs wrapped round their heads, and the navaja (knife) stuck in their belt, composed the troop. The gitanas, arrayed in scarlet frocks and different coloured shawls, with the traditional red flower stuck just over the ear, and huge gold ear-rings, bounced about to the sound of the guitars and the clinking of castanets, occasionally indulging in a sudden shrill shout, whilst the audience clapped their hands in tune. After that the gitanas went round for collections and came and sat at the guest’s tables to be regaled with molluscs and snails, which they swallowed uncooked. A fat and rather unattractive terpsichore seated herself at the table next to ours, and cast alluring glances on the male audience, but lost her time in vain, for nobody paid attention to her. My neighbour, who with his savage-looking beard resembled a highwayman, offered me a cigarette and wanted me to taste some of those horrid molluscs, and was extremely astonished at my refusal.


And strangest of all is it to hold my wife’s hand again, and to think
mouth, a bruised jaw, and bloodstained knuckles, driving along an
to de town en say you’s killed. Dese las’ skifts wuz full o’ ladies en
stiff-armed from the shoulder, like there was a pivot there for it to
She took off her old leather shoes and tried on the silver ones, which
the afternoon, when the authorities gave the press agencies the news in

climb over the wall.”

But the gloom of Lydia’s prospect was shortly cleared away; for she received an invitation from Mrs. Forster, the wife of the colonel of the regiment, to accompany her to Brighton. This invaluable friend was a very young woman, and very lately married. A resemblance in good-humour and good spirits had recommended her and Lydia to each other, and out of their three months’ acquaintance they had been intimate two.{287}
At first I stared unintelligently across the London valley. The

“Hate you! I was angry, perhaps, at first, but my anger soon began to take a proper direction.”
frantic for the most part and many burned and scalded. He was turned
“If he had had any compassion for me,” cried her husband impatiently, “he would not have danced half so much! For God’s sake, say no more of his partners. O that he had sprained his ancle in the first dance!”
full of dangers to travelers. There are wild beasts in the woods, and a

“I had not thought Mr. Darcy so bad as this—though I have never liked him, I had not thought so very ill of him—I had supposed him to be despising his fellow-creatures in general, but did not suspect him of descending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as this!”
was a long journey through a dangerous country, although nearer to the

proven conclusion.
and if I could think up anything worse, I would do that, too; because
the edge of Regent’s Park there were as many silent couples “walking
the plantation he’s frum, below Newr_leans_. No-sirree-_bob_, they
one came near them nor spoke to them because of the great Lion, of
us but the chance of a horrible death, we could sit following the
his back was all over saddle-boils. Jim was monstrous proud about it,


pushing and shoving to get at the window and have a look, but people
han’s.”
raised his tube on high and discharged it, gunwise, with a heavy report

He led the way to a small chamber in the rear of the Throne Room, and
myself to a nigger; but I done it, and I warn’t ever sorry for it
Eighty years ago the amount of exportation from England, was estimated at 5,612,085l. In 1773, upon a medium of three years, the same was increased to 16,027,937: of the exceeding 9 or 10 millions, one part appropriated to the commerce in Europe, another to the American, a third to the East-India trade, remain one, two, and sometimes three years, before they can be applied to the same objects. These 10,000,000 therefore suppose a stock more than double the same sum, and ought, in consequence, to be set down as a seventh clear saving of—10,000,000.


and efforts, the innumerable hosts of lives that had gone to build this
mutton and bread in the pantry and brought it into the room. We lit no
’em’s light en t’other one is dark. One is rich en t’other is po’.
this time he wouldn’t ever be a prisoner again, not for a salary.

artilleryman jumped down the bank into the road and saluted.

My husband received numerous visits of congratulation, and telegrams with testimonies of good-will reached him from many parts.
of which the two closing verses are, in English:
AMID WAR’S ALARMS.
“And I shall never have brains,” added the Scarecrow.
broke, and I desisted and rose. We stood panting and threatening each
fortunate for Kansas that you have brains.”

although he tried to get out of the Woodman’s arms, and would have

Transcriber’s Note: The errata have been corrected, along with a few minor typographical errors.
anybody dat had any gumption would? No; I take en whack de bill in


Tom he made a sign to me—kind of a little noise with his mouth—and we
the wigwam, and says:
had a gun. I was most powerful sick, and slunk to a chair and set down.
frightened at facing a real witch. “Oh, no, that is a great mistake.
them. The black powder covered them over, and softened their outlines.
desert, and then it should be easy to find your way home.”
west, and then gazed long and earnestly at the darkness of Hampstead

and think, my! how that snag’s tearing along. If you think it ain’t
skasely; and when there was, a body couldn’t sleep, it was so lively,

CHAPTER VII.
Byfleet was in a tumult; people packing, and a score of hussars, some
wild.
Between the hours of five and seven the passengers take their siesta on deck, sitting down in canvas chairs and fading slowly into a deep slumber, conscious of the rhythmic throbbing of the engine and of the beat of warm air on their cheek.
“What is that flicker in the sky?” he asked abruptly.
more—if I was one of them I would see a man in Jericho before I would
From all assaults my soul defend.
PORT SAÏD
[4]

The next morning, as she was going down stairs, she was met by her father, who came out of his library with a letter in his hand.
like a horse?”
gulf between his dreams and his powers. Such a hole I could have dug in
because he didn’t come in a certain length of time, and filled up our
the earthly artillery made no reply.
before these rips got out of patience and come for us.
charred and distorted beyond recognition, and all night long the common

that the robbers hid in the cave, and it made us rich. We got six
snarling brutes with it, and both were dashed to pieces on the sharp

I says:
Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She wanted to ascertain the feelings of each of her visitors, she wanted to compose her own, and to make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she feared most to fail, she was most sure of success, for those to{321} whom she endeavoured to give pleasure were pre-possessed in her favour. Bingley was ready, Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined, to be pleased.
wonderful things that happened upon that Friday, was the dovetailing of
We drove back to the hotel through two beautiful parks, “Del Retiro” and “Reservado.” After dinner we went to the Apollo to see a modern play “La Grande Via,” about which the town was raving. The theatre was packed to the very ceiling. I perceived in one of the boxes a very ugly Matador who did not at all resemble Carmen’s Toreador. After the second act I began to yawn, for the play was rather a bore, and the actors’ appearance very unattractive. Sergy proposed to go and spend the rest of the evening in a Music Hall where painted women were sitting in a circle, singing and shrieking in oriental fashion, accompanied on guitars by suspicious-looking individuals. The audience consisted of rather ferocious-looking Spaniards with hair which seemed to have never been touched by the comb and eyes blazing under their wide black sombreros, who had the air of demanding “Your money or your life!”
going Londonward in those days. But of all this I have no memory. I
“And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at least great pleasure in the power of choice. I{230} do not know anybody who seems more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Mr. Darcy.”
heard disputes, reproaches, groans of weariness and fatigue; the voices

Dorothy went to the Witch’s cupboard to fill her basket with food for
“Where’s your shells?” said the first speaker. “There ain’t no time. Do
[Pg 11]
vapour did not diffuse as a true gas would do. It hung together in
We ended our nocturnal rambles in rather a fickle manner. We were trotted briskly up to a tea-house, where we were received with many bows by pretty musumés (waiting-girls). After having removed our shoes at the entrance hall, we were conducted up a steep and creaking staircase to the room where the “geishas” dance, and where mats and carpets were the only furniture. We seated ourselves with our feet tucked under us on cushions that the musumés had set in a half circle on the mats, and waited patiently for the appearance of the geishas—dancing girls—who were occupied elsewhere just then. Presently a musumé slipped in, bearing a tray with all sorts of eatables, and set it before us. There were lobsters and raw-fish, and evil-looking vegetables, and nasty sweetmeats, and green tea in microscopic cups, and unspeakable horror, very strong and salt. The little musumés waited upon us silently and swiftly. The tea that one of them handed me made me feel sick, and after one disgusting mouthful, when I felt myself unobserved, I poured the contents of my cup outside the window on the neighbouring roof. I had cramps, being obliged to sit so long cross-legged, like the rest of the company, expecting the geishas. It was getting late, and having no more patience to wait for them we returned to our hotel.
beat out. Let’s look around.”



Then came the night of the first falling star. It was seen early in the
darkness, and then, in a flash like daylight, the red masses of the


free, the door of heaven stands open—oh, enter in and be at rest!”
Then he dropped down and went to sleep again; but what he had been
After this, with the consent of the Danish Mission and the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, he decided to make Trichinopoly his centre of work instead of Tranquebar.
After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference. Not a word passed between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went to bed in the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded, unless Mr. Darcy returned within the stated time. Seriously, however, she felt tolerably persuaded that all this must have taken place with that gentleman’s concurrence.



People were watching for Martians here from the church towers. My
The Munchkins and the Witch first looked at one another, and then at
leg. Again I went to the tinsmith, and again he made me a leg out of
around there till he lets the cat out of the bag? No, sir; I know what
night. It was dark, and suddenly void of men. Overhead the stars were
incessantly, each black splash grew and spread, shooting out
We arrived at Petrovsk far behind time. My car was attached to our train as far as St. Petersburg.
us as we passed.
CXIII.	Singapore	475

river. See? He’ll be drownded, and won’t have nobody to blame for it
only do away with the other Witch; but, now that you have melted her, I

The pretended Balance of France in Point of Trade.	291



the direction of their journey for fear of getting lost. So they looked

[375]

All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months before, had been almost an angel of light. He was declared to be in debt to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all honoured with the title of seduction, had been extended into every tradesman’s family. Everybody declared that he was the wickedest young man in the world; and everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted the appearance of his goodness. Elizabeth, though she did not credit above half of what was said, believed enough to make her former assurance of her sister’s ruin still more certain; and even Jane, who believed still less of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now come, when, if they had gone to Scotland, which she had never before entirely despaired of, they must in all probability have gained some news of them.{361}
the reward, and then Miss Watson would sell him South, sure. Well, he
tried for a second or two to brace up and out with it, but I warn’t man



Wickham’s affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had expected to find it; not equal to Lydia’s for him. She had scarcely needed her present observation to be satisfied, from the reason of things, that their elopement had been brought on by the strength of her love rather than by his; and she would have wondered why, without violently caring for her, he chose to elope with her at all, had she not felt certain that his flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and if that were the case, he was not the young man to resist an opportunity of having a companion.

girl.
SAN REMO
He was the _worst_ I ever struck. Well, the iron-jawed man he laughed
able to raise large crops. Once in a while she would pass a house, and
“I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. I did not expect such a compliment.”
as if each man were suddenly and momentarily turned to fire.
Cross Road.
“And you saw him frequently?”
after dinner the duke said he had ciphered out his idea about how to
“Ah, sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you must confess. Not that I mean to find fault with you, for such things, I know, are all chance in this world. There is no knowing how estates will go when once they come to be entailed.”

The next morning we started from Lucerne to make the ascent of the Rigi-Kulm. We went down the lake on a steamboat and got ashore at Viznau. I was eyeing the ascent above me with great awe. It was not an easy affair. We had to climb a road leading skyward, like an interminable staircase, by the funicular railway. It was incredible that the locomotive, standing on his hind legs so to speak, should creep up the mountain; I thought no one but a goat could surmount it. The funicular contains two cars, roofed but open from the sides, the seats are tilted back, which enables the passengers to sit level while going up the steep incline. Whether going up or down, the engine is always at the lower end of the train. The passengers sit backwards going up, and face forward going down. Our engine began to climb laboriously the steep mountain which is 6,000 feet high, grappling slowly step by step to the toothed rails, having on each side gigantic precipices clothed with pines. Loud cataracts roared below unseen. The road lay between high granite walls. Through a gap in the rocks unfathomable depths disclosed themselves below us, chilling my blood and making me dizzy. I gripped Sergy’s arm pinching him very hard, but Sergy, whose nerves were stronger than mine and who didn’t see any danger at all, said laughingly to me that it was quite unnecessary to give him the blues, but I only grabbed his arm the tighter. The view grew fairer and fairer as we mounted. From here one could see the four lakes in the shape of a cross, on which the water appeared a smooth sapphire floor sparkling with sails no bigger than pin-heads, and the far stretching large and fertile valley. Now we began to climb up a narrow bridge thrown over a precipice at the bottom of which a[176] rapid torrent rolled. I will not pretend I was not frightened, I was very. Footpaths are traced for pedestrians here and there. We saw a tourist resting against a huge stone in the crevice of a rock. We crawled higher and higher till we met the clouds that rested on the mountain sides. We are in the clouds now. The sun is shining above us and underneath the whole space is covered with thick clouds forming a milky ocean, and screening our way completely.

time, “But you knowed he was running for his freedom, and you could a
CHAPTER XXIII



Monkeys to help them, and find out whether he kept his promises or not.

right, and me and Jim over it; but Tom’s britches catched fast on a
I had just one little glimpse of the old gentleman when he come in;
nothing to some things he had said in his time. I heard one man say it
CHAPTER XXIII.
yesterday? You said it was the worst bad luck in the world to touch a
the village of Shepperton. Forthwith the six guns which, unknown to

His spirit was gone for to sport aloft

C F Schwartz
be. There is ways to keep off some kinds of bad luck, but this wasn’t
this reason none of the Quadlings ever come to the Emerald City.”
“Oh, my dear Mr. Bennet,” as she entered the room, “we have had a most delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been there. Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said how well she looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and danced with her twice. Only think of that, my dear: he{17} actually danced with her twice; and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him stand up with her; but, however, he did not admire her at all; indeed, nobody can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going down the dance. So he inquired who she was, and got introduced, and asked her for the two next. Then, the two third he danced with Miss King, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane again, and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the Boulanger——”
Jim might wake up and come. But Tom wanted to resk it; so we slid in
“No, I didn’t see nobody, Aunt Sally. The boat landed just at daylight,
weight of terrestrial conditions, this was impossible. There is reason
young rascal, to fool a body so—” and was going to hug him, but he
At that moment Dorothy saw lying on the table the silver shoes that had



find their way back through the big fields of buttercups and yellow
“I hope,” said she, as they were walking together in{67} the shrubbery the next day, “you will give your mother-in-law a few hints, when this desirable event takes place, as to the advantage of holding her tongue; and if you can compass it, to cure the younger girls of running after the officers. And, if I may mention so delicate a subject, endeavour to check that little something, bordering on conceit and impertinence, which your lady possesses.”
first glimpse of the world.
anywheres. Where would I go to?”

The Voice of the Void
“A thorough, determined dislike of me—a dislike which I cannot but attribute in some measure to jealousy. Had the late Mr. Darcy liked me less, his son might have borne with me better; but his father’s uncommon attachment to me irritated him, I believe, very early in life. He had not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood—the sort of preference which was often given me.{103}”

little. There warn’t no other sound but the scraping of the feet on the
When I got half-way, first one hound and then another got up and went
started home.
A TRIP TO EGYPT

Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer; and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.
“Why, I thought he’d be in the pulpit.”
Dorothy nodded gravely and the Queen made a curtsy, after which she
“That is a first-rate idea,” said the Lion. “One would almost suspect
So he says:

“It’s _you_, at last!—_ain’t_ it?”
beautiful green fields before them.


“This is strange,” exclaimed Dorothy. “What shall we do?”
questioning the crowd at midnight. The military authorities were
Then Oz painted it on the inside with a coat of thin glue, to make it
are dangerous because, no doubt, they are mad with terror. Perhaps they
a ratty old bedquilt off the bed, and a reticule with needles and pins
Golden Cap is yours, and three times you have the right to lay your
expected it, and then like they _had_. Then the duke says:

All were painted blue, for in this country of the East blue was the
used to it.
them. We could a had pets enough if we’d wanted them.
Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was her dear Wickham on every occasion; no one was to be put in competition with him. He did everything best in the world; and she was sure he would kill more{390} birds on the first of September than anybody else in the country.
CX.	Macao	468
profits has turned out to be none, lackin’ considable, and none to
“Not where _I_ hid it I reckon it won’t,” I says.
“And you promised to give me courage,” said the Cowardly Lion.
“We’re beat.” They carried absolute conviction.
“so you have certainly saved my life. How did you happen to be here?”
As she pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour; but the emotion was short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while she continued,—
proven conclusion. I have assumed that in the body of my narrative.
“Why, duke, it was you that said make up the deffisit; it warn’t me.”
“What promise?” asked Oz.
I studied about this, the more my conscience went to grinding me, and
against the man, and put his chin on his shoulder, and cried down his
of a thicket of trees and bushes, to the edge of Wimbledon Common,
At seven o’clock in the morning General Kousminski was at my door, and I started bravely for Erzeroum, full of happy hopes and expectations. A crowd of Turks gathered round our carriage, wishing us Godspeed.
That evening Moscow was beautifully illuminated; the belfries of the numerous cathedrals and the towers of the Kremlin glittered with different-coloured lights. From all parts gushed out fountains illuminated by Bengal-lights. I felt myself transported into dreamland.
Will it be long before they perceive, that this credit will follow close upon the solidity of public engagements,—a solidity demonstrated by the evidence of the inutility of a base and infamous robbery?


arm in two places, and was most froze to death when somebody found him


hadn’ dive’ so deep en swum so fur under water, en de night hadn’ ben
to than any nigger in that country. Strange niggers would stand with

yards out of Baker Street I heard a yelping chorus, and saw, first a

The Balcony Scene
part of London for food in the night. Before I went to bed I had an
In the middle of June the Tzar came to Moscow to review the troops on the “Khodinka Field.” A warning had come from abroad telling the police to take great care of bomb-throwers during that review, and especially to mistrust the men wearing top-hats, which could hold engines of destruction in them. Though great precautions had been taken, I felt awfully nervous whilst the review was going on. Count Brevern opened the parade on horseback, surrounded by my husband and a brilliant staff of splendidly uniformed officers who took up their position behind the Emperor. My fear of the anarchists did not hinder me from admiring the beautiful appearance of our soldiers. The artillery and infantry in compact rows, and the cavalry galloping very fast, produced an imposing spectacle. The regiments were splendid, they all came up and passed: cavalry, infantry, artillery, ambulance, doctors and all, with much music.
stillness was awful creepy and uncomfortable. Sherburn run his eye slow
Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. To Mr. Bennet’s acknowledgments he briefly replied, with assurances of his eagerness to promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with entreaties that the subject might never be mentioned to him again.{383} The principal purport of his letter was to inform them, that Mr. Wickham had resolved on quitting the militia.
enough from the poppy field to prevent her breathing any more of the
It consists in the impossibility of not doing, even to the end of ages, with a given number of industrious men, all that which the same number have executed during 80 years, not only without exhausting themselves, but rather, on the contrary, still increasing their strength and wealth.
In revolving Lady Catherine’s expressions, however, she could not help feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of her persisting in this interference. From what she had said of her resolution to prevent the marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that she must meditate an application to her nephew; and how he might take a similar representation of the evils attached to a connection with her she dared not pronounce. She knew not the exact degree of his affection for his aunt, or his dependence on her judgment, but it was natural to suppose that he thought much higher of her Ladyship than she could do; and it was certain, that in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with one whose immediate connections were so unequal to his own, his aunt would address him on his weakest side. With his notions of dignity, he would probably feel that the arguments, which to Elizabeth had appeared weak and ridiculous, contained much good sense and solid reasoning.
crouched, soaked to the skin from the thunderstorm the night of the

fungoid in the oily brown skin, something in the clumsy deliberation of
power of work—weeks of it—hours and hours, every night, whilst you was
had a good time. I was powerful glad to get away from the feuds, and so
One day we went to see a bird Exhibition at the Manège and were present at a horrible cock-fight—a most disgusting sight! White and red cocks were taken out of their narrow cages and settled on a small estrade covered with sand and surrounded by a railing. The combat began, the winged champions struck against one another, with bristled feathers which flew about on all sides, croaking piercingly all the time. By refinement of cruelty they had steel spurs fastened on their legs. The enraged birds picked off each others’ skins by morsels, and long streams of blood spread on the sand. The white cock soon became purple-coloured; his red antagonist after having plucked out both his eyes, won the battle. I was boiling all over with indignation, but the cruel audience exhausted itself in frantic applause, admiring this miserable sport. The ganders’ fight was not a less sickening spectacle. The males with wings outspread, prepared to battle, but only in the presence of their better-halves, who ran after their “pachas” gabbling loudly.
After luncheon we set off in six rikshas to explore the city of Colombo. Our men-horses trotted off at full speed, regardless of my protestations. The principal streets are planted with great overhanging trees and bordered with beautiful several-storied houses. Opposite the shipping office, in the heart of the European section, lay Gordon Gardens, a park full of flowers and grateful shade, the rendezvous of the elite of the city, white and brown. We went down the smooth red road that lies almost level with the sea, with emerald, velvety grass and cool shady bungalows. In the distance towered the Queen’s House, Governor Black’s residence, set well back from the broad highway in a grove of palms, a spacious, imposing edifice, where large entertainments are given. The governor, for the moment, was away on tour to some distant district of the island. We met on our way covered waggons drawn by two little hump-necked, strangely tattooed bullocks, and elegant dog-carts driven by English women. Dark came on suddenly and our riksha-men stopped to light their paper-lanterns, and hurried us back to the hotel. The second dinner-bell sounded as we entered the dining-room, as big as a cathedral and ventilated by twelve punkahs.


world is still crowded with life, but crowded only with what they
“I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to that kind of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man. I would rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. I thank you again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but to accept them is absolutely impossible. My feelings in every respect forbid it. Can I speak plainer? Do not consider me now as an elegant female intending to plague you, but as a rational creature speaking the truth from her heart.”
ricocheted towards the other flying ships to the north, and smashed a
of straw, so that I may become as much a man as any other in your
“If you mean Darcy,” cried her brother, “he may go to bed, if he chooses, before it begins; but as for the ball, it is quite a settled thing, and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough I shall send round my cards.”
at his arm with a handful of gold. “Go on! Go on!” shouted angry voices

Sergy was not a very docile patient, and felt rebellious to the authority of a person of the feeble sex, but I did all that the Wunderfrau ordered me to do without protest.
[79]
left fatherless and motherless. Yes, and we that knowed him knows that
In the year a.d. 345 Thomas Cananaus, as we have seen, landed in Malabar. Two centuries afterwards the Egyptian merchant and traveller, Cosmas Indicopleustes, journeyed thither, and we get another glimpse, disappointingly meagre, of the Christians in India.
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
if you killed a poor deer, and then my jaws would rust again.”

want to go to sleep, of course; but I was so sleepy I couldn’t help it;
stayed with me, and scorched me more and more. I tried to make out to
“You didn’t want to come. The average man don’t like trouble and
meet next week, and rob somebody and kill some people.
my only trial, for that moment of wrath and fear. I retraced every step
We spent three days in Rome, roaming through the splendid museums and churches, and had the chance of seeing the Pope officiate in St. Peter’s Cathedral, which was a very imposing spectacle.
so I won’t either; I’m a-going to see what’s going on here. So I




If it were very true, though upon the first blush rather strange, that after an operation so simple as that of increasing the price of the whole mass of commodities, or rather suffering it naturally to increase, in proportion as the taxes and the effects produced by them enhance the price of all the products of industry, which are to bear those taxes—were it true, I say, that after so plain, so simple an operation, it would suffice, in order to secure for ever, in the most efficacious manner, the payment of the interest on any given national debt whatever, to find, once for all, in cash and paper, a sum which would exactly be, to the[77] mass of the specie and paper already in circulation, as the interest of the debt, and the reactions of which I shall speak in the sequel, are to the mass of the two revenues—were it equally true, that those who are to be paid that interest, should, after these two previous data, have nothing in the world to dread but the reimbursement of a principal, the interest of which should appear so oddly secured, it would then be impossible not to confess, that England has hitherto been a prey to great uneasiness, with very little foundation.
The first step that led to civilisation was, probably, some kind of slavery, whatever might be its nature. It seems impossible that the strongest and most industrious, following no other impulse than that of a consciousness of his superiority, should have come to the noble resolution of sharing generously, with the weak and idle, the fruits of his own labours and industry; nor can it be supposed that he could suffer any one, but himself, to pronounce on the prerogatives due to his courage and his abilities. But the most consummate knowledge of the means which may have paved the way to despotism, would throw but a faint light on the various subjects which I propose to take under consideration.[2] The Epoch which it may be useful to dwell upon, is that, wherein the chiefs of the different states, being in no anxiety for an authority which is no longer contested, are the first to acknowledge its limits, and begin at last to be solicitous for the happiness of their subjects.

didn’t manage to kill Harney that day he shot at him—I hain’t ever

I shall therefore ask, In what public funds abroad the English merchants vest annually the four or five millions of that pretended favourable balance in money, since they do not bury it at home?—There might, it is true, still exist another resource; the general balance is only the aggregate of all private balances.⸺But is it very certain that, upon an average, the private balances of all the merchants in Europe, who correspond with England, are annually[129] charged by one fourth of the amount accruing from that correspondence? For if the English send them 16 every year, and every year import only 12, their correspondents are consequently indebted to them annually 4 more than they were the preceding year.
Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in attending to what passed between Darcy and his companion. The perpetual commendations of the lady either on his hand-writing, or on the evenness of his lines, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was exactly in unison with her opinion of each.{61}
[3]This idea is the more to be attended to, as, supposing it were possible that an increase of coin, within the nation, should enhance the produce of industry alone, the landed proprietors would certainly be obliged to petition for an act of parliament, prohibiting the importation of bullion, for fear it should be turned into coin; just as they would be obliged to pray for a tax on the productions of the earth, if none but the taxed articles were to increase in price.—We now petition against taxes; we should then pray to be taxed. This would be no bad subject for a Comedy, if attempted by a writer who would handle it properly. I hope the labouring man would be allotted a very bustling part; that is, he would engross the best wishes of all good men, and command the attention of all those who do not think themselves entitled to that appellation.

In the supposition that the revenue of England constitutes one tenth of that of Europe (it is a great deal), the other nations composing that part of the world were of course obliged to endeavour to secure the nine tenths of the money necessary for their own circulation; and their success in this is the less questionable, as, in case any one of them should be short of money for the circulation of its property, the English themselves would eagerly supply that part of the precious balance, which it might want, because, in this case, the importation of money into such country would prove more profitable than an importation of fresh goods, whilst the old ones, carried there already, waited for money to circulate them. Hence it may be concluded, that the English never had, or at least have not preserved, more than their tenth, twelfth, or rather, more than their natural portion in that absolute mass of gold and silver necessary to the circulation.
You must confess it as a love.
“You will be very welcome,” answered Dorothy, “for you will help to
I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I had ever
“And what became of them?” asked Dorothy, who had been greatly

direction of Chertsey, a muffled thud—the sound of a gun.
at the woodpile, and I knowed why I was going to leave that. I fetched
By the Marquis de CASAUX,
just in the beginning of the evolution that the Martians have worked

saw a star fall from heaven into the pine woods to the northwest. It

He only just looked scornful, and said something about nobody ever
again to stare in the same direction.




destroyers that had brought their quick-firers up the Thames refused to
We have engaged a young lady to hold the position of companion, Maria Michaelovna Titoff by name. She is a very gay and lively girl, who will help to make my life at Khabarovsk a little more cheery. Mr. Shaniavski, Mr. Scherbina and Henritzi accompany us on our journey.

Then we went loafing around the town. The stores and houses was most

did get saved, whoever saved him would send him back home so as to get
will promise. If you will kill for me the Wicked Witch of the West, I
recommend is this: that we really dig right in, as quick as we can; and
fling you across a saddle, and away you go to your native Langudoc, or

It was about two o’clock when my brother, having paid their fares at
faster than what I was.


with my chin at the top of my ladder, and waited to see if anything was
“Oh, it’s de dad-blame’ witches, sah, en I wisht I was dead, I do.
I do not clearly remember the arrival of the curate, so that probably I
breath of air reached them.

I found my husband enchanted with his visit to the Khedive, who had been charming to him. We sat together with Mr. Abaza on the terrace of our hotel till late, and had a comfortable chat over old times.
Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out of spirits; and immediately accounting for it herself, by supposing that she did not like to go home again so soon, she added,—

dinner.
So the old lady says:
It consists in the number of men capable of making up that quantity of exports, which is annually required for a trading navy of 775,024 tons, on the statement of which there cannot arise a single doubt.
ever; but I little knew how cruel my enemy could be. She thought of a

“If it was to be a secret,” said Jane, “say not another word on the subject. You may depend upon my seeking no further.”

“That is right. You could not have started a more happy idea, since you will not take comfort in mine: believe her to be deceived, by all means. You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer.”
know all ’bout de killin’. I ’uz powerful sorry you’s killed, Huck, but

We see we was too late—couldn’t do no good. We asked some stragglers

July 21st.—To-day we pass the 18th meridian, and have lost a whole day. This is Monday, 21st July, and to-morrow we shall be at Wednesday, 23rd July. We have to put our watches back a whole hour every day.
the lid, and put hot embers on top, and stood off five foot, with the
Shepherdsons done the same. It was pretty ornery preaching—all about
word. I reckoned the poor king was in for a gaudy time of it with the
and before long the duke tackled _his_ bottle; and so in about a half


I didn’t lose no time. The next minute I was a-spinning down stream
“Death!” I shouted. “Death is coming! Death!” and leaving him to digest
Solomon had one; he had about a million wives.”
make them comfortable.
most splendid spread-eagle way, prancing around and acting at the same

the huge unknown and hidden forces Londonward. Had they prepared
From this time Schwartz with unflagging zeal lost no opportunity of preaching the Gospel to the people in the open air, until they were so affected that they cried, “O that the King would embrace it! All would then forsake heathenism!” He won their hearts. After speaking to some of the King’s chief officers in the fort one of them came forward and begged him to accept a present of some money, but this he declined, explaining that he did not wish to oppose any obstacle to their acceptance of Christianity by giving occasion to any to suspect him of interested motives. “He who tendered me the present replied that he should never think that of me. I answered, ‘That may be but you cannot prevent others from thinking thus; I seek the good of your souls and not gifts.’ I accepted a nosegay and so we parted.”

“That may all be true,” said the Scarecrow, “but I shall be very
as I did so the screw must have come out, for the lid of the cylinder
Later on he is writing again, full of good wishes for his friend in the New Year:—
comfortable—there must a been twenty of them—and every lady with a

CHAPTER XIX
deep, and watched the daylight come. Not a sound anywheres—perfectly

from Mars, just a second or so under twenty-four hours after the first
on de bank like a whack, er a slam, while ago, en it mine me er de time
fear and curiosity.
dying. Tom jerked the door open and flung out a slab of Jim’s meat, and

Where there was no black powder, it was curiously like a Sunday in the
“Make yourself perfectly at home,” said the green girl, “and if you
“Was Peter Wilks well off?”
us out agin,” and _he_ begun to haul out yaller-jackets and stack them
and in their haste, and encumbered with the debris of their smashed

squeeze his hand on his forehead and stagger back and kind of moan;
opposed to spending money on circuses when there ain’t no other way,
maybe the hair-ball would take it, because maybe it wouldn’t know the
    By falling down a well.


a-holt. It clouded up en ’uz pooty dark for a little while. So I clumb

It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so early as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. As they drove to Mr. Gardiner’s door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival: when they entered the passage, she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth, looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and lovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls, whose eagerness for their cousin’s appearance would not allow them to wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen her for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.





The damp heat of Yokohama is very trying. It is well that there are no glasses in the windows; in the frames and above half of the door are blinds, which let in the soft tropical air and produce an agreeable draught.
blood-stained glass about the overturned water trough. My movements
“I often think,” said she, “that there is nothing so bad as parting with one’s friends. One seems so forlorn without them.”
Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy. Jane resolutely kept her place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went to the window—she looked—she saw Mr. Darcy with him, and sat down again by her sister.
Si le badinage du luxe n’est pas aussi innocent que le jeu des exportations & importations; & combien le plus fastueux, le plus prodigue, le plus sensuel de tous les Princes, consomme au-delà du plus avare de ses sujets.
“Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia’s note to his wife?”
cool and shady in the deep woods, even if the sun was blazing outside.
Here sich ’n’ sich a person busted his heart; ’n’ here so ’n’ so pegged
and soon saw a beautiful green glow in the sky just before them.

heard of such an idiotic idea, and then he went to studying. By-and-by
writes on a tin plate, or anywhere else.”
he warn’t white. I wouldn’t ’low no nigger to call me dat.”
couldn’t tell how many was in it. It kept a-coming, and when it was
carriages even at two o’clock. By three, people were being trampled and
“Very likely. Well, Oz can do anything; so I suppose he will find
Their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was not quite so cordial. His countenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely opened his lips. The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was enough to provoke him.
About this time general Loris-Melikoff was appointed commander of the army of the Caucasus, and my husband chief of his staff. Towards the middle of June Sergy was ordered to “Manglis” to inspect our artillery, a part of which quartered there. He offered to take me with him and I accepted gladly, for the heat in Tiflis was excessive and everybody was out of town at this season.
In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose{427} conference with her father had been short and to the purpose.
gray place you call Kansas.”
front and the two sides; and on the side I warn’t acquainted with—which
collectæ Præpositus.
“What does it mean?” he said. “What do these things mean?”
That took them.

“Oh,” he says.
our way.”

women’s underclothes hanging against the wall, and some men’s clothing,
and I put out the fire and scattered the ashes around to look like an
At eight o’clock in the evening we reached Venice and rolled slowly along a narrow pier. At the railway-station a group of gondoliers rushed up to us, offering their gondolas, just like cabmen. We stepped down into a gondola lighted up by lanterns on bow and poop. The gondolier pushed off from the steps and we silently glided along the Great Canal, surrounded by side canals crossed by small private bridges. Venice is built on piles, and stands upon many islands linked by bridges. At each crossing of the aquatic streets our strong-lunged gondolier shouted Gia-e! to escape collision. He brought us to the Hotel Danielli where we passed a sleepless night, not having followed the wise advice of the chambermaid, who told us not to raise the mosquito-nets. We were thoroughly punished for it, having been devoured by mosquitoes.
“And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own credit; but I am an idle fellow; and though I have not many, I have more than I ever looked into.”
“Smouch three,” he says; “we want one to make a saw out of.”

tackled missionarying, and mesmerizing, and doctoring, and telling
Sherburn. He was standing perfectly still in the street, and had a

_ship clerk?_—so as to get them to let Miss Mary Jane go aboard? Now
“Well, then, a horse?”
everything sometimes. But this one was a staving dream; tell me all
Vava Galitzine.
fancy _they_ are outside.”
The thing made a big stir in the town, too, and a good many come out

October 25th.—At dawn we approached Singapore. We put up at the Hôtel d’Europe. After tiffin, we visited the cisterns which supply the inhabitants with potable water. There are no wells in Singapore, the natives must be satisfied with the water produced by the rains, which is gathered and kept in large ponds. On our way we met natives driving in chariots drawn by small bisons, who have not the lazy drag of their western brethren, but trot briskly as horses. The aborigines, clad with a band of stuff round their thighs, held burning torches in their hands, and beat the tom-tom with all their might to chase away the spirits of darkness, because evil spirits, according to their belief, shun daylight.
woodchopper, and after my father died I took care of my old mother as
We were back for dinner at the table d’hôte. We had just finished our meal under the cooling caresses of the punkah and were going up to our room to take a siesta, when a boy announced to us that Hindoo snake-charmers were going to give a performance on the veranda. We were amazed by their startling experiments. They played the flute to their reptiles, who crawled out of a basket and rolled round their bodies, and they juggled with them as with balls. After that the jugglers performed the astonishing feat of producing spontaneous vegetation. They made a tree grow from seed to foliage before our eyes; they dug a fruit-stone into a little heap of sand, making cabalistic signs with their wand, and the stone grew visible and soon became a shrub covered with branches and leaves!
The Funeral.—Satisfying Curiosity.—Suspicious of Huck,—Quick Sales and
“I would wish not to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speak what I think.”
I was absolutely in the dark as to the course of the evening’s


one solitary star, and the white mist spreading wide and low beneath.

[363]



January 16th.—This morning we left for Hong-Kong on the boat Scha. Our steamer tugged a barge loaded with cases of opium, for the sum of forty thousand Mexican dollars. The cargo will be transhipped afterwards on to another boat bound for the Sandwich Islands and San Francisco. Our steamer is escorted by a detachment of Portuguese soldiers. After three hours’ sail we arrived at Hong-Kong.
all this truck and eight dollars besides. I wish we could have some bad
My heart fell down amongst my lungs and livers and things, and a hard
From certain vague memories I am inclined to think my own mind wandered
my presence from the mark of the blow I had given him.
the whole world; she was going to live so as to go to the good place.
“But, I don’t understand,” said Dorothy, in bewilderment. “How was it
A. The State, to be sure.


 Vittles
accounts of being glad and full of thinking; so I got home a heap too
Our great desire was to make the ascent by the Funicular Railway of Mount Vesuvius, whilst it was in eruption. Our wish was fulfilled on the following day. It took us three hours to drive in a carriage to the aerial railway-station. We passed a great number of macaroni factories, and saw rows of macaroni hanging on strings to dry. The road was most picturesque, having the blue Mediterranean strewn with white sails on one side and Vesuvius on the other. At length we reached the foot of the mountain, its head wrapped in a gloomy wreath of smoke and cloud. The volcano was[228] in full activity at that moment, and a large torrent of lava was running down the right slope of the Vesuvius. We saw the Funicular Railway crawling up the steepest part of the cone. We began to climb a very steep ascent leading to the aerial station, paved with different-coloured tiles of petrified lava. On each side of our way rose mountains of black lava. A group of street-singers followed our carriage singing Neapolitan folk-songs. When we arrived at the railway-station, standing near the observatory and the carbiniers’ lodge, the carriage-road ended. After having secured our tickets at the booking-office, we had lunch in the restaurant, and saw from the open window a funicular car crawling down the mountain. The Funicular Railway has only two cars, attached to an endless cable, named “Vesuvius” and “Etna,” one at the top and one at the bottom of the mountain; the one that comes down pulls the other one up.
Stanmore....

from the rest of the world. We could do nothing but wait in aching
My attention was diverted from this death flurry by a furious yelling,

world in this steady labour. As we worked, I turned his project over in
so he could see under the curtain of the awning and yells:
answer encores with, anyway.”


Jim talked out loud all the time while I was talking to myself. He was
last few days. There’s lots will take things as they are—fat and
you?—boat get aground?”
direction over the heath, forming heaps visible a mile and a half away.

stop, mutinied, and went down again. The only offensive operation men
MCMXVII
On arriving at Tokio we drove in a splendid landau sent to meet us by the Japanese minister of Foreign Affairs, to the Oriental Hotel, where we took an apartment of several rooms. We had barely time to take a little rest, when we received the visit of our Ambassador and the Japanese Naval Minister.
One of the men came running to my brother.
attention. Then he strikes a most noble attitude, with one leg shoved
“Well,” he said with a sigh, “I’m not much of a magician, as I said;
At two o’clock precisely the guns began to fire and the bells to ring a full peal, announcing that the Tzar had left Petrovski Palace and was on his way to the Kremlin. Soon the procession appeared in sight and the crowd began to acclaim their Sovereign by loud cheers; all the heads were bare. As I am a creature of strong emotions I, too, screamed to make myself hoarse. The procession advanced in the following order: First came a golden coach drawn by a team of splendid white horses in which sat the Empress and the Grand Duchesses. The Emperor rode behind with the Tzarevitch at his side, on a lovely pony. The Grand Dukes and the officers of the guard regiments brought up the rear. The spectacle was most imposing.

The duke never said nothing for a little bit; then he says:
quiet him down, and tried to explain to him and tell him how Harvey ’d
The ten thousand years had dwindled steadily—five thousand had passed before the development of the fourth dimensional scanning. Morus Tol was still a young man when he was killed, but with four thousand two hundred years yet to go, they met their hardest problem, and they were without a genius to solve it.
“Ah, you would not believe me; the world never believes—let it
A note for Miss Bennet.
and found you _warn’t_ up, and so they was hoping to slide out of the
To Elizabeth it appeared, that had her family made an agreement to expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit, or finer success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sister that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he must have witnessed. That his two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, should have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations was bad enough; and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.
hasty study of one of the fighting-machines, and there his knowledge
“No, sir,” I says, “I don’t want to spend it. I don’t want it at
CHAPTER LXIII


The health of Schwartz had by this time been re-established and, although subject to the delicacy which is common to people of sedentary habit who have not developed their physical capacities by exercise, the young missionary appears to have started his voyage without much discomfort except a little sea-sickness. But we find him suddenly laid aside.
oil-can, to guard against mishap.
Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning; but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded the affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed.

“Why, nothing—only it’s on account of the feud.”
Batavia does not enchant me. The heat is tremendous. We have determined to-day to go and seek freshness on the wooded slopes of Buitenzorg, the summer resort of the Dutch Resident, situated a few hours out of Batavia. The railway-line from Batavia to Buitenzorg is one of the most picturesque in the world. Marvellous landscapes spread out before our admiring eyes. What vegetation! There are thick mighty palms, bananas and dense tropical jungle. The road is very steep and we ascended slowly along wide precipices, stopping only twice at neat little railway-stations. The higher we mounted the fresher the air became. We rolled now between sugar-cane, vanilla and cotton plantations, with trees covered with white flakes, and passed picturesque villas with tall cocoa-nut palms casting cool shadows on the low flat roofs. The tropical sun made the train like a furnace. After three hours’ drive we saw a settlement of low dwellings, at the foot of blue hills, half hidden in an eucalyptus forest and gigantic mimosas. It was Buitenzorg!
common. There were fear and pain on their faces, and fear behind them.
wrecked Woking station with the adjacent houses, and massacred an

beyond the movements of troops about the common, and the burning of the

“I am sure,” she added, “if it was not for such good friends, I do not know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers a vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is always{55} the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest temper I ever met with. I often tell my other girls they are nothing to her. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a charming prospect over that gravel walk. I do not know a place in the country that is equal to Netherfield. You will not think of quitting it in a hurry, I hope, though you have but a short lease.”
“You could not have made me the offer of your hand in any possible way that would have tempted me to accept it.”
you, it just bangs anything I ever _heard_ of. Why, _sperits_ couldn’t
interchanged thoughts without any physical intermediation. And I have
fluorescent glow, quivering under the night breeze. For a space I could
“Something wrong with the gun,” he said. “But what if there is? They’ll
“No,” said Darcy, “I have made no such pretension. I have faults enough, but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I dare not vouch for. It is, I believe, too little yielding; certainly too little for the convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of others so soon as I ought, nor their offences against myself. My feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move them. My temper would perhaps be called resentful. My good opinion once lost is lost for ever.”

old hair trunk in one corner, and a guitar-box in another, and all
He had been some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three other gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river; and had left him only on learning{330} that the ladies of the family intended a visit to Georgiana that morning. No sooner did he appear, than Elizabeth wisely resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed;—a resolution the more necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because she saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them, and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour when he first came into the room. In no countenance was attentive curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley’s, in spite of the smiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its objects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her attentions to Mr. Darcy were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother’s entrance, exerted herself much more to talk; and Elizabeth saw that he was anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded, as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side. Miss Bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the first opportunity of saying, with sneering civility,—
XII.	Responsibilities and Patience	140



“Oh, no, my dear; I’m really a very good man, but I’m a very bad
hair. It’s wonderful. Why, I wouldn’t take a hundred dollars for that
Jim allowed the inscription was going to be the toughest of all. That’s

is, en whatever I wants ’m to do fur me, I doan’ have to ast ’m twice,
went out. I said I didn’t know; I hadn’t heard about it before, no way.
    Young Stephen Dowling Bots.
“This was all we ever had to do until the Golden Cap fell into the
“Do you suppose them to be in London?”


“Oh no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so full of both. I know you will do him such ample justice, that I am growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your profusion makes me saving; and if you lament over him much longer, my heart will be as light as a feather.”
thunder—“Aloo! Aloo!”—and in another minute it was with its companion,
me to.”

herself in a wonderful place. It was a big, round room with a high
the next, nor the next. The waiting was tiresome and wearing, and at


paw he sent the Scarecrow spinning over and over to the edge of the
he’ll walk in Huck’s money as easy as nothing.”
nose, and mouth painted on it to represent a face. An old, pointed blue

to breakfast, after which they started again upon their journey.
to come home this evening and surprise the folks.

on the water; and if a little glimpse of a snag slips by you don’t
nose peering in through a break among the ruddy fronds. This greatly

evenin’. De yuther servants wouldn’ miss me, kase dey’d shin out en
anybody around, the way pap would do, for that might set people after
a friend on both sides of him a-holt of his arms and hurrying him

“What a happiness it would be if all Christians were actuated by such love or desire of making others happy here and hereafter!
when they came out from its gloom saw before them a steep hill, covered
laying it again with their steam jets when it had served its purpose,
and rose into the air, until finally the basket just touched the
chanst, en a-patchin’ up de raf’ nights when—”
Tin Woodman had no heart at that moment, for it would have beat loud

“Why are those needles and pins sticking out of your head?” asked the
he saw the three of them now close together, and standing so far out to


So he set down on the ground betwixt me and Tom. He leaned his back up
“Because she’s a big Orleans boat, and I was afeard she mightn’t stop



you see before you, in blue jeans and misery, the wanderin’, exiled,

CHAPTER VIII.
you’s de bes’ fren’ Jim’s ever had; en you’s de _only_ fren’ ole Jim’s

the evening.

_him_. But he said it warn’t no use, nothing but to be dead and done

had read it, and I said no, and she asked me if I could read writing,


are so that a lot of people feel they ought to be doing something, the
But now the reports from all the other planets were coming in, and in every case eventual victory was secured. On two planets the issue was for a time in doubt, for there seemed to be great centers of the creatures here. However, there was no difficulty in discovering where the remnant had fled to! The electronic activity readings of the outermost planet, the minor sun, had risen 12.5 per cent. Since a star does not depend on atomic energy, it was easy to see that the creatures had sought refuge here. The range of the present ray was too short to permit attack on that planet. The blazing furnace drove them back to a distance of a million miles as the least distance of safe approach. They could not attack the creatures here. What could they do? They must exterminate them before the people moved to their new planets, for the creatures could make a raid, destroy a city, and be gone before the battleships could leave their docks.
was clothes hanging against the wall. There was something laying on the
“If He be pleased to let us stand for some time O may He grant us strength to live to His glory and praise! Our time is in His hand.” He is shocked at the luxurious and sinful life which the Europeans are living, careless and corrupt, on the edge of a volcano but blind to consequences. This degeneration in the character of the white men utterly discredited them in the dark watchful eyes of the natives. The tearing up of treaties and breaking of solemn promises had exasperated Hyder Ali and made him resolve to sweep the English with their rotten government into the sea. His ambition was like a roaring furnace; while the enemies were fiddling and dancing he was preparing the immense army of nearly an hundred thousand well trained men, led by French officers and equipped for immediate battle. He[Pg 118] swept onward, wasting, burning, killing, behind him a smoking desolation and before him a terror struck and fleeing people. His objective was Madras and then a clean sweep of the enemy all through the Carnatic. It seems inconceivable that the Government could, from sheer apathy, wilful ignorance and vicious living, become so incompetent as to make no provision for defence and take no notice of impending doom until the black clouds of smoke and lurid flames almost reached the City. Here is the comment of Schwartz upon the position:

“There is only one thing we can do,” returned the Lion, “and that is to
South here. And when you tell him the handbill and the reward’s bogus,
when their time comes.”

August 26th.—It was about seven in the morning when we arrived at Iman and made our way to the special train which was waiting for us. It was composed of three saloon-cars. We advance slowly, with great precautions, going twenty miles an hour only, because the ballast is not firmly set yet. Just about a year ago we drove in these parts in an antediluvian carriage, by impossible roads covered with untrodden forests, and now we proceed by train, with all the comfort of modern communication. It took formerly a whole week to reach Vladivostock, and now the journey is made in three days! Scores of “manzas,” Chinese workmen, are completing the railway-line. Their heads are enveloped in a rag, to protect them from the bites of the mosquitoes, which abound here. We do not stop at the stations because of the cholera raging in these parts.
My heart jumped up amongst my lungs. I never waited for to look
eaten nothing but nuts all day, and she made a hearty meal of the ripe


The Winged Monkeys
song—that draft?”



continued intermittently, and after midnight there seemed to be sheet
After an interminable string of games, we supped, and the artilleryman
trampled-on, and sufferin’ rightful King of France.”
printing-office—horse bills—and took the money, four dollars. And he
and cautiously, made their way through Byfleet and Pyrford towards
“Don’t you play nothing on me, because I wouldn’t on you. Honest injun
“They are, indeed,” said the Scarecrow, “and I am thankful I am made of
showed in forty ways that he _was_ Harvey, and knowed everybody by
_dozen_ a-helpin’ that nigger, ’n’ I lay I’d skin every last nigger on
hill as if he had been struck by a cannon ball.



says:
plants, knee-high, without a solitary terrestrial growth to dispute
CHAPTER LXXXVII
Which part of the impost is truly hurtful to the wealth of nations? A standing army of 50,000 men in time of peace, both for the sea and land-service, and 50,000 more employed, either upon the different objects relating to those services, or to maintain good order and public tranquillity, or intrusted with the collection of the revenue, are evidently 100,000 men, taken in England from that last class which, though last in point of rank, is nevertheless the sole instrument of the national riches. Now, out of the given number of 9 millions of inhabitants, 6 millions only constitute this precious, this productive class; the other 3 millions consist[37] merely of consumers: from the 6 millions, allowed in the productive class, deduct 4 millions of children, old people, and women, half of whose life is taken up with the cares and incumbrances of a domestic nature; of this truly profitable class 3 millions only will then remain. A hundred thousand men, all stout, vigorous and skilful, constantly withdrawn from that class, occasion a vacuum of about a twentieth in the productions of the land, and of the arts, that is to say, (for there should be no illusion in the case) the twentieth part of the possible wealth. That portion of the impost, which is set apart for the subsistence of those 100,000 men, is therefore, in some manner, burdensome; since society is thus deprived, not only of the produce of their industry, but also of that part of other people’s labour which they consume without contributing towards it: but amends are amply made for those indispensable privations, by the property being better secured, and enjoyed in full tranquillity. Besides, that part of Society, which suffers most thereby, does not belong to the productive class; the latter, as has been already observed, is, in the richest as well as in the poorest countries, ever reduced to that pittance which is but just necessary to keep up industry. Nations the most free differ in this point from those who groan under the most[38] slavish despotism, only by the insolence with which this scanty pittance, if refused, is insisted upon in a free country, and the humble manner in which it is sued for in the others. The difference of natural talents, displayed in their utmost energy, suffices to establish, sooner or later, amongst the freest people, that enormous disproportion of wealth which gives offence elsewhere, only because it is not always the proof or reward of labour, abilities, and œconomy.
“Very well,” she answered, and putting on the Golden Cap she uttered

They asked us considerable many questions; wanted to know what we





CHAPTER XXV.
the rock the strangest man the travelers had ever seen.

Far from my thoughts, vain world, begone,
slide out of here one of these nights and get an outfit, and go for
Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.
July 3rd.—The sea is the colour of ink, and I am ill, ill! ... Towards noon great black clouds came upon us rapidly and very soon the whole sky was covered, it was almost as dark as night; a heavy storm was coming on. The recruits are put down in the hold. The long menacing waves were advancing upon our ship like big mountains. Sounds of broken crockery are heard; two beautiful Chinese vases, standing on the side-board in the saloon, were thrown out on the floor and went to pieces.
October 7th.—I couldn’t sleep the whole night for the heat. The temperature continues to rise; as soon as the sun gets up it is already scorching. The tropics are making themselves strongly felt. We are only 600 miles from the equator.
This morning a soldier of the light infantry, belonging to the Malakani sect, desiring to embrace the Orthodox religion, came to beg me to stand Godmother to him. This soldier made a vow to be baptised if he escaped war safely; he has been in all the fights without having received the slightest wound, and thinks it proper now to fulfil his promise, I of course consented willingly.
We installed ourselves at Alexandropol in the house of a rich Armenian merchant. It was a dreary home, my new one, with its cross-barred windows, and suggested to my mind being in prison. I suffered a great deal from the cold, for our apartments were very badly heated, and we were obliged to put up an iron stove in the drawing-room.

To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would make no reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, that if he persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flattering encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered in such a manner as must be decisive, and whose behaviour at least could not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.{139}

[64]
I clumb up the shed and crept into my window just before day was
“Are they, indeed?” cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.
CHAPTER XIII



lightning-rod, and shoved for the town; for I didn’t believe anybody
face and over the hinges of his jaw, and there they rusted. When
by side, the men just in their drawers and undershirts, and no shoes
fusillade I had heard might mean the extermination of our invaders from
“What you doin’ with this gun?”


But she was on my mind and Tom was on my mind, so I slept very
CHAPTER XCVI
“Well, that _is_ a question, I must say; and _just_ like women! Why, I
other side; ash-hopper and big kettle to bile soap in by the little
“We are lost, for they will surely tear us to pieces with their sharp
to work with in your apron pocket—”
as big as a bedroom all hung around with vines, and found a man laying

“No!—is that so? _Ain’t_ it bully! Why, Huck, if it was to do over
that is to say, Mars was in opposition from the point of view of an
The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the world; though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first run away, they had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune.{431}

understand. I followed the river, because I considered that the water
Then, after an interminable time, as it seemed to us, crouching and
blanket, and went to work to saw a section of the big bottom log

Then we started for the house, and I went in the back door—you only
did.”
things that God, in his wisdom, has put upon this earth.

“Why, a man I met at daybreak this morning, just as I was going to turn
road. I remember most vividly three smashed bicycles in a heap, pounded

to stand on at one end of the sheds. The women had on sun-bonnets; and
bed, and don’t you deffersit _me_ no more deffersits, long ’s _you_
“My body shone so brightly in the sun that I felt very proud of it and
the only shadow was that of the few scattered pine trees. The burning
Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and that she could not leave her. Bingley urged Mr. Jones’s being sent for immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country advice could be of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the most eminent physicians. This she would not hear of; but she was not so unwilling to comply with their brother’s proposal; and it was settled that Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet were not decidedly better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters declared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness, however, by duets after supper; while he could find no better relief to his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions that every possible attention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister.{53}
 They Tip-toed Along
rescuing him, he was so pleased that he wept tears of joy, and Dorothy
by myself.”
here at a farm; so I ain’t hungry no more. It’s what makes me so late.
yesterday afternoon, and camped on a piece of a raft we found, and
many times they _didn’t_ steal that; and flour, and candles, and

CHAPTERXXVIII.
couldn’t I put on some of them old things and dress up like a girl?
eyes very natural, and takes a look, and says:
but he says:
next day done me good and cheered me up. So the longer I went to school
We saw a black spot advancing rapidly towards us; we are going to have a storm. Soon wind began to blow furiously, and the ship staggered and pitched. The captain promised better weather for to-morrow; yes, but it is to-day that we have to go through!

had been took out of the fourth stomach of an ox, and he used to do


is going to turn out.” Then he said good-bye to them all in a cheerful

just how you’d been buried. All these—the sort of people that lived in



as lightning, and saved myself. Pretty soon he was all tired out, and
hoped it would be the lovely Lady. “For,” he said to himself, “if it is





upstairs myself for the box she was clamouring for.


Most recently updated: June 17, 2024

August 12th.—The sea is much calmer and we sail from Nagasaki to-night. Before embarking we went for a drive in rikshas and met nearly all the officers from the “Mandchour.” By night as we approached our ship in a canoe, our rower shouted out the password “An officer,” to the question, “Who rows?” of the sailor on duty.
“I beg your pardon,” replied Miss Bingley, turning away with a sneer. “Excuse my interference; it was kindly meant.”


When it was all ready, Oz sent word to his people that he was going to
that. So the duke and the king went to overhauling our wigwam, to see
 VIII. FRIDAY NIGHT.
Escaping Properly.—Dark Schemes.—Discrimination in Stealing.—A Deep

In the war which was terminated by the treaty of Paris, the most considerable part of the debt contracted for its support, was acquired by the[119] Dutch: Why so? Because the English, carrying on, without any opposition, an exclusive trade with every part of the world open to them alone, found therein the opportunity of employing their capitals to a far greater advantage, than that held out by government in the interest of the loan. During the last war, on the contrary, the English, being more narrowly circumscribed in regard to their commercial operations, by a navy, the possibility of which they did not even suspect, much less its real existence, and being kept more circumspect by a new system which opened a free navigation to all the powers not involved in war, thought themselves happy to find, in the national loan, an employment for that portion of their capitals, which, from circumstances, was become useless. The interests of the last debt are then due and paid within, and by Great Britain; but will it be said, that England would not be so rich, were the 3 millions additional interest, with which she is burdened, due to Holland, and had the English, instead of employing their capitals, as they have done, in support of the last war, made use of them in the same profitable manner as in the year 1755? had that money, for instance, been laid out in the improvement of their waste lands in Europe, whilst Dutch cash should have[120] fought against French money, to determine how many European nations ought to be permitted to carry to North America, the goods of the other parts of the globe!

her with. I held up my two hands and she put the hank over them, and

He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each other. They were not the only objects of Mr. Collins’s admiration. The hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and praised; and his commendation of everything would have touched Mrs. Bennet’s heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his own future property. The dinner, too, in its turn, was highly admired; and he begged to know to which of his fair cousins the excellence of its cookery was owing. But here he was set right by Mrs. Bennet, who assured him, with some asperity, that they were very well able to keep a good cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. He begged pardon for having displeased her. In a softened tone she declared herself not at all offended; but he continued to apologize for about a quarter of an hour.{84}
“With an affectionate smile.”

in pretty hard luck. Here, I’ll put a twenty-dollar gold piece on this
I would have it also enquired into, whether the clergy, finding the objects of that general consumption loaded with 11 millions more, could be aggrieved by the sole disappointment of giving no longer gratuitously to his Majesty,[238] those 11 millions which they are now compelled to pay; and whether they would not be left in possession of all the faculties necessary to satisfy the first article, as soon as they should be freed from the other.
and grey liners from Southampton and Hamburg; and along the blue coast
[236]
“Poor Ogilvy!” I said. “To think he may be lying dead there!”
Three things struggled for possession of my mind: the killing of the

what they might, and she couldn’t stand them no way you could fix it;
That was just his way. If it didn’t suit him to explain a thing to you,
as the hut, but narrow—only about six foot wide. The door to it was at
July 5th.—I passed again the whole of the night in the corridor; Maria Michaelovna followed my example and came up with her pillow and coverlet, and slipped into the narrow space between me and my maid. Towards noon the direction of the wind changed, we are out of the cyclone centre.
me. The houses caved in as they dissolved at its touch, and darted out

minute everybody was saying it; so away they went, mad and yelling, and
CHAPTER XXXV

widow”; and in the end I agreed to go with him, under cover of the
“And can you likewise declare, that there is no foundation for it?”
that pleased everybody too, because then the girls would be well fixed
He nodded.

“I come from Byfleet,” he said; “a man on a bicycle came through the
“I certainly have not the talent which some people possess,” said Darcy, “of conversing easily with those I have never seen before. I cannot catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their concerns, as I often see done.”
The sound of drumming and trumpeting came from the Albany Street
“He is just what a young-man ought to be,” said she, “sensible, good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners! so much ease, with such perfect good breeding!”
and extending his arms. “Speak! The word of the Lord is upon me!”
“They aren’t to be killed,” said the milkman, “if that can possibly be
floor in the far corner that looked like a man. So Jim says:
perfect right to steal anything on this place we had the least use for


So Tom he thanked them very hearty and handsome, and let himself be
There were two men and a woman at the gate.

The next day the Delbrucks proposed another expedition to the convent of the “Bernardines,” where the nuns took vows of perpetual silence. When we came within the enclosure of that monastery, situated near Bayonne, there was an ominous deep stillness around us. In passing through the garden we saw a group of nuns sitting in pairs under the trees, with their backs turned to each other reading their bréviaires. These poor cloistered women were draped in long white robes with a black cross embroidered on the back; an enormous hood covered their faces entirely.
junketings round about and on the river, and dances and picnics in the
The object which at present fixes the attention of all the States in Europe, (all of them either debtors or creditors), is the National Debt of England, and the measures which will be taken on that subject by the Assembly the most clear-sighted of any in the world to every thing that concerns the interests of the people, the most jealous of its rights, and the most free, at least in its debates. It is by considering that formidable debt, and its influence on the wealth of the State and the ease of the People, that the Author dares to begin. But before he proceeds to unfold the mechanism of the national debt, the result of which developement presents some ideas too opposite to the received opinion, he endeavours by degrees to familiarise his Readers with his own, by some general reflexions on the present situation of England: these reflexions leave him no room to doubt, that England was in 1779, notwithstanding the national debt, richer than she was at the beginning of this century;—richer, either in a fourfold, or in a double proportion, as the Reader is disposed to adopt the one or the other rate of population: whence it appears that the Author, in respect to his plan, does not affix any importance to the difference of opinions on this article.
together. The legendary hosts of Goths and Huns, the hugest armies Asia



the canoe and went down there to see if there was any chance in that
_you_ know he ain’t. What _will_ he do, then? Why, he’ll say, ‘It’s a
Then suddenly he noticed with a start that some of the grey clinker,
mine had run on Saturday, on military details. He thought of all those
“You have a very small park here,” returned Lady Catherine, after a short silence.
“Why, is this my poor dead brother’s old friend that he’s wrote so
“If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it.”
The Khabarovsk was built in England. It is lighted all over with electricity. We are the only passengers on board, except two American travellers to whom Sergy gave permission to take passage with us. They had to go in all haste to Japan, and the regular boat was only to sail next week.
In order to employ those hands by whose labour the annual sum of 35,000,000 was produced, 10,000,000 were probably sufficient; whereas 20,000,000 are now required. This shews a fifth clear saving of—10,000,000.

About a couple of miles out lay an ironclad, very low in the water,
[428]
everlasting fire.”
Then suddenly the trees in the pine wood ahead of me were parted, as
minute, I says:
further and further away all the time, we couldn’t hardly hear them at
“Not now; have it for breakfast, have it for breakfast! Cut loose and
“Why, I guess so,” Dorothy answered. “It would be as easy as to give
I went up the bank about fifty yards, and then I doubled on my tracks
“Well?” said Henderson.
frivolishness about him, not a bit, and he warn’t ever loud. He was as
“I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be no want of subject. We may compare our different opinions.”

largely a mystery, but we know now that even in its equatorial region

approaching them with signals, that we too were intelligent.
Well, he warn’t there to supper; so right after supper uncle went.


But as dark as a frying pan.
About twelve o’clock we turned out and went along up the bank. The
She represented to her sister, as forcibly as possible, what she felt on the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect. Jane’s temper was not desponding; and she was gradually led to hope, though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, that Bingley would return to Netherfield, and answer every wish of her heart.

“Only think of its being three months,” she cried, “since I went away: it seems but a fortnight, I declare; and yet there have been things enough happened in the time. Good gracious! when I went away, I am sure I had no more idea of being married till I came back again! though I thought it would be very good fun if I was.”
ulla, ulla, ulla,” confused my mind. Perhaps I was too tired to be very

One is evidently equal to the other; but what is not so, is, that industry, who paid her workmen with 20 millions when the quarter of wheat was at 40s. cannot pay them since the wheat is increased to 46s. 8d. but by adding to the former wages, 3,333,333l. 6s. 8d. an advance which, when divided on the total of her products, heretofore rated at 60 millions, raises each third part of 20 to 21,111,111, and some trifling fractions.—Now, there remains in the hands of each of the parties concerned in agriculture, only 20 millions over and above the payment of the tax.—Those who are in the persuasion that the discharge of the import must lessen, by its whole amount at least, the revenue of those who pay it, think, no doubt, that agriculture is very well off, to have, by raising the price of its commodities two thirds, lightened the weight of so terrible a burden; yet if it were possible by a vigorous exertion, by an additional increase in the price of provisions, to make it null to every body, I do not see that it would be reasonable to oppose such exertion; for, after all,

We drove in a tram through the three towns. Batavia is a city of many canals; it reminded me of Rotterdam. We saw lots of natives bathing in the Grand Canal. When passing the Portuguese Gate, we were shown a big cannon which is the object of a queer sort of pilgrimage for barren Malay women, who bring offering to the cannon in order not to remain childless in their wedded life.

foolishness. Why can’t a body take a club and ransom them as soon as

all—nor the six thousand, nuther. I want you to take it; I want to give
“Yours, etc.”


Scarecrow, she was surprised to see one of the eyes slowly wink at her.

That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over a ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate.
how close they can come without touching; sometimes the wheel bites off

For a whole week I had no news from Sergy and was beginning to get very anxious. One rainy afternoon, as I was sitting in the drawing-room, hemming towels for our future household, I heard the sound of wheels on the gravel. Oh! there is the door bell! It is some intrusive country-neighbour that had burst upon us for sure. This irony of fate exasperated me beyond measure; suppose that instead of that boring visitor it was my welcome bridegroom who had come! But no, that was not possible, I was stupid to think about it, it was just as well to desire the moon. As I could not possibly see any strangers now, I gathered up my needlework and fled into my room. Soon after I was called by mamma, and directed my steps adagio towards the drawing-room. But lo! what was that? the clinking of spurs? I opened the door, my heart beating wildly, and stood dazed and unable to believe my own eyes. There, on the threshold, was Sergy, my beloved Sergy! It was no dream and the next instant his arms were thrown eagerly round me. Sergy had contrived to obtain a few days leave, on the most urgent private affairs, and run over to Dolgik, crossing the Black Sea, so stormy at this time of year, in order to spend a week with me. It was so very sweet of him[70] to come all that long way, that horrid November month, to see me! So that was the reason of his long silence.
Wonderful Attraction!
nobody would know me, even in the daytime, hardly. I practiced around
still—just like the whole world was asleep, only sometimes the
caught cheerful. They’ll be quite glad after a bit. They’ll wonder what
more than that, if he’ll sell it so cheap. Maybe there’s something
We returned on board after dinner, and shall weigh anchor early to-morrow morning. The Kahns have to hurry to Shanghai and are taking a Japanese steamer to-night. Before leaving they have sent a beautiful bouquet in a “cloisonné” vase to me, with a card bearing their name, and underneath stood “Pour remplacer avantageusement.”
“Frustrate all the machinations of the devil against this house, preserve it from all dangerous accidents, and let it long be what we from henceforth humbly call it, Christ’s Church.”

ordering up eggs. ‘Fetch up Nell Gwynn,’ he says. They fetch her up.
towards me, and then a pack of starving mongrels in pursuit of him. He


road.
“We may as well leave them by themselves, you know,” said her mother as soon as she was in the hall. “Kitty and I are going upstairs to sit in my dressing-room.”

“You may depend upon it, madam,” said Miss Bingley, with cold civility, “that Miss Bennet shall receive every possible attention while she remains with us.”
day yet. He said his father and his two brothers was killed, and two or
them? Yonder!”

utmost could but crawl a little out of it; but she answered only in
Whether the possibility of a balance of trade, always favourable, be not as doubtful as the necessity of a national bankruptcy, and the advantage of a national reimbursement?
First, It is the highest interest of the landed capitalist, that there be the greatest plenty and variety of the best products of industry, and the greatest consumption of the productions of the earth.
“Go to the strangers who are within my land and destroy them all except
to read aloud to the ladies. Mr. Collins readily assented, and a book was produced; but on beholding it (for everything announced it to be from a circulating library){88} he started back, and, begging pardon, protested that he never read novels. Kitty stared at him, and Lydia exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after some deliberation he chose “Fordyce’s Sermons.” Lydia gaped as he opened the volume; and before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read three pages, she interrupted him with,—
The Principality of Monaco is quite a small one. It would take half an hour to walk over the island, from one end to the other. The reigning Prince has a diminutive army of sixty regular soldiers, two officers and three constables, and that’s all! Sergy asked one of the constables who was on duty at the railway station, how their army could manage without any cavalry, and he answered that they wouldn’t have known what to do with it, for it would take more time to saddle a horse than to walk around their whole territory!

August 1st.—According to a Turkish legend, the eclipse of the moon proceeds from a “Flying Dragon” attempting to swallow up that planet. In order to prevent the monster from realising his sinister project, the native women climb on to their roofs and make a dreadful noise with different brass instruments to frighten the “Dragon” away, whilst the men discharge a number of musket-shots. Yesterday, for instance, there was an eclipse, but this time the inhabitants were strictly forbidden to shoot.
sabbatical to have assumed their best clothes. The soldiers were having
was so glad to see me. He says:
The widow she cried over me, and called me a poor lost lamb, and she

“Indeed, you are mistaken, madam; I have not been at all able to account for the honour of seeing you here.”

I was going to say yes; but she chipped in and says: “About what, Sid?”
air, being carried by a cyclone. So I believe the best way to get


It is said in a Persian sacred book, the “Zend-Avesta,” written two hundred years before Christ, that Turkestan is one of the most ancient cradles of humanity. Tashkend, our new home, is a city a thousand years old. It was captured in 1865 by General Tsherniaeff. That country is as big as France and England put together, and has a population of eight millions.
Mr. Swinine, a friend of my aunt Galitzine’s, greeted us cordially in Moscow, and offered us the hospitality of his splendid home, where everything spoke of wealth. The house was a veritable museum; all the rooms, of great height and good proportion, were furnished with every luxury, and filled with pictures of old masters and bronzes and antiquities of immense value. There was a painting of the[47] utmost impropriety but it was covered with a veil during our stay.


“If it won’t float,” remarked Dorothy, “it will be of no use to us.”
raised up part way and listened, with his head to one side. He says,

woman do to you that you could treat her so mean? Why, she tried to
CHAPTER LXXXVI
glide along the wall, just his shoulders showing over the people’s



ashamed.”
“That is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity. Your mother should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters.”
Afterwards he found that the vague feeling of alarm had spread to the
“The captain see me standing around, and told me I better have
just old pie to him, so to speak. And after supper he talked to him
Elizabeth’s astonishment was beyond expression. She stared, coloured, doubted, and was silent. This he considered sufficient encouragement, and the avowal of all that he felt and had long felt for her immediately followed. He spoke well; but there were feelings besides those of the heart to be detailed, and he was not more eloquent on the subject of tenderness than of pride. His sense of her inferiority, of its being a degradation, of the family obstacles which judgment had always opposed to inclination, were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to the consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his suit.

submit to persecution and the will of the Lord. Very likely you’ve seen
“There, there, don’t! Yes, I’ll go before breakfast—I’ll be glad to.
you’s got hairy arms en a hairy breas’, it’s a sign dat you’s agwyne to
either never appeared upon Mars or Martian sanitary science eliminated

January 22nd.—We left the harbour of Saigon at seven in the morning, when the tide was in. We passed before huge English and German cargo-ships anchored in a line along the banks of the river. It is terribly hot, we are all at roasting point.
I’d much rather go back to Kansas with you and be in a circus again.”
The little Americans are quite their own masters. They are running about all day without no one to look after them, and spend most of their time in quarrelling, flying at each other’s faces, pulling each other by the hair, and pinching, and scratching. I hear Danys’s shrill little voice coming from the garden, shouting orders to her brother, “Hermann, go in the shade!” but he would not obey and paid no heed to her repeated calls to be quiet.




Dorothy, and she dressed her in one of the prettiest gowns, made of
and picked up nearly a hundred too drunk or frightened to run away.”

little and a little more till somebody said, “There, that’s enough—put
“With great energy; but it is a subject which always makes a lady energetic.{32}”
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DIARY OF A RUSSIAN LADY ***
I had the middle watch, you know, but I was pretty sleepy by that time,
of its villas and fences and lamps, and so presently I got out of this
“The water?” he said.

Chapter I






MOSCOW


She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley. “I did not think Caroline in spirits,” were her words, “but she was very glad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my coming to London. I was right, therefore; my last letter had never reached her. I inquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but so much engaged with Mr. Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. I found that Miss Darcy was expected to dinner: I wish I could see her. My visit was not long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out. I dare say I shall soon see them here.”
Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and within four hours of their leaving Hunsford they reached Mr. Gardiner’s house, where they were to remain a few days.
down and out into the street, just as the sky between the parapets of
them a little, and find out who I was. But I couldn’t get no show, Mrs.

sudden he heaves all the tea in Boston Harbor overboard, and whacks out
One man’s hands pressed on the back of another. My brother stood at the

while Oz was alive he never was allowed to come farther than the door.
I will!”

“I did not think you would; and that being the case, I cannot consider your situation with much compassion.”
He was drunk, and weaving about in his saddle; he was over fifty year
While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend the day with them. She was met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to her, cried in a half whisper, “I am glad you are come, for there is such fun here! What do you think has happened this{143} morning? Mr. Collins has made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him.”
wrinkles in it.

And everybody runs to see, and she snatches off my hat, and out comes

That first Atomic Giant did not last long enough to warn the others. It was an entirely unexpected form of attack, and when the light of the mighty sun could once more be seen through the spot where the Minus Force had been sent, the Atomic Creature was not there, all its great forces had been drained from it. And, being only a pool of force, it vanished.
“Or I my courage?” asked the Lion.

mere attempt to stand upright upon our planet would have broken every

digging him out as we ought to. By rights I reckon we ought to be a
But I had plenty time. Aunt Sally she stuck to the sick-room all day

“Yes they would. _They_ don’t care what kind of music ’tis. A



[66]
“Stop!” screamed my brother, and pushing a woman out of his way, tried
his advice.”
“I am not afraid of you,” said he, smilingly.
find or learn there whither the Surrey people had fled. I knew I wanted


Our carriage stopped before a shabby little house, and we made our way up a dark and tortuous stairs to a room which had a dreary deserted appearance. A rickety table and two lame chairs formed almost all the furniture. The proprietor, an old Turk wearing an enormous white turban on his head, came in and welcomed me graciously, putting his hand to his heart and to his forehead. He offered me a little refreshment,[91] which one of his wives brought in to me on a tray laden with all sorts of sweets; but what I wished for most at that moment was that my host would go away, for I was very weary and exhausted after the journey. When the old Turk had paid me all his oriental civilities and I had got rid of him, I lay down upon a mattress which had been spread on the floor, for there was no bed in the room, but nevertheless I was asleep almost before my head touched the pillow.
and you must stand by me all you can.”
me, I had the best chance of learning what the Martians and my


crowd struck up the doxolojer, and everybody joined in with all their
men or animals had rushed across the lawn. I began to see his face,
come—everybody; for he respected everybody, he liked everybody, and so
For a long while I lay close to the peephole, but not daring to move
astonishing speech I ever heard—and I’m bound to say Tom Sawyer fell
_you_ think she’d like me to kiss her, sir?”

high explosives were being prepared to be used in automatic mines
3. _Here a lonely heart broke, and a worn spirit went to its rest,
Methinks upon viewing the picture I have drawn, it is easy now to conceive, why, as I have observed in page 62, a person, however strongly convinced of the cruel effect which ought naturally to arise from a debt of 64 millions sterling, contracted from 1754 to 1762, could not nevertheless cite in England, from 1763 to 1775, a single indication of a decay in agriculture or commerce, nor any falling-off in the enjoyment of luxury, public or private, nor less insolence in the bulk of the people. The reason is this: the two capitalists, who failed not to increase the price of every thing they were concerned in, according to the exigency of the taxes, determined[347] also (after a few little formalities, always necessary with regard to the people, when nothing but luxury has been taxed) to augment the price of labour in proportion to that of its products; foreigners, on the other hand, raised the price of their goods in proportion as taxes had increased the goods of England exported to them; and the old equilibrium was restored every where, as soon as the general increase of prices had made the general power of consumption, equal to the need the State was in of an exterior as well as an interior, i. e. of a foreign as well as a national consumption, in order that all the taxes might be productive.
Prohibitory Laws against Exportation.
beast come bounding over the grass toward them. It was, indeed, a great

“Here I have often found,” he writes, “blessed traces of awakening grace. A soldier said he had been such[Pg 81] thirty-two years. I asked him how long he had served Christ? He wept and replied, ‘Alas, I have not yet entered His service.’” “An officer who had previously discovered a great inclination to religion and entreated me to instruct him catechetically, just as I would an ignorant heathen, in which we had made a beginning, but were interrupted by the war, was brought in mortally wounded. He expressed a great desire for instruction. I accordingly visited him daily and explained to him the chief points in practical Christianity. After a few days he appeared to be something better. He could occasionally take the fresh air and his appetite returned. Under these circumstances he gradually yielded to indifference as to religion. He listened, indeed, but not with real earnestness. At length I said to him, ‘I see you are quite different. I fear you are deceiving yourself. Your wound is as mortal now as it was fourteen days ago. When you perceive that you are drawing near to your end you will be terrified to think that you have been so foolish as to allow worldly men to draw you off from the chief concern.’ He replied, ‘It is true, they have flattered me with the hope that I shall recover; but it is not so. I know that my wound is mortal.’ After this he became more earnest in prayer and meditation on the Word of God. Before his death I visited him and exhorted him to commit himself in faith into the hands of his Merciful Saviour. Speaking was painful to him, yet he said he hoped to obtain mercy, and thus he departed amid the exhortations and prayers of those around him.”


So Mary Jane took us up, and she showed them their rooms, which was

get pretty fur till the doctor begun to laugh; and Levi Bell, the
Meanwhile the political horizon grew very dark, and the shadow of evil hung over us. A great number of the heroes of the last Russo-Turkish war are buried in Alexandropol in the “Dale of Honour,” and when I thought that a new war was very near to bursting out, I had a ferocious desire to fling myself into the Arpatchai. I tried to keep up my spirits as[78] best I could, deluding myself with vain hopes that in a short time we should return safe and sound to Tiflis; but the menace of coming war became more evident every day, it was no use deceiving myself. “Is war inevitable then?” I asked Sergy a hundred times a day, and he could give me but little comfort. How could I live then with this sword of Damocles hanging over me?
February 13th.—We arrived at Colombo this morning, and immediately took passage on the Armand Behic an ocean liner sailing to Suez from Australia. We have abandoned the Laos to avoid the quarantine at Bombay, where the ship was to stop. Nearly all her passengers passed over on the Armand Behic. There were many Australians and Japs on board and some French officers who are returning from Tonkin, very pale and suffering, whilst the Australians are all blooming with health. There were different sets, of course, among a throng of four hundred passengers. There was the “gay set,” who got up plays and dances on board, the “cultured set,” the “musical set,” etc., etc.
“Pride,” observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her reflections, “is a very common failing, I believe. By all that I have ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed; that human nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different things, though the words are often{26} used synonymously. A person may be proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of ourselves; vanity to what we would have others think of us.”

CHAPTER III.
“Certainly. If it wasn’t for Dorothy I should never have had brains.

wood-rank four foot high a little ways in front of the tree, and first
“I am the less surprised at what has happened,” replied Sir William, “from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, which my situation in life has allowed me to acquire. About the court, such instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon.”
My breff mos’ hop outer me; en I feel so—so—I doan’ know _how_ I feel.
set to work to think out the coat of arms. By-and-by he said he’d


powers at all I soon found out that the Witches were really able to do
“The Post.”
and the niggers waited on the rest. Mary Jane she set at the head of
didn’t take notice nor let on. I knowed what it was about. He was
“Tu vis esse meus per coenam, Christe, sacratam:
XL.	Moscow	248
his tongue just _went_ it—she a-chipping in, and spitting fire all
“Well,” says I, “I think they are a pack of flat-heads for not keeping
She often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking her guest, by talking of their supposed marriage, and planning his happiness in such an alliance.

middle we let her alone, and let her float wherever the current wanted
Secondly, that therefore, labour alone being the standard of value, labour is consequently the only standard that can regulate the exchanges between one nation and another:
[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]
her lips touched the girl they left a round, shining mark, as Dorothy

“Yes,” he says.
straight from the throne itself; so they walked toward it and stood in
upward. The Martian staggered with the violence of her explosion, and
August 13th.—We were anchored in the bay the whole night waiting for the break of day, and left Nagasaki at six in the morning. The day is very fine. I lay comfortably stretched in my chair on the deck, covered all over with an awning to ameliorate the ardour of the sun. The crew was exercising on the upper deck. I hear the command of “Fire!” (powder charges). A second “False alarm” was rung, “Man overboard!” someone cried, and in the space of three minutes a life-boat was equipped and lowered, manned by two sailors who brought up triumphantly to the officer on duty the huge club, which represented the shipwrecked man.
together, we will begin to work on our balloon.”


Hermann was a very wicked little boy, and took delight in torturing animals and insects. What pleased him more than anything was to help the cook to wring the chickens’ and hens’ necks and then to boast of it afterwards, showing us his blood-stained hands. Horrid little creature! There never was such a child for mischief; he enjoyed playing all sorts of tricks on Frau Weidemann. That imp of a boy stole behind her chair when she was knitting in the garden, and took a malicious pleasure in tangling her skeins of wool. At dinner Hermann loved annoying Danys; the little pig dropped hair into her soup and gave her furtive little kicks[206] under the table. Frau Weidemann did all she could to train him a little.

June 25th.—It is getting hotter and hotter. My hair is out of curl, but never mind; this awful heat takes away all attempt at coquetry. A tent has been spread on deck, under which we take our repasts, protected from the rays of the scorching sun. We have given to this tent the poetical name of “Villa Borghese.” During our dinner the recruits danced a wild jig on the deck, to the accompaniment of five violins, a tambourine and a blow-pipe. One of the men began to whistle artistically, imitating the nightingale, whilst another recruit gambolled and turned somersaults, representing a trained monkey. It is pleasant to see the good relations between the recruits and the chief of their battalion, surnamed by his men “Captain Tempest,” on account of his fiery temper. He raged and stormed a great deal, but was adored by the recruits, notwithstanding his rough tongue.
_flash_ comes the light in Mary Jane’s window! and my heart swelled up
mysterious death—as swift as the passage of light—would leap after me
o’clock; then we slid by, pretty wide away from the town, and didn’t
hear old missus tell de widder she gwyne to sell me down to Orleans,
“Mr. Bennet, how can you abuse your own children in such a way? You take delight in vexing me. You have no compassion on my poor nerves.”
big bend on the Illinois side, and hacked off cottonwood branches with
look once more on whatever remained of the little life that seemed so
As soon as I got started I took out after the raft, hot and heavy,
6ᵒ.
from the planet Mars, but I judged it improbable that it contained any
Well, I let go all holts then, like I was shot. It was the most


got enough he would buy his wife, which was owned on a farm close to
crossroads.
get thrown about.” He walked up to another tree, as he spoke, but its
I looked at my house with a quick flash of hope that faded immediately.
This was spoken jestingly, but it appeared to her so just a picture of Mr. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer; and, therefore, abruptly changing the conversation, talked on indifferent matters till they reached the Parsonage. There, shut into her own room, as soon as their visitor left them, she could think without interruption of all that she had heard. It was not to be supposed that any other people could be meant than those with whom she was connected. There could not exist in the world two men over whom Mr. Darcy could have such boundless influence. That he had been concerned in the measures taken to separate Mr. Bingley and Jane, she had never doubted; but she had always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and arrangement of them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him, he was the cause—his pride and caprice were the cause—of all that Jane had suffered, and still continued to suffer. He had ruined for a while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart in the world; and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have inflicted.{234}
and she didn’t _care_, and warn’t a-going to bullyrag the rest of her
were interested, or, if alarmed, alarmed only on account of the local
Twelfth Hypothesis.

Martians making the pit nothing more than a temporary encampment. Or
Apparently the vegetable kingdom in Mars, instead of having green for a


me, he took a good gap and stretch, and then he says:
duke’s great-grandfather and all the other Dukes of Bilgewater was a


Them’s the very words I said; they all heard me; and the country may
head out only about a couple of foot from me, and I thought I was gone;
soon after they had begun their journey again they came to a place


clambered up to it. At first I could see no reason for his frantic
sounds inside had ceased, and a thin circle of bright metal showed
tree, and bucks and wenches looking over every fence; and as soon as
This nigger had a good-natured, chuckle-headed face, and his wool was
from her long sleep and opened her eyes. She was greatly astonished to
pow’ful long time ’fo’ I _ast_ him. En mo’ en dat, I doan’ _want_ him
crest of the hill, making a huge redoubt of it—it was the final and
arrow—that’s what it is; and if you don’t look clost, you can’t see it.
Suddenly there was a flash of light, and a quantity of luminous
arrival of the next attack.
[90]
morning was coming, so we hunted a place to hide and tie up right away.
“Certainly,” answered the Queen; “but it is a great way off, for you
box, with the pots of orchids on the lid of it, and staring vaguely
walk—I don’t mind the distance.”


playing out that way after I had took so much trouble and run so much

all come _out_ at once but just one time.”


woman would say something more; the longer she set still the uneasier I
XXXIII.	Florence	217
again.
 Jim and the Snake
hide it; and by-and-by, when I’m away down the river, I’ll write a
his level best with the lightning-rod, but he couldn’t come it, his
We was feeling pretty good after breakfast, and took my canoe and went
The next day we went on donkeys to see the “whirling dervishes,” an extraordinary and rather terrific sight. We entered a mosque consisting of a square hall, with sheep-skins laid down in the middle, on which a score of dervishes, in long white skirts, were ranged in a wide half-circle. Their Sheikh, an old man with a long white beard, stood between them holding the Prophet’s banner. The dervishes, their long hair falling to their shoulders, swayed their bodies from side to side, uttering ominous sounds like that of angry lions. I glanced around with an involuntary shiver, and went and sat at the back of the hall, near a group of officers of the Egyptian army, feeling a sense of security in their proximity. Suddenly the Sheikh gave vent to an odd sort of growl which I didn’t like at all, it made me think of wolves. The dervishes tried to imitate him and so horribly that I turned cold and measured the distance to the door, wanting frantically to get away. At each howl the dervishes’ heads went backward and forward and then from right to left, to the sound of cymbals and blow-pipes, their long hair covering their faces, falling gradually into frantic convulsions, their eyes out of their sockets. One of them entered into such a frenzy that he continued for more than five minutes wagging his head, not being able to stop it by inert force. The long human chain holding each other by the hand, began bending to the ground to the increasing shouts of “Allah, Allah!” At last they fell on the floor inanimate, with foam on their lips. Having gone through all this programme, the dervishes, quietening down, came up to their Sheikh and kissed him.
Jim was laid up for four days and nights. Then the swelling was all
money—take it _all_. It’s the gift of him that lays yonder, cold but
Mr. Gardiner, whose manners were easy and pleasant,{305} encouraged her communicativeness by his questions and remarks: Mrs. Reynolds, either from pride or attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of her master and his sister.
after he was rested he allowed he would give her one more turn for
There was empty drygoods boxes under the awnings, and loafers roosting

States. He said twenty mile more warn’t far for the raft to go, but he
“Why didn’t you roust me out?”
which was so striking and disturbing to the human beholder, was
round. But so little it was, so silvery warm—a pin’s head of light! It
to pull loose, which snapped the splinter and made a noise; and as he
[215]
When it was beginning to come on dark we poked our heads out of the
With Schwartz the practice of brotherly love was part of his daily life, it seemed natural to him to show charity and to make no difference in dealing with native or European. It was his custom at the meetings of the missionaries for worship and prayer to admit the natives and in not a few instances it was seen that good results followed this practice. It will be sufficient to mention one case of which Schwartz makes a note in his journal:
help her into the basket, when, crack! went the ropes, and the balloon

It would be absurd to suppose, that the taxes necessary to discharge the debt incurred during the late war, exceed the twentieth part of the value of the products both of foreign and national industry, consumed within the country. In this case, is it not impossible that the additional tax of a twentieth, in whatever manner it may be assessed on the mass of those products, should not enhance, by a twentieth, the value[80] of this very mass? Let us call it a fifteenth; all kind of reaction included.
signal. You must go into the Throne Room alone.”
 Reforming the Drunkard
Then, as in the present time, the preparing, manufacturing, and delivering, required six, twelve, or eighteen months. Let us suppose the year, upon an average of the slowness of one operation, and the celerity with which another was performed, we shall find again, in the difference of the flock, a third saving of 35,000,000.
Schwartz was the beloved of his people. When during a temporary improvement in his condition he[Pg 179] was able slowly to enter his Church once more, which he had built in his garden, the native Christians received him with raptures of joy, running up to him, eager to hold his hand and look into his face again. When Mr. Caemmerer had to say good-bye in order to resume his work, Schwartz embraced him with much tenderness. “I will detain you no longer, my brother,” said he; “set out on your journey in the name of God, and may He be with you! As to myself I commit all my concerns to our gracious God. Whether I live, I live unto the Lord; or whether I die, I die unto the Lord. Salute the brethren most cordially. The God of peace be with them. Not knowing how long it may please God to preserve our lives, let us be up and doing. Though we should not always be privileged immediately to see the success of our labours let us still persevere, so long as God may allow us to work in His vineyard.”
CHAPTER XXXII.
big rocks in it—all I could drag—and I started it from the pig, and


On the Isle of Rhoda, the broadest arm of the Nile, there is a Nilometer dating from the time of the Pharaohs. We went to see it, and crossed on the other side of the island in a caïque, in the company of barefooted Arabs. We moored to the spot where the daughter of the Pharaoh found Moses. The Nile being now in overflow, the Nilometer was submerged in the water to the very top. The native women, with bronze arms, were drawing water from the Nile in stone pitchers, and carried it away, balancing their picturesque burdens, gracefully poised on head and shoulder, recalling the Biblical times.
June 20th.—This morning Sergy reviewed the recruits who are to sail with us on the Orel.
was, “Meat first, and spoon vittles to top off on.”
The Cyclone

out there all the time; and at last he nudged us, and we slid out, and
have to pay for the things they buy till a whole day after the auction


There’s a gaudy big grindstone down at the mill, and we’ll smouch it,
intervals. He slept little.
Another day we went to see “Buffalo Bill’s Wild West,” where a troup of “Red Skins” attacked a caravan of travellers, after which they scalped them and showed dramatically all the horrors described by Mayne Reid. Suddenly the Cowboys, with pistols bulging from their belts, came galloping on and drove away the Red Indians.
“But I tell you you don’t get the point.”
TOKIO

In the supposition of an event the most opposite to that of an epidemic disease, viz. of the revenue being increased one half, one third, nay, three fourths, if you please, as well as the population; yet the mine yielding a great deal above what is necessary to answer to an increase in all kinds,[144] and the Sovereign being resolved upon a recoinage of the specie, on principles entirely different from the former, that is, by preserving exactly the same number, standard, and denomination of the coin; the number, because it is sufficient; the denomination, because there must be one, and that it is indifferent which it bears; and the standard, because there is no further danger in fixing it; but, by advancing the weight of a shilling from 65 to 86 grains, there will certainly be no alteration in the prices; the wheat will keep up at 40 shillings, and other articles in the same proportion;—and none will be richer or poorer for it, although, at the price of 40s. the quarter of wheat, they give, without hesitation, 3440 grains of silver for an article for which they gave 650 only, previous to the epidemic disease, or the opening of the mine, which has produced the same effect.
I must have remained there some time.
Dowling Bots.—Poetical Effusions.
I couldn’t bear to think about it; and yet, somehow, I couldn’t think

written in big, white chalk marks:

The river went on raising and raising for ten or twelve days, till at
CHAPTER XVIII.
Ohio amongst the free States, and then be out of trouble.
anxious to perpetuate the memory of such transcendent work,

sad plight of her old friend, and the Lion looking sober and sorry.
hour ago; he’ll be back any minute now. You must a met him on the road,
heads—merely heads. Entrails they had none. They did not eat, much less
There was, in her cupboard, a Golden Cap, with a circle of diamonds and
“What, _all_ of them?”
But the wicked creature was very cunning, and she finally thought of a

Then they come out and locked him up. I hoped they was going to say he
It is certain, that one cannot, without some reflexion, comprehend that chain composed of so many incoherent, so widely distant links, that union, that mutual dependance of interests, in appearance so opposite to each other; and that, even with the assistance of a few hypotheses sufficient to give an idea of the whole, the only confession subscribed to by the reader, will be, that they imply no palpable contradiction, but that they are nevertheless the mere offspring of imagination, and ought to be ranked amongst non-entities. Yet the two hypotheses of which Rome seemed to be the subject, were no more, if we except the paper-currency, than the type of the revolution which took place in France at the time of the regulation I have spoken of,—a regulation, which in less than two years increased the wealth of that nation from 16 to 24, 50 per cent.; as if the French had been at last made sensible, that England could not work for herself without working for them, and that consequently they had a right to say with my Roman: England[289] is rich to the amount of 24, only because she denominates 24 that same quantity of wheat which our barricadoes and barriers have obliged us to call only 16 in our country; the only thing to be done therefore, is to set fire to our barricadoes, and break down our barriers, that henceforth the same 16 may be denominated 24, and all at once we shall be in fact as rich as England, without having been so judiciously at work.

said she could rattle off poetry like nothing. She didn’t ever have to
yard so as to see what the hounds would do. They knowed us, and didn’t

like this; if it warn’t so, I wouldn’t approve of it, nor I wouldn’t

It would be no easy matter to assign, for certain general facts, any other cause than the force of Nature; who, in the end, gets the better of all the regulations that thwart her. But let any one examine whether there be a single untaxed object, which, from 90 years back, or, to speak more to the purpose, from the origin of the national debt, is not raised more than one seventh, above the nominal value[29] it had at that period. It is therefore sufficiently probable that the taxes have been felt, not only by the consumer of the taxed commodities, (according to the laudable intentions of Government) but also by the whole nation, by all the individuals that compose it:—And this, in my opinion, is equally just and unexceptionable.
“Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?”
into the road by the wheels of subsequent carts. We crossed Richmond
We stopped talking, and got to thinking. By-and-by Tom says:
With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not held there in much estimation; for though the chief of his concerns with the son of his patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well-known fact that, on his quitting Derbyshire, he had left many debts behind him, which Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged.

glowing he could scarcely bear to gaze upon it. His first thought was


Our apartment is next to the Hollands, our new American friends, who travelled with us on board the “Tzar,” from Piræus to Alexandria. Mrs. Holland is a charming lady, but rather despotic; she could twist her husband round her little finger. He was very mild and fond of peace.
No, you go right along, Miss Mary Jane, and I’ll fix it with all of


men and horses near it seen dimly, running, shrieking, falling
flight had not grown to a panic, but there were already far more people
An age of almost intolerable suspense intervened; then I heard it

stay longer, but they said they could see it couldn’t be done. And he
It may be that amongst this crowd of visitors from other countries some would apply to Bishop Demetrius for a missionary to be sent to India; indeed, it is stated that some of the catechists who had passed under the hands of Pantaenus did actually beseech him to come and nourish the faith and bless the lives of the Christians scattered abroad. When he went and how long he stayed with the Church on the Malabar coast we know not, for as yet no fragment of ancient history gives any sign. But the alleged discovery of the autograph Gospel of St. Matthew amongst these Jewish Christians awakens our interest. It was believed that this Gospel, written in Aramaic, was brought thither by St. Bartholomew after the martyrdom of St. Stephen. After his visit Pantaenus brought back this precious MS. in the year a.d. 211 when he returned to take up his old position with the catechumens in Alexandria. We would fain know more of this strong and cultured man, to whom was entrusted the task of instructing the Church at a period when already the bitterest doctrinal differences had arisen within her borders, and also of strengthening, as doubtless he did, the hearts of the little colony of Christian believers on the Malabar coast. These probably held the Faith not unalloyed with errors born of ignorance within and their environment without.
um, I tell you dat. I never knowed b’fo’ ’t was so much bother and

that hid us.
A terrible crime has just been committed at St. Petersburg. On the first of March our beloved Emperor, Alexander II., was murdered by the anarchists. This noblest of men has been killed by a bomb in the streets whilst returning from a visit to the Duchess of Oldenbourg. That day we went to a concert given by Marcella Sembrich, the celebrated opera singer. In the middle of the performance an officer came up to say that the Governor-General of Moscow, Prince Dolgorouki, wished to see my husband at once. Something serious must have happened, otherwise the Prince would not have disturbed Sergy who promised to be back soon. But I returned home immediately and would not go to bed before Sergy’s return. I became very anxious at his prolonged absence and couldn’t imagine what was keeping him so long. Eleven o’clock arrived and he had not yet returned. I could not help being very much alarmed, and as the minutes passed, I listened more and more anxiously for the sound of hoofs on the pavement, but still there was no sign of my husband. It was long past midnight when he came home in a great state of excitement, bringing the awful news of the murder of our Tzar. A bomb had been flung at his carriage, the back of which was torn away. His Majesty, luckily, was[143] not hurt, but two Cossacks of his escort, and a boy who was passing in the street at that moment, were severely injured. The Tzar insisted upon seeing the wounded and approached the victims, when a second bomb was flung at him which tore off one of his legs and shattered the other. General Grösser, the Prefect of the Police, who always accompanied the Emperor wherever he went, had him lifted up into his sledge and transported His Majesty in that desperate state to the Winter Palace, where he passed away some minutes after.



hired the court house, and we went around and stuck up our bills. They
tell of the experiences of my brother that all through the last two


thinking. After Weybridge I went south—thinking. I saw what was up.
tragedy in which he had been involved—it was evident he was a fugitive


There is a good dress-maker in Khabarovsk, the widow of an officer, who after the death of her husband was left absolutely destitute, and to support herself took in sewing, making dresses for Khabarovsk belles.
Dorothy leaned her chin upon her hand and gazed thoughtfully at the
“Your praise it will be (a praise of endless duration on earth and followed by a just recompense in Heaven) to have laboured in the vineyard which yourselves have planted, to have declared the Name of Christ where it was not known before and through much peril and difficulty to have converted to the faith those among whom you afterwards fulfilled your ministry. Your province therefore, brethren, your office, I place before all dignities in the Church. Let others be pontiffs, patriarchs, or popes, let[Pg 23] them glitter in purple, in scarlet or in gold, let them seek the admiration of the wondering multitude and receive obeisance on the bended knee. You have acquired a better name than they and a more sacred fame. Admitted into the glorious society of the prophets, evangelists and apostles, ye with them shall shine like the sun among his lesser stars in the Kingdom of your Father, for ever.”

pawed around and found the candle and lit it, and stood over Jim

No one in London knew positively of the nature of the armoured

too, and both legs, and said he warn’t to have nothing but bread and
see a boy in such a dangerous fix; and when they was all took by
would a thought he was Adam—he was just all mud. Whenever his liquor
a runaway nigger. We don’t run daytimes no more now; nights they don’t
So she put me up a snack, and says:
Peter’s business—which was a tanner; and about George’s—which was a


“Lize, hurry up and get him a hot breakfast right away—or did you get
“Such as vanity and pride.”
“Oh, that’s all very fine to _say_, Tom Sawyer, but how in the nation

Author: Marquis de Casaux
Oz, “I tired of that, and became a balloonist.”
Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Mr. Wickham had received his commission before he left London, and he was to join his regiment at the end of a fortnight.

they had fought across to the opposite side of the way. It was din and
“What’s a feud?”
This foolish “boy and girl love” lasted during all our stay in Stuttgart. We arranged clandestine meetings at the Rydes. Ettie was a staunch friend, full of sympathy, and we poured into her willing ears the story of our love, having found a comfortable ally in her. We used to have great fun together. One evening we were in the wildest spirits, playing charades, and Jeffrey was just going to accomplish one of his forfeits: he had to kneel down beside the prettiest girl of all the company and kiss the one he loved best. He had chosen me for both manifestations. In the midst of the fun mamma appeared. Tableau! She didn’t approve of kissing, mamma—and soon put a stop to the delightful game.
“Don’t anybody know?”
scrouge in and get a sight, you never see; and in the dark, that way,
that’s got sand in it.
of bars down that way. I see I’d got to invent a bar, or forget the
had a boy about as big as me that died last year, and he was sorry to
“Indeed I do not dare.”

a row while Dorothy said:
Martian conquest, vigilant and yet powerless to prevent it.
again; and then a little girl of eight or nine, all alone, threw

Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey; and as she did not answer them all herself attention was necessary—which Elizabeth{265} believed to be lucky for her; or, with a mind so occupied, she might have forgotten where she was. Reflection must be reserved for solitary hours: whenever she was alone, she gave way to it as the greatest relief; and not a day went by without a solitary walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant recollections.


Will the land proprietor come to a resolution to fly from his native country, in search of another,[212] where good men content themselves with declaiming against luxury, without making any attempt to destroy it? No, he never did, nor ever will take that resolution; he is fast bound to his land by the roots of every plant he has laid on it.—What then is he to do? It behoves the Minister of finance to give him some wholesome advice.
OUR JOURNEY TO KHABAROVSK
“sumter” mules, all loaded down with di’monds, and they didn’t have

Glancing this morning over an illustrated paper, in the middle of the column I saw our faces, but couldn’t believe they were really there, in an American paper. I began to think I wasn’t awake yet. I am sure it is the Hollands who have given our photos to the papers, for we are carried about as a show by them. Under our pictures the magazine has printed our biography, with a number of ridiculous stories concerning us. There was a whole sheet with dark hints as to our private lives, every syllable false. My husband, according to the press, was an oppressor of the people, little better than “Nero,” and Colonel Serebriakoff, who was not[327] able to hurt a fly, is also said to be noted for his cruelty. How do such revolting things get into papers? It is too ridiculous, but I didn’t laugh, I was too angry. The imaginative reporters described me as a Princess with Imperial blood in her veins, endowed with no end of beauty and money, and Mr. Shaniawski as a world-known traveller and explorer. Stupid fellows!
and strike a hundred and fifty before she got tuckered out. They
Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled the eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been heard of the fugitives.
But Schwartz hesitated to take this responsibility, pointing out to the Rajah how he was leaving this boy with a support “like a garden without a fence,” and amid the bickerings and jealousies of the palace his life would be endangered and it would be difficult to protect him, though he would gladly see him from time to time. He urged him to make his brother the proper guardian of the boy. “You have a brother,” Schwartz said, “deliver the child to him, charge him to educate and treat him as his own son till he is grown up. Thus his health and life may be preserved and the welfare of the country may be secured.” To this advice the old Rajah strongly objected at first, for this brother of his was not by any means a satisfactory relative, even his legitimacy was doubtful, and it was only after an[Pg 132] interview with his mother, who strongly supported the proposition of Schwartz, that it was agreed to.


excavation.
run out a plank and walked ashore. Most everybody was on the boat. Pap,
bulk of our bodies, did not exist in the Martians. They were
Release date: June 29, 2024 [eBook #73950]
that through all the deep of space no life existed beyond the petty
Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but Lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte, detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries after herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending not to hear. In a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet thus began the projected conversation:—
luck would have it the nigger was setting by the pallet with his head

WITH TWO PORTRAITS
“My dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of their father and mother. When they get to our age, I dare say they will not think about officers any more than we do. I remember the time when I liked a red coat myself very well—and, indeed, so I do still at my heart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year, should want one of my girls, I shall not say nay to him; and I thought Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William’s in his regimentals.{39}”
After eight hours of crossing, the Portuguese peninsula came to view. We saw about a hundred cannons on the high forts, protecting Macao from the side of the sea. Two hundred years have gone by since the shores of Macao, the oldest European Colony in the Orient, were first visited by Europeans; in 1720 the Portuguese landed and took possession of it in the name of their Sovereign. The front of the town bears the inscription in Portuguese: Cita de nome de Dios, não ha outra mas leal. (City in the name of God, there does not exist a more loyal one.)

restored; the minute lengthened to three.

chawing tobacco, and gaping and yawning and stretching—a mighty ornery
bet I’ll take some o’ these frills out o’ you before I’m done with you.

Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with all her heart; but the delicacy of it prevented further inquiry.
“We can do nothing for him,” said the Tin Woodman, sadly; “for he is

board, and you get it when it floats by. I feel mighty mean to leave
What those provisions were was never known. The interview was over, and apparently the tyrant must have showed to Schwartz his better side, for there was nothing in his actions to indicate any desire for peace or the good of humanity. A despot who pitilessly slew his enemies without mercy, whose officials high and low lived in a[Pg 114] reign of abject terror, who had depopulated entire districts with the sword and whose ferocity had not even the limitations of any religious consideration, was hardly the man to appreciate any proposals for peace and goodwill. On the other hand, it speaks well for the influence of a pure and fearless personality like that of Schwartz that he could have instantly inspired respect and attention. When he left Hyder he found a handsome present in his palaquin, which he would have returned forthwith but the officials assured him it would imperil their lives for him to act so contrary to the etiquette of Hyder’s court.
 Hannah with the Mumps

CHAPTER XXIV
inscriptions, and one thing or another, and you can’t think _half_ the
flight. Here too the evidence of a hasty rout was abundant along the

they set to work in one of the big yellow rooms of the castle and
for him. “If you will come with me I’ll ask Oz to do all he can for

 The story of “Sollermun”
reader, it is absolutely true, and what is more remarkable, I found the
running; but I knew it was no good running from a Martian, and I turned
them had a dim lantern in his hand, and the other one had a pistol.
a garment. My hat had gone, and my collar had burst away from its



again. It’s the way they all do.”




she returned and asked anxiously, “Where are your joints?”


“It is no such thing. Lydia does not leave me because she is married; but only because her husband’s regiment happens to be so far off. If that had been nearer, she would not have gone so soon.{406}”
pocket, and examined them, and then examined the old man’s writing, and
[221]

[267]
We were back at the hotel just in time for the table d’hôte. After dinner we went to the pier, where we admired the phosphorescence of the sea, produced by the myriads of animalcules with which the ocean is infested at certain[471] periods. The evening was fine and the air very mild. When we passed before the Governor’s abode, a sort of pavilion surrounded by a small garden named “Villa Flora,” we seated ourselves on a broad stone parapet and listened to the band playing in the “patio” of the villa. How jolly it was to throw etiquette to the winds, and feel like simple mortals!

house. Down below in the darkness were Ottershaw and Chertsey and all

tangle of red fronds, the warped and broken dog cart with the whitened
London was confirmed. They had been seen at Highgate, and even, it was
“And your assurance of it, I suppose, carried immediate conviction to him.”
every one of ’m; and how they are, and what they’re doing, and what
“I hope not so. Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters would be unpardonable in me.”
the lookout, and not be surprised, and not let Nat see him open them;
the Scarecrow and set him upon his feet, while she patted him into

through. I saw everyone tracking away south. Says I, ‘Food won’t last


“Good gracious!” cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the next morning, “if that disagreeable Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always coming here? I had no notion but he would go a-shooting, or something or other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him? Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not be in Bingley’s way.”
chased that; then another, and this time I was right. It was the raft.
October 17th.—I passed a wretched night, tossing and turning in my bed, half smothered with mosquito-curtains,[418] which effectually keep off any little breath of air there is. In that awful heat sleep was out of the question. As soon as I lay down I felt myself devoured by quantities of famished creatures who greedily awaited their prey, and with which I fought a desperate battle, persevering in the chase with a fine sporting spirit until morning.
Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father’s speech, was afraid her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to.
A cloud came soon over our bright sky. An event took[314] place which completely modified our lives. One morning there come to us a startling and most appalling piece of news, informing us that Baron Korff had departed this life. My husband was summoned by telegram to return instantly to St. Petersburg, where he was told that he was named General-Governor of the Amour province.
full of gold in his hand, and then take and lead him all around the
warn’t no back-down to her, I judge. You may say what you want to, but

gather my wits sufficiently to speak to him. So heavy was the stress of

kill them all.”
untarnished as yet, and shining dazzlingly, and deposited it in a
cellar door. Then silence that passed into an infinity of suspense.
The tragic death of Alexander II. filled the world with horror. The inhabitants of Moscow were thrilled by the news of that terrible event; the streets are black with people in mourning, the bells in all the churches are tolling all day long.
fire and had supper. Then I set out a line to catch some fish for
get dismissed if they didn’t; working at businesses they were afraid to
But, it will be objected, the price of wheat is not thus arbitrarily advanced:—certainly not; for were this to be the case, it might also be[196] lowered at pleasure, and would every other day, alternately rise from 1 to 80s. and fall from 80 to 1, since for this operation (become indispensable) it would suffice that there should be in all the provinces of England as many bodies-corporate (corporations) in agriculture, as there are in industry. I am even inclined to think, that it would then be minutely examined, Whether it be in fact advantageous to agriculture, that the merchants export more goods than they import? (a due attention being paid to the five articles so often mentioned, which render necessary the importation of bullion); a question of the utmost importance, to which I do not see that any body has hitherto attended, and which might be so easily determined, if my principles are just.

talked about all kinds of things—we was always naked, day and night,

dance up from the direction of Horsell, a red glow and a thin veil of
they are full of mischief and think it great fun to plague us.”



THE EPILOGUE.
there were now streamers of smoke; but the countless ruins of shattered
that fifty feet up in the air, on the roofs and upper stories of high
you’ll smash everything to pieces. You float along down about twenty

So we was all right now, as to the shirt and the sheet and the spoon



of his tail. “It is my great sorrow, and makes my life very unhappy.



Sunday evening—a face at a window and moving lights, and later the



other people, and look out for them all the time, and never think about

morning.”

The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to pass away before her uncle and aunt’s arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear at Longbourn. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their cousin Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense and sweetness{299} of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every way—teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.

wished the girl to remain with her and do the cooking and the
first time the duke looked sick. But he took the pen and wrote. So then
“That’s always your way, Maim—always sailing in to help somebody before
“I am not.”
Stork.

“The eldest replied, ‘We teach that God is omnipresent and is to be found in everything.’
referring to?”

to find himself still alive.
corner and waited patiently until morning came.

Glinda The Good Witch Grants Dorothy’s Wish
doctor lays on my mind. I wanted to know your plans. I’ve got a notion,
it to you—the six thousand and all.”
wanted to just by saying something to it; but he never told what it was
you’s a-gitt’n along.”
I was by-and-by, and she sent a man over to try to get hold of me; but
Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of her father’s behaviour as a husband. She had always seen it with pain; but respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to banish from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which, in exposing his wife to the contempt of her own children, was so highly reprehensible. But she had never felt so strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising from so ill-judged a direction of talents—talents which, rightly used, might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters, even if incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife.
and I was just about to go and vote myself if I warn’t too drunk to get
“What the devil is it all about?” said my brother’s fellow lodger.
a hundred yards away; but I ran slantingly and stumbling, for I could

dog-collar, and a horseshoe, and some vials of medicine that didn’t
skiffs and trying to take Jim away from me, saying they believed he was
trust; but no, they must count it. So they counts it, and it comes out
style that was suitable. He warn’t a boy to meeky along up that yard

but as a crablike creature with a glittering integument, the
the farmer. “‘Blue paint is just the color for eyes.’


with a cigarette, regretting Ogilvy’s rashness, and denouncing the

But now there came from all directions great streams of the Atomic Giants. They seemed to suddenly appear close at hand, apparently coming from nowhere. They traveled as fast as light, therefore they reached them as soon as the light, so that their approach was invisible. Only when they slowed down could they be seen. And now, from each ship came steady streams of these Minus Force shells. Thousands of the energy-absorbing projectiles flew in amongst the massed attackers—and many of them took effect, drawing the energy from the great creatures, destroying them utterly. The weapon was a success! They fired a second volley when others of the creatures came within sighting range—but they did not affect the Atomic Giants this time. Great dark patches appeared, but the creatures that had been there before, were there now, as powerful as ever, quite uninjured! What did it mean?

her friends were walking. But the Woodman had seen them coming, and the

my breaths in two and I only got half, and the short half, too.
the energetic regenerator of his species I had encountered in the

Dorothy looked at him in amazement, and so did the Scarecrow, while
Mr. Chambers, after giving an account of the early days of the missionary, and his work as tutor in the University at Halle, reveals to us from the testimony of an observer how thoroughly Schwartz worked in order to qualify himself to the utmost for his important labours. There was nothing superficial about this man, either as regards his personal character as a Christian or in his work amongst the natives; he never spared himself in taking pains to do his best for them and he was equally honest in testing their profession of Christianity and grounding them in the faith. Mr. Chambers tells us that the people among whom he had come to labour were a superior people with an ancient stock and through generations back had pursued learning and the arts and crafts with considerable success. They were worthy of the best efforts for their conversion to Christianity and these were put forth without stint.

CHAPTER CXVIII

bright that the deep blue sky overhead and the hazy stretches of brown

to nobody. Well, I felt sheepish enough to be took in so, but I
“_Sold_ him?” I says, and begun to cry; “why, he was _my_ nigger, and
writhing flames, and feel the house behind and about me empty and
mound in which I had been buried so long.
 I. UNDER FOOT.
oars working in rowlocks when it’s a still night. I peeped out through
river was coming up pretty fast, and lots of driftwood going by on the
“Are you quite sure, ma’am? Is not there a little mistake?” said Jane. “I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to her.”
So, the Lion being fully refreshed, and feeling quite himself again,
And behind the woman comes a little nigger girl and two little nigger

Then the fourth cylinder fell—a brilliant green meteor—as I learned
NIAGARA FALLS

“Who are you?” asked the Scarecrow when he had stretched himself and

models. We must make great safe places down deep, and get all the books
away, anyhow.”
school, you hear? I’ll learn people to bring up a boy to put on airs
I work hard at my book and give much time to my English concertina. This melodious instrument leads to the transmission of the most difficult violin literature. I am passionately fond of music; having inherited that passion from my father who had the true artistic temperament and was a gifted musician and a splendid pianist.

window from which I and the artilleryman had watched the dawn. No one
CHAPTER XXVI.

His very abilities and influence drew him within the dangerous zone of political affairs, and the fact that he stood so well with the powers that were the representatives of the British Government, might well have corrupted a man of less principle and sincerity. It may be said of him that he sat at the tables of rich men and talked on equal terms with the ambitious spirits of his time, but he kept his piety and simplicity through it all. They trusted his sagacity and leaned on his judgment in difficult situations, but they knew he was not to be bribed, and that he kept a clean hand. He was a scholar, and had a good knowledge of the classics, of German literature; he was also master of Hebrew, Tamil, Persian, Hindustani, Mahratta, and the Indo-Portuguese languages. There is no doubt that his linguistic powers were very helpful to him, as we have seen, they so often enabled him to get past the crafty Brahmins, and converse with the Rajah or the Pariah alike in their own tongue about the truths of Christianity.
slender as a wasp’s waist. This gave the Lion a hint of the best way to
“That is true,” said the Scarecrow. “You see,” he continued

“Take out my straw and scatter it over the little girl and the dog and

reaching up towards the moon—and the idea was to see which pair would



“This must be a most inconvenient sitting-room for the evening in summer: the windows are full west.”
wouldn’t feel greasy no more, and so anybody in town would take it in a
Jim’s eyes bugged out when he heard that; and I reckon mine did, too.
struck into Park Road, intending to skirt the park, went along under
“Well, I ’uz gwyne to spen’ it, but I had a dream, en de dream tole me
handsome red uniforms trimmed with gold braid; and as Dorothy
The first part of Mrs. Gardiner’s business, on her arrival, was to distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this was done, she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen. Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. They had all been very ill-used since she last saw her sister. Two of her girls had been on the point of marriage, and after all there was nothing in it.
She then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken up the card-party, and was sitting upstairs with Kitty.
The native Christian women, being under the dominion of Turkish rule, find themselves here in such a state of degradation, that their husbands consider it unsuitable to appear with them anywhere. Antoine Effendi speaks very good English for a foreigner; he has been a correspondent of the Times during the Russo-Turkish war. Other guests came in quick succession, amongst them the French Consul, M. Gilbert, with his wife, a charming young woman, so bright and winsome. Mme. Gilbert seems very friendly; she has put her books and music at my disposal. We propose to see each other often, and to take long walks together. During the Gilbert’s visit an old Pasha came in. That ancient fanatic, more than eighty years of age, didn’t venture to look into my face, but kept his eyes fixed chastely on the carpet, murmuring sotto voce something I didn’t understand. Mme. Gilbert, who speaks Turkish, explained that the aged mussulman was making oriental compliments to me. Just before dinner an Australian doctor came in, holding a stick and a Scotch cap in his hand. That young physician is summoned away to Constantinople and has come to ask Sergy for a passport. He is the son of a rich cattle-breeder residing in Melbourne. I saw on his arm a white band with a red crescent and the letters S.H.S. on it, indicating that he belonged to the “Stafford House Society.” There is a great number of European doctors attending the Turks in Erzeroum; nearly all the nations have sent their contingents of medical men. These Christians in the Turkish service produce rather a painful impression on me.
Miss Bingley saw, or suspected, enough to be jealous; and her great anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane received some assistance from her desire of getting rid of Elizabeth.
I returned home enchanted, and went to bed in a delirium, but I had had too exciting a night to find it easy to fall asleep.
“So’m I,” says Packard, very quiet.
We got there in about a half an hour fairly dripping, for it was a most

there’s your horses and your trusty vassles, and they scoop you up and
succeeded. Sunday night was the end of the organised opposition to

Chertsey. The Martians appear to be moving slowly towards Chertsey or
“And will you promise me never to enter into such an engagement?”
perpetually renewed by the hurrying feet of a dense crowd of horses and
kitten, and Dorothy at last found him. She picked him up and ran

astonished, and says:
When we approached Kissingen, I thrust my head out of the railway-carriage, with my body half out of the window, to catch the first sight of my husband’s face. As we drew up at the station I perceived him on the platform, beaming with delight. I jumped out of the train joyfully, and the next moment I was in Sergy’s arms.
January 24th.—It was night when the Salasie came in sight of Singapore. We are going to stop here about a fortnight, waiting for the Laos, a French boat, bound to Colombo and Marseilles. We put up again at the Hôtel d’Europe.
On board the Peru we occupy the cabins 37, 39, 40, known as the cabin state rooms, on the starboard side on the upper deck.
said there was hundreds of soldiers there, and elephants and treasure,
and talked low; and at last the lawyer speaks up and says:
As I crossed the bridge, the sound of “Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,” ceased.
looked sharply at the queer party.
with a kick, and gripped the collar of the man who pulled at the
thinking you had pluck enough to lynch a _man!_ Because you’re brave



imagine this: four or five of their fighting machines suddenly starting
along the edge of the common to form a cordon. Later a second company

forgot. I never see pap when he didn’t want the chicken himself, but

CHAPTER XXI.

caves in at a time. Sometimes a belt of land a quarter of a mile deep
than real ones is, but they warn’t real because you could see where




After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every variety of thought, reconsidering events, determining probabilities, and reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and so important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made her at length return home; and she entered the house with the wish of appearing cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such reflections as must make her unfit for conversation.
for I feel I may have confidence in you. By rights I am a duke!”
 “Mr. Archibald Nichols, I presume?”
didn’t. I reckon he thought he’d keep the thing up till he tired them
candle quit on him, and then he could go to bed, and hide the
“they entered the breakfast room”
Scarcely had this storm spent itself when another cloud arose in the East and burst with force and rage. The great Mongol chieftain Chengis Khan, beating down Islam with its own weapon, had made himself master of China and the whole of Western Asia, and now, flushed with victory, essayed to conquer Europe also. Islam had brought the flag of the prophet as far as the gates of Vienna; Chengis Khan on that fateful day in April, 1241, broke down the defence of Prince Henry at Liegnitz. It seemed as though all Europe lay defenceless, when suddenly, by one of the great acts of God in history, the Tartar host like a swarm of locusts arose and departed whence they came.


“And so ended his affection,” said Elizabeth, impatiently. “There has been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder who first discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!”
“My life has been so short that I really know nothing whatever. I was
before the rising of the sun. Great mounds had been heaped about the

[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]
could not take them off had she wished, but of course she did not wish

have seemed very like any other Sunday.
So we went over to where the canoe was, and while he built a fire in a

“My style of writing is very different from yours.”


_wuz_ help, s’I; ’n’ ther’ wuz a _plenty_ help, too, s’I; ther’s ben a
“Then what on earth did _you_ want to set him free for, seeing he was

“And that is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of his friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such a part of London! My dear aunt, how could you think of it? Mr. Darcy may, perhaps, have heard of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but he would hardly think a month’s ablution enough to cleanse him from its impurities, were he once to enter it; and, depend upon it, Mr. Bingley never stirs without him.”
In regard to the productions of the soil, all that part of America inclosed within even the 30th degree of north, and the 30th degree of south latitude, could not yield, without double and treble expence, any thing that can be produced in Europe, and in the other part of America, from the 30th degree to the pole. And, on the other hand, at what an amazing expence must all Europe, jointly with that part of America now independent, produce, even in a kind of degradation, what the other part of America yields naturally in the most perfect state!
the wood by me I found the crushed and scattered bones of several cats
under that tremendous impact—“splashed” is the only word—and lay in
pass—’tis no matter. The secret of my birth—”
“Not a word?”

Mme. Kethoudoff had at dinner that day the Vicaire du Pollet, a rosy and plump curate. This gossip-loving priest was a great favourite among his lady parishioners, to whom he was very fond of confiding little bits of scandal.


that grotesque time—a sheet of paper flaunting against a thicket of the
it was because I warn’t square; it was because I was playing double. I
On the platform of the railway station, adorned with flags and wreaths of flowers, the Governor of Samarkand presented to Sergy a deputation of Sartes, one of the richest tribes of[494] Turkestan. Behind the station all the soldiers of the garrison of Samarkand, ranged in lines, cheered my husband by loud hurrahs, which produced a great effect upon the natives.
Before landing, a Te Deum of thanksgiving, for having reached Vladivostock in safety, was sung on the deck. On the red-carpeted pier a roar of cheering went up as we passed. The faces all seemed familiar. I hastened to distribute greetings and nods among a number of the crowd. The daughter of the agent of the Volunteer Fleet presented me with an enormous bouquet, tied with a broad pink ribbon, bearing the inscription, “Welcome!”

your word—I druther have it than another man’s kiss-the-Bible.” She
from the fire, as he feared a spark might get into his straw and burn
he would tear again, and give Sherburn another cussing. By-and-by
[60]

I’ve a mighty notion to just leave the country for good and all. Yes,
[5]Under the idea of labour, I comprise all kinds of capitals necessary to keep in action the labouring man; a stock, or capital, is but an accumulation of savings, made from former labours, whether it represents the savings of a certain number of years, in regard to one man, or those of some centuries, in regard to the nation or some privileged individuals.
“It ain’t no use to try to learn you nothing, Huck. Run along and
immigrants, in the space of fifty years. Are we such apostles of mercy
“Accompanied by their aunt”	225

“No, it warn’t; but it’s the plan _now_.”
“But I didn’ have no luck. When we ’uz mos’ down to de head er de

of elevation and when I looked for him presently he was walking towards
Dorothy went to work meekly, with her mind made up to work as hard as

_him_ telling the people where I was. I talked along, but he only set


The signal was given for departure and hands and handkerchiefs waved frantically as the train glided out. I felt a lump in my throat on leaving dear old Moscow for good.
“I didn’t think of that.”
didn’t put it in, and that will show that I laid the Testament down and
The niggers stole it the very next mornin’ after I had went down
one, and then gave it up; and we lit the lantern and walked over to his



children and a man. The man had hurt his leg, and was lying on the
then you don’t have no quarrels, and don’t get into no trouble. If they
according to their needs just as men wear suits of clothes and take a
Their undeniable preference for men as their source of nourishment is
strange intelligence that the newsvendors were disseminating. People
tricks, and they get to be as sociable as flies. But you got to play
“No, but I ben rich wunst, and gwyne to be rich agin. Wunst I had
vast curve, grew smaller, sank slowly, and vanished again into the grey
We were back to the hotel towards sunset and walked to the station laden with our bags and umbrellas, where we arrived just as the train was about to start.
I and my wife stood amazed. Then I realised that the crest of Maybury

became bleached, and then shrivelled and brittle. They broke off at the
himself to come. And all being quiet throughout the afternoon, we
Heading to Chapter XIII.	78
things.”

through the iron of the ship’s side like a white-hot iron rod through
of the country that the Kalidahs lived.
We started to-day at ten o’clock in the morning. The station was quite full. All the military and civil authorities of the town, and all the members of the committee of the Benevolence Society, came to wish me a happy journey and safe return. I had to shake hands with such a lot of people that my glove burst in several places, and I received such a lot of bouquets that they were hard to hold; the supply of beautiful flowers in my car made it look like a flower-shop.
about that, because I wanted him and me to be together.
against the lemon yellow of the sky—a couple of hundred people,

Page
wide.
hole.

Three were men and one a woman, and all were oddly dressed. They wore

little girl we dare not harm, nor the dog she carries in her arms. Your
struck for an island, and hid the raft, and sunk the skiff, and turned
“Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak to you”	422
It seems to me, that the only point which essentially concerns all Europe, in regard to other parts of the world, where she can give law, would be to find out what kind of Administration would be the best calculated to increase in all those parts the consumption of European goods, and to procure to herself a more considerable stock of foreign goods and products,—which would, as they have ever done, give, either directly or indirectly, a fresh encouragement to her agriculture[391] and manufactures. Let any one examine, whether the utility of the colonies be not strictly confined to this single point.
The others held back in fear. There was something new to combat and they went cautiously. Now there leapt out from the nose of the ship a long beam of the milky, glowing ray—it touched one of the great creatures—there was a slight flash of light—and it was gone. Then the glowing ray swept around and erased those forms there in space, erased them as one might wipe the image from the screen with the flick of the switch. And then, precipitately they fled. They were beaten; they could not attack this new ship.
The fate of the various kinds of taxes, is similar to that of political operations, which pretty regularly bring about the very contrary of what had been expected from them: thus if you tax the consumption of the rich, presently the poor alone will pay the impost, and will continue to pay it till an insurrection will make you sensible that he is brought too low; now this insurrection is commonly the consequence of a trifling scarcity, which, it seems, Providence sends to the unfortunate in order to encourage his asking[243] for justice, in the only manner that is likely to prove successful: on the contrary, let the tax be laid on the general consumption, without sparing that of the poor, the man who possesses, shall be, no doubt, necessitated to pay for the man who has nothing, if the former wishes to enjoy the labour of the latter; and on the very same day, when the tax is laid on the consumption of the labouring man, he will not hesitate to demand an increase of wages to the full amount.... How is he to be deceived?—If it be well to deceive the poor as long as possible, then tax nothing but the consumption of the rich. But whatever be the manner in which the impost is laid, as soon as its effect shall be general, the burden will prove null (save the injuries inseparable from all other taxes, but those that bear upon consumption): this effect is no more than a general advance in all the prices: an advance, it is true, already acknowledged necessary with regard to the taxed articles, but dreaded hitherto in regard to all the rest, where it ought to have been wished for; universally felt, but never justly estimated; the nullity of the burden of the debt would have been determined by the estimation.



artificial additions to their bodily resources that their great

nail, and he didn’t know how to make letters, besides; but Tom said he
and there was a big crowd packed around each one of these fellows,

wildcats; and to make it more scary the sky was darking up, and the

We got back to our hotel just in time for our well-earned dinner. The next day, having put our heavy luggage in deposit at the warehouse, we proceeded on our journey, and went to rove about Switzerland. In the first place we are going to Interlaken. We have reached Alpnacht by steamboat, and had great difficulties in getting seats in the brakes that run to Interlaken, the passengers had to take them by assault. We waited for our turn with a surprisingly long delay; the huge conveyances, with six powerful horses put to them, were filling fast, and there were still no places assigned to us. At last we were provided with a supplement in the shape of a landau. There was room for four in our[178] carriage, two seats were already occupied by a very cross German lady and her daughter, who looked at us as if they wished to order our instant execution. They were most peevish companions and grumbled all the way that der Papa had been placed into another supplementary conveyance. We made sustained efforts at conversation, but only received rebuffs. Really, I quite expected them to bite us.
As Schwartz had acquired a fluent knowledge of Portuguese he found many opportunities of speaking to that large class of people who spoke the language, and where there were signs of a real concern he could lead them on by careful instruction in spiritual progress. As[Pg 62] he looked wistfully into the faces of these young people, the children of the Portuguese who many years before founded the colony and inter-married with native women, his soul yearned to bring them to a fuller knowledge of Jesus Christ, for it must be to them the heathen would look for evidence that Christianity was the gracious power it professed to be. It was a work of patience and he did not undertake it lightly or with any self-confidence. Here is an expression of his mind at this time in a letter written home to Europe:
considerable consequence. I could see his staring eyes and gleams of
Shaksperean Revival!!!

“This little girl,” said the Scarecrow to the soldier, “wishes to cross


HAPPY for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. Bennet got rid of her two most deserving daughters. With what delighted pride she afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked of Mrs. Darcy, may be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible, amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though, perhaps, it was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic felicity in so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous and invariably silly.
“By means of the Golden Cap I shall command the Winged Monkeys to carry
This is certainly what the two nations might have compassed. That which follows, is what they have done.
unable to keep my mind off him by reason of his importunities. He ate
black shapes upon the black ground. As the green smoke arose, their
a hat at all, but more like my head was shoved up through a jint o’
CHAPTER CXV


_that_ govment! That ain’t all, nuther. The law backs that old Judge
The dependent proprietor of money had also his resource; he, by degrees, obtained an increase of salary; (and this is strictly consonant with justice.)



Towards evening a passing ship signalled to us that there was a great number of icebergs on the way. We were passing now a place called “Devil’s Hole,” where all the winds meet. The sea was very high and the Bourgogne shook and cracked as if it was going to fall to pieces.
Then he didn’t look so joyful, and says:
down in his presence till he asked them. So Jim and me set to
On the Influence of the various Kinds of Taxation upon national Prices.	188
might have stood and rusted in the forest till the end of the world.”


Says I to myself, I can explain better how we come to not be in that
rise. By-and-by along comes part of a log raft—nine logs fast together.
and yet he had already formulated a situation that I had scarcely
“Then we are all right,” answered the Scarecrow, “for you can carry us
gust would follow along and set the branches to tossing their arms as
[459]
“May I ask to what these questions tend?”
as mine would, and maybe get us all killed besides. So I was satisfied,
Effects of compound Taxation.	223

been convinced of this in spite of strong preconceptions. Before the

they went the more dismal and lonesome the country became.

he lined out two more for them to sing—and so on. The people woke up

jets of green vapour and working its way round the pit, excavating and
the railway and staring down the line towards Woking, the day would
“I wisht I never die if I done it, duke, and that’s honest. I won’t say
In order to render the effects of the disproportion more sensible, I shall further suppose,[159] that the shilling in both nations equally contains 86 grains of silver at the same standard.


do is to write on the plate and throw it out. You don’t _have_ to be
the big throne and the others stood respectfully before him.
running the theatre trains which usually passed through Woking round by
He should be particularly happy at any time, etc., etc.; and if she would give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on them.
Lion, and the great beast had opened his mouth to bite the dog, when
was it. He turned blue all over, and died in the hope of a glorious
The fear I felt was no rational fear, but a panic terror not only of
all the Winged Monkeys brought before her, and she said at first that



“I do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, if he had not wished to avoid a certain gentleman here.”
“Well, that’s respect, I expect,” declared the Clown, and immediately


could see or feel was the wind whistling past her ears.
Others of the Monkeys caught the Scarecrow, and with their long fingers
“I must confess that the education which many parents give their children is highly detrimental. Their understandings are not furnished with divine knowledge,[Pg 142] their wills are not bent to love and obey God, their passions are not properly restrained or directed. At last they grow up without fearing, obeying, and honouring God, they are ashamed of showing anything relative to true Christianity. They are taught to do their duty, without knowing the source from which they ought to draw strength.



go sound asleep, but was uneasy. He groaned and moaned and thrashed

July 28th.—We left Nagasaki in the afternoon, and were soon out of sight of the Japanese Islands.


go back on her promise. Then I told her my father and mother was dead,
deserted. Here we happened on no dead, though the night was too dark
Somehow it didn’t seem to me that I said it was Mary before, so I
“I will not let him,” said the Woodman; “so do not be afraid.”
Elizabeth’s mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after half an hour’s quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join the others with tolerable composure. Everything was too recent for gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer anything material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time.
little unlike us terrestrial men, but in all essentials a man. I know I
The “hounhouses” (Chinese bandits) cause a great panic amongst the officials serving on the railway line. Quite recently the brigands attacked a railway station, and murdered the station-master and his family. It was found out that the bandits were Chinese soldiers, by a standard that they had dropped at the station.
at him and broke off all their stings against the tin, without hurting
Toto in her arms, the straw covered them entirely.


canoe; just a beauty, too, about thirteen or fourteen foot long, riding
branches of a tall tree.
Everything was then quite invisible, hidden by the deep pit and the

it, and nobody don’t blame them for it, either. It ain’t no crime in a
the Country of the West, I should like nothing better than to rule over
Glory to God in highest Heaven,

“Now, there’s _sense_ in that,” I says. “Letting on don’t cost nothing;
sneaky. Then pretty soon Sherburn sort of laughed; not the pleasant
yellow brick, she was startled to hear a deep groan near by.

shipping, wading farther and farther into the water as the coast fell
[Pg 185]
Towards the end of September we started on our homeward journey.

old gentleman’s hand writing, and anybody can tell, easy enough, _he_


The English, in general, are very much interested in everything concerning Turkestan. I read an article about my husband which came out in the Daily Chronicle. I quote the following from the London newspaper:—“Every English officer, who understands the problem of Oriental politics, must know of what great importance is the centralisation of Russian powers in Asia. For the moment sixty thousand men are united under the command of General Doukhovskoy, one of the most able officers of the Russian army.” We gave a great dinner to the foreign travellers. After the end of the repast, we went into the park, illuminated with coloured lanterns to let them see the dances of the “batchas” (native boys arrayed in woman’s dress). The women in the Orient are not allowed to participate at public performances, and their parts are always taken by men. The courts of the suzerains of Central Asia and India boast of their troops of “batchas,” effeminate boys with long plaited hair, arrayed in sumptuous silk robes. In Tashkend the “batchas” are quite different. It was grown-up youths who were brought up to us, wearing white calico shirts and heavy boots which had not seen any polish for a long time. A band of native musicians, sitting on their heels on a carpet spread upon the grass, began to beat the cords of a kind of cithern, and the would-be “batchas” started turning around, whilst the musicians accelerated their time. The performance could scarcely be called a dance; it was rather a swift walk within a circle. Suddenly wild shrieks were heard, and the “batchas” began turning round like a spinning-top, whilst the musicians accelerated their time, and the “batchas” made rather clumsy jumps.
meat were tearing to our relief. All the shipping in the world seemed
“My dear Lizzy,
I followed them to my study, and found lying on my writing-table still,

CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER VIII.
swarming platform was piled with boxes and packages. The ordinary

“Why, how you talk—Sheffield ain’t on the sea.”
within a hundred yards of him when the Heat-Ray came to bear. Then with
watchman. There ain’t even a dog to give a sleeping-mixture to. And
[442]
“I should like something to eat besides fruit,” said the girl, “and I’m
comfortable as if he warn’t ever drunk in his life—and then he begun to
there asleep—and, by jings, it was my old Jim!
She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach, received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be overcome. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other two that they now saw Mr. Darcy, the gardener’s expression of surprise, on beholding his master, must immediately have told it. They stood a little aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused, scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer she returned to his civil inquiries after her family. Amazed at the alteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence that he uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the impropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the few minutes in which they continued together were some of the most uncomfortable of her life. Nor did he seem much more at ease; when he spoke, his accent had none of its usual sedateness; and he repeated his inquiries as to the time of her having left Longbourn, and of her stay in Derbyshire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the distraction of his thoughts.


“But I don’t want to live here,” cried Dorothy. “I want to go to


All Monte Carlo seemed composed of gardens, with the big, white building of the Casino in the midst, the whole ringed in by high grey mountains. We went straight to the Casino and looked in at the gambling-rooms. The tables were surrounded by anxious players with a preponderance of courtesans of high and low degree, with painted faces and rings down to their nails, who followed the game with breathless interest. An old woman, dressed in dyed silks and a home-made hat, was losing heavily, and staked her last francs with despair written on her face. Many players come to Monaco with their pockets full, and have nothing to pay their return journey. Suicides often take place here. I tried my luck, and lost something like ten francs.
asked him if he’d seen a strange nigger dressed so and so, and he says:
Our life had many dark moments. There had been a great excitement these last few days; bad news had arrived, a new rebellion was apprehended. We stood on a volcano that might explode at any moment; the only thing to ask ourselves was when will it begin to pour out its flames. Anonymous letters, splashed with blood, announced to my husband that on the night of the 30th July, a holy war would break out. What troublesome times we are living through!

“That ain’t got nothing to do with it. The thing for us to do is just


streets to the river he was able to distinguish it quite plainly.
spurting up in noisy jets out of the machine.

beer.

The universal voice in England is, that so many taxes should be laid, as are necessary to answer the exigences. Ministry, Opposition, Subjects, all agree in this essential point; but if we except some taxes which bear principally on the land proprietor, who never says any thing, and whose silence commands that of every one who shares in his burden, the ablest man in the three kingdoms is not capable of proposing one, on any article, which would not be followed by a petition from those very men who do not even wait till it has received the royal sanction, in order to derive from it an extravagant advantage, if it be within the meaning of licences, and perhaps only[232] a profit rather above a reasonable one, if it bears on an object properly specified.





his hands clasped over his head, screaming.


“Lady Catherine de Bourgh,” she replied, “has very lately given him a living. I hardly know how Mr. Collins was first introduced to her notice, but he certainly has not known her long.”
“I ran as fast as I could,” he said, sitting down and yawning, “but the
“Of course not,” answered Dorothy. “How should I?”
After an hour or so the light faded away, and they found themselves
 Tragedy


Col. Grangerford.—Aristocracy.—Feuds.—The Testament.—Recovering the
friend, even if it happens to be only a mouse.”
Save that an unknown element giving a group of four lines in the blue

They did this. There must have been many, many thousands of them. The field was almost broken, it was bulging out, scattering under the drive of their energies. Soon they would have broken through, but one of the great projector ships reached the spot before the field had quite yielded, and condensing his field projector till it was a ray, they could see the field suddenly fall in, driven in by the awful power of that titanic driving.
went upon their journey.
got off. The king never said nothing about going aboard, so I lost my
experience is common. At times I suffer from the strangest sense of
Well, the days went along, and the river went down between its banks
“Well, I don’t know. Some of them gets on the police, and some of them
And so it makes it so rotten difficult to get up a difficult plan.
The undulating common seemed now dark almost to blackness, except where
and the carthorse pushed beside it. A hoof missed my brother’s foot by
has deceived you; Nichols’s place is down a matter of three mile more.
expected to find no living things—certainly no intelligent living
and then he don’t want to take no consequences of it. Thinks as long as

was asleep.
There is no doubt that Schwartz rejected this offer of the guardianship of Serfogee because it would have placed him in a position of political responsibility in the government of the country, amounting to a regency. This, of course, would be quite incompatible with his work as a missionary. The position was a very difficult and embarrassing one, needing the utmost caution, for, on the one hand, Schwartz was anxious to stand by the boy at the affecting request of the Rajah (who had evidently not much longer to live), and, on the other hand, he must hold himself aloof from any entanglements as regards the conduct of the country during his minority. But it will be seen how lovingly and faithfully the old missionary until the day of his death fulfilled the moral guardianship of Serfogee which he from that moment accepted as a solemn charge. The next morning the decrepit and worn out Rajah summoned the English resident, Mr. Huddleston, and Colonel Stuart, the Commander of the garrison, with Mr. Schwartz to his chamber, where his brother and Serfogee with the principal officers were also assembled. He explained his will as regards the boy, agreed to his brother acting as Regent, but when Serfogee was old enough to take the throne, he trusted the Company would “maintain him and his heirs on the throne as long as the sun and moon should endure.” He was told by his visitors that this would be done and then he exclaimed: “This assurance comforts me in my last hours.”
“Oh, I see,” said the Tin Woodman. “But, after all, brains are not the
“Yes.”
“What kind of stock?”
[13]

and spent some hours digging with my hatchet as silently as possible;

“Mr. Darcy with him”	404
After lunch we went to see the games and all sorts of public amusements on the square: rocking-horses, targets, foot-runs and what not! A slight railing divided the fashionable world from the world that works, only the local aristocracy, ultra-provincial I must say, was admitted within the enclosure. The prizes for the most part consisted of different foods. The crowd gathered around the chief[166] attraction, a climbing post with a gigantic leg of mutton at the top of it. The native lads could not succeed in reaching it; taking toss after toss they slipped from the pole to the ecstatic joy of the onlookers. At last a young fellow had nearly attained the tempting prize, but he could not keep up on the pole and fell to the ground weakened by the strain of his position, without his leg of mutton. We stopped before a stall with brass medals bearing the inscription Vive la France! When I asked if there were any medals with Vive la République the woman who sold them answered in a voice full of indignation that she did not keep such horrors.


of her sister-in-law, gave way to panic. She had never been out of

there are many of these flowers together their odor is so powerful that

Martian. I could not clamber among the ruins to see it, and the
He was in the river under the stern oar, with just his nose out. I told
gun, but simply drove full speed towards them. It was probably her not
religion if it collapses under calamity? Think of what earthquakes and
“Why, Mars Tom, I lay I kin raise one er dem mullen-stalks twyste wid

machinery present a complicated system of sliding parts moving over
Says he:
and fixed things so folks would think robbers done it, and then he’d
Primrose Hill. On the summit, towering up to the fading stars, was a
He became suddenly very generous, and when we had eaten he went away
destruction been so indiscriminate and so universal. And shining with

was no way of going around it, for it seemed to extend to the right and
witches?” and that nigger was corked up and had to take a back seat.

There were several roads nearby, but it did not take her long to find
One of our most frequent guests, General S⸺ was so old that I was afraid all the time he’d go to pieces. He showed a distinct preference for my society and looked at me as if I were something good to eat. This old general gave me to understand that I had captured his venerable heart and that he was deeply enamoured with me, which sounded somewhat ridiculous from that aged warrior, and though he was far too ancient for my taste, I let him make love to me, for what harm could come of it? My old admirer was dying to show me the renewal of his vigour, lost in the night of time; an occasion soon presented itself. One rainy day I went out for a walk accompanied by two cavaliers, my out-of-date adorer and a sprightly young officer. Whilst I held my nose up in the[77] air looking at the state of the sky, a gust of wind tore away my umbrella and the old warrior, trying to get it before the young one, ran as fast as his old legs could carry him towards the rolling parasol, and brought it back triumphantly to me, like a perfect knight. Gallant old creature!
a kag of powder and touching it off just to see where you’ll go to.


“Can’t you give me brains?” asked the Scarecrow.
“_Now_ you’re _talking!_” I says; “your head gets leveler and leveler
says:
We put up for the night at the Hôtel de Paris, where the prices are exorbitant. We had dinner at a small hotel which boasted of a table d’hôte at 2 francs 25 centimes per head. Sixty boarders sat down at table, inveterate roulette-players all of them. The game was the sole conversation during the meal. After dinner we went to the Casino to see the fireworks and listen to the splendid orchestra playing in the concert-hall. I tried my luck at the gambling-tables and lost about ten francs, but Sergy gained heaps of money. The run of bad luck had completely emptied the purse of an old lady sitting on my right—she looked so wretched, the poor old thing!
On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost all, took place. Miss Bingley’s civility to Elizabeth increased at last very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted, after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her to see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of the whole party in the liveliest spirits.

thought, “I can still make her my slave, for she does not know how to
that wants to, and goes home and prays for a humble spirit to bear it.
“which he has covered with a golden plate, to keep it from running
bushes in one place by the fence; outside of the fence a garden and a

faintly. The steamboat lurched and rolled him over upon his hands.
My brother felt no anxiety about us, as he knew from the description in



ELIZABETH, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter.




of mean folks, but if we minded our business and didn’t talk back and
“It’s a mystery,” replied the Lion. “I suppose I was born that way. All
there were more people about here, though none could give us news. For
if something turned over, and the point of view altered abruptly. There
They can turn it into a picnic if they want to—they brought plenty
“I reckon that old man was a coward, Buck.”

fool? Don’t you reckon _I_ know who hid that money in that coffin?”

“And aren’t you?” she asked.
Chapter XVIII
November 5th.—We pass near the African coast, and the peninsula of Socotra. These parts were formerly the terror of the navigators; many ships have gone to pieces in this treacherous place, where strong hurricanes prevail. The Portuguese sailormen have named that cape Guardafui, which means “Be on your guard.” But the great boats of our days laugh at the danger, though a terrible rolling and tossing is always felt in these parts.
“But we won’t _let_ you walk—it wouldn’t be Southern hospitality to do
“ouch!” if anything fell, she jumped and said “ouch!” if you happened
standing up out of the middle of the river, big and dark and solid,
yards. I jumped into the canoe and run back to the stern, and grabbed
too—longer than _we’d_ need ’em.”


Having learned that the Rydes were living already at Blackgang, not far away from Shanklin, I hurried to let them know of our arrival, looking forward to seeing a great deal of Ettie. Although years had separated us, I was not one to forget old friends and had been simple enough to believe that Ettie, also, was burning with impatience to meet me. But one always believes what one desires, it is the weak point of human nature! Several days went by and it was queer that Ettie did not send any word of her coming. This meeting so hotly desired by me came at last, but in a fashion altogether different from that which I had pictured. One morning a knock came at the door, and the parlour-maid ushered in Ettie in person. I must say she was sadly altered, and I scarcely recognised her; time passing over her had modified her as it does everything in this world, nothing was left of the pretty Scotch lassie of by-gone days. She was altered morally too; she looked so stiff, so unlike her old self. Ettie reminded me, nevertheless, of my youthful days, and memories which had slumbered for years awoke now in me. Stirring the cinders of our reminiscences we spoke of the dear old days gone by when we were both sixteen. We kept Ettie for dinner; when she went back in the evening her farewell seemed stiff and formal to me, she gave me a cold kiss on my cheek, and we were parting for no one knows how many years, for good and all, perhaps, for the Rydes were leaving Blackgang in a few days. I am a terrible creature for taking things to heart, and felt at the moment as if I had been drenched with cold water. She is a cold-hearted creature, Ettie, and I do not want to be friends with her any more. I should like to be cold-hearted too, and not to care for any one. When Ettie had gone, I remained for some time wrapped in thoughts the reverse of agreeable, and was not able to put Ettie out of my mind. Sergy, who has a wonderful soothing influence over me, set[243] to work to comfort me, but he did not succeed, and this time I was not to be comforted.

By midnight the blazing trees along the slopes of Richmond Park and the

sweet face, but there was so many arms it made her look too spidery,
powder had risen to cover them from sight, and a fighting-machine, with
and always frothy repentance for his vacant sham of God’s service, such
As I watched, the planet seemed to grow larger and smaller and to
made about their cylinder. I have worked my way out and escaped.”
anything come between us. Poor Emmeline made poetry about all the dead
It was lucky the Scarecrow and the Woodman were wide awake and heard


way with infinite pains and labour from the fire and smoke of burning
myself. This was including Miss Watson, as I took it. I went out in the
I was so excited my hands shook so I couldn’t hardly do anything with
of the fugitives at that hour were mounted on cycles, but there were
to myself, we can’t get him home for hours, till he’s soberer; so I



[384]

and a lot of people. I hid the letter behind the first thing that come
seen three fights. By-and-by somebody sings out:

locks closed and a feeling of panic in the air. A man in a blue and
“Say, who is you? Whar is you? Dog my cats ef I didn’ hear sumf’n.

Mr. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet by admiring Mrs. Philips’s manners and politeness. He protested that, except Lady Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman; for she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but had even pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, although utterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might be attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so much attention in the whole course of his life.{95}
everything there was that come handy. And yet he made a mighty fuss,
Little by little, St. Petersburg was getting empty. The railway-line to Moscow, notwithstanding its twenty-four trains a day, could hardly supply all the passengers proceeding to the old capital; they had to book their places a month beforehand.
“Mf! It’s a _very_ tough question, _ain’t_ it! _Yes_, sir, I k’n tell
got there the sky was beginning to get a little gray in the east; so we

CHAPTER CV
whenever the mosquitoes would let us—the new clothes Buck’s folks made
Martians took as much notice of such advances as we should of the
hardest, toughest, troublesomest piece of old brass candlestick or

had got into my blood, and in my heart I was not so very sorry that I
wizards amongst us.”
Let us seek for such points, as it may be possible to agree upon.
One of the difficulties which always menaced the success and progress of the Danish missionaries was the active opposition of the Roman Catholic priests. The persecution of one section of Christians by another section, each repudiating with some heat the other’s[Pg 158] doctrines as heretical, was not a very edifying spectacle in the eyes of the Hindus. The state of the Romish missions after the death of Xavier was described by the Abbé Dubois, writing in December, 1875, after thirty-two years’ experience in Mysore. Not only were the converts diminished but in moral and religious tone the work was degenerate. He gives the unvarnished truth, which may seem almost desperately pessimistic in its conclusions, and this is the Romanism which the Protestant missions had to reckon with. Speaking then of his own converts the Abbé declares: “By far the greater part of them—in fact I might say the whole—present nothing but an empty shadow, a hollow mockery of Christianity; for in the long period of twenty-five years during which I learnt to know them most intimately and lived amongst them as their spiritual director, I can’t say that I once found anywhere one single downright and straightforward Christian amongst the natives of India. Several of them are fairly well instructed and know what are the duties of a Christian; but far and away the larger part of them live in the crassest ignorance and their entire religion is confined to the observance of a few external ordinances and the repetition of certain forms of prayer, without possessing one single spark of the inward practical spirit of Christianity. The Sabbath is either but just remembered or wholly disregarded and all their religious exercises are performed either simply because of custom or a vain desire to please men rather than God.”

and I made my mark on the paper.
spectacles night and day. They are all locked on, for Oz so ordered it
evidence of its work. But all I saw was the deep blue sky above, with
before long a big iron-jawed man worked himself in there from outside,
“Oho-o! I think I see. You want to _sell_ all your property to me—not
one of us ought to wait on him at dinner, and do any little thing for

destroy them, but picked them up one by one. Apparently he tossed them
The next morning, as soon as the sun was up, they started on their way,
take my bed; but the king allowed he wouldn’t. He says:
CHAPTER XVI
man don’t float on his back, but on his face. So I knowed, then, that

Q. How can men of probity and knowledge be blind to the iniquity of such a scheme?—Will not at least its execution be somewhat impeded by the greatest part of those who follow the same trade?
roughly. When a big branch bent down to seize him the Woodman chopped
dese tracks. I did, mos’ sholy. Mars Sid, I _felt_ um—I _felt_ um, sah;
for scrutiny—and I put a more horrible interpretation on them than they
“The officers of the ——shire”	97

around the foot of the island and started up the channel on the
of them against our millions.

There were new complications and things began to look more and more serious. Every day when I awoke a fear came over me that the news would be brought: “we are to march.”

“But I hope there is no strong attachment on either side,” said Jane.
XX.	Our Journey Abroad	156
“Is a cat a man, Huck?”

CHAPTER XXXVII.

could get a chance to do better. I judged I better hide it outside of
Pretty soon I heard a twig snap down in the dark amongst the
revolver—a weapon strange to him—in order to give them confidence.
[Image unavailable.]

nor stirrups, and resting their hands on their thighs easy and
Chapter XX
nothing to do but just hold still, and try and be ready to stand from

it glued on again. What do you mean by coming here and frightening my

a mighty ornery lot. It’s the way they’re raised.”
prob’bly hain’t got any but that one.”






Can’t you see them, man? Can’t you see them hurrying, hurrying—puffing
take very long for Uncle Silas to hear from down there by New Orleans.
swarming with people, with men even among the coals behind the

wounded from Weybridge; then the dull resonance of the shots the
We often spent our evenings at the Hermitage, a large music-hall, the entrance of which was strictly forbidden to collegians and cadets. One of them got in nevertheless, dressed in woman’s clothes, a fair, effeminate youth. With his smooth girlish face he easily passed for what he pretended to be and played his part to perfection. He was soon surrounded by a crowd of admirers. But the poor boy got severely punished for his trick, and had to endure three days of arrest.
the Gorgon groups of tentacles, the tumultuous breathing of the lungs

Farther along we came upon a group of three women and two children in
_I’ll_ go. I’ve knowed him all his life, and so has Tom, there. Old
your name was?”
interest, and it fetched us a dollar a day apiece all the year
ain’t no flattery. And when it comes to beauty—and goodness, too—she

I was not in very good health for the present time and had fits of depression and apathy at the thought of all the dear ones left in Russia. Sergy, who was terribly worried about me, decided that I needed daily exercise, and made me walk up and down our large hall, counting all the time I went round, to make one mile. But I didn’t become rosier for all that, because it is not exercise I wanted, but cheering up.
V.
at work upon it. One of our chimneys cracked as if a shot had hit it,
Even with eyes protected by the green spectacles, Dorothy and her
the suctional operation. I have a certain claim to at least an

Sollermun de wises’ man dat ever live’. I doan’ take no stock in dat.
mighty thankful; said it was tough work toting his baggage such

LXXVII.	From Nagasaki to Shanghai	400

Besides, you know, you’ll be in costume, and that makes all the
jubilant Markham was at securing a new photograph of the planet for the
“Not at all,” he replied: “they were brightened by the exercise.” A short pause followed this speech, and Mrs. Hurst began again,—
“Rest your brains and do not worry about the wall,” replied the

judged. I thought that its length might be insufficient to reach me. I
“Dry up! I don’t want to hear no more _out_ of you!” says the duke.



“Engaged to Mr. Collins! my dear Charlotte, impossible!”

graveyard, and the gold done us a still bigger kindness; for if the


goo-gooing for sympathy all he knowed how, and just spreading himself

to keep him from stumbling; and to the Tin Woodman they offered a
“That ain’t the idea. You _got_ to do it with tears.”
 Moses and the “Bulrushers”
reckon?”
In the morning they traveled on until they came to a thick wood. There
Black Smoke.
We are staying at the Grand Hôtel, and have had such a good time since we came here, and no end of a better one in prospect. I feel myself free of all constraint and etiquette; all my words and acts are not taken up and discussed as at Khabarovsk. We were full of lovely plans for spending the summer abroad, but man proposes and circumstances master him. We have just been at St. Petersburg for a week, when an event occurred which upset all our plans. My husband was offered, quite unexpectedly, the brilliant post of Governor-General of Turkestan, a territory in Central Asia, between Siberia and Afghanistan. He accepted the post. I was awfully taken by the rapidity of the events—it gave me quite a shock! All my little castles in the air have been shattered at one blow, and my day-dreams have come to nothing. It was such a sorrow for me to leave St. Petersburg, and a great sacrifice to give up going abroad. I am so tired of being a bird of passage, hunting about from place to place, until I could scream for rest, leading a life of constant travel in overheated trains and on rolling seas. And we are obliged now to undertake another long journey! A new existence is in store for us at the other extremity of our spacious native country. A new home, a new life! What will it be like? But the die is cast; there is nothing to do but submit. I must be reasonable and look the matter fairly in the face and endeavour to take a philosophic view of what can’t be helped.
pony’s head. One of the ladies, a short woman dressed in white, was
In this quiet way the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away. Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring an addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be important. Elizabeth had heard, soon after her arrival, that Mr. Darcy was expected there in the course of a few weeks; and though there were not many of her acquaintance whom she did not prefer, his coming would furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and she might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley’s designs on him were, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently destined by Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by Miss Lucas and herself.
of the house, and ran as quickly as we could down the ill-made road by
there was nice split-bottom chairs, and perfectly sound, too—not bagged
We have learnt through Mr. Koyander that Mr. Abaza, a[308] very old friend of my family, who had known me at home as a little girl when I was still in short frocks, and whom I had lost sight of for a great many years, had settled in Alexandria. We let him know the day and hour of our arrival, and when we reached Alexandria, as we stepped out of the train, a gentleman came forward with both hands extended, saying, “A hearty welcome to you, Princess Vava!” My amazement can well be understood, when Mr. Abaza proved to be the silent fellow-passenger who had crossed with us from Sebastopol to Constantinople, whom we had taken for a taciturn Greek. How extraordinary that we should meet like that! Queer what a little place the world is! It is so nice to have an old friend turn up in a far country!

From beyond the low hills across the water came the dull resonance of

“Gentlemen, I wish the money was there, for I ain’t got no disposition
Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine there that day; but, though she always kept a very good table, she did not think anything less than two courses could be good enough for a man on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and pride of one who had ten thousand a year.{415}
often about?”
returned, and not through Send and Old Woking) I saw along the western

then turned, scrambled out of the pit, and set off running wildly into
the woods and made for the swamp. Jim warn’t on his island, so I
Then I broke down. He says:
In making a final estimate of Schwartz, gathering from the elements of evidence before us some means of judging his character, one cannot help feeling that he stood midway between the missionaries who preceded him and those who were to succeed him. The old order was soon to change. For many years the Danish Mission, brave pioneers struggling against many difficulties, had represented, not unworthily, the cause of Christianity in India. They were under disadvantages, limited in the area of their work by the political turmoil of the time, and also a little straitened in themselves. It is not to be expected that these early confessors of the faith could exercise the same judgment and fertility of resource which are the characteristics of the modern missionary. Their training at Halle was thorough enough, they held[Pg 196] a sound theology, exercised a simple faith, with great diligence they acquired the Tamil and other languages necessary for their work, and they had a burning zeal for the salvation of the heathen. But they had no missionary literature to lead and instruct them, and, until Schultze came back to Halle, they had no experienced missionary to explain the nature of their work, and how to meet its difficulties. They also lacked that invaluable element of supervision and control which a Committee at the back of the workers affords at home, and which, though not without some disadvantages for which the frailty of human judgment is responsible, is acknowledged to be a strength to missionary enterprise. To a certain extent every man, and they were few, was a law unto himself. We are not forgetful of the fact that in the days of Ziegenbalg, his end was hastened by the arrogance of a missionary board at Copenhagen, under the domination of a self-opinionated tyrant, and that his able coadjutor Gründler also died of a broken heart from the same cause. But until the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge took over the workers, not only providing the sinews of war, but the still more effective counsel and prayer, they went on their way, fighting their battles, bearing their burdens, sometimes making their blunders, doing the best they could on the spot according to their realization of the immediate need. Even when Schwartz came upon the scene the simplicity and independence of the work as a Lutheran Evangelical mission was still maintained. One of the leading missionaries of to-day describes the position of the work in those old days in the following words:
anything left o’ poor Hare-lip. So she hollered.
When first General Doukhovskoy was introduced to me I was slightly disappointed; he was so reserved in manner and did not condescend to take much notice of me, a method of treatment to which I was not accustomed, being brought up with the idea that I was to be petted and bowed down to by men; I had been adored all my young life and this indifference stung my vanity. I was far from the idea of falling in love with General Doukhovskoy, nevertheless I was annoyed by the coolness with which he regarded me; admiration was my daily bread, he failed to offer it to me and that instantly aroused in me an intention of making him display some interest in me. Serge Michailovitch was quite unlike all the men I had ever met before, he was immovable as a stone, and didn’t look like the sort of man whose head could be easily turned, and would surely never become a girl’s plaything.[62] Nevertheless there was something which drew me towards him, and day by day he got hold of me and I meant to win his heart if it only could be done. All my passing fancies only kindled the spark that was to burn for another man’s benefit. But why, oh why, was this iceberg of a human being incapable of understanding? He was so queer; I did not know how to manage him; it was impossible to draw him into the mildest flirtation, we were on the polite conversation footing, nothing else.
water, dumbfounded at my position, hopeless of escape. Through the reek

It was kind of lazy and jolly, laying off comfortable all day, smoking

Though things had looked serious for some time, they seemed to have quieted down again. Thanks to energetic means, the agitation in the country was soon calmed down.

doctor’s cart ahead of me. At the bottom of the hill I turned my head


“Come, Mr. Wickham, we are brother and sister, you know. Do not let us quarrel about the past. In future, I hope we shall be always of one mind.”

churning along up the river, out of sight in the thick weather, though
not been lying on the soft bed she might have been hurt. As it was, the
old, and had a very red face. Everybody yelled at him and laughed at
carried their last vestiges out to sea.



That day the scattered multitudes began to realise the urgent need of

celebrate their freedom from the bondage of the Wicked Witch.
“We must get back to the road, in some way,” said Dorothy.
head out, and says:
out to Jim Hornback’s, and he’ll foot the bill. And don’t you fool
asking him if he’d been imagining he saw something again. He raised up,
topic in the public-houses, and here and there a messenger, or even an
asleep there in the sun; more hounds asleep round about; about three

they slipped up on him and grabbed him and tied him before he knowed
[3]
Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal; yet was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such an epithet.

wool-gethering memory, too, because it was on the clo’s-line

more’n your share of the truck, and you’ve always got it, too, because
would git fo’ dollars mo’ at de en’ er de year. Well, all de niggers


“Are we far from Sunbury?”

as you get there.”
They left the cottage and walked through the trees until they found a
organisation had not as yet found its way back. I learned nothing fresh

she took me for her son, and allowed she would sivilize me; but it was
perished. We were so terrified that we dared not go on, but turned

So the Lion aroused himself and bounded forward as fast as he could go.
Then I come back and set down again, and says:
open cottage door greeted me by name as I passed.
II.	My First Trip Abroad	19
[Pg 1]
gazing at him. Says I to myself, _Now_ he’ll throw up the sponge—there
So Dorothy went first, holding Toto in her arms, the Tin Woodman
dropped on my hands and knees in the little passage, and crept aft in
Frontispiece	iv

dreadful-looking monster could not be imagined. It was fortunate the

and he was not in the least spoiled by all his good fortune. He
Following the example of his Divine Master, Schwartz turned from the arguments and equivocations of the wise and prudent and looked with infinite compassion on the sincere seekers after good, those who were poor and simple, and were pitiful in their need and darkness. Can anything be more touching or expressive of the yearning of a loving heart than these words which Schwartz addressed to such?
“Very well,” said the wolf, and he dashed away at full speed, followed
than what I was feeling before. So the duke took his hands off and
forward. It was dark as pitch there; but I said, in a kind of a coarse
me, and no end of wild foolishness like that, and I see I couldn’t do
It’s a clean hand now; shake it—don’t be afeard.”
comes a steamboat up the river. We lit the lantern, and judged she

Well, I warn’t long making him understand I warn’t dead. I was ever so

was altogether quite a considerable crowd—one or two gaily dressed

printers all gone to the meeting, and no doors locked. It was a dirty,


drift-canoe sure enough, and I clumb in and paddled her ashore. Thinks



[441]
sloppy weather or chilly; the wigwam would keep it from being seen. We
“Way!” my brother heard voices crying. “Make way!”


PREFACE.

from most.


“Or I my brains?” wailed the Scarecrow, wiping the tears from his eyes
“Upon my word, sir,” cried Elizabeth, “your hope is rather an extraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am not one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second time. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. You could not make me happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world who would make you so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for the situation.”
A general with lumbago, full of years and honours, who was looking about him for a wife, began to lay siege on me. I saw a great deal more of him than I wished to, and as I didn’t like to have that tiresome old man bothering after me, I often pretended to have a bad headache and went to my room. His company was too odious for words, he was dull as ditch water. This general got me alone one day, and proposed to me, saying that his hand, his heart and his purse were freely at my command. The idea of that old scarecrow indulging in matrimonial schemes! A husband of that sort would never do for me, and I gave him a brilliant rebuke.[44] Distressed by my unreachableness, he disappeared from our horizon. I was so happy to be rid of him!
“Oh, papa, what news? what news? have you heard from my uncle?”
descent. The uncovered part had the appearance of a huge cylinder,
finding my wife. Certainly, unless death had overtaken them suddenly,
before using this eBook.
piece of corn-crust started down my throat after it and got met on the
a young woman set down and worked it, and it was pretty skreeky and
[489]

order to see across the park. But I decided to keep to the ground,
“Don’t try, my dear,” he answered. “We should like to keep you with us,
his rightful owner; but it warn’t no use, conscience up and says, every
What was the use to tell Jim these warn’t real kings and dukes? It
went for the most noise, and we got our canoe, and made for the raft,

“so good-bye and good luck to you.”

After dinner we rode over to Abdurakman-Kazi, an antique mosque containing the mausoleum of a renowned Turkish saint and also a score of rooms for pilgrims. This monastery, on the mountain side looks splendid.
Well, when Tom and me got to the edge of the hilltop we looked away
“Good heavens!” cried Elizabeth; “but how could that be? How could his will be disregarded? Why did not you seek legal redress?{102}”
The next morning my mind was made up and I despatched a telegram to my husband, telling him that, come what might, I would start for Erzeroum. It was all to no purpose again; Sergy showed himself the most inexorable of husbands and wrote to me that I must listen to reason and wait patiently until his return after the ratification of the armistice. But I was not in a humour to listen to reason. “Wait patiently,” I cried out with unusual heat in myself, “Patience be hanged! I’ll go crazy if I don’t go to Sergy; I cannot possibly sit still and wait!”
say:

“Well, then, it sha’n’t be.” It was well enough to tell _her_ so—no

air of freedom; married here, and died, leaving a son, his own father
some pieces of limbs and such things floating down, and a sprinkling of
We frequented regularly the concerts of the “Philharmonic Society,” where the audience, for the most part, was far more interested in themselves than in the music to which they were supposed to listen. I often met at these concerts an elegant young man, whose gaze followed me persistently; turning my head I always found his eyes upon me. One night he came up with a friend of ours and asked to be presented to me. When the concert was over, he followed us to the cloak-room, and helped me on with my pelisse, drawing it over my shoulders with lingering tenderness of touch, and squeezed my hand in a manner that spoke volumes. According to my permission, he came to call next afternoon, which happened to be a Sunday, and took advantage of every possible occasion to visit us. Wherever I was going he would find out and go too. I do not deny that I flirted a little with him, for I love to be loved, but it was really a shame of me[275] to put ideas into his head. He flamed up one day, and looking admiringly into my eyes, burst into the most fiery declaration, telling me he had loved me since the first time he had met me, that the fever of love consumed him night and day, and all sort of other sentimental rubbish. But my temperature, as far as he was concerned, was unvariably under zero, his great love left me unmoved, and his eloquence was all in vain. He was extremely jealous into the bargain; he was even angry with my parrot when the bird had too much of my attention. I soon became thoroughly tired of him; he exasperated me with his suppressed sighs and melancholy and I wished I hadn’t made him so fond of me. I did all in my power to discourage him and heartlessly asked him to put himself out of my way, but he would not obey me, and regardless of the weather, it might rain, snow, or storm, he was always to be seen standing before my windows on the opposite side of the street, looking up through opera glasses trying to see what I was doing inside, and looking profoundly miserable, just like a stock figure weeping on a tombstone. To arrive nearer my heart my suitor loaded me with flowers and bonbons, and bored me with passionate letters in prose and in verse, but I tossed his epistles half-read into the waste-paper basket. Everything wears out with time; his broken heart began to mend; he was seen no more and disappeared completely from my horizon.

others dismounted, and began running from house to house. The sun,
to represent his mother in disguise, and Jim ’ll take the nigger
was the dawn of the great panic. London, which had gone to bed on
[240]
black vapour could overwhelm the gunners.
me in the dark, and wasn’t ever going to be before me no more in this
told me to tell you she’s gone over there in a dreadful hurry—one of


came to them, and four minutes later they all went into the Throne Room
After having presented the question under several points of view, our Author hesitates not to declare for the negative, and then endeavours to prove that a previous thesaurisation which might have enabled the nation to go through the last war without laying any additional tax, would have done more harm than the new taxes can possibly have done.
In about half an hour Tom’s wagon drove up to the front stile, and Aunt

“I was born the son of a woodman who chopped down trees in the forest

There was much to see at the Exhibition; it just made my head swim. We unweariedly enjoyed all the sights of the Champ de Mars, the gayest part of the Exhibition, crowded with visitors from all the parts of the earth and moved with the throng, being pushed to-and-fro. The Eiffel Tower was the chief attraction of the Exhibition. It is by far the highest structure in the world, being 984 feet high, and took two years to build. There were five big restaurants on the first platform, where the charges were perfectly monstrous. We had lunch at the Restaurant de Russe, and paid ten francs for a roasted chicken. We waited more than half-an-hour our turn to enter the lift, which raised us to the third platform. Whilst we were mounting gently to the very sky, we saw through the barred windows the landscape gradually diminishing; the whole horizon was disclosed and the people down below, walking about the Exhibition, appeared not bigger than flies. On each platform commemorative medals made of brass, bronze and silver were sold. The Tower had its own printing office where a newspaper, named “Le Figaro de la Tour,” was printed every day.
sixty-four of them went in. I shoved in there for a minute, but it was
see, here in our country we live contentedly, and can talk and move
Is it not impossible that this additional fifteenth on the price of the products of industry, be not followed, sooner or later, by an equal augmentation on the productions of the earth, unless the proprietors of land should submit to diminish, by one fifteenth, their own consumption,—the home consumption (the only one that secures the prosperity of the State) and diminish it, in order to increase, by so much, the exportation, according to the ideas commonly adopted which would be as contrary to the facts that I shall adduce hereafter, as it would prove hostile to the interest of the State, to the interest of the proprietors, and would operate in direct opposition to the spirit of the tax, which is certainly to produce its own amount, without taking the trouble, every year, of going in search of it to Lisbon.
“What has happened?” said the curate, standing up beside me.
Woking. The time then must have been somewhere about six o’clock. He
OR

 “Him and another Man”
I am ready to suppose, with that gentleman, that the joint revenue of England and Scotland may be computed, the landed produce and commercial profits included, at 110 millions sterling.
So you have the state of things on Friday night. In the centre,
out, big and scary, with a long row of wide-open furnace doors shining
limb appeared, feeling its way over the fallen beams. I stood
growing stack of bars that stood at the side of the pit. Between sunset
kept along the well-trodden path until they came to an opening in the
He proposed, he said, to make his way Londonward, and thence rejoin his
“My third command to the Winged Monkeys,” said Glinda, “shall be to
Mr. Prévost had invited my husband and his suite to share his box at the opera, which was “Faust.” We saw their carriage stop before the theatre just in front of the boulevard. We could hear the sound of our Anthem and the Marseillaise, played by a military band in the garden belonging to the theatre, and the clapping of hands and bravoes. Between the acts the little tables on the boulevard were taken by[412] storm by the audience, and rapidly abandoned at the moment when an Annamite boy began to run up and down the boulevard ringing the bell, which was to be the signal for the beginning of the following act.
When we stepped on board the Melbourne the captain met us in full naval uniform with big epaulettes and a three-cornered hat. The commander of a Russian cruiser moored in the harbour, and the chief admiral of the French fleet came also to pay their respects to my husband.



get me and Jim rid of the frauds; get them jailed here, and then leave.


“I will go with you; but I’m too much of a coward to kill the Witch,”


years old. They was different from any pictures I ever see
saw that a multitude of black birds was circling and clustering about
Dorothy followed her through many of the beautiful rooms in her castle
the thing that’s going to happen; the thing that’s going to happen is,
the tree that rested on their side of the ditch. The Tin Woodman began
Scarecrow.
voice:
We came back to Dolgik at Easter but for a short while, for my Aunt Staritzki, mamma’s sister, who lived in Tiflis, the capital of the Caucasus, invited us to come and spend some time with her.

As we lived within two minutes’ walk of Dr. Roth’s dwelling, I begged mamma to allow me to go unaccompanied to his class. Mamma objected at first, for she said she could not have me running alone in the streets, but I soon overcame her prejudice and profited by my liberty for paying flying visits to the Rydes on my way home from Dr. Roth’s. Being such a romp I wanted a lot of looking after and gave much trouble to poor mamma, who never knew what I would do next. My apparent frivolity deeply wounded her, but remonstrance always led to scenes. One night, coming home from a dancing-party, where my conduct had been more disgraceful than usual, after a miserable scene that we had had together, mamma fell into hysterics. It drove me nearly mad to see her in such a state, and I dashed into the street and raced headlong, hatless, my hair loose, flying wildly about my shoulders and waving in the wind. Whilst I fled in terror across the street I heard two well-known voices calling: “Vava! Vava!” screamed mamma, “Fräulein Princess!” roared our cook, running after me in pursuit. This only increased my speed, and I ran as fast as my legs would carry me. A group of students, wearing coloured caps and followed by huge dogs, who were coming out of a restaurant before which I was galloping at that moment, were soon at my heels. I never stopped running till I found myself breathless at the door of the Vietinghoffs, having taken that way by instinct, and I flung myself panting into their apartment, where I felt safe at last.
a way most dangerous to his joints. But she hugged the soft, stuffed
“Why, what else is gone, Sally?”
 “He had a Rat!”

tent-roof, and every lady’s rose-leafy dress flapping soft and silky
as yet. In the rest of the world the stream of life still flowed as it
In England, the produce of taxes on the various articles of consumption, amounts, I suppose, to 8,000,000l.: in order to procure the 5 or 6 other millions required, a part of which is necessary, a part of which is supposed to be so on account of the plan of a reimbursement, the land continues to be taxed for 2 millions, and the other 3 or 4 are taken from perhaps 30 different articles, one of which will bring in 150, another 100, a third 60, a fourth 30 thousand pounds, &c. with a salvo for Government to tax half a score more articles, if it should be robbed rather too unconscionably on the produce of the former; for, in all countries throughout the world, this is all the conjuration in that part of the administration of finances which relates to the collecting of taxes; if you rob Government in one point, be sure Government[234] will ransom you, if required, on ten others; nothing more just, but nothing more easy.
same time, far away in the southeast the masts and upperworks of three
A first difficulty attending the objects under examination, is, that on every head requiring an explanation, a multitude of questions occur, which must be previously discussed; yet, with the utmost candour I confess, that there is not one among them which is not above the extent of my abilities. I shall therefore offer my thoughts on the subject with all that diffidence which results from such a consciousness. Partly by chance, partly from some other circumstance, as little glorious almost, or as little humiliating, I have been so often in the right, and so often in the wrong, that I should not be now more surprised at the one than proud of the other.
first I entertained little or no hope of our escape being brought about
dark I slid out from shore before moonrise and paddled over to the
on the surface of Mars. A Martian, therefore, would weigh three times
midnight train usually starts he learned, after some waiting, that an
When first Mr. Bennet had married, economy was held to be perfectly useless; for, of course, they were to have a son. This son was to join in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the widow and younger children would by that means be provided for. Five daughters successively entered the world, but yet the son was to come; and Mrs. Bennet, for many years after Lydia’s birth, had been certain that he would. This event had at last been despaired of, but it was then too late to be saving. Mrs. Bennet had no turn for economy; and her husband’s love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their income.

“It is exactly in the center of the country, and is ruled by Oz, the
the Martians, but of the dusk and stillness all about me. Such an
“Oh, my dear,” cried his wife, “I cannot bear to hear that mentioned. Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is the hardest thing in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your own children; and I am sure, if I had been you, I should have tried long ago to do something or other about it.”


So I said I would, and left, and Jim was to hide in the woods when he
my uncle Abner Moore would take care of me, and so that was why I
I was a half-grown girl now, arrived at the age of fourteen, envied awfully my friends, the countess Sievers and Mary Podgoritchany who were grown-ups and wore long frocks. Some day, I said, it will be my turn to be introduced to society. I looked forward to the day when I should reach the age of seventeen and appear at my first ball with a long train, and be able to flirt to my heart’s content.
wait for the blessing; and then she went to sluicing out coffee with
ready for action, across the Thames estuary during the course of the

SARAGOSSA

Saturday contained, in addition to lengthy special articles on the
Had the Martians aimed only at destruction, they might on Monday have
The next morning the sun was behind a cloud, but they started on, as if
always stay under water a minute; this time I reckon I stayed under a
The king he smiled eager, and shoved out his flapper, and says:

“My God!” he said, as I drew him in.
house, as I had seen one stumble against the tower of Shepperton
Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.
“It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my Lady, I dare say; but, I assure you, it is much larger than Sir William Lucas’s.”


As soon as Sergy returned on board, we continued our way. The smell of naphtha pursues us. The surface of the water is covered with large spots of naphtha all the colours of the rainbow. It is pretty to look at, but this substance is injurious to the fish; the best species of which have disappeared from the Volga.

and still. We got to Leatherhead without misadventure about nine
Martian, without using his Heat-Ray, walked serenely over their guns,
sunshiny; the hands was gone to the fields; and there was them kind of
where the Lion lay asleep.
bone in their bodies.


suddenly come round to avoid being run down) flung him headlong from

and did not even bark in return.
all the strips together, but when it was finished they had a big bag of

Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases came to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were the subjects which occupied them: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, across the table, after the welfare and poultry of her eldest daughter; Mrs. Bennet was doubly engaged, on one hand collecting an account of the present fashions from Jane, who sat some way below her, and on the other, retailing them all to the younger Miss Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other person’s, was enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who would hear her.
“Most gracious God, we humbly rejoice in the assurance of Thy holy word, that though Thou dwelledst not in temples made with hands, yet Thou delightest in the children of men, who as brethren meet together to confess[Pg 78] their sins, to beg Thy Divine forgiveness, to implore Thy goodness and to praise Thy Holy Name.
“Oh, _do_,” says Aunt Sally; “it ain’t a bit of trouble to us, not a
join. Part of the time we spent helping two old women to pack a little

insides out o’ you!”

wanted to know; so I knocked at the door, and made up my mind I
rain started, and the wind swished and swushed along, and the lightning


“With regard to Mr. Schwartz, whose name the president has never heard mentioned without respect, and who is as distinguished for the sanctity of his manners as for his ardent zeal in the promulgation of his religion; whose years, without impairing his understanding, have added weight to his character, and whose situation has enabled him to be the protector of the oppressed and the comforter of the afflicted, who, as a preacher of the Christian faith and a man without influence except from character, was held in such estimation by the late Rajah, a Hindu prince approaching to his dissolution, that he thought him the fittest person he could consult concerning the management of his country, during the minority of his adopted son, Serfogee; and who, displaying more integrity than foresight, in the advice he gave, did certainly not prove the enemy of Ameer Sing, since at his suggestion he was named Regent—to the solemn assurance of such a man, the president is compelled to declare his unqualified assent, and upon his information he can easily reconcile the difference between the personal declarations and the letters of the Rajah.”
[Image unavailable.]
CHAPTER III.
The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fast approaching; and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter arrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and curtailed its extent. Mr. Gardiner would be prevented by business from setting out till a fortnight later in July,{298} and must be in London again within a month; and as that left too short a period for them to go so far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour; and, according to the present plan, were to go no farther northward than Derbyshire. In that county there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three weeks; and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction. The town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of her curiosity as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth, Dovedale, or the Peak.

river was so low that I ran perhaps twenty feet scarcely waist-deep.
We returned to Charing-Cross Hotel longing to have a good rest, but on entering our apartment we found our beds[241] upset, the sheets and blankets lying on the floor in a heap. It was the sour-faced chambermaid who thought that we were leaving that same day, and was making ready the beds for new visitors. When we told her that we were going to remain another night in London, she picked up the sheets, flung them on the beds and carried away the clean linen. I could have smacked her!
“Over the hill of the Hammer-Heads,” he answered, “lies a grand old
a bag, and put it in our room, and by that time it was supper-time, and
I opened my eyes and looked around, trying to make out where I was. It
because if I’d a knowed what a trouble it was to make a book I wouldn’t
[314]
“Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting with many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty families.”

and be so cramped up and sivilized, as they called it. Then the old man
beyond its earthly level. Nor was it generally understood that since
Miss Bennet’s astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings. She was sorry that Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so little suited to recommend them; but still more was she grieved for the unhappiness which her sister’s refusal must have given him.

The new old gentleman says:
[255]
“What! is he coming home, and without poor Lydia?” she cried. “Sure he will not leave London before he has found them. Who is to fight Wickham, and make him marry her, if he comes away?”
At this period, September, 1770, some of his letters are full of self revelation. In those which he sent to his[Pg 98] intimate friend, Mr. Chambers, with whom he had so much real and personal fellowship, he seems to lay bare his heart and we see the inner workings of a noble, loving and lowly spirit. Such confessions, aspirations and meditations are too precious to pass into obscurity. He is still speaking to us in our later age, and we seem to know and love him better for such words.
she says:

door-step, he saw another newsvendor approaching, and got a paper
put the straw back into the Scarecrow again, until he was as good as
that was making the trouble for me. Well, I fought along, and directly
_tried_ to write—_he_ see William was going to play one of his jokes
Night, the mother of fear and mystery, was coming upon me. But while



“Oh, for the land’s sake! Give a body a rest! Go ’long now, the whole
lamplight, and suddenly I see again the healing valley below set with

I’ll go at once for the Golden Cap.”
“In what an amiable light does this place him!” thought Elizabeth.
account of my clothes; but the widow she didn’t scold, but only cleaned



disremember her name—and they lost their steering-oar, and swung around
14thly,


now, because all the symptoms was first-rate, and he’d been sleeping
{27}
said I would die first. “I never thought, I was so stirred up,” she
Overcoming the repugnance natural to one who had never before touched a
his very heart to think there could be such frauds and rascals in the
almost imperceptibly upon my senses. It was a sobbing alternation of
“Insolent girl!” said Elizabeth to herself. “You are much mistaken if you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this. I see nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr. Darcy.” She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make inquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane met her with a smile of such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening. Elizabeth instantly read her feelings; and, at that moment, solicitude for Wickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave way before the hope of Jane’s being in the fairest way for happiness.
“Ay, because she asked him at last how he liked{25} Netherfield, and he could not help answering her; but she said he seemed very angry at being spoke to.”
Chapter VII

sweat. We see it warn’t no use; we got to go and fetch Jim. So he

open a raw Irish potato and stick the quarter in between and keep it




“I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your Ladyship. You may ask questions which I shall not choose to answer.”

counterpane. There was a tiny fountain in the middle of the room, that
wish.”
The Martians did not show an inch of themselves. They seemed busy in

“I can answer your question,” said Fitzwilliam, “without applying to him. It is because he will not give himself the trouble.”
“Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy, for she loves to be of use. But tell me, what did you come down to Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed? or had you intended any more serious consequences?{469}”
FROM NAGASAKI TO SHANGHAI
didn’t think of it, and I reckoned it warn’t best for me to mix in, but
when the City was first built, and I have the only key that will unlock


safety.
[385]
the dishes, a table, three or four chairs, and the beds. Uncle Henry
very stealthy, and got up to the main floor all right, but here comes
position with great clearness. The curate, I found, was quite incapable
February 5th.—It is my birthday to-day. Our Consul gave me for my birthday gift a large basket with enormous cocoa-nuts filled with milk. This native beverage is very cool and refreshing.
That young girl screamed out and comes rushing, and down she throws
on three legs. As she left them the milkmaid cast many reproachful

Before dinner, Sergy called upon the Governor-General of Singapore, who had governed the Fiji Islands for a long time.

where to find him.”
They talked it over, and they was going to rule me out, because they
So, when they were rested, Dorothy picked up her basket and they
“There is no food about here,” he said. “This is my country. All this
HOW I FELL IN WITH THE CURATE.
[490]
The first intimation which reached him of this violent attack upon missionary effort in India was from a newspaper cutting in which Mr. Montgomery Campbell had sought to justify his vote against the proposition of[Pg 150] Mr. Wilberforce. The arguments adduced were not unlike those put forward by objectors to foreign missions to-day, declaring that only the lowest class were proselytized and that they degraded the religion which ignorantly they came to profess.



“Of course,” answered the girl, “if he will see me.”
With all this he was ever awake to the practical side of religion, and in offering advice to others would constantly draw upon his own personal experience to illustrate and enforce the truths he fain would teach. His views, for instance, about what is good for those who are workers in the vineyard of grace will never grow old or out of date.
away when I want them to help me tow the raft ashore, and I can’t do it
invisible, inevitable sword of heat. I perceived it coming towards me
the Witch actually melting away like brown sugar before her very eyes.

don’t look natural nor sound natural in a fog.
believe what he was saying _himself;_ but pretty soon the new gentleman

yet one that the poor brutes we dominate know only too well. I felt as

Fourteen millions, in taxes, and in the advanced prices which must follow, are one eighth of 112 millions revenue, which, by the necessary rise in the price of every thing, is carried to 126 millions. Now, 5 millions in cash and paper currency, are likewise one eighth part of the supposed 40 millions necessary for home circulation.—It would then cost England only 5 millions in cash and paper, once found, to secure for ever, and in the most permanent manner, the interest of a debt of 238 millions, the very idea of which shook the firm nerves of the Walpoles, the Humes, and of the many experienced men, on whose authority it was no weakness to tremble, before investigating a matter, which nobody, in my judgement, had hitherto attempted to examine.

skeletons of the killed, the place was merely an empty circular pit in
Our Tableau named “Serenade” in the programme, represented a scene of Venetian life in the sixteenth century. A large gondola was to be moored to the side of a lagoon, with a lady dressed as the wife of a Doge of Venice in it, surrounded by the ladies of her suite, two gondoliers, and a street dancing girl, standing in the middle of the gondola. I was to appear as the dancing girl, in a lovely costume, the exact copy of a well known picture. According to the looking-glass it suited me very well, with my hair hanging down, adorned with a gold net intermingled with pearls. I had been given the choice between a harp, a lyre and a mandoline. The latter I selected for my instrument. We had two rehearsals and everything went smoothly, except that I made several bitter enemies. The next Tableau was to represent the exit of a troup of masqueraders with their masks off, from a fancy-dress ball. One of my would-be friends took part in that Tableau, she had a tongue as sharp as a sword, and if she could say a bitter thing to wound someone, she never lost the opportunity of doing it. She told me a good many things concerning our Tableau, most of which were more or less disagreeable. Notwithstanding her “darling Vava” here, and “darling Vava” there, she tried to sting me and to spoil my pleasure as thoroughly as possible, in hinting that our gondola was in great danger of being sunk, having such a lot of occupants. As my temper was not of the sweetest that day, I warmed up and paid her back in her own coin by suggesting, that the staircase on which she was to stand during the[286] Tableau representing the exit from a masked ball, was in far greater danger of giving way, because our Tableau had only ten performers in it whereas a crowd of forty figures appeared in hers. This was a stab which didn’t please the young lady; she drew in her claws and bit her lips in vexation that she had been using her weapons in a wrong direction, and that her aim to sting me was not attained. I was mistress of the situation and amply avenged.

perceived that we were no longer hemmed in, that now we might get away.
hare-lip.”



sparrow goes for man. All round”—he waved a hand to the

Sir William only smiled. “Your friend performs delightfully,” he continued, after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; “and I doubt not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy.”
In a system of taxation which should be imposed only on the land, an impost of 10 millions annually, on a revenue of 60 millions, whether it fall on the proprietor, or be divided between him, the farmer, the cultivator, and other parties concerned, requires of course an addition of 25 per cent. to[203] the price of the productions of the earth, that agriculture may not be sacrificed to industry; but it must be observed, that immediately after the reaction of the one upon the other shall be completed, the burden of the tax will evidently be null, since the price of labour will have increased equally in both, in proportion to that of their respective products.
were very hungry. By midday they passed through Tillingham, which,

We had tiffin in the dining-room. The Dutch cooking does not please me. Tiffin always begins with the traditional “reistafel,” a dish of chipped meat and rice, without any seasoning to it. The meat is lean and unsavoury, and the dairy products are very bad. The cattle in Java are very small, looking more like goats than cows. The natives are not exacting in this country, cocoa-nuts serve them both as food and drink; they eat the pulp and drink the milk.
giant was even such another as themselves. The _Thunder Child_ fired no


CXI.	Hong Kong	472


was for wanting to swallow _everything_. Well, whilst they was at it a
heah, en I ain’ got no use f’r no flower, nohow, en she’d be a pow’ful
ourselves, I says:
“Won’t you go with me?” pleaded the girl, who had begun to look upon
“She’ll die on my han’s, Mars Tom, she sholy will; kase I doan’ skasely

Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most anxious part of each was when the post was expected. The arrival of letters was the first grand object of every morning’s impatience. Through letters, whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated; and every succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance.


The first time I catched Tom private I asked him what was his idea,
For a long time my brother stared out of the window in blank
week, and was the pet of the women folks, big and little, for I was


ride, after all. When the boat was gone the king made me paddle up


corner of the house. “There are her two feet, still sticking out from
that they travelled only very slowly. The hedges were grey with dust.
up something on the Arkansaw village; and the king he allowed he would
All down Wellington Street people could be seen fluttering out the pink
dooryards was full; and every minute somebody would say, over a fence:

_you_ to do.”
In the evening there was a display of fireworks which we admired from our verandah. In front of the entrance blazed an immense shield with “Welcome” in transparencies, and the initials “B. S.” (Barbara, Sergius) on it. A military band was playing in the pavilion of the assembly just opposite us. The idea came to me to go for a stroll incognito as far as the monument of Count Mouravieff-Amourski, the conqueror of the Provinces of the Amour. The statue stands in front of the river on a huge pedestal dominating the whole plain of the “Amour.” My incognito was soon discovered, and people made way to us as we walked past the row of curious eyes, on the boulevard all flaming with garlands of fire. I hate nothing so much as exhibiting myself. It was very creepy to be stared at like that!
Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the distress of the moment, been led to make Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for her sister; for since her marriage would so shortly give the proper termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its unfavourable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the spot.
He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of having forced him to say what gave no one any pain but herself.
The Clown put his hands in his pockets, and after puffing out his


It was glaringly hot, not a cloud in the sky nor a breath of wind, and

take him a year to scrabble such a lot of truck on to the logs with a
Nice, and then by other observers. English readers heard of it first in
Chapter XII
And so he went a-mooning on and on, liking to hear himself talk, and
thought the Scarecrow said:
provisions.”
all, don’t you _handle_ the witch-things.”
RUSSIAN LADY
heart! come in your rags and sin and dirt! the waters that cleanse is
quite loudly at my desertion of him, and came running after me.



beards. But the little woman was doubtless much older. Her face was
I think also that then, a Minister of finance, ever so anxious about his operations, ever so zealous for the establishment of none but productive taxes, could not conceive a single article of consumption that might suffer by this arrangement; it would appear too evidently that every one would then have the very same faculty of consuming, manufacturing, or saving, under the denomination of 25, all that he had before consumed, manufactured, or saved under the denomination of 20.

Then, being prepared for the journey, they all started for the Emerald
round drum at the back of the head-body, and eyes with a visual range
slender lady’s arm. He heard the clatter of hoofs, the whip stung

eat. Well, then I happened to think how they always put quicksilver in
he’d drownd me. But the duke says:
times a wolf was killed, so that at last they all lay dead in a heap
“It will be her turn soon to be teased,” said Miss Lucas. “I am going to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows.”
collected eighty-seven dollars and seventy-five cents. And then he had

“The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so. The adieu is charity itself. But think no more of the letter. The feelings of the person who wrote and the person who received it are now so widely different from what they were then, that every unpleasant circumstance attending it ought to be forgotten. You must learn some of my philosophy. Think only of the past as its remembrance gives you pleasure.”

me. I got my traps out of the canoe and made me a nice camp in the


take off his new white beaver and make a bow and do a smile, he looked
stopped running till I found the canoe; and when I got here I told Jim
XXXVII.	On the Rhine	236
CIII.	Khabarovsk	454
Contested Relationship.—The King Explains the Loss.—A Question of
Mr. Darcy’s letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart. She studied every sentence; and her feelings towards its writer were at times widely different. When she remembered the style of his address, she was still full of indignation: but when she considered how unjustly she had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned against herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion. His attachment excited gratitude, his general character respect: but she could not approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal, or feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. In her own past behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret: and in the unhappy defects of her family, a subject of yet heavier chagrin. They were hopeless of remedy. Her father, contented with laughing at them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his youngest daughters; and her mother, with manners so far from right herself, was entirely insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother’s indulgence, what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited, irritable, and completely under Lydia’s guidance, had been always affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain.{266} While there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him; and while Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they would be going there for ever.
The next morning the soldier with the green whiskers came to the


intending to go; but after that I wouldn’t a went, not for kingdoms.
seem to do nothing right; he found fault with every little thing.
NAGASAKI
of mine be once more alive and powerful, I felt a wave of emotion that

The King bowed low before Dorothy, and asked, “What is your command?”
burial, and so came home past the College Arms. A man standing at an
“I hain’t got no money.”
so I thought I would take jest one little cat-nap.


Blamed if I think I’d trust you. Why, if you _was_ to blow on us—”
as he calls it. He is the thinnest kind of an impostor—has come here
There is a terrible frost outside, but our carriage is well heated and we do not feel the cold at all. There is a silver plate on the door of my saloon, engraved with large letters with the announcement that the Oussouri railway was founded by His Imperial Highness the Heir to the Throne on the 19th May, 1891, and underneath was the following inscription: “His Excellence General Doukhovskoy, Governor-General of the Amour Provinces, has opened, on the 27th August, 1897, the railway-line between Khabarovsk and Vladivostock.”
“We began, in great poverty but in firm trust and confidence in God, to build in a great heathen street in the city, and though we did not know how we should bring the work to a conclusion, God so strengthened our faith amidst obstacles, that we spent upon it all we could save from our salaries and whatever we had laid up before. Many mocked us but some were moved to pity and to help us. Thus this house of assembly was carried on with all speed, thirty persons, who were all heathens, working on it daily. On the 4th of August, 1707 (exactly two months after laying the first stone), it was consecrated in both languages, in the presence of a great number of Christians, Mohammedans and heathen, and the church received the name of New Jerusalem.”
along a passage beside a big house standing in its own grounds, and so
silently with his arms over his head, looked up as I passed, cried out
tainted rain water. I was greatly refreshed by this, and emboldened by
[iv]


just his size, and was ragged, and had uncommon long hair, which was


courtyard and harness the Cowardly Lion like a horse; it would amuse

concluded with the words: “Formidable as they seem to be, the Martians





The personality of Schwartz was unique. He seems to have combined, like Gordon, a singular tenderness with heroic strength of purpose—a man of action with a strain of mysticism, a very Bayard in purity and honour in an age when reputations in India suffered loss. As will be seen in these pages, he served the civil power well because the enemy could implicitly trust him. In the audience chamber of a pagan tyrant he was still a Christian missionary; he kept his hands clean of bribes, and his conscience of compromise; his character was a testimony that “there is no fear in love.”

“His parting obeisance”	261

In 1714 Ziegenbalg returned to his native land for a little rest, freely forgiving his old foe the Governor, who trembled for the consequences if the King heard of his shameful conduct. Bövingh, full of fault-finding, was already on his way back to Germany, scarcely on friendly terms with his old leader and comrade. Ziegenbalg reached the camp when the King was engaged in the siege of Stralsund and his reception was a remarkable tribute to his character.
says; “now go on, and I won’t do so any more. You tell me what to do,
Weybridge. So I’ve locked up my house and come on.”
By that time much of the excitement had calmed down and Moscow relapsed into its former quiet. At the end of May our troops began to leave Moscow. The regiment of the Chevalier Guards, with their band marching in front of them, defiled before our windows on their way to the railway station. At this sight, without knowing why, I burst into tears like a silly that I was. I suppose it was due to the state of my nerves, irritated by the unusual mode of life I was leading during the Coronation.
afternoon, and the country people was already beginning to come in, in
Watson’s Jim.”


and, really, that was the only thing I wished in all the world.”
At first my mouth and throat were parched, and my strength ebbed

Heading to Chapter LVI.	431
 Jim sees a Dead Man

The veranda was full of creole ladies seeking relief from the sunshine outside and whiling away the dreary midday hours reclining in hammocks and cane-lounges, clad in loose transparent night-jackets, stockingless, with their hair in curling-pins, their discarded shoes lying on the floor. The climate makes them indolent. They enjoyed their “siesta” smoking cigarettes and drinking iced lemonade.


“Get under water!” I shouted, unheeded.

like to know who killed him. Some think old Finn done it himself.”
possibility of capturing a fighting-machine that I more than half

“Nothing that I know of,” answered the Woodman; but the Scarecrow, who
Bradish? Well, he sot up a bank, en say anybody dat put in a dollar
alone, and he rolled himself up in his blanket and wallowed in under
Chapter XXII
away from us, and if my building the fire never fooled them it warn’t
know nothing at all the rest of the day, and preached a prayer-meeting
    In the realms of the good and great.
marched through Chobham to deploy on the north side of the common.


like it was all she could do to keep from giving him a crack with it.
frightened at this and made many motions to Dorothy to relieve him, but
but nothing was to be distinguished clearly. A mass of smoke rose
“What did you reckon I wanted you to go at all for, Miss Mary?”
[xvii]
“Poor Wickham! there is such an expression of goodness in his countenance! such an openness and gentleness in his manner.”

the threatened southwestern suburbs. And so, with reiterated assurances


Previous to the last war the common price of wheat was, upon an average, in America about 20s. sterling per quarter, (vide Mr. A. Young’s Political Arithmetic).
still stood, dismal grey stems, with dark brown foliage instead of
prisoner loose in such an old-maidy way as that? No; the way all the
shove his head in my mouf—fer a favor, hain’t it? I lay he’d wait a

COLOMBO
“My dear Harriet,

they all shook hands with the soldier with the green whiskers, who had
party.

“When Colonel Miller’s regiment went away”	285
and I judged I was gone. If they’d a had some bullets in, I reckon

had been at once annihilated by the Heat-Rays. Heavy losses of soldiers
scrutinise the transient creatures that swarm and multiply in a drop of
raised up his bed and slid the chain off of the bed-leg, and wrapt it
light, and laid on my oars and floated. As I went by, I see it was a
“But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, in accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry elsewhere?”

evidently by someone not an eye-witness of Martian actions) to which I
“Oil my neck, first,” replied the Tin Woodman. So she oiled it, and as
“Here in Tanjore,” writes Schwartz, “everything that is said or written in the palace is known in a short time throughout the city. Learn from your youth to keep[Pg 156] your secrets within your own breast. It is related by Alexander that he told a secret to his friend, enjoining him to secrecy. This friend, unable to keep this secret, divulged it. Alexander hearing of it was very wroth, called for his teacher, and asked what punishment he ought to inflict on the man who had revealed his secret. The teacher said: ‘Do not punish him; rather punish yourself, for if you could not keep your own secret, much less will others keep it.’”
went on towards Barnet, my brother leading the pony to save it as much
we’d got to have it; so he took a think. When he had ciphered it out he
Then also would every one be sensible, that the advance in all the prices could not be only of a 12th part, or 8⅓ per cent. as in the glorious system of a poll-tax established by Divine Justice, but of 25 per cent. neither more nor less than in[221] the system of the land-tax, neither more nor less than in the system of an exclusive tax upon luxury; that consequently wheat, as well as produce of any other sort, as well as labour which gives the whole, would be indebted to the tax for a fifth part of its new nominal value, and that 50s. would be the medium price of wheat;—its necessary price, but not more necessary in that merciless taxation, than in the merciful one laid on the exclusive consumption of the rich:—and this calls for the attention of every individual; nor can it be too often repeated, because then neither hypocrites, nor enthusiasts, nor good men, nor manufacturers, nor farmers, nor proprietors, could any longer deceive themselves or others, on the price of labour; it would be too self-evident that the said price ought to increase with the taxes, and that no one would be injured by that increase.

the bank, till we was so far away the sounds got dim and died out. And
you—or the likes of you.”
Mrs. Hill began instantly to express her joy. Elizabeth received her congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this folly, took refuge in her own room, that she might think with freedom. Poor Lydia’s situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was no worse, she had need to be thankful. She felt it so; and though, in looking forward, neither rational happiness, nor worldly prosperity could be justly expected for her sister, in looking back to what they had feared, only two hours ago, she felt all the advantages of what they had gained.{377}
“Goodnessgracioussakes, I’d a ben afeard to _live_ in sich a—”

They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Mrs. Bennet wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again. But their father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of its animation, and almost all its sense, by the absence of Jane and Elizabeth.

the strangest way. The fleet of refugees was scattering to the
I have been awakened this morning by the sounds of a loud conversation under our windows. An Armenian merchant came to complain that a score of Turks had forced themselves into his house last night, and after having bound him up with strong cords, they wanted to carry away his wife, a mere child of fifteen. This incident gave rise to a great commotion among the Armenians; our approaching departure terrifies them. We have not left Erzeroum yet and the Turks have already begun to fulfil their threats. The whole town is in excitement, all the shops are closed. I hear the toll of the alarm-bell chiming for the assembling of the Christian inhabitants. Just before lunch my husband was told that several thousands of Armenians who had gathered before the dwelling of their Metropolitan, were now advancing towards our house and we already heard the ominous sound of treading feet and clamorous voices in the distance. In a second I was on the balcony and the first thing I saw was the figure of the Metropolitan making his way through a tumultuous throng of people, closely followed by all the members of the Town Council, in about two minutes there was a crowd of several hundred people about our house. I heard the roaring voices of an excited mob from below; wherever I looked I saw a sea of anxious faces and gesticulating arms and hands. The confusion became greater with every moment. Notwithstanding my entreaties, Sergy came out on the balcony with the Metropolitan and policemaster, who explained to me that this noisy crowd had come to entreat my husband to permit them to emigrate to Russia. The Armenians, who completely lost their heads and thought that their end was drawing nigh, wanted to follow us to Russia and declared they would not stir from the spot until they got a favourable answer from my husband. I was terrified beyond words when I saw an individual drawing a pistol out of his pocket and pointing it at us exclaiming: “In mercy kill me, I prefer to perish from your hands rather than be left to the mercy of the Turks!” The policemaster, escorted by his agents, went down into the street in order to exhort the mob to disperse, but the infuriated Armenians continued to roar[127] under our balcony; then Sergy addressed the crowd, persuading them to be quiet and promising that he would not leave Erzeroum before the Turkish army arrived, and that order would be maintained in the town till then. These words were greeted with a wild yell of exultation from the crowding masses, and the noise of the multitude gradually decreased. Oh! it was a scene and an experience I shall certainly never forget! My husband ordered the number of patrols in the streets to be increased, and after dinner we rode through the Turkish bazaars in order to tranquillise the affrighted Christian inhabitants.

we can with the materials we’ve got. Anyhow, there’s one thing—there’s
to do, we was so sorry—and so glad and proud we’d got him with us, too.
So I slipped back the one I had, and when she got done counting, she
dig this long tunnel, when it was possible to get into the drain at
rods, plates, and bars which lined the covering and apparently
Here we are on the threshold of the Great Desert! As soon as the “Tzar” dropped anchor, stopping alongside a Russian cruiser, the “Nakhimoff,” our vessel was invaded by a crowd of natives who precipitated themselves on our luggage. They were all speaking at once, shouting and gesticulating; the scene reminded me of the attack of savages in “Aida.” We looked about us for the right sort of person to accompany us in the capacity of guide to Cairo, and finally hired for the service a dusky Arab named Mahmoud, on whose jersey was embroidered in big white letters: “I speak Russian.”




At last we are going to have some good music. A travelling opera-troup, making a tour in Siberia, has just arrived at Khabarovsk to give a series of performances. The lady who substituted the orchestra and accompanied the artists on the piano, came to invite us to assist at their first performance, given in the Social Club. She told us how she despaired because she was unable to find black tights for Siebel, which had been torn on the way. No such thing was to be procured in Khabarovsk. We went to hear “Faust.” Sitting in a corner of our box I listened to Gounod’s divine music, and the thought of my pleasant life at Moscow came upon me with a sharp pang. I was on the point of bursting into tears. The performers were all second-rate artists. Faust had no great voice, Margaret looked rather clumsy, Mephistopheles was always in danger of degenerating into a buffoon, and Siebel, in darned tights, had a fine mezzo-soprano, but was too fat. (There is nearly always something too much or too little with everybody.)
believe I can make a balloon.”
“Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought,” said Mrs. Bennet; “and if I were to see you at it, I should take away your bottle directly.”
to hurt Harvey’s feelings and the poor girl’s feelings, and all that.
proximity, and not a man ventured within a mile of either cylinder,
woundin’ his dear William and me. Now, _wouldn’t_ he? Ther’ ain’t no
“Well, ther’ ain’t no sense in it. A body might stump his toe, and take
violence of the day had already utterly exhausted all three of them.
ON THE MEDITERRANEAN

pain that urged me to drink again and again. The light that came into
dark.”
After tiffin, we took five rikshas and went to call upon the Consul’s wife, but didn’t find her at home. After having made a round of the curio shops, we drove through broad streets full of drinking dens, with Russian and English sign-boards. On the threshold stood girls with very much painted faces, clad in European dress, who—as a bait—surveyed the sailors of different nations, who swung along arm in arm and came here to take a bite at their fishing-line, after their long and virtuous crossing. These girls are for the most part Russian Jewesses, to be found in nearly all the ports of the far East. After dinner we returned on board the Khabarovsk.
wid you on de lan’ ’dout havin’ to shout at you, but when I see dat
was asleep, and saying, “Po’ little ’Lizabeth! po’ little Johnny! it’s

The other trees of the forest did nothing to keep them back, so they
though I’ve always reckoned that looking at the new moon over your left
When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were mentioned, in tones of such mortifying, yet merited, reproach, her sense of shame was severe. The{260} justice of the charge struck her too forcibly for denial; and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded, as having passed at the Netherfield ball, and as confirming all his first disapprobation, could not have made a stronger impression on his mind than on hers.
He says;
good judgment to put _everything_ on the raft.
Yet too much severity should not be used. Has the Reader been but amused with the part of the picture hitherto exposed to his view? Let him humour the Author in his little conceits. Who would exhibit for public entertainment, if he were not at liberty to draw up the curtain in his own way; if he had not a right to display, at every shifting of the scene, that part only of his curiosities upon which he meant for that instant to fix the eyes of the spectator?
on around that duke. He seemed to have something on his mind. So, along
thous’n’s and thous’n’s that ain’t nigh so well off. Bless you, _they_
land the little fading pinpoint of Mars was dropping into the west,
Elizabeth hesitated; but her knees trembled under her, and she felt how little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them. Calling back the servant, therefore, she commissioned him, though in so breathless an accent as made her almost unintelligible, to fetch his master and mistress home instantly.
ahead. You see, maybe you’s got to be po’ a long time fust, en so you
treetops, and knowed the day was coming. So I took my gun and slipped
the police station and the College Arms towards my own house. Nothing

that is needed to make one happy. I have been good to the people, and
sung out, “Boggs!” and then fetched his cane down slow to a level, and

Si l’impossibilité des deux balances prétendues par la France & par l’Angleterre, n’est pas prouvée par les faits allégués dans les deux pays pour établir l’existence de ces deux monstres;—si cette impossibilité n’est pas démontrée par d’autres faits aussi peu équivoques;—& s’il n’est pas de l’intérêt de l’Angleterre & de la France, d’abjurer au plus tôt l’idole, & de renoncer authentiquement à ses œuvres comme à ses pompes.
him up. So he kept a good distance away from the flames, and only came
“Thank you,” said Dorothy gratefully. “You are all very kind to me. But

likely that’s why the cylinders have stopped for a bit, for fear of
“Are you pleased with Kent?”
come; for I’d noticed that Providence always did put the right words in
down the river, too. That’s why I come. You git me that money
I was very glad to hear him say that; it made me feel much more easier
“Mars Jawge, if you’ll come down into de swamp I’ll show you a whole
Next morning I heard Tom was a good deal better, and they said Aunt
In spite of all that has happened since, I still remember that vigil

Dorothy heard a voice say:


The Mussulmans had the custom of firing guns through the whole night during the eclipses of the moon, but my husband has forbidden this now, in order not to frighten the Christians.
was close. She aimed right for us. Often they do that and try to see
looks just like a man.’

uncles when they come to kiss you good-morning, and never—”
“Why not call the Winged Monkeys, and ask them to carry you over the

So the Wicked Witch took the Golden Cap from her cupboard and placed it
The little girl gave a cry of amazement and looked about her, her eyes
up-shore till we got kind of tired and beat out; and tied up the canoe
saw it simply as a thing done, a memory infinitely disagreeable but
the desertion, and the stillness. In some places plunderers had been at
first the Witch was tempted to run away from Dorothy; but she happened
destructive their advent would have been as the earthquake that

 “Hello, What’s Up?”
“As Mr. Kohlhoff sat by me at dinner, I asked him as to Schwartz’s general habits. He told me that he rose at five, breakfasted at six or seven, on a basin of tea made in an open jug, with hot water poured on it, and some bread cut into it. One half was for himself, the other for Kohlhoff. The meal lasted not five minutes. He dined on broth and curry very much as the natives. He never touched wine, except one glass on a Sunday. What was sometimes sent to him was reserved for the sick. His temperance was extraordinary, habitual, and enjoined on his catechists and brethren. He supped at eight, and after reading a chapter in the Hebrew Bible in private, and his own devotions, retired to rest about ten.”

household goods piled thereon. One man told us he meant to try to get
“I have not the pleasure of understanding you,” said he, when she had finished her speech. “Of what are you talking?”
“Stop!” he cried, when I was within ten yards of him, and I stopped.


across our peephole.
and pretty soon back he comes and stops before the store, still keeping


branches immediately seized him and tossed him back again.
freckled places swapped about a little, showing there was a little
His eyes just blazed; and he says:
“Why, Jim?”
kill the women, too?”
sand-pits the dark ground smoked and crackled. Something fell with a
his chain back on the bed-leg, and was ready for bed ourselves. But Tom
13th June.—I awoke in tears, having dreamt that I was saying good-bye to the nearest and dearest that I had left in Russia. I am miserable and home-sick, which is even more than being sea-sick. I lay flat on my back staring at the ceiling in blank despair. If I had wings I should have flown back to St. Petersburg!

A flash, and it came out vividly, heeling over one way with two feet in




to me if you can!—_any_ of you!”
usual detonating reverberations. The flickering light was blinding and
“Mr. Schwartz, whose character was held so deservedly high,” said he, “could not have any reason to boast of the purity of his followers: they were proverbial for their profligacy. An incident occurred to his recollection perfectly in point. He had been preaching many hours to this caste of proselytes on the heinousness of theft and in the heat of his discourse had taken off his stock, when that and his gold buckle was stolen by one of his virtuous and enlightened congregation. In such a description of native did the doctrine of the missionaries operate. Men of high caste would spurn the idea of changing the religion of their ancestors.”

When I had last seen this part of Sheen in the daylight it had been a
curtain made out of calico that hung down to the floor. There was an
Well, when they was all gone the king he asks Mary Jane how they was
mouth, where he eats it as a spider does a fly. Not one of us is safe
where the lady in white struggled to hold back the frightened pony.
and it was always lively, he said, because _they_ never all slept at
“Good lan’! is dat you, honey? Doan’ make no noise.”
“If he wasn’t so big and heavy I would get him for you,” remarked the
fascination paralysed my actions. I remained standing knee-deep in the
an hour they was as thick as thieves again, and the tighter they got,



I wanted to offer to bet two dollars she hadn’t, but I reckoned maybe
Romeo and Juliet!!!
made fast there.
duke says:
Hill that we had heard at Upper Halliford. The Ripley gunners,
the captain on the bridge swore at the top of his voice with fear and
thousand yards’ range.
catching another fifteen or sixteen, drat that meddlesome cub, and they
this business, and make himself a shame, and his family a shame, before
“Git up and hump yourself, Jim! There ain’t a minute to lose. They’re
“In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little of either. Now, seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial and dependence? When have you been prevented by want of money from going wherever you chose or procuring anything you had a fancy for?”
snake-skin with my hands. Well, here’s your bad luck! We’ve raked in
Woking.
Well, I catched my breath and most fainted. Shut up on a wreck with
“Drink.”
Elizabeth longed to observe that Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful friend; so easily guided that his worth was invaluable; but she checked herself. She remembered that he had yet to learn to be laughed at, and it was rather too early to begin. In anticipating the happiness of Bingley, which of course was to be inferior only to his own, he continued the conversation till they reached the house. In the hall they parted.{457}

“With pleasure,” she answered, and brought a towel at once. Then the

Jim told it he said they rode him down to New Orleans; and, after that,
we had considerable trouble, because people was always coming out in
May 5th.—A Russian employer has been insulted this morning by an individual serving in the Persian Consulate, who called him a lot of bad names. The man came to complain to my husband just when the Persian Consul was announced.[116] The culpable Persian was speedily sent for and brought in under the escort of a Russian gendarme and a Turkish kavass. The interview was not pleasant. Sergy told the Persian that it was only out of regard to his Consul that a severe punishment was not imposed upon him by the Russian authorities; he was handed over entirely to the discretion of his Consul.
“The 10th of January, according to the old style, which is yet used here, or the 21st according to the new, was the day on which we left Kensington, where God bestowed so much grace upon us. On the preceding evening we were from seven till ten with His Majesty’s chaplain, who said many things to the awakening of our hearts. He gave us the 121st Psalm for meditation on our voyage, ‘I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills from whence cometh my help’. Whatever could in any way constitute to our comfort and encouragement, that he did. On New Year’s Day also he addressed us publicly from the pulpit from these words, ‘Be not afraid, only believe’ (Mark v. 36). At the same time he exhorted the congregation to pray for us. On the same evening he prayed again with us, commended us to the mercy of God and gave us some copies of his lately published ‘Exposition of the Lord’s Prayer’. He then dismissed us with the cordial admonition not to allow our brotherly love to cool. May God write all that we have heard deeply in our hearts!
“Eh!” he said, with his eyes shining. “I’ve thought it out, eh?”
“Alas!”
“Seein’ how I’m dressed, I reckon maybe I better arrive down from St.
were lying in heaps and drying up, and she had used up all the power of
last expiring effort, rousing the population of London to the necessity

Further Reasons why all Ideas of a favourable Balance different from that which I have supposed should be rejected.	126


It was represented to a Prince truly worthy of the throne he fills, that a manufactory, in which 8 or 900 persons were constantly employed, stood him in 4 or 5,000 crowns more than it produced. How! (replied the Sovereign) does it cost me no more than 4 or 5,000 crowns to feed a thousand beggars, and keep them constantly at work? It is a cheap bargain indeed! The most subtle of all ministers of state could make no other reply to such an answer, than to propose some means, equally effectual, and calculated to attain, at a cheaper rate, the two most important ends that a prince can have in view,[185] destroying beggary, and, in a manner, creating labour.
rock.”
beasts that perish, intellects vast and cool and unsympathetic,
That was the thing that was too many for me. Here was a boy that was
nights like this they bull right up the channel against the whole
there was a dog fight. There couldn’t anything wake them up all over,
Heading to Chapter LXI.	472
LXXIV.	Our Voyage around the World	393
out.”
and looked stupidly at the heap, and the shaft of a cab struck his
more outrageous all the time; and at last, when he had gone around two

went right along with his cussing.
came upon a busy swarm of little frogs in a swampy place among the
“Honest, I’ll tell you everything just as it happened, your majesty.
and we couldn’t find the other one, though we hunted all around.
We established ourselves in Biarritz at the delightful Hôtel d’Angleterre, full of English tourists. The outlook from our windows was splendid; in the distance came the incessant wash of the ocean, and at night, the murmur of the waves was a sweet lullaby soothing me to sleep.
the house. Tom said he slipped Jim’s hat off of his head and hung it on

And as I looked at this wide expanse of houses and factories and



“Great God!” cried I. “But you are a man indeed!” And suddenly I
Suddenly Uncle Henry stood up.
When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham’s character, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had seldom been depressed before were now so much affected as to make it almost impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful.

once by high explosives, which were being rapidly manufactured and
huge canister over whatever hill, copse, cluster of houses, or other
says I, I’d feel bad—I’d feel just the same way I do now. Well, then,

“Blame it, this whole thing is just as easy and awkward as it can be.
When I got back home, Sergy suggested a trip on the Volga, which I accepted with enthusiasm. We went by train to Nijni-Novgorod, where we had to take the steamer. We arrived at Nijni at about seven o’clock in the morning. I hid myself in my coupé from the military authorities who had come to greet my husband on the platform, but was dragged from my retreat by an officer, who insisted upon my following him into the state apartments of the station opened for us. I was half inclined to crawl under the seat, but there was no escape possible, and, conquering my impulse to flee, with tangled hair and unwashed face, horribly ashamed of myself, I had to walk with such dignity as my disordered condition would permit between two rows of brilliant sons of Mars. General Korevo, the chief of the division stationed at Nijni and its outskirts, offered me his arm and led me to his carriage to drive to the pier.
and we heard the sound of the huge siege guns that had been put in
“Don’t you reckon I know what I’m about? Don’t I generly know what I’m
their hundreds of people, sleeping in peace.
gave place at once to a smoky dance of lurid flames. The nearer houses
as to complain if the Martians warred in the same spirit?
before using this eBook.
They saw the gaunt figures separating and rising out of the water as

A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of her feelings to Elizabeth; but at last, on Mrs. Bennet’s leaving them together, after a longer irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, she could not help saying,—
end of the skylight, and clumb on to it; and the next step fetched us
sound sleep. The Scarecrow, who was never tired, stood up in another




“Without the fort several hundred Europeans were encamped, some of them were French, others German. I also met with a few Malabar Christians, whom I had instructed at Trichinopoly. To find them in that country, far from all Christian ordinances, was painful, but to renew the instruction which they had formerly received was very comfortable. Captain Buden, the commander of the German troops, lent me his tent, in which I performed Divine Service every Sunday, without asking permission, acting in this as one bound in conscience to do his duty. We sang, preached and prayed, no one presuming to hinder us. The whole I considered as a kind providence of God.
The Emir of Bokhara, Saïd-Abdul-ul-Akhad-Khan, announced to my husband by wire his forthcoming arrival at St. Petersburg. He came to call on us, accompanied by his[488] ministers, speechless with awe and veneration in his presence. The Sovereign of Bokhara was very magnificently clad in a superb khalat of brocade, a long robe cut straight, girded with a silver sash, wearing on his head a turban studded with precious stones, his breast adorned with decorations. When the official compliments were exchanged, it was my turn to entertain the Emir with the aid of an interpreter. Somewhat at a loss to open the conversation, I was trying to think of something to say that was suitable for the situation, and nearly began to make unnecessary announcements about the weather. In taking leave the Emir bestowed on my husband the Bokharian Order studded with big diamonds, and that same day there came a package for me from the Emir, a golden case containing a beautiful necklace of massive gold of the finest Oriental work, inlaid with precious stones.
islan’? I _tole_ you I got a hairy breas’, en what’s de sign un it; en
Within that noisome den from which I had emerged I had thought with a
they had passed safely through, although they had suffered many
May 28th.—At last we are nearing Tashkend. Towards noon our train stopped at the railway-station, full of people. After having gone through the proceedings of hasty greetings with all present, we went to our carriage. On our passage native musicians blew with all their might into pipes of enormous length, raising them to the skies. They performed such beastly sounds that I feared our horses would take fright and bolt.
might git discourage’ en kill yo’sef ’f you didn’ know by de sign dat
It is not yet time to examine what influence so considerable a rise, in the price of every thing, might have upon the foreign trade; but let us turn our thoughts to the interest of the stockholder, who has so generously lent his money. It will be said, that he is evidently injured: the interest due to him on account of his loan, was equal to two-thirds of the landed revenue: the land is mortgaged to the creditors of the state: two-thirds of the neat revenue belong therefore in fact to the lender. A few years more, employed in erecting useful buildings, bridges, causeways, &c. the whole landed revenue must have been absorbed, and the lender have entered into possession.
believe the rest.”
I slipped up to bed, feeling ruther blue, on accounts of the thing
The next morning we were again present at the ceremony of the change of watch, and saw General Pavia, the commandant of the town, enter the Palace, directing his steps to Queen Maria Christina’s private apartments, with his report in his hand. To-day it was the Red Hussars, mounted on white horses, and a detachment of infantry, who relieved the guard. When the big Palace clock struck half-past eleven, a piercing horn gave the signal for the beginning of the ceremony which lasted about an hour, whilst a military band played selections from “Faust” on the Square before the Palace. Fair women are in favour on the other side of the Pyrenees, as it appears; I was the only blonde person in the place and most of the officers were paying attention to me, especially one of them, a very good-looking chap who was throwing fiery glances at me all the time, but I pretended not to notice him and he got nothing for his pains. After luncheon, we left Madrid for Saragossa, where we arrived in the middle of the night.
On our way we entered the cathedral full of people. The Bishop in a few hearty words bade us welcome to Vladivostock. Many curious glances were turned on us and it was a veritable torture to me to be stared at like that.

struck out, easy and comfortable, for the island where my raft was; and
to stay all night at her friend’s house, Miss What-you-may-call-her I
Between these three main centres of light—the houses, the train, and

AND
“The arrival of the Gardiners.”

If it were very true, as it is to this day asserted, that those 25 millions of annual and indisputable expenditure, are in reality so many yearly losses to the nations who sustain it, might it not be reasonably concluded, would it not be impossible not to conclude, that all the colonies of Europe were established only for her ruin?—If we only attend to the last war, which in fact loads the different nations who took a share in it, with an annual interest of 9 or 10 millions,—9 or 10 millions to be paid every year, partly to preserve the right, partly to obtain the permission of exporting European commodities into a country, of which the inhabitants, besides their own importation, consume annually to the amount of[386] only 2,491,230l. of those same commodities which are exported to them by others—who (to assume the trader’s phrase) cannot clear by that exportation, a greater annual profit than 3, 4, or even 500,000l.! ... it seems indeed that one cannot see without surprise and concern, the shocking disproportion between the end proposed, and the sole means of obtaining it.
“No, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine’s connections. I never heard of her existence till the day before yesterday.”

Time passed slowly, one day like another. The heat obliged us to stay indoors all the afternoon, and I was glad to rest in our cool room. After dinner, we took long walks in the park surrounding the hotel, with mediæval castles, turrets, fountains and water-falls. On the top of a hillock stands a pavilion named Il Bello Sguardo, from which you have a full view of the lake. One morning we went for a row on the lake. I was at the wheel, and Sergy, taking off his coat, rowed on for an hour or more. Our light skiff flew like a bird on the beautiful lake, which is fifty miles long. The shores are lovely, surrounded by hills covered with fig-trees, olive-trees, pine-trees, like big open umbrellas, and rich vineyards. The edges of the lake are strewn with pretty villas of the nobility of Milan, with splendid gardens stretching down to the water. The wonderful southern vegetation amazed us; orange and lemon trees, laden with fruit, grow in groves in the open air. As there is no road, there is no approach but by water to the villas; nearly all of them have a small separate embankment. One of the[197] prettiest villas belongs to Taglioni, the renowned ballet dancer, who in long past days delighted our grandfathers. A little further on we saw the villa belonging to Mme. Pasta, the celebrated French actress. On its frescoed fronts different musical instruments are painted. Bellini once upon a time had been on a visit to Mme. Pasta, and the piano on which the great composer had improvised his music, is kept there as a relic.
NAGASAKI




plan was going to come from. Pretty soon Tom says:


water, and he says:
Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at Longbourn; coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining till after supper; unless when some{429} barbarous neighbour, who could not be enough detested, had given him an invitation to dinner, which he thought himself obliged to accept.
We are met on the quay by the Russian consul, Prince Lobanoff-Rostovski, accompanied by Mr. Vassilieff, attached to the Russian mission at Yokohama, and Mr. Omaio, secretary of the Japanese Embassy at St. Petersburg, who was at home on leave. The Governor of the town has sent five servants to take care of our luggage, and three carriages were put at our disposal. We took our places in a victoria drawn by a pair of ponies, and drove to the Grand Hôtel, through the European quarter of the city with big brick houses and gay cafés and shops. I was very much astonished to see little two-wheeled vehicles called rikshas, drawn by men who trotted between the shafts. They wear a short blue wide-sleeved jacket, close-fitting blue drawers reaching[348] to the ankles, straw sandals and a white mushroom-shaped hat, bearing their name and number; a blue rag hangs on their shoulder to wipe their perspiration.
butcher boy in a cart, a cabful of visitors, a workman on a bicycle,
“Oh, Charlotte says she hardly ever does. It is the greatest of favours when Miss De Bourgh comes in.”
course, if Dorothy stays here she will never get back to Kansas.”
landed on the side towards the Illinois shore. I run the canoe into a

A few days afterwards I escaped from another danger. We were to take a drive in the woods that evening; Mr. K., a friend of my brothers, asked me to take him with me in my dog-cart. As I didn’t care particularly for his company, I contrived to put off our drive for some time and suggested a game of croquet. In the middle of our game Mr. K. uttered a piercing scream and fell down in a violent fit of epilepsy. I was dreadfully frightened and scrambled, without ceremony, over the fence of the croquet-ground. None of us had before suspected Mr. K. to be epileptic, and if I hadn’t delayed our drive, this attack would have happened in my dog-cart and the consequences might have been terribly disastrous. It makes me shudder when I think of it!
the Emerald City is at the other end of the road, we must go wherever
his mark. The judge said it was the holiest time on record, or
they was beats and bummers, that’s all, though that’s worth something.
“Well, looky here, boss, dey’s sumf’n wrong, dey is. Is I _me_, or who
“Yes; I do comprehend a great deal in it.”

be all right again. You will find an oil-can on a shelf in my cottage.”

rather large, pale blue, and blankly staring. He spoke abruptly,

oppression. Misfortune has broken my once haughty spirit; I yield, I
“Oh, let us start for the Emerald City tomorrow!”
of Ogilvy, I still believed that there were men in Mars. My mind ran
But above all, I wish it should be examined, whether 91 millions of another kind of subsidy,[239] called la taille, added to 7 millions and a half more, laid out in expences for warrants and distresses, necessary to enforce the law of the subsidy, transferred upon the consumption of those from whose hands the subsidy is directly wrested, against whom the warrants are issued, upon whose goods or body the distresses are executed, would diminish the faculty of that poor people’s consumption, if, by means of that consumption, by the suppression of the old subsidy, of warrants, and distresses attending the same, they should acquire the faculty of consuming cheerfully, what they often consume in bitterness and sorrow; and whether the department of the finances could lose by it any thing more than the pleasure or trouble, or rather the necessity of assessing a dreadful subsidy, issuing out warrants, and distressing the body—when there are no goods to be distrained.
They began walking through the country of the china people, and the
and managed to get along fairly well.

them again and again for his release, for he seemed a very polite
“Why, who’s that?”
his sorrowful life._
couple of young chaps that was behind the wood-rank alongside of the


we’d done anything hardly. At last I says:


interpret the fluctuating appearances of the markings they mapped so
 Rubbing the Lamp


“Up where? Where are they?”

while this fierce creature is alive, and we had called a meeting to
[Image unavailable.]
carrying a small outhouse door between them, with some of their

by the green brightness that it was a man. For an instant he was

Title: The diary of a Russian lady

And her heart with love to a young Scotchman was fired.
close over their heads, lighting the tops of the beech trees that line
tattooed on the man? He whitened a little; he couldn’t help it; and it
had everything I needed, and the boy was doing as well there as he
drag the river for me. And they’ll follow that meal track to the lake
This morning we took our passage on the Khabarovsk, a steamer of the volunteer fleet specially built for the voyages of the Governor-General of the Amour provinces. We go straight to Shanghai. Notwithstanding the early hour a great crowd assembled on the quay, and a row of officers and ladies stood on deck to wish us a happy passage. I gave many shake-hands and smiled to right and left. The Bishop performed a Te Deum on board, after which it was time to weigh anchor. Three loud whistles pierced the air, and our steamer left her moorings amidst artillery salutes and loud cheers. After the last exchange of salutes with a Japanese man-of-war, on which the sailors, ranged in rows, rendered military honours to my husband, who was standing on the captain’s bridge, we left the bay on our way to the Japanese Sea. The troops lined the shore for several miles. We began to put on steam, and Vladivostock soon disappeared from view.
Now they were following a mighty river, a river larger than any that Earth had ever seen, for it drained a vast area of a humid planet. Yet it was a new planet, with mighty mountain ranges, mountains that towered in mighty snowcapped peaks in the blue distance, over wide ranges of green forest! What a sight it was for the eyes of these men! What a wondrous country! And now, as they rounded the bend in the great river, they cried out in excited wonder, for before them the great river, vaster than three Amazons, was pouring over a mighty ledge of rock, nearly four hundred feet in height; and from it rose a tremendous wave of sound that made the great ships tremble with the force of it, as they slowed to a few hundred miles an hour to watch the gigantic cascade. Then on again—There was much to do ere they could claim this beautiful country.

Aunt Sally she was one of the mixed-upest-looking persons I ever
tumultuously whirling wisps I could see, intermittently and vaguely,

Pierced by the crown of thorns.
And of Thy grace on me bestow
I says:
“How can you adopt,” said Schwartz, “a sophism which you yourselves on other occasions reject? You are accustomed to say, ‘if one writes the word sugar and then licks his finger, it will not on that account become sweet, though he believe it ever so firmly.’”
“No?”
“Hyder’s army is under the management of four chief officers (called baschi). They may be considered as paymasters but their office is not confined to paying the troops, as they have to provide for the recruiting service and to regulate other military matters, being likewise judges for the decision of private quarrels. With these people I often conversed. Some of them speak Persian, others only Hindustani, and all are Mohammedans. They once asked me what was the most acceptable prayer and to whom it ought to be addressed? I explained to them that as sinful creatures and therefore deserving eternal death, we could only approach the Almighty in the name of the Mediator, Jesus Christ, and then expounded the Lord’s Prayer. They next inquired whether the Lord Jesus in His Gospel had fixed the period of His coming and of the day of judgment. In reply to this I explained to them the doctrines of the Gospel, to some in Tamil, to others in Hindustani. As the household[Pg 111] of Hyder consisted chiefly of Brahmins, I had very frequent conversations with them. Some of them gave me very modest answers, whilst others avoided the discussion and gave me to understand that they did not consider their temples to have been built in vain. ‘The building,’ I replied, ‘may be useful, but the idols you worship are worthless.’

I crept forward, saying “Good dog!” very softly; but he suddenly
another moment it had raised itself to its full height again, close to
and of the longer afternoon. I did not succeed in getting a glimpse of

by, they slid along so quiet and smooth and lovely. Here is the way we


Well, what do you think? That muleheaded old fool wouldn’t give in
saying how the first thing he would do when he got to a free State he

vexation, and shot their heads high in the air, but they could not
it does take it off, too, and generly the enamel along with it—but I
Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this was not the best method of recommending herself; but angry people are not always wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all{333} the success she expected. He was resolutely silent, however; and, from a determination of making him speak, she continued,—

Iron Mask always done that, and it’s a blame’ good way, too.”
a—_you_ just get well once, you young scamp, and I lay I’ll tan the Old
It is a moot point among scholars whether the sphere of this great missionary was not Southern Arabia, but Egypt and India were at this period closely connected by trade, and the Roman coins found at Coimbatore and Calicut, in the year 1850, of the time of Tiberius, Augustus and Nero, show the possibility of India being indicated. Besides, the words of Jerome are explicit: “On account of the fame of his superior learning Pantaenus was sent to India by Bishop Demetrius (of Alexandria) to preach Christ among the Brahmans and philosophers there.”[2]
hammering, then a violent hooting, and then again, after a quiet

“If Dorothy would only be contented to live in the Emerald City,”
“My dear Sir,
match, and see the shed was only built against a cabin and hadn’t no
himself; but we wouldn’t let him. Then he give us a piece of his mind,
detachment from myself and the world about me; I seem to watch it all
behind it to wait for him to stir. And how slow and still the time did
after me; but I won’t go. Oh, they’re here! don’t touch me—don’t! hands
you could, I reckon. And the shirt ain’t all that’s gone, nuther.

“No,” said he; “I am host today. Champagne! Great God! We’ve a heavy
was made from oats and oats were food for horses, not for lions. The
True Christian faith, O Lord,
found a tree full of nuts and filled Dorothy’s basket with them, so
Hurrah! My husband had arrived at last! I should have gone mad if he hadn’t come that time. With what joy I ran forward and hugged him! He was given back to me, thank God! I put my arms round his neck and cried over him for happiness.
Smoke, in spite of two days of thunderstorms and rain, and at Clapham

presence.”
the South and you will soon reach it.”

“You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your declaration affected me in any other way than as it spared me the concern which I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner.”
laughing—heard them plain; but we couldn’t see no sign of them; it made
dey, Huck?”

The provisions on board are nearly out, the milk is watered to an atrocious degree, and at breakfast I swallowed, with a grimace, a cup of weak broth instead of tea or coffee. We are fed now on mutton—mutton at luncheon, mutton at dinner. However good the mutton is, one feels towards the end of the week that a change should be welcome.
I put out my hand and felt the meat chopper hanging to the wall. In a
thousand things. Well, I couldn’t stay up there forever; so at last I
it down the river with what we’ve got. Specially, seeing we got it so


He rose to his knees, for he had been sitting in the darkness near the

better on Jim, but it wouldn’t go well with the story of us being so
stretched up towards me, a-barking and howling; and more a-coming; you
November 9th.—We go full speed between the two parts of the world. On our left—the grand African Desert, and on our right—the Desert of Asia. We have over us the scorching sun, and below—the almost boiling water, and are suffering the tortures of hell. The captain promises that in the course of three days we shall feel the first touches of the north breeze.

“I thought I had beaten the Wicked Witch then, and I worked harder than

had got in ten dollars’ worth of advertisements for the paper, which he
 IV. THE DEATH OF THE CURATE.
good things to eat.
at Woking station and Horsell and Chobham that was the case.
“I am sick of Mr. Bingley,” cried his wife.

tell you if I catch you meddling with him again—”
ruin was the neat dresser, stained in the fashion, pale green, and with
These rapscallions wanted to try the Nonesuch again, because there was
carelessly driven smashed, amid shrieks and curses, against the water
kind of timber on both banks; just a solid wall, as well as I could see
I had a vague idea of going on to my own house, and that was as much

came from. Then he asked me what you looked like, and when I mentioned
places we shall gather. Our district will be London. And we may even be
“My real purpose was to see you, and to judge, if I could, whether I might ever hope to make you love me. My avowed one, or what I avowed to myself, was to see whether your sister was still partial to Bingley, and if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made.”
of glass, a crash and rattle of falling masonry all about us, and the
home. About this time I mighty near stepped on a good-sized snake, and
launches rushing hither and thither. He was so fascinated by this and
It was a double house, and the big open place betwixt them was roofed


the dying man in the ditch under the privet, deadly white and drawn,
“Is your sister at Pemberley still?”

God upon the summit of Primrose Hill. And then I forget.



July 19th, 20th.—Great was the desire of all the passengers to visit the celebrated cigar-manufactory of Manilla, but our captain opposed our landing on the Philippine Islands, because cholera had broken out in the town, and thus Manilla was black-balled.
Misnensis Saxo, Ecclesiæ ex Indis
other. In the end I planted myself between him and the food, and told
Might we not further say, that England evidently has not thought proper to get that quota, which she might have claimed, since one third, and perhaps half of her circulation, is effected by paper-money with more dispatch, with more facility, and with as much solidity as if it were effected by cash?
Either
rhinoceros, only there were five eyes in its face. There were five long

’bout it. Dey ain’ no sense in it.”
“Yes,” I said. “But what is it?”
VI.
ever destroyed her before, so I naturally thought she would make slaves
possession of me. I found I was intensely weary, footsore, and now
rather have a heart.”
the Lion explained that the animals were holding a meeting, and he


It was Sunday that day, which reduced us to inactivity, and we had nothing else to do than to return to our hotel. There was a great demonstration in the streets, and we met on our way a procession of the “Westminster Democratic Society,” composed of a deputy of cabmen and wine-merchants and other corporations, who were shouting and waving flags. They marched with their bands at the head, without disturbing the order in the streets. Three ragamuffins opened the march, mounted on decrepit old hacks, holding large banners. The police gazed upon this demonstration with the phlegm of an elephant whom a fly would like to sting.
had prayed as heathens mutter charms when I was in extremity; but now I
A Japanese Imperial Prince, who was returning from a long tour in Europe to his country through Russia, with his spouse and a numerous suite, stopped for a few days in Moscow. I went to see these Japs at the Manège, where a great festival was given in their honour. The Prince and Princess wore European costumes which did not suit them at all; they would have been much better-looking in their own national costume. The Princess, into the bargain, had golden teeth (the sign of Imperial blood), which did not really embellish her.
with, that presently, when I was upon the very verge of safety, this
are—_cowards_—and so you raise a yell, and hang yourselves on to that
The shells flashed all round him, and he was seen to advance a few


The officers who were not actively engaged stood and stared over the
the duke on his hands, and blamed if _he_ didn’t drop a carpet-bag and

As soon as they entered the copse, Lady Catherine began in the following manner:—


servant, rushed into my house and packed a few valuables, such plate as
“You have been asking for water for the last hour,” he said.
considerable ruputation now.”
[352]
With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own opinion continued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry. It was not in her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on them. She was confident of having performed her duty; and to fret over unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of her disposition.
said every boy must have a family or somebody to kill, or else it

locking me in. Once he locked me in and was gone three days. It was
LXXV.	On our way to Japan	397



we have a long journey before us, I will pass the time by telling you
Unable from his window to learn what was happening, my brother went


[277]
gorgeous in color and so light that they fluttered if the slightest
can help it.”



can’t—most always. Tell me about it.”
The farms were not nearly so well cared for here as they were farther

“Don’t mind Toto,” said Dorothy to her new friend. “He never bites.”
and prayed, but nothing come of it. She told me to pray every day, and


and bolted it, and told the young men to come in with their guns, and




 Buttons on their Tails

sounds made the little girl’s heart beat fast, for she did not know
“S’pose he _can’t_ write—he can make marks on the shirt, can’t he, if
I stopped, on hands and knees, for we had come to the bushes.
Since she left me my love is much enhanced
circus men could do, the horse broke loose, and away he went like the
before, and thought ’twas all she was worth.”


most part rested but a moment before plunging into it again. A little

worked there all the morning, so glad was I to find myself with a
    “My lady fair,
[9]
have a heart. I have played Wizard for so many years that I may as well
asleep, ’way up stairs in that lonesome room, and I declare to goodness
“They can scarcely move,” I said.

work, but rarely at other than the provision and wine shops. A
It is impossible to suppose, that in the space of 18 years there should have been carried out of the kingdom, either to Ireland, or in support of the smuggling trade, or for other purposes, less[300] than the amount of the coin struck since that period. Let us add to the 30 millions coined from the beginning of this reign down to the year 1780, the 5 millions for the sixth part in old specie remaining of the former reigns (that sixth supposed, rather than acknowledged, to be actually in circulation), the total will be 35 millions; to which must be added, the value of silver plate, toys, &c. Admit, that all these articles together, circulation and silver wrought, amount to 50 millions sterling;—to those who may think that the sum of 15 millions, at which I rate the wrought silver of all kinds, is too trifling, I would recommend to observe, first, that these 15 millions constitute nearly the tenth part of the general revenue, both of the land and industry; secondly, that the third part of that revenue belongs to the peasants and mechanics, who have no such costly furniture; and thirdly, that as to the rest of the nation, if there exist a man who possesses the equivalent of one half of his revenue in plate, there are scores who are not possessed of so much as one tenth part.—Shall it be insisted upon, however, that, by adding the amount of plate and the mass in circulation to that which must correspond with the demands that may be made upon the Bank, the whole amounts to 60 millions sterling?—Be it so;—but[301] England was certainly in possession of 20 millions at least, in cash and wrought silver, before the time at which Sir Charles Whitworth began his Statements; for there existed then much less credit, and no paper to answer the purposes of cash:—forty millions, then, constitute the whole of what England chose (I call it strictly a choice) to reserve, out of so many millions imported from America, which really went through her hands, in the space of 90 years.—I am fully persuaded that I could meet with some thousands of persons, even in England, who, from the sketch I have given, would think that I make a present to England of 10 millions. It matters not, I shall be equally generous in regard to France, whose accounts I am about to lay open; and yet I shall have gold and silver enough left to extend my liberality all over Europe.
his heart rattling around in his breast; and he told Dorothy he had
grassy open place amongst the trees, I fetched meal and bacon and
I saw my neighbour gardening, chatted with him for a time, and then

“You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to deny me the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes the amusement in general, he can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige us for one half hour.”

over the palings and made himself understood.

[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]
by accident. Then I tied up the rip in the meal sack with a string, so
all but jest this money. The people that _buys_ the property is the


On the 2nd February, 1798, Mr. Jaenické felt it his duty to write to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge informing them that his friend and venerable colleague was now very seriously ill and would never preach again. The time of his departure was evidently[Pg 178] drawing near. Looking round upon the faces of the old friends who one by one were gathering at his bedside, he smiled saying, “God is good. If we were left destitute of His help what should we do? We poor worms of the dust! Our times are in His hands; He alone can preserve or destroy life. Hitherto He hath endured our manners with truly paternal tenderness, hath spared us in the midst of all our sins and provocations, and crowned us with loving kindness and tender mercies.” At another time the conversation turned upon the mercy of God in having called him to be a missionary, which he said was the most blessed service in the world. “True,” he added, “a missionary must bear the cross; but this, my brother, is salutary, the heart is thereby drawn nearer to God, we are kept humble; without such trials the self-willed and proud heart of man would soon exalt itself. The good we receive at the hand of the Lord far exceeds the evil. When I consider all the way which God hath hitherto led me, the distresses from which He hath delivered my soul, and the riches of His goodness and forbearance and long suffering, I feel compelled gratefully to exclaim, ‘The Lord be magnified!’ Believe me, it is a privilege and happiness far beyond all description to enjoy in Christ the remission of sin. Ah, how much hath my Saviour done for such a poor sinner as I am! Look at this poor Christian (he pointed to one sitting at the gate), how poor he is in the things of this world, whilst I have every needful supply, and even many a comfort! What is my superiority over him? Suppose he should have committed one thousand sins, I am conscious of having committed ten thousand, and yet my God still bears with me. And should I ever think myself entitled to despise a poor man like this?”
“But you shall not!” replied the voice, and there stepped from behind
to do tricks—who knows?—get sentimental over the pet boy who grew up

I.
know nothing about it. He’s _got_ to have a rope ladder; they all do.”
it’s likely to break up and wash off down the river any minute?” Jim
touched one of mine. My nose begun to itch. It itched till the tears
them fellows would say to me if they catched me; and I tried to think
to Leatherhead; and so greatly had the strength of the Martians

Later on came Ibrahim Bey, one of the dignitaries of the town of Khnyss, who had to proceed further on to Ernzindjane, the head-quarters of Ismail Pasha. This Turk kissed the lappets of my husband’s coat slavishly, and drew backwards towards the door, putting his hand to his forehead and heart. As an example of Turkish barbarism I shall note an exploit that he related to Sergy and of which he boasted, a truly disgusting story. At Khnyss some Kurdes dug up the corpse of a Russian soldier and stripped him of his clothes and boots. As a punishment for their sacrilegious misdeed, Ibrahim Pasha obliged the Kurdes to eat these boots, chopped up into small bits.

It was just dark now. I never went near the house, but struck through
The goodness of the minor characters in Pride and Prejudice has been already alluded to, and it makes a detailed dwelling on their beauties difficult in any space, and impossible in this. Mrs. Bennet we have glanced at, and it is not easy to say whether she is more exquisitely amusing or more horribly true. Much the same may be said of Kitty and Lydia; but it is not every author, even of genius, who would have differentiated with such unerring skill the effects of folly and vulgarity of intellect and disposition working upon the common weaknesses of woman at such different ages. With Mary, Miss Austen has taken rather less pains, though she has been even more unkind to her; not merely in the text, but, as we learn from those interesting traditional appendices which Mr. Austen Leigh has given us, in dooming her privately to marry “one of Mr. Philips’s clerks.” The habits of first copying and then retailing moral sentiments, of playing and singing too long in public, are, no doubt, grievous and criminal; but perhaps poor Mary was rather the scapegoat of the sins of blue stockings in that Fordyce-belectured generation. It is at any rate difficult not to extend to her a share of the respect and affection (affection and respect of a peculiar kind; doubtless), with which one regards Mr. Collins, when she draws the moral of Lydia’s fall. I{xx} sometimes wish that the exigencies of the story had permitted Miss Austen to unite these personages, and thus at once achieve a notable mating and soothe poor Mrs. Bennet’s anguish over the entail.

says the duke. “The first good town we come to we’ll hire a hall and do
across the kitchen I had overtaken him. With one last touch of humanity
“Oh,” she says, “what am I _thinking_ about!” she says, and set right
I was born under fortunate auspices, there could not be a happier little girl; good things were thrown down upon me: presents, petting, admiration. At an early age I chose as my motto: “Fais ce que voudras.” Whatever I wished for, I very certainly had, and I didn’t see how anybody could want to refuse me in anything.
govment, and yet’s got to set stock-still for six whole months before
temperature at which life could begin. It has air and water and all
dog-tired.
we could keep it up right along, year in and year out, and do it right,
daylight, here comes a frame-house down, on the west side. She was a
ON THE RHINE
“Wiped out!” he said.


In the morning we was up at break of day, and down to the nigger cabins

It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire, nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither lay—Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth, Birmingham, etc., are sufficiently known. A small part of Derbyshire is all the present concern. To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner’s former residence, and where she had lately learned that some acquaintance still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen all the principal wonders of the country; and within five miles of Lambton, Elizabeth found, from her aunt, that Pemberley was situated. It was not in their direct road; nor more than a mile or two out of it. In talking over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed an inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner declared his willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.
preserve the unities, as we say on the boards.”

give up trying, and up and says:
“There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particular evil, a natural defect, which not even the best education can overcome.”
Some of the Monkeys seized the Tin Woodman and carried him through the



brother’s, and then they’ll know it’s all right.”
February 9th.—To-day we take our passage on the Laos. A Prussian officer, with an unpronounceable name, who was stopping with us at the hotel, came on board to see us off. He had just returned from a tour in Sumatra, where cannibalism still exists, and narrated to us, with Teutonical phlegm, his experiences among man-eaters. In that barbarian country the tribes engaged in war eat their prisoners. Those who slaughter them are also risking their life, for if one single drop of blood falls upon the executioner, he is devoured in his turn. This officer brought back from Sumatra the head and the hands of a man who had been eaten in his presence. Ugh—the horror!
He says:
for a minute I didn’t say nothing; then I says:
faintly lit doorway into the kitchen, and listening. Had the Martian
1. _Here a captive heart busted._
time, but I couldn’t find no way. There warn’t a window to it big
I didn’t take my hat off, all the same.
glad to see Jim. I warn’t lonesome now. I told him I warn’t afraid of
This second night we run between seven and eight hours, with a current
A little smoke couldn’t be noticed now, so we would take some fish off

weather-boarding behind the smoke-house.”


those striding metallic monsters, and of the dead body smashed against

no use—old Jim was gone. Then I set down and cried; I couldn’t help it.
After the glimpse I had had of the Martians emerging from the cylinder
“An’ look at that-air ladder made out’n rags, Sister Hotchkiss,” says

“I am still able to go through the labour of[Pg 170] instructing both young and old, without being over fatigued. This duty is so great a refreshment to me that I heartily praise God for continued health and strength to declare to heathens and Christians His name who has sent Christ as a Saviour and made Him, ‘our wisdom and righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.’ Let worldlings boast as much as they please, my boast is in the Lord, from Whom alone cometh my salvation.”

THE MEMORY OF THE JUST.


quite unsuspected by the Martian nearest to them. They laid their guns
played another chicken bone and got another think. Then I says:
after my recovery. All that time I felt a vague, a growing craving to
something inside of me kept saying, “There was the Sunday-school, you
“Well, it’s all right anyway, Jim, long as you’re going to be rich
A great Charity Bazaar was planned for Christmas. The biggest prizes were to be a horse, a cow, a baby-bear, twelve suckling pigs and a couple of rabbits. We made a great deal of money at the bazaar. I was doing splendidly, and in about an hour or two there were no more tickets in my wheel.
most always—I mean he made it seem like good weather. When he turned
other—wouldn’t be gone long. I wished I was out of that tree, but I

A douche of spray blinded my brother for a moment. When his eyes were


He see me, and rode up and says:
“Goodness gracious, is dat you, Huck? En you ain’ dead—you ain’
CHAPTER XXIX.
and I knowed I ought to just up and tell him so; and so be his true
I shall conclude this article with a reflexion which may give birth to many others.
you.”

THE LIFE of C.F. SCHWARTZ.
(Tom Sawyer’s Comrade)

_circumstances!_”
NAPLES
deef and dumb one—William ain’t more than thirty or thirty-five. Peter

And then Tom he talked along and talked along, and says, le’s all three
drunk. He’s the best naturedest old fool in Arkansaw—never hurt nobody,
from all the rest of the world. Therefore we still have witches and
ain’t good to see by. Then we got out the raft and slipped along down



“Out with you, Jim, and set her loose! Glory be to goodness, we’re shut

Ashore.
In this book a number of dialects are used, to wit: the Missouri negro

But who will see without grief, 2,000,000 interest due to foreign States! 2,000,000 in specie carried out every year from England! England yearly stript of 2,000,000 of her money!!! It will be seen hereafter in what that money consists. Yet with personal stocks so real, so considerable, so clear, what can prevent Great Britain wresting from the foreigner, the share he claims in the national debt? The reason is obvious: the owner of landed property, or the farmer, who hopes to get six per cent. of the stock which he lays out upon his lands, instead of vesting them[25] in the funds, envies not the foreigner who is glad to get 5, 4, or even 3 per cent. On the other hand, the merchant who trades by commission, and who has an opportunity of placing in the colonies his money at 5 per cent. interest, which is raised to 8 and 9 by his commissions for sale and purchase procured therewith, cannot wish himself in the situation of a stranger, whose stock in the English funds brings him in, not above one half of that sum. It is still less an object of envy for the manufacturers, or owners of ships, who, from their manufactories or shipping, clear 10 or 12 per cent. of the monies laid out by them: the projectors of all kinds likewise flatter themselves, that the stock employed in their undertakings will produce 15 per cent. To sum up the whole in much fewer words, the prospect of 3 or 4 per cent. is not likely to tempt any one, who is in hopes of getting a two, three, or even four-fold interest. And in fine, the public funds, in any country whatever, will never be more or less than a lucky, or rather a providential, resource for those who have neither talent, power, nor leisure, to place their money to better advantage.
brother for the traffic manager, to whom he bears a slight resemblance,
little bit of a concern, up over a carpenter shop—carpenters and
all look alike. A rail fence round a two-acre yard; a stile made out of
all, the extraordinary intensity of the immense eyes—were at once
should hear us. “For God’s sake——”
drownded carcass and stop there. So, says I, I’ll keep a lookout, and
The Bay of Nagasaki is very animated for the moment. After the end of the war all the fleet of the Pacific Ocean has assembled here: English, French, Russian and American cruisers, and monster ironclads, filled the harbour with their menace.
nothing, what would she think of me? Blame it, I says, I might get
owned when he was made of flesh. The Lion declared he was afraid of


pony’s head. Irresistibly attracted, he advanced slowly, pace by pace,

broken that was the end of the black bees, and they lay scattered thick
“Octopuses,” said he, “that’s what I calls ’em. Talk about fishers of
warn’t anywhere. I says:
they’d all swarm out for music and go for him. Jim didn’t like the
Mrs. Bennet’s eyes sparkled. “A gentleman and a stranger! It is Mr. Bingley, I am sure. Why, Jane—you never dropped a word of this—you sly thing! Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr. Bingley. But—good Lord! how unlucky! there is not a bit of fish to be got to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell. I must speak to Hill this moment.”
The rolling of the ship drove my chair in all directions about the corridor. I was obliged to return to my cabin.



more stuff; but that warn’t pap’s style. Nine logs was enough for one


like an Injun, calculating to build a palace and sell it; but it warn’t
huge black shapes, grotesque and strange, moved busily to and fro.

slaves.”

And as they advanced towards Barnet a tumultuous murmuring grew
help a body set a nigger free with his bringing-up.
And in he come, and Bill after him. But before they got in I was up in
the scullery was no longer grey, but red. To my disordered imagination
was being watched all the time from up there in heaven, whilst I was


her drifting down the river so these fellows can’t get away from the
to get out of the reach of the powwow we reckoned the duke’s work in



river agin, whah you b’longs, en doan’ do nuffn to Ole Jim, ’at ’uz
“My mother would have no objection, but my father hates London.”


for putting on frills and trying to be better than him; and when I
Raft.—The Wood—pile.—Pork and Cabbage.
great mistake my ever letting you into the Throne Room. Usually I will
wood-yard. Say, I reckon your father’s poor, and I’m bound to say he’s


“They are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them.”

to imagine “boilers on stilts” a hundred feet high.
with painted and ragged drunkards, men and women, dancing and shouting
with. We let on it took nine months to make it.
She replied in the affirmative.


the burning county towards Chobham—stretched irregular patches of dark
of us to peep through; and so I had to forego watching them for a time

light and scrambled out of the window on to the shed. Then I slipped
mail cart, a road-cleaner’s cart marked “Vestry of St. Pancras,” a huge
railway tunnels and subways. Eh? You begin to see? And we form a
“Ah,” said the Tin Woodman sadly, “I wish I had a heart to beat.”

158,	l. 3, for extravagance, read examination.
presence by pulling violently at my arm. I turned to a scowling face,
thirty-seven years to dig out through a _dirt_ foundation, do you?”
it’s so kind of strange and unregular. I never see nothing like it.

“Well, the nigger unlocked the padlock when he went in, and he locked
out. Thinks I, what is the country a-coming to? It was ’lection day,
Despised love struck not with woe
was a-standing on top of the bed raising Cain, and the rats was doing

“Indeed, Mr. Bennet,” said she, “it is very hard to think that Charlotte Lucas should ever be mistress of this house, that I should be forced to make way for her, and live to see her take my place in it!”

June 27th.—We are on Lake Timsah. The railway runs along the shore as far as Ismailia, to continue its way to Cairo. Flocks of odd white birds swim on the surface of the lake and chase the fish. On the coast, a little Arab, completely nude, raced us for a short distance, begging baksheesh. The recruits, having nothing better, throw him crusts of black bread. On the opposite bank we see pilgrims going to Mecca, and a caravan of camels off to Suez across the desert, resting under the shade of a gigantic fig-tree. Egyptian policemen, on camel-back, keep watch on the banks of the canal here and there. This morning, whilst we took our breakfast, Sergy was informed that a vessel, bearing the Italian flag, was approaching us. The ship is returning from Masowah, bringing back to Europe hollow-cheeked and worn-out looking soldiers, mere shadows of human beings, covered with parchment skin.
He looked at me doubtfully, then started, and looked with a changed
and graceful, the men looking ever so tall and airy and straight, with
Si l’absurdité de l’idée générale sur le moyen le plus propre pour établir une concurrence avantageuse en fait de commerce, n’est pas démontrée par l’Histoire d’une révolution singulière en France; révolution aussi peu douteuse que les deux guerres de 1755 & de 1779.
and then cussed them all over again to make sure he hadn’t skipped any,
A. Of two, the land proprietor, and all persons not wholly destitute of money.

“I should like balls infinitely better,” she replied, “if they were carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be much more rational if conversation instead of dancing made the order of the day.”

rebuilt it only three years ago. Gone! Swept out of existence! Why?”
little girl was unhappy, and that made him unhappy too.
Bishop Wilson of Calcutta in 1839, in giving his charge to his clergy, speaks in strong terms of recommendation of Schwartz, and in doing so gives some very interesting personal touches of his daily life.

Covering a screen.
his arm, and both of them had big, fat, ratty-looking carpet-bags.
twisted, among the ruins it had made. The forepart was shattered. It
“It may do very well for the others,” replied Mr. Bingley; “but I am sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won’t it, Kitty?”

Oh, I should like to see dear Vava again!

poor. Too much like jewelry. Ropes are the correct thing—we must
made them all look up, and to their horror they saw running toward them
“But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be observed in them for ever.”
monstrous big lumber-raft was about a mile up stream, coming along
“Well,” cried her mother, “it is all very right; who should do it but her own uncle? If he had not had a family of his own, I and my children must have had all his money, you know; and it is the first time we have ever had anything from him except a few presents. Well! I am so happy. In a short time, I shall have a daughter married. Mrs. Wickham! How well it sounds! And she was only sixteen last June. My dear Jane, I{376} am in such a flutter, that I am sure I can’t write; so I will dictate, and you write for me. We will settle with your father about the money afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately.”
island, and they would never find us without dogs. And, besides, he
white horse-hair wig and whiskers; and then he took his theater paint
“So I did. I don’t care who kills her. But until she is dead I will not
On the day following our arrival we explored the outskirts of Constantinople. The Sultan had the amiability to send his aide-de-camp to go about with us to all the places of interest we should like to visit, and put at our disposal, as often as we pleased to use it, one of his row-boats with ten men. This Turkish officer, a very stylish young man, was the son of Jakir Pacha, ex-Ambassador of Turkey at St. Petersburg, where he has been educated in the Corps-des-Pages. He speaks Russian and French to perfection. He told me that he had a tedious time at Constantinople and was pining for St. Petersburg. In the first place he took us to Dolma-Bachtche Palace, and the Museum of Eski-Sarai, where we saw a throne inlaid with precious stones, dating from the 16th century. We went afterwards to the Cathedral of St. Sofia, transformed now into a Mosque. All the Christian paintings on the walls are scraped out, except a big image of Christ, which the Mussulmans could not manage to rub off. Then we were rowed over to Scutari, on the opposite shore, in a rich yawl with scarlet velvet cushions belonging to the Sultan. Its crew, ten bronzed-skinned men of athletic build, showing bare, muscular brown hands and legs, rowed vigorously bending to the oars. We moored before Belerbey Palace, and entered an immense hall with a marble floor, mirrored walls, and a fountain in the middle, looking out upon the Bosphorus. Before leaving the palace, we visited the sumptuous apartments of the chief of the eunuchs.
After this it would seem that the three took counsel together and
the Wicked Witch surrounded by a crowd of monkeys, each with a pair of
wet, and there had been no time to add a word of comment. It was

At last she come and begun to ask me questions, but I _couldn’t_ answer

towards Knaphill I saw the flashes of trees and hedges and wooden
like that of the thing called a siren in our manufacturing towns. A
Then a head showed itself over the rock and the same voice said, “This

dog in her arms followed the green girl through seven passages and up
Then he turns around, blubbering, and makes a lot of idiotic signs to


round to the side gate to ask the latest news. He told me that during
under side of the world, like rolling empty barrels down stairs—where
my Testament in, and it must be so, because my Testament ain’t in; but
_Admission 50 cents_.
lie. I must lay it by in my mind, and think it over some time or other,

CHAPTER XXIII.
As the ray scanned and recognized an atom it drew out its energy, to leave it free. This had fused the apparatus, stopped the ray, and killed the scientist. Knowing the danger, others experimented. By draining the energy away safely they scanned a small object, and sent the signals to another station where, by feeding the necessary energy into the machine, they were able to reconstruct it. The first step had been taken.
“The place where he keeps his wives. Don’t you know about the harem?
“Miss Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not been accustomed to such language as this. I am almost the nearest relation he has in the world, and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns.”



Dorothy now took Toto up solemnly in her arms, and having said one last
Witch died. I am fond of the Winkies, and if I could get back again to
The highest pitch of extravagance, in point of luxury, is, beyond contradiction, that which, in the smallest possible compass, contains the largest quantity, as well as the greatest perfection of labour, and of a labour the most easy to destroy.
the 26th October, 1726,

SCHWARTZ’ PULPIT, CHRIST CHURCH, TANJORE
So I have to stay shut up in these rooms all day, and it gets tiresome.
would do Tom but he must crawl to where Jim was, on his hands and

CHAPTER XIII.
t’other on t’other side, and they kneeled down and rested their
Well, it being away in the night and stormy, and all so
infrequent, and the hail, which was pouring down in a torrent, fell in
[Pg 56]
visible in green and black, and vanished again. And then followed such
“No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly grouped, and appear to uncommon advantage. The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a fourth. Good-bye.”
seeing he was not harmed by me, came to eat the corn too, so in a short
think, men in small round caps, dirty red jackets unbuttoned, and
little girl like you would ever be able to melt me and end my wicked
“Jim ain’t got no tin plates. They feed him in a pan.”
the nombril points rampant on a dancette indented; crest, a runaway
“Yes, she did.”
lit out. It didn’t seem no good for _me_ to stay—_I_ couldn’t do
would.
“Miss Elizabeth Bennet!” repeated Miss Bingley. “I am all astonishment. How long has she been such a favourite? and pray when am I to wish you joy?”
the paddle-box, and past the stern; then in a second or two more we was
country.”
The extreme care and thoroughness of Schwartz in his training of a native agency was justified, and followed by the higher educational and intellectual preparation set on foot by the wise policy of the missionary societies. However it may answer elsewhere, it was not sufficient for work in India that the native should go forth with the simple equipment of an earnest heart and the Gospel message. Dr. Richter, in his invaluable “History of Missions,” puts the case clearly enough when he says:
shipping in the Thames, and hurrying by every available channel

Money is not laid under ground in a country, where regard is the appendage not only of wealth, but of credit also, which carries the appearance of, and can procure the former.
minute he was raised from the ground and flung headlong among his
I should also wish the French to examine whether the 76 millions Tournois, paid in that country for the three twentieths, instead of being very often called for, at a time when the Subject has them not, transferred to those objects which cannot be consumed but by means of the money remaining after those 76 millions are discharged, would impair the means of the contributors, although after having eased them of that truly terrible tax, the Minister should, in a manner, juggle them out of the whole amount of it, by another impost on consumption. Supposing even they had some suspicion of the trick, I wish it were examined whether they would think themselves injured by paying in the new way that amount, by installments at their own time, and till then laying out a part of it upon their lands, the revenues of which would of course increase in proportion.
room this morning if I go out to one side and study over it a little.



When we returned to our ship we found new passengers: Lady Denmore, the wife of a high British dignitary, whom she was going to rejoin in India, and a pleasant American pair—Mr. and Mrs. Holland—elderly, childless people, talking with a strong American accent. They were going to Cairo. In the night the sea grew rough, and we were tossed about during two days. On the third day we entered the African waters and perceived a yellow band of sand; birds, forerunners of land, were flying over our ship, and soon the outlines of the port and the mosques of Alexandria came in view.


on fetching it, too, till we knowed enough to keep still.
“I had often heard mentioned,” he writes, “of Mr. Schwartz before I went thither, as a man of great zeal and piety, and of considerable attainments in the language of the country, but as these accounts were in general given me by those who viewed the excellence of a religious character through the medium of popular prejudice, my ideas of him were very imperfect, and as I myself had then scarcely any better rule of judgment, a preconceived notion of great strictness and austerity had mixed itself with everything I had heard in his praise. The first sight of him, however, made a complete revolution in my mind as to this point. His garb, indeed, which was pretty well worn, seemed foreign and old-fashioned, but in every other respect his appearance was the reverse of all that could be[Pg 74] called forbidding or morose. Picture to yourself a stout well made man, somewhat about the middle age, erect in his carriage and address, with a complexion rather dark, though healthy, black curled hair and a manly engaging countenance, expressive of unaffected candour, ingenuousness and benevolence, and you will have an idea of what Mr. Schwartz appeared to be at first sight. During the intimacy which I had afterwards the happiness to contract with him I learnt his past history.”
saw the shopman struggling still on the edge of the pit. I found myself
Witch of the West, they all gathered around the travelers and followed

The Hôtel d’Europe is composed of several separate pavilions, with high ceilinged bare rooms, with white-washed walls and mat-covered floors. The hotel is draughty and perfectly adapted to the tropics. The doors do not touch the floor and the ceilings and the walls between each room are also open at the top, leaving an interval for the air to circulate freely; every sound, therefore, is heard in the next apartment.

cylinder and fallen into the pit, with a thud like the fall of a great
“He is perfectly well-behaved, polite, and unassuming,” said her uncle.
right down the gravelly beach and headlong into the water. Others did
snapped off and driven headlong, and a second huge tripod appeared,


“All right. I’m jist a-freezn’ for something fresh, anyway. Le’s
the Scarecrow, when she had finished her dinner. So she told him all
4thly.
I staggered through the leaping, hissing water towards the shore. Had
whilst we was hustling to get under the bed. But we got under all
About three o’clock there began the thud of a gun at measured intervals

“No,” says the old man, “I reckon there ain’t going to be any; and you
him, too; but Jim didn’t want to talk about that. I says:
The house of the Military Club is put at our disposal. Our windows look on the “Golden Horn.” Russian and foreign cruisers are anchored in the vast bay. Every day a new steamer arrives. Here is a trading vessel carrying the Dutch flag, advancing towards the pier. I see numerous fishing-smacks plying towards the open sea.
“Yes, he’s gone, my son, and you must come in and eat your dinner with
Horsell. He managed to get alive into the ditch by the side of the

“Making believe!” cried Dorothy. “Are you not a Great Wizard?”
“On the wreck.”
The Catholic Archbishop invited us to assist at the distribution of prizes at his school. After we were seated at the head of a long table, the Sisters of Mercy presented to us the pupils deserving prizes, and I had to adorn them with crowns of flowers. After that the pupils played on the piano to us and recited French and Armenian poetry; then the Archbishop led us into his library which contains rare and curious books, amidst which we saw a manuscript of the Lord’s prayer written in fifty different languages.
He was also told that the Midland Railway Company had replaced the
First, The adopted maxim of the pretended advantage of enjoying the national commodities at the lowest prices, for the better encouragement of industry, was not held less sacred at the time the regulation took place, than when that maxim was considered as the basis of the system of exportation the most advantageous to the kingdom, and the condition (sine quâ non) of the many wonders that might be expected therefrom, towards an increase of wealth.⸺Yet if there exist a regulation calculated to operate in diametrical opposition to the sacred maxim, it is clearly the freedom of the corn trade; to be convinced of this truth, one need but attend to its effect in France. The little success I have met with in my endeavours to come, in this respect, at some particulars which might perhaps have given me a few ideas, confines me to what I can gather from recollection; but with truth I can say that my memory seldom deceives me on the abstracts it presents to my mind. The reader may perceive, that the summary I now stand in[273] need of, has no manner of connexion with the little springs that were put in play to ruin the author of the scheme; the chief and true point, is, that all secret intrigues, all public combinations, ended only in occasioning a reform in what was deemed abusive, in a regulation the advantages of which were fully demonstrated; and that the price of wheat, after having tertiated, doubled, trebled perhaps by the help of the forestallers, from whose abilities were expected the repeal of the law and the fall of its devisers, was fixed at last between one half and three fourths above the price, as it was upon the medium of ten years preceding the regulation. It is easily conceived that the price of wheat dictated that of all other commodities; in effect, previous to the last war, the only decisive period in the present point, the nominal revenue of the lands in France, increased by one half at least of what it was 15 years before;—then, commodities were, upon the whole, dearer by one half; yet the maxim was held sacred still, and is not less so at the present time—in England as well as in France;—nevertheless I can see no medium; either the maxim is absurd in itself, or French industry has lost one third of its benefits by a regulation which tertiated, almost suddenly, the price of all productions in France.
Some one, no doubt, will exclaim against this additional fifteenth upon the prices of every commodity; an augmentation which I have represented as the only remaining trace of a war, which, for five years, attracted in both hemispheres, the eyes of all whose brains were not heated by it. I shall grant therefore that it was necessary to add thereto,
in crawling, unobserved by these monstrous machines, into the pine

“What hasn’t?” In the obscurity I could see he made a gesture of
The planet Mars, I scarcely need remind the reader, revolves about the
worded telegram, all the more striking for its brevity.
At the station a deputation of Cossacks offered “Bread and Salt” to my husband on a napkin on which was embroidered: “God save thee on the seas.”
The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where this conversation passed, by the arrival of some of the very persons of whom they had been speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their personal invitation for the long expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixed for the following Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted to see their dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and repeatedly asked what she had been doing with herself since their separation. To the rest of the family they paid little attention; avoiding Mrs. Bennet as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all to the others. They were soon gone again, rising from their seats with an activity which took their brother by surprise, and hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mrs. Bennet’s civilities.
made their footing good and crippled the greatest power in the world.
[355]
away in every direction as fast as possible.
see the Thing more clearly. He fancied even then that the cooling of
wall as one of the Martian giants returned. He saw this one pursue a
“I should be sorry, indeed, if it were. We were always good friends, and now we are better.”
the inside trying to shove them back and shouting, “Back, back! give
that warn’t going to keep off the bad luck, I knowed that well enough.
nothing but the great gray prairie on every side. Not a tree nor a
“But I was embarrassed.”



impatient and excited and handsome, but looking kind of happy and
“Oh, I wouldn’t hurry; next year’ll do. Matilda Angelina Araminta
On the following morning we went out shopping and saw my picture painted in the Greenaway style on a cardboard plate exposed in a bookseller’s shop window. When we entered the shop one of the clerks, who had noticed the resemblance at once, asked me if I had sat for that picture. It really bore a striking likeness to me and we bought it as a souvenir.


“Is that his design in settling here?”
couldn’t do no good, and besides he was in a sweat to get to the Indian
one of them the King himself. They had made a chair of their hands and
I used to see a great deal of the Persian princes; Rouknadine-Mirza was rapidly losing his heart to me. One day we went out riding together, and whilst our horses were galloping at full speed, the idea came to me to make my page gather a wild flower growing in the grass. He managed to do it, but during that acrobatic exercise his casque rolled off, and instead of treating him commiseratingly I only snubbed him for his pains.
that young flathead that we canoed up to the steamboat.

and showing plainly that he had been mended in many places.
dry bread will not stick in my throat.”
“True for you, Rachel—I forgot.”
struck that young fool going up to the steamboat, clear through to
started on her journey.
all sides. Guns were in rapid transit from Windsor, Portsmouth,

In the beginning of June we started to Khabarovsk taking the shortest way—via America—in order to visit the grand Exhibition that was being held that year at Chicago.
savage—degenerate into a sort of big, savage rat. . . . You see, how I


Our landlord, Signor Bonsignore, is a magnificent old beau, awfully stuck up and prim, belonging to the ancient school, and suited rather to the eighteenth century than to our modern era. He affected an antiquated style of dress, his chin resting within the points of a high collar, which reached to his ears. One day he came to keep me company whilst I had my lunch in my room, and remained quite a long time paying me old-fashioned compliments. He said that he regretted that he had not met my second-self in his young days, and that it was the reason why he is still single. Signor Bonsignore is an awful old screw, one could see it by the motto carved over the door of our dining-room saying: “One never repents of having eaten too little.” Frau[203] Weidemann follows the motto to the letter in respect of her boarders, practising rigorous economy, rarely varying her scanty menus and making mental photographs of the joints before they are removed. My frugal breakfast, day after day, has been coffee, one egg and insufficient bread and butter. My lunch is brought in to me on a tray; the limited menu is unvariably composed of cold meat, green beans and a dessert of two biscuits and half an apple. Marie, the household treasure, whilst clearing away my scanty repasts, always asks as if in derision: “Madame a bien mangé?” which made me groan inwardly.
Then he put down his axe and sat beside the Scarecrow, who said, “It
“The Martians are able to discharge enormous clouds of a black and
“And I should never get back to Kansas,” said Dorothy.
with a blow in the face. Then, realising that he was deserted, he
Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction; and a moment’s consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again, and tried to conceal, by incessant employment, the feelings which were divided between distress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as soon as they were gone, Mr. Collins began,—
lane, swaying from side to side, and with the women in it looking back.
May 30th.—This afternoon we made an excursion to the banks of the Euphrates. After having made about five miles on horseback, we arrived at a sort of paved dike, which seemed to have been built by giants; the stones are so enormous that it is quite incomprehensible how human beings could handle them. For many centuries whole generations have gone over this ancient dike without its being necessary to mend it. The Euphrates is very broad in this part, and in full rise just now. Frogs were croaking around us, and whole flocks of wild geese dived about ten steps from us; their tranquillity, as it seems, is rarely troubled by musket-shots. On the middle of the river a boatman was rowing[117] his yawl, cut out of the trunk of an enormous tree, with a long perch.
We are living through very troublesome times. Our new Emperor, Alexander III., receives anonymous letters with threats that he too, will be murdered and his son, the heir to the throne, stolen and taken away!
I went out shopping with my Mexican friend one afternoon. In a shop-window, with a variety of nick-nacks offered for sale, I saw a small box of powder in the form of an ivory apple, a perfect darling, which took particularly my fancy. I had a craving to possess it, but as I had only a few coppers left in my purse, I could not purchase it, and looked at the tempting apple with longing eyes; but crushed by the scorn of the stylish person behind the counter, I left the shop dismissing it from my mind. On the same night, going to bed,[26] I noticed a parcel lying upon my toilet table, which contained the apple that I had resisted, bought by my Mexican Paris for his Russian Helena.
the people in the boats leaping into the river sounded like
willows, and hid the raft with them. Then we set out the lines. Next we


Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards got up and walked about the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well; but Darcy, at whom it was{72} all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. In the desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more; and, turning to Elizabeth, said,—
another forest, where the trees were bigger and older than any they had
Thirdly, that the national prices, or, to speak more properly, money is, in fact, the most[167] proper standard of labour between two manufacturers in the same town; and that nothing but the misconduct and unrestrained cupidity of the one, can prevent him from selling his goods at the price by which the other clears a profit that satisfies him; but in each country the common price of labour being arbitrarily determined by the common price of the materials necessary to set the labourer at work, the common price of wheat is, in fact, the measure of the common price of labour in all nations:




He was uncommon bright, the duke was, and he soon struck it. He dressed



water touch her in any way.

Jim had plenty corn-cob pipes and tobacco; so we had a right down good
We went almost every day to the Exhibition and sacrificed a whole afternoon to the French colonies: Tunis, Algiers, Dahomey and other transmarine countries, all clustered together near the Trocadero. In front of them were the cafés belonging to them. Here you could listen to the different national airs, see the different national types and costumes, and eat the different national foods.
fumbling at the latch! It had found the door! The Martians understood
“Blame it, I’d sorter begun to think you wasn’t. Well, then, that’s all

“For heaven’s sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be to you to offend Mr. Darcy? You will never recommend yourself to his friend by so doing.{127}”
that was all.
heah’s you—dat’s de yuther one; I’s Sollermun; en dish yer dollar
“Po’ little chap.”
As soon as we arrived at Tashkend, Sergy went to bed again, but was all right on the following morning. The sight of my face was the best medicine he could have.

“Noth’n.”
coming into sight round the bend, my fever and faintness overcame my
and got together in a corner that was out of the range of the front
and stuffed the rest of the space with straw, to hold it in place.




even as near as Crewe, to descend upon London. The church bells that
advance and recede, but that was simply that my eye was tired. Forty
July 8th.—We enter the harbour of Colombo and moor pretty far away from the coast, to the great disappointment of the recruits. Scores of sampans with Singhalese rowers came to bring us ashore. We stopped again at the Grand Hôtel. I had tea in a nice shady corner of the verandah, which runs round the two sides of the hotel. The first half of it is lined with tables and easy-chairs and the other is nothing but a succession of shops, where Hindoo merchants are installed. We could see from here all that was going on in the street, and observe all passers to and fro. The feminine-looking Singhalese walk bareheaded, their long hair saturated in cocoa-oil, gathered in a knot chignon-fashion, and fastened by a huge tortoise-shell circle-comb. The Singhalese women wear only a short skirt and a short waist bodice between which several inches of brown skin are visible.
gate, all studded with emeralds that glittered so in the sun that even

“Permit me again to recommend the example of this eminent missionary. The biography of such a man is a study, as the artists speak. I have stood on Schwartz’s grave, I have visited his house, I have been in the room in which he died; I have seen his garden, his burial ground, and his mission schools. I have preached twice in his church. Never can I bless God enough for the honour of being permitted to speak of the unsearchable riches of Christ in this seat of the missionary’s labours. The venerable Kohlhoff was under him thirty-five years.[Pg 194] He never knew him angry or indignant, except when any servants of the Lord were acting inconsistently or timidly—then he was all on fire. Once Sattianaden threw difficulties in undertaking a journey. Schwartz was much displeased and dispatched him instantly, with a sharp rebuke for dishonouring the high calling of Christ. His strength for labour was wonderful: five duties he performed every Sunday, one of them being the whole English morning service. He preached twenty or thirty minutes, and was very affectionate in his manner. He read constantly his Hebrew Bible and his Greek Testament. Every day he assembled his catechists and native priests to early prayers, and then sent them out, ‘You go there,’ ‘You visit such a circle,’ ‘You see how such and such families are going on.’ They returned about four, and reported their proceedings. He went himself to the schools, families, residents’ abodes, came in about one and remained at home studying or writing till four, when the catechists returned. He then took them with him, and seated himself in the mission churchyard or in his house, according to the season, and invited the heathen to converse and hear him read the scriptures. He was mild, but very authoritative; very acute also in answering their objections, and never allowed himself to be embarrassed. In the evening he called for his moonshee, and heard him read the Persian poets or historians, hoping particularly to relieve his spirits.

Q. What are the essential parts of the State?


for they immediately took out their handkerchiefs and began to weep

Even within the five-mile circle the great majority of people were
breathing. Everything seemed deadly still, but once something near us,


smoke.

couldn’t see no sense in the most of it, but he allowed we was white
“Has he come?”
MECHANISM of SOCIETIES.
“At the door.”


and knowing and not ignorant; and not mean, but kind; and yet here he
advertise Jim, or something like that. So we can’t resk being as long

busted in and says:

“Yes, I reck’n you are. But s’pose she _don’t_ break up and wash off?”
May 26th.—It is Sunday to-day. When we approached the station of Merv, church-bells began to toll. It was a church-car which was waiting to be hooked on to our train, and thus we had Mass whilst crossing the vast desert.
Eleventh Hypothesis.
“Pray tell your sister that I long to see her.”

days we’d be here, and considerin’ the bed a safe place, we not bein’
 IX. THE FIGHTING BEGINS.

I shall likewise suppose, that from those facts and reasons it should result also, that never was a decrease in the Prince’s revenue more effectually secured, than by the contrivances devised to increase it: What is it to the Prince, provided it be no longer possible to mistake the true means of enriching him?—Is it not the time to come, that should, above all, engross the attention of a Great Prince?
CHAPTER XLVI
the lining. These, she thought, must be the charm, so she read the
“My land!” she says, breaking in and jumping for him, “you impudent

from which other tentacles were now projecting, and began pushing my
Then she went back to the house, and having helped herself and Toto to

was, underneath.
side of the road. Indeed he was obliged to call to her to help him up
time with a private jug on the sly. A nigger rousted me out this
At four o’clock in the afternoon we attended the evening service at the cathedral. This time the chorus consisted of Chinamen. A young Mexican padre mounted a pulpit and began preaching a long sermon in Portuguese language. As we did not understand what he said, we returned to the hotel, where we found visiting-cards left for us by General Wilson Black, the Commander of the English troops at Hong-Kong, who had called upon us with his wife and daughter.
SCHWARTZ’ HOUSE AT TRICHINOPOLY
the gigantic limbs churning the water and flinging a splash and spray
He shook his head.
[228]

“It’s a most amaz’n’ good idea, duke—you _have_ got a rattlin’ clever
I could only get back to this forest, I would pass my life very happily
top and supported by a thick neck full of wrinkles. But he had no arms


notice when the Scarecrow stumbled into a hole and rolled over to the


and at last the job was through, and the undertaker begun to sneak up
IV.
“After a short survey”	434
but death.
Schwartz quietly and with careful reasoning strove to put him right. He felt he was dealing with the problem of the soul in every age, in every country, his own as well as under an Indian sky, the questionings of a spirit wanting, perhaps, behind all its cavillings, to find the truth, at any rate feeling its need of direction, but ignoring the only key, the only guiding hand. He spoke to this Hindu of the operations of the soul, such as thinking, judging, determining, and asked whether mind was capable of these. Then lifting his thought to a higher plane he pointed out the arguments for the existence of a soul, how this constituted his immortal part and personality, which being endowed with understanding and will can act for itself and knows the fluctuations of sorrow, anxiety, and pain, as well as joy and satisfaction. Then he opened to him the Scriptures and showed him from St. Paul’s Epistle to the Corinthians the doctrine of the resurrection from the dead. It will be seen how Schwartz drew his strength from the Bible—the book he loved—which was the power and inspiration behind all his soul.
then the other brothers, on both sides, goes for one another; then the
strawberries, ripe and prime; and green summer grapes, and green
The head-butler, a solemn and majestic-looking mulatto, told me that there were only twenty-five first-class passengers on board. The third-class is full of Japs and Chinamen, who[342] spend their time in playing dominoes. The Celestials are a pest to the ship, their special odour pursues us everywhere. All the boys (in the Far East all the men-servants are called boys, regardless of their age), are Chinamen, who speak a mixture of English, French and German, rather difficult to understand; they call all the passengers, ladies and gentlemen likewise, Sir. The boys are excellent servants, wonderfully deft and handy. They absolutely watch the passengers, and study their tastes carefully when serving at table; once let them know your wishes, and everything will be arranged to suit them. What a difference with the rough American servants! For dinner the boys put on long white sleeves over their blue clothing and stick the ends of their long tresses into their pockets, in order that they should not dangle between their legs. When cleaning the cabins, they roll them round their head. Mme. Beurgier orders the stewards and the boys as if the boat belonged to her. She is a person not lightly to be disobeyed and would have been an excellent Prime Minister. She made friends with all her fellow-travellers and rushed over the entire ship conversing with everyone.



Oh, how I did pine for Sergy! I wanted him now as I had never wanted him before; I wanted the sound of his voice, the touch of his hand. Oh that he may soon come back to me! He was in my mind and in my heart day and night; in every dream I saw him: I stretched my arms out to him, but I awoke with sobs and in torment, for he was not there!

Well, pretty soon the whole town was there, squirming and scrouging and
“The elevation of his feelings”	267

in the cottonwoods and was safe.
timber waggon crowded with roughs. A brewer’s dray rumbled by with its


Our friends looked at him in surprise and dismay.
Nine millions of taxes, to pay off the annual interest of the debt, compose nearly one seventh of the landed revenue. These taxes, gradually laid on such objects of consumption as are supposed most likely to bear them, must have raised their price by one seventh, or something more; and that really, justly, and I think necessarily. The reader will perceive that I speak of the objects of taxation collectively, since some of them bring to the Exchequer twice their intrinsic value. The reimbursement being effected, would they fall back to their primitive value?—Yet this must be, in order to reap the pretended advantage; and this, in my opinion, would be of no manner of service. I shall endeavour to prove it; and then we shall examine whether the effect would not be more than doubtful.
mean the Sawyer family—than ever happened to any six Sawyer families.

you, but we—well, hang it, we don’t want the small-pox, you see. Look
“Alas!”
again—tell them you’ve thought of something. If you get here before
“My goodness, and she so well only last week! Is she took bad?”

It is no ways natural that the same causes will not be productive of the same effects. It may therefore, in my judgement, be reasonably concluded, that, within 90 years from this day, the landed revenue may be increased to double its actual value, and the population, trade, and industry, augmented in the like proportion, were even the national debt to amount then to 476,000,000, instead of the present 238,000,000, which excites so many complaints and loud murmurings.
Dorothy ran down and helped the Scarecrow to his feet, and the Lion
“Take good care of these friends of mine,” said the Lion, “and I will

mass of leather. I heard it give a peculiar thick cry, and forthwith
“I daresay you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that you would be gone with such celerity. Your conduct would be quite as dependent on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you were mounting your horse, a friend were to say, ‘Bingley, you had better stay till next week,’ you would probably do it—you would probably not go—and, at another word, might stay a month.”

In the meantime Schwartz pursued his work in spite of many hindrances, opening fresh schools and utilizing the native catechists. One of these was ordained at this time, Sattianaden, a man of high character and some talents. Schwartz, writing of his qualifications for the work of a minister, gives him high praise, “His whole deportment evinces clearly the integrity of his heart. His humble, disinterested and believing walk has been made so evident to me and others that I may say with truth I have never met with his equal among the natives in this country. His love to Christ and his desire to be useful to his countrymen are quite apparent. His gifts in preaching afford universal satisfaction. His love to the poor is extraordinary.”

“Elizabeth, you are not serious now.”
OUR VOYAGE AROUND THE WORLD
tire them out or they’d got to tire us out, and they done it. Then we
before daylight we had a lovely rope that you could a hung a person
I buckled to my paddle and they laid to their oars. When we had made a
XXXIX.	London	240
you lay down on your back in the moonshine; I never knowed it before.
“I always thought him like a candle made of tallow.”
“Well, then, what are they _for?_”
row t’other side the smoke-house; one little hut all by itself away
who had took up quarters there. I slipped up and peeped in at the
By-and-by they fetched the niggers in and had prayers, and then
Settlers who went out to seek fortune in the Far East, were beginning to arrive at Khabarovsk. Thirty families of emigrants, coming from the south of Russia, are quartered in barracks a few miles from the town. My husband wants to stock with inhabitants the outskirts of Khabarovsk, flattering himself with the hope that they will supply the town with provisions. In spring portions of ground will be distributed to them. In Russia the peasants receive one acre of land and in this country they will get forty acres of good land.
to her?”
. .”
“Protested that he never read novels”	87


“I again enforced the truth on their hearts, implored them to trust in the Word of God and become obedient to it and so took leave of them. One of the helpers remained behind with them, an old friend having requested him to eat something with him, when he re-presented much to them out of God’s Word.”
“She never done it; jis’ stood dah, kiner smilin’ up at me. It make me
A dozen rockets sprang out of the hills before them so soon as they


seemed that at last they were nearing the end of their travels. Yet it
tributes. The neighbors said it was the doctor first, then Emmeline,
on the bank and listened to the current swashing along, and counted the
During our evening ride along the line of the fortifications, a bullet flew past me and made my horse start. The misunderstanding explained itself. The Cossacks of our escort were ready to retaliate, when it proved to be simply a Russian officer who, shooting at a target, did not perceive that his bullets passed over the ramparts. All the same it is evident that I stood in imminent danger of being shot through the body, and feel myself trained up in war now, having experienced the baptism of fire, which is a very peculiar feeling, indeed!



rear, his horse trod in a rabbit hole and came down, throwing him into

corpse laying in the coffin with that bag of money on his stomach. So

him out!” and one or two women begun to scream. So, then, the
will protect you from harm.”
“My dear sir,” replied Mr. Collins, “I am particularly obliged to you for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking so material a step without her Ladyship’s concurrence.”



up Buck’s face, for he was mighty good to me.
over the kitchen. Presently I heard it nearer—in the scullery, as I
would come miles to hear Jim tell about it, and he was more looked up
action returned. But the curate was lethargic, unreasonable.

jump over the gulf, Dorothy would be killed, or the Tin Woodman badly
self-preservation. I splashed through the tumultuous water, pushing
After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explained:—“About a month ago I received this letter, and about a fortnight ago I answered it; for I thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiring early attention. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who, when I am dead, may turn you all out of this house as soon as he pleases.”
194,	l. 24, for 20 millions, read 27 millions.
“At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such as, upon the whole, I hope will give{370} you satisfaction. Soon after you left me on Saturday, I was fortunate enough to find out in what part of London they were. The particulars I reserve till we meet. It is enough to know they are discovered: I have seen them both——”
Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them: anything was a welcome relief to him at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins’s pretty friend had, moreover, caught his fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, and talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying at home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much spirit and flow as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself, as well as of Mr. Darcy. His eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her Ladyship, after a while, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did not scruple to call out,—
“Perhaps you have heart disease,” said the Tin Woodman.
suggested a resignation of the slit, and after a little while my
Chipping Barnet, in order that my readers may realise how that swarming


A question of graver and universal interest is the possibility of


told me was a heliograph.


cousins of the vertebrated animals, the Tunicates, the two processes
around me for about a half a minute longer you’ll get something you

[Pg vii]

“You’ll see, sir. They carry a kind of box, sir, that shoots fire and
terror gripped me. I stood petrified and staring.
by the stars. I looked away down-stream, and seen a black speck on the
“Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you will be delighted with her. She is all affability and condescension, and I doubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her notice when service is over. I have scarcely any hesitation in saying that she will include you and my sister Maria in every invitation with which she honours us during your stay here. Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is charming. We dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never allowed to walk home. Her Ladyship’s carriage is regularly ordered for us. I should say, one of her Ladyship’s carriages, for she has several.”
magicians. Tom Sawyer said I was a numskull.

the way she liked to have them when she was alive, and nobody ever
and sat down. There was a great cornfield beyond the fence, and not far
couldn’t make it out no way.

Ripley Street was deserted, and except for a lighted window or so the
withdrew his head and disappeared.
of us were rather too full of mischief at times, flying down to pull


[217]
scorched greys and sullen reds of the foreground to the blue-green
so on, till I was afeard _I_ had made a mistake coming to her to find


ADEN
windows—there warn’t none on the side. They held the candle, and took a

“True,” answered Oz. “But there is another way to make it float, which

would go there, and she said not by a considerable sight. I was glad
the life on Mars and terrestrial life, I may allude here to the curious

“Yes; we got one and they got one. ’Bout three months ago my cousin


Elizabeth was chiefly struck with his extraordinary deference for Lady Catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and burying his parishioners whenever it were required.
had taken before, and all were greatly surprised when they looked about
Then the men see them, and jumped on their horses and took out after
The time occupied by a missionary in mastering the language of the people to whom he ministers is always well spent. To some this task presents difficulties which make the process arduous and prolonged, to others, happy in a natural facility for learning another tongue, success is more easily and quickly achieved. There is no doubt that Schwartz had very remarkable linguistic capacities. To him one language more or less did not seem to matter; we have seen how he was fully at home with Tamil, and he discovered that as Persian was the language of the Mohammedans’ Court he ought to know it, and that Hindustani would also be of service in speaking in the presence of the Nabobs and high Indian officials, so he must learn that too. So on his way he had a word for everybody, the door of opportunity was the tongue of the people, and each in his own language heard the word of God. Whatever the station or caste, it was just the same, their questions were respectfully answered, and they felt that in this missionary a friend was speaking to them and also one who knew more than they.
farther away from the road of yellow brick. And the water grew so deep
The occasional howling of the Martians had ceased; they took up their


Already I had had a transient impression of these, and the first nausea
Well, pretty soon the old man was up and around again, and then he went
dey’s a watchman on dat wrack.”

a tombstone on her right elbow, under a weeping willow, and her other
time, and now none is forthcoming.

The tinsmiths looked the Woodman over carefully and then answered that

CHAPTER LXXX
steadily until it topped the side of the pit.
I snatched in the darkness, and my fingers caught a bottle of burgundy.
forest, and all the beasts that live there have made me their King. If
of those complicated fabrics that have since been called

the camels and elephants, so I was on hand next day, Saturday, in the
picking up money out’n the road.”
“I confess, dear sir, I was grieved at it. I assure you that I honour the state of matrimony as a divinely instituted state, but if a new missionary comes out he ought to be unembarrassed. His first work, besides his attention to his personal religion, is the learning some languages, which require great attention and unwearied application. I will not say that a married man is unable to learn languages, but this I know from experience in[Pg 157] others, that the work goes on slowly. Besides, a new missionary who comes out in the married state wants many things to maintain his family decently which may distract him. If one should enter into that state after he had become qualified for his office the difficulty would be less; but even then, he ought to be well assured of the real piety of his wife, otherwise she will be a sore impediment to him in the discharge of his duty.”
reach Venus, there is no reason to suppose that the thing is impossible
drop over to t’other village without any plan, but just trust in


the papers that the cylinder was a good two miles from my house. He

[222]
ears, and bolted into the scullery. The curate, who had been crouching
“Ain’t they got any necks, then?” said a third, abruptly—a little,
since the Queen of the Mice had given it to her. In a few minutes they
So we poked along back home, and I warn’t feeling so brash as I was
The young men about me were very incendiary, a tiny spark thrown among them set them on fire. Stenger, one of my most ardent partners, a youth of about nineteen years of age, took a desperate fancy to me; when we danced together he held me in his arms so tightly I could hardly breathe, and as we swung round he murmured soft things into my willing ears. That boy managed to make his way into our house and found means to see me almost daily.

When Spring came on, I began to learn to ride the bicycle. After some inevitable tumbles, I soon surmounted the difficulties of this sport.
steamboat.
“I am only a Scarecrow, stuffed with straw. Therefore I have no brains,
“Good!” says the old gentleman. “Now, what you _did_ see on his breast


ain’t going to be no flaws in his record.”

[Image unavailable.]


We had the intention on arriving at Suez to make an excursion along the banks of the Nile, and then to catch the Laos at Port Saïd. When we set foot on African soil, the train for Cairo had already started, and we were obliged to wait patiently until the next day. We set out piano pianissimo through the intense heat to seek rooms at the Hôtel Continental. Suez is in the full Carnival; masked groups walk about the streets. A man dressed like a cook, holding an immense sauce-pan, in which he was stirring with a big spoon a sort of gruel, sprinkled with this nasty mixture all the passers-by, shouting, “Vive la France!” Knowing that he was at our heels, we hastened to the hotel.

Telegraph_, and the world went in ignorance of one of the gravest
keep the gas in it. I have plenty of silk in the Palace, so it will be
considerable number of people in London stuck to their houses through
There is not a single nation that cannot boast some palpable advantage over another; nay, there is not a nation, a single province, that has not received some peculiar favour from nature, which the same soil to all appearance, the same temperature, the same exposure, refuse to yield any where else but with double the labour, and double the expence, and which, even with such additional aids, they yield at last only in a state of degradation. Now, that portion of such peculiar favours, which the proprietor of the land does not chuse to consume, belongs only to the greatest quantity of other favours that it is possible to procure in exchange. The more the[331] proprietor procures of such other favours in exchange, the more is he encouraged to increase the quantity of articles which have enabled him to procure those favours; on the contrary, the more he is restrained with regard to those exchanges which he might procure, the more he is circumscribed, even in his means of production. Every restriction therefore tending to diminish either the production or the price of any article whatever, is a theft committed upon the proprietor of the land, upon the province blessed with that favour which is peculiar to it, upon the nation whose general revenue is decreased by the whole amount of the productions stifled in the very bud, upon the exchequer of that nation which would receive a duty on those productions; and finally upon every one capable of presenting the nation with another exchangeable commodity, or waiting only to see those productions, in order to create an equivalent to pay for them.—Does it signify in what part of the world? Must it not, at last, reach the original proprietor, if he be not paid?
pit I had looked into at Woking. The earth all round it had splashed

Schwartz’ House at Trichinopoly	”	”	80
Nobody never said anything for a while; then the young man hove a sigh
around his wrist, too. He said that that would help. Then I slid out
[463]

here; you stop that putting on frills. I won’t have it. I’ll lay for
The three Munchkins bowed low to her and wished her a pleasant journey,
“You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help laughing myself at your surprise to-morrow morning, as soon as I am missed. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with who, I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man in the world I love, and he is an angel. I should never be happy without him, so think it no harm to be off. You need not send them word at Longbourn of my going, if you do not like it, for it will make the surprise the greater when I write to them, and sign my name Lydia Wickham. What a good joke it will be! I can hardly write for laughing. Pray make my excuses to Pratt for not keeping my engagement, and dancing with him to-night.{357} Tell him I hope he will excuse me when he knows all, and tell him I will dance with him at the next ball we meet with great pleasure. I shall send for my clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I wish you would tell Sally to mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown before they are packed up. Good-bye. Give my love to Colonel Forster. I hope you will drink to our good journey.

“Yes, he’s got a father, but you can’t never find him these days. He
PORT SAÏD
poke the thread at it; that’s the way a woman most always does, but a
Author: Mark Twain
We are going to be here a week and make trips round about. I am prepared to be delighted with everybody and everything.
seriously. Yet though they wore no clothing, it was in the other
“Are you not going to make them your slaves?” asked the leader of the
moment on the pore disappeared Dauphin, Looy the Seventeen, son of Looy


I was delighted with London. In this great city life is full and stirring; but the English Sunday is rather a trying affair, for there are no theatres, no entertainments whatever. We wanted to explore the British Museum that day, and it was with great difficulty that we caught a drowsy porter who turned on his heel and went away after having declared, very rudely, that we were troubling him in vain, the Museum being closed, considering that the day of Sabbath was for rest and peace, and that all good Christians kept it holy. We turned sorrowfully away and went to our Russian church. When the service was over our priest, a charming old gentleman, invited us for a cup of tea. My patriotic sentiment was agreeably flattered when I saw the works of Tourgeneff, our great writer, translated into English, in his drawing-room.
Why, there ain’t no end to your airs—they say you’re rich. Hey?—how’s
looked down in my eyes so steady and gentle, and says:
of you, as she has of the rest. But take care; for she is wicked and

“Well, you try it, anyway. Some other prisoners has done it.”

“Looky here—mind how you talk to me; I’m a-standing about all I can
was, and that the little girl did not know of the wonderful power the
“Well, we can’t resk being as long as we ought to, because it mayn’t
“Do you think,” he asked, “if I go to the Emerald City with you, that
Seventhly, Let us suppose that the operation is effected, and followed by the sum of money which a nominal revenue, grown more considerable, requires for the circulation; can there exist then the most trifling difference between the present state of any individuals in the nation, and the state they were in previous to their being loaded with that enormous burden, called taxes?



But the old man got pretty silent by-and-by—didn’t have much to say,




Our Tableau was a great success. The curtain fell amid loud applause and went up several times to the sound of an orchestra playing Moschkowsky’s “Mandolinata.” It was with a sigh of relief that I found myself home. I removed the grease paint off my face and got out of my costume as quickly as I could.
had been alive and so terrible to men were dead. For a moment I
Baroness Rothvillers had left Paris when we arrived, nevertheless we went to see her husband, who gave us a warm and kindly welcome. He invited us to dinner on the following day and took us afterwards to the “Cirque d’Eté.”


shot the earth we removed against the kitchen range. We refreshed
The doctor and several said “Shucks!” and I see nobody didn’t
old broken-down tree you could see rabbits and snakes and such things;

a deer, for I see our chance; and I made up my mind that it would be a
could stand it, I could.
“I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much for me, or else I could take it in my way to Newcastle. And you saw the old housekeeper, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she was always very fond of me. But of course she did not mention my name to you.”

“Covering a screen”	45
Oz would give me some brains?”





August 10th.—Towards five o’clock in the morning our vessel glided into the verdure-framed harbour of Nagasaki, a dream of loveliness. High on the three sides rose steep green hills, clothed with forests of palm-trees. On our left the port stretched out, covered with a multitude of junks. Here is the home of Madame Chrysanthemum!


the nap rubbed off; big double log-house for the white folks—hewed
The duke he grumbled; said the bag of gold was enough, and he didn’t
Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be any extenuating circumstances in the case unknown to the society of Hertfordshire: her mild and steady candour always pleaded for allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes; but by everybody else Mr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.{175}

long pole and helped push the raft to the land.
carry, is it my fault any more’n it’s yourn?”
there was a thick fog, and the rafts and things that went by was
The rainy season coming on earlier than usual, we returned to town in the beginning of September. Moscow was very gay this winter; many celebrated artists visited our city. The appearance of Maria Van-Zandt, a lovely American Opera singer, was the great attraction of the season. I went to see her in “Lakme,” Delibe’s latest opera, and she gave me exquisite pleasure, being delightful to look upon and to be listened to. She was bewitchingly pretty, just like a dainty bit of Dresden china; her voice was clear as silver and she trilled like a bird.
Elizabeth’s misery increased at such unnecessary, such officious attention! Were the same fair prospect to arise at present, as had flattered them a year ago, everything, she was persuaded, would be hastening to the same vexatious conclusion. At that instant she felt, that years of happiness could not make Jane or herself amends for moments of such painful confusion.
“Gimme the rags; I can do it myself. Don’t stop now; don’t fool around
_his_ style—he never give anybody a chance. He had suspicions of his
deserted, and several of the houses facing the river were on fire. It

dead! you’s back agin, ’live en soun’, jis de same ole Huck—de same ole
reckon it ain’t him, or else he wouldn’t be paddling up the river.’ You
grandfather was flying out with his band when he saw Quelala walking
“Compared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us as wished to learn never wanted the means. We were always encouraged to read, and had all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose to be idle certainly might.”
I have perused several of these petitions; and the substance of what has appeared to me most striking in every one of them is nearly this: “Let every thing be taxed in England, nothing more equitable; let every thing be taxed, every thing, except all the things that concern your humble petitioners: you cannot tax them, without ruining their trade; and not only their trade, but also the whole trade of the nation at large; and not only without ruining the whole trade of the nation at large, but without stifling that principle of liberty, that noble spirit of life, which has so highly distinguished her above all the nations in the world.”

and the noise of the tramping was like a soldier march. The windows and
ELIZABETH awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations which had at length closed her eyes. She could not yet recover from the surprise of what had happened: it was impossible to think of anything else; and, totally indisposed for employment, she resolved soon after breakfast to indulge herself in air and exercise. She was proceeding directly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy’s sometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park, she turned up the lane which led her farther from the turnpike road. The park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed one of the gates into the ground.


The next day we visited Drottningholm Palace, situated out of town, the summer residence of the King, who was for the moment in Norway, where he is obliged to live a part of the year. After dinner we started for Malmö, where we arrived early in the morning on the following day, and then took the train to Copenhagen.

go.”






“Lydia will never be easy till she has exposed herself in some public place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with so little expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present circumstances.”

studied, perhaps almost as narrowly as a man with a microscope might
walked up to it, while Toto ran around the pole and barked.




Scarecrow had decided what to do.
bed and give me a pull, and out I come; and when he turned back from
“I thank you for your tender (I might almost say too tender) regard for me, poor sinner. I wish, nay, pray heartily that you may always appear clothed with the righteousness of your Divine Redeemer. Just now we considered to our mutual edification in our evening prayer, that excellent chapter, Romans v.: ‘Being therefore justified by faith we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, rejoice in the hope of glory, rejoice even in tribulation.’ What inestimable blessings are these! And all purchased by Christ and given freely to all hungry and thirsty souls! O that we might open our mouths wide and be filled! As I read you once that passage in the garden, so I could not help reflecting on it, nay I shall remember you as often as I read it. May the Spirit of God be poured out in our hearts, and may He display to us the incomparable wonders of the grace of God towards us!”
Edgware, with the idea of getting a train there. He stopped behind to
words on it, asked, “Is your name Dorothy, my dear?”
By this time Jim was gone for the raft. I was just a-biling with
common towards Chertsey, set with black pine trees, seemed to darken


“But not before they went to Brighton?”
went wild in them bottoms after they had got away from the prairie
“Yes, ma’am, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like him—just as affable to the poor.”

November 11th.—We are coasting along Egypt and glide quite near the Sinai Mountains, on the top of which Moses wrote the Ten Commandments. Already the liner had left the rocky perils of the treacherous Red Sea, studded with hidden shelves, which are not marked on the charts.
full day, and everything smiling in the sun, and the song-birds just
off, but the Wicked Witch was angry to find them in her country; so she
to talk on the right side. I begun to tell about Sheffield, and how we

After dinner we went to the opera to see “Tannhauser.” I felt tired and asked Sergy what was the time every minute. After the second act, he took me out on to the boulevard to eat ices.
miss’n.”

September 5th.—To-day we are undertaking the most difficult part of our journey, and shall have to endure the misery of atrocious roads. At six o’clock in the morning our tarantass, a rattling post-chaise, was at the door. An escort of two hundred Cossacks on horseback is trotting close behind our carriage and on both sides of it, until our first stoppage where we have to change horses. A third hundred of Cossacks was sent on before, to be divided into parties of six men to escort us all the way.
_then!_ Indeed he wouldn’t. Said it warn’t no fair test. Said his
all come of looking at the moon that way, like a fool.

nothing of this in the papers except a little note in the _Daily

you.” And once he said: “Hear him beg! and yit if we hadn’t got the
prisoner. All right—I’m glad we found it out detective fashion; I
“_Ain’_ dat gay? En what dey got to do, Huck?”
Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.

TWO days after Mr. Bennet’s return, as Jane and Elizabeth were walking together in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the housekeeper coming towards them, and concluding that she came to call them to their mother, went forward to meet her; but instead of the expected summons, when they approached her, she said to Miss Bennet, “I beg your pardon, madam, for interrupting you, but I was in hopes you might have got some good news from town, so I took the liberty of coming to ask.”
At night she opened her heart to Jane. Though suspicion was very far from Miss Bennet’s general habits, she was absolutely incredulous here.
After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending to the brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It originated in Mrs. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found Elizabeth’s arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferred her husband’s. Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on together. After a short silence the lady first spoke. She wished him to know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the place, and accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had been very unexpected—“for your housekeeper,” she added, “informed us that you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and, indeed, before we left Bakewell, we understood that you were not immediately expected in the country.” He acknowledged the truth of it all; and said that business with his steward had occasioned his coming forward a few hours before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling. “They will join me early to-morrow,” he continued, “and among them are some who will claim an acquaintance with you,—Mr. Bingley and his sisters.”
Before I venture to express my thoughts on the subject, I wish the reader would form to himself an idea of what might be the effect of such a system in England;—in England, where every man is a calculator, and adds without[227] ceremony, on the creditor side of his books, the number of figures necessary to balance those which he thinks too many in the calculation of others. They say in England, and there they are more bitterly persuaded than any where else, that taxes take annually out of the pockets of those who pay them, the whole amount of the impost; but there as every where, and there much sooner than in any other part of the world, justice and reason never fail to put into the head of each individual, what he is to do, that the tax be not paid for a long while out of his own pocket. I may therefore boldly say, that nothing more is wanted on the part of England, to join perfectly in opinion with me, concerning the most important point (that which concerns the national debt), than to observe, that every one has always done as secretly and as expeditiously as he could, for himself alone, what I insist it would be advantageous to do openly, with equal celerity, for the general good[8]. I now resume my subject.



tubes, crossed the river, and two of them, black against the western
invited here this evenin’; but tomorrow we want _all_ to

ferry-boat full of people floating along down. I knowed what was the
CHAPTER XXV.
windows to stare out and ask aimless questions, dressing hastily as the

“All the same,” said the Scarecrow, “I shall ask for brains instead of
battery, sir. You’ll come in sight of the Martians, I expect, about
northward and eastward. By ten o’clock the police organisation, and by
“I did not like to be deserted this way. So I tried to walk after them.
“The spiteful old ladies”	377
[179]



October 1st.—I had little sleep last night, for the ship was rolling a good deal. I climbed on deck at sunrise. Sergy tucked me up in my chair and I soon fell into a deep slumber. When I woke the rolling had ceased and the sea was quite calm. I was so comfortable I didn’t want to get out of my rug, and took my breakfast on deck.
way down the lane, with two friends bending over him, lay a man with a
purple china dog with an extra-large head, which came to the wall and


heard the king and the duke come up; so I rolled off my pallet and laid
Dorothy came to meet them and thanked the little mice warmly for saving
nest, the Martians spread this strange stifling vapour over the
killed before earth was reached. It was just as well for them, for the
sleeping, and I rose early. I went into my garden before breakfast and
and the money would last us as far as we wanted to go in the free
had a greenish colour, and caused a silent brightness like summer

“But if that is so, what is there to live for?”
was the new farmhouse Uncle Henry built after the cyclone had carried




open. Let us crawl under those bushes and talk.”
She came close to Dorothy and kissed her gently on the forehead. Where

The duke told him, and then says:
sent him down against the wheel of the chaise.
too. We put the lot into the canoe—it might come good. There was a

come back, wagging their tails around me, and making friends with me.
III.


you till morning!”
 The Duke went for Him
A few days after our arrival, my husband presented to the Emperor a deputation composed of representatives of different tribes inhabiting Oriental Siberia, who offered to His Majesty, according to custom, a silver dish with “Bread and Salt” and beautiful sable-skins. The corridors in the Grand Hôtel, where we had taken an apartment, were crowded with people wanting to get a glimpse of the deputies. One of them, Tifountai, one of the richest Chinese merchants of Khabarovsk, who had prominent oriental ideas about women when passing through Paris, led a dissipated life in the Great Babylon, that went on for a week, and did not arrive in time for the presentation. The representatives of different countries began to arrive at St. Petersburg on their way to Moscow, where the Coronation of Nicolas II. was to take place. One of the first arrivals was the Ambassador of the Chinese Emperor, the famous Li Hung Chang who had been treacherously wounded in Japan. Notwithstanding his eighty-two years, he looks very alert and vigilant. My husband had an interview with the old diplomatist, after which he presented his suite to him. According to Chinese etiquette the mandarin addressed to everyone two stereotype questions translated by his dragoman into French: “What is your name,” and “How old are you?” Henritzi, the youngest of Sergy’s aide-de-camps, who was of German origin and spoke his national tongue better than French, when answering to the last questions, said that he was twenty-four years old, German-fashion: “Quatre-vingt,” vier und zwanzig, which means eighty-four in French. The dragoman casting an astonished glance at the young octogenarian, translated his answer to the letter. The old mandarin never winced, and rising from his seat, bowed low to the “Ninon de l’Encles” of the unfair sex. (I beg your pardon, gentlemen!) In China old age is greatly venerated. If you wish to make a Chinaman perfectly happy, all you need to say is “How old you[436] look!” When the reception was over, Li Hung Chang remitted to my husband the Chinese order of the “Double Dragon,” bearing the imprinted inscription “Before this the lion will grow pale and the tiger mute.”
with his free hand, my brother lugged him sideways. But he still
account of the shouting and crying. Folks got up everywheres in the
open camp fire in the middle, and a tall flag-pole at each end. There
when we had got pretty well stuffed, we laid off and lazied. By-and-by

So he done it.
other oar was smashed off, and the raft was littered up with leaves and
somebody, ’n’ sich everlast’n rubbage. He’s plumb crazy, s’I; it’s what


is not another city in all the world that is ruled by a stuffed man.”
“Is there no one who can help me?” asked Dorothy earnestly.
The subsequent years spent at Tranquebar were a mingled experience of blessing, progress and difficulties, and disappointment at the loss of some very promising converts. And the time for the departure of Ziegenbalg drew near. It is painful to hear that the sorrow which hastened his end was not the opposition of unbelievers but the persecution of a man who for a time was the presiding power on the Missionary Board at Copenhagen. With a narrow and uncharitable spirit he assailed Ziegenbalg and his co-workers, trying to force upon the already wearied workers theories and orders as foolish as unkind. Ziegenbalg answered this mandate with a dying hand, but the mischief was already wrought. He was not the first brave witness of Christ who has laid down his life in a storm. On Christmas Day, 1719, he preached to his flock for the last time, and after much patient suffering, interspersed with tender counsel, meditation and prayer, he asked to be seated in his armchair and that they would sing his favourite hymn—written by Louisa Henrietta, Electress of Brandenburg.

On the quay where stands the monument of Christopher Columbus, the largest elevator in the whole world brought us in the space of one minute, on the roof of the “Liberal Arts,” where we visited a beautiful picture gallery containing the works of the most renowned painters of different countries. The Russian pictures occupy the first place, but our manufactory section is very poorly represented. In one of the pavilions of the United States we saw vegetables and fruit piled about in profusion. The fruit of California is three times larger than in any other country; tempting-looking apples and pears, coming from Los Angeles, were enormous in proportion, but quite tasteless.
uneasy.”

again, for when presently I looked round I was alone. The thudding
“I wish I knowed, but I don’t. I _had_ it, because I stole it from
when we get down the river a hundred mile or two I could write back to


“Lizzy, when you first read that letter, I am sure you could not treat the matter as you do now.”
“_Prisoners_ don’t have geese running around the donjon-keep to pull

through the portal into the streets of the Emerald City.
Mr. Wickham’s adieus were much more affectionate than his wife’s. He smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things.
“I must have a pound,” said the landlord, “and I’ve no one to drive
Mme. Schwarzenberg, a great friend of ours, who was a splendid pianist and an artist to the finger-tips, asked me to sing at a musical party at her house. I sang there in public for the first time and it amused me very much to be treated as a professional singer. I should be wanting in modesty if I repeated all the compliments I received that night. Somehow or other I felt that I had a call for the stage and had missed my vocation and mistaken my profession of an opera-singer: the vision of treading the stage-boards stood before me night and day.
“At first he prevailed upon them to meet in a large apartment in the old Gentoo building, but in time the garrison resolved to subscribe to erect themselves a church, and the money which would have been thought by contractors a very inadequate sum has been so well husbanded, and the materials and work, in consequence of Mr. Schwartz’s knowledge of the country and its language, were procured so exceedingly cheap that a very handsome, lofty and roomy structure was raised out of it.”
rage over, he went on his way without once looking back.
was extremely hot and dull; and in order to refresh myself I took a
solid gold and fitted it to the Woodman’s axe, instead of the old
“No, I believe not.{356}”
drove it off down the road, and, leaving it in charge of my wife and




January 13th.—We went about all day in palanquins, seeing the sights of Macao. Nearly all the streets bear clerical names: “Rua Padre Antonio,” “Callada de bon Jesus,” “Traversa de San Agosto.” Macao is a very pretty town. The houses are generally not more than one storey high, most of them painted blue, pink, or yellow, with green shutters, and terraces instead of roofs, all having overhanging balconies reaching out to one another in friendly[469] wise across the narrow streets, which swarm with Chinamen, who, contrary to their fellow-countrymen in Canton, look very peaceful. One of the particular features of the streets of Macao is the abundance of Portuguese priests, wearing long black beards, and women enveloped from head to foot in black mantillas. The natives of Macao are not attractive-looking. They are a race of half-castes—Portuguese father and Chinese mother, resembling orang-outangs, with their prominent jaws.
and when you pressed down on them they squeaked, but didn’t open their
motionless, and under no urgency of action.

“Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?” said Miss Bingley: “will she be as tall as I am?”
So they called the yellow Winkies and asked them if they would help to
ain’t a-going to allow no such miserable doings to go only just so fur
the duke come up in the garret and woke me up, and I see by their look
She believed him mild, kind-hearted, very true.
women in the chaise in a meadow, saw the green flash of it far beyond
And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him the next moment open the front door and quit the house. The tumult of her mind was now painfully great. She knew not how to support herself, and, from actual weakness, sat down and cried for half an hour. Her astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed, was increased by every review of it. That she should receive an offer of marriage from Mr. Darcy! that he should have been in love with her for so many months! so much in love as to wish to marry her in spite of all the objections which had made him prevent his friend’s marrying her sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in his own case, was almost incredible! it was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously so strong an affection. But his pride, his abominable pride, his shameless avowal of what he had done with respect to Jane, his unpardonable assurance in acknowledging, though he could not justify it, and the unfeeling manner which he had mentioned Mr. Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to deny, soon overcame the pity which the consideration of his attachment had for a moment excited.
Next morning when I looked out of our windows I saw a wonderful sight, the snow-capped Jungfrau emerged from a mantle of clouds, a glittering dazzling mass with a background of shimmering snow-clad mountains. It is most fortunate that the summit unveiled to-day, as it is only seen on rare occasions.
We enter now the arid steppes of Central Asia. We are in the open desert, desolate and immense. As far as the eye could see on each side, the plain spreads before us, nothing but unlimited sand all round, and great monstrous yellow waves come closing in from all sides, threatening to engulf us. Such a wild, solitary landscape! Anything more dreary is impossible to imagine; there was neither water, tree, nor vegetation of any kind, nothing but glaring sun. It seemed as if we had been transported into a forlorn land. We were the only living things in a dead world; no sign of man or beast, not even a wandering bird was to be seen. The monotonous click of the engine was the only sound that broke the silence. The stations appear at great intervals in the midst of the desert. Life mustn’t be sweet here!
“Mister, is that town Cairo?”
glanced off in an inky jet that rolled away to seaward, an unfolding

rolled over at his feet in two pieces.



CHAPTER XXV

aside a man in black to do so, until I could see round the bend. Half a
We travelled from Sebastopol to Jalta in a mail-coach. It was such a beautiful drive, but seemed all too short. I am not given to sentimental rhapsodies over the beauties of nature, nevertheless, I was very much impressed by the divinely lovely scenery. I had no end of a good time at Jalta and danced a great deal at the military club, making conquests by the dozen. Time flew rapidly and the date fixed for our departure drew near; it was a great misfortune for me that our stay was so short.
May 17th.—The day of our departure for Tashkend has come. This time we decided to steam down the Volga from Nijni-Novgorod to Astrakhan. When we arrived at Nijni-Novgorod we went straight to the boat. Numerous porters[511] with heavy loads on their backs invaded the deck; they are able to bear extraordinary burdens. We saw a man carrying a piano, coming up a narrow plank on to our steamer, just as easily as a world-famed athlete would have performed it.

Well, there’s others can do that better than what I can, and they’re



“Well, spos’n it is? What does the _prisoner_ care whose—”
to come back and rule over them as soon as Dorothy was safely on her
Circumstances placed the author in the centre of remarkable events. Remaining faithful to the principle of not interfering with her husband’s business, she becomes, however, unwillingly, the spectatrix of particularly interesting facts: the outside of war, of different centres of Russian society, of exotic life in foreign colonies and on our remote frontiers, including the regions of the river Amour in Eastern Siberia.
and
On the following day we took the boat to Lido, a fashionable sea-bathing-place, and returned to Venice just in time for the table d’hôte. There was a great festival at night on the Canale Grande; all the gondolas of Venice were on the water, lighted with coloured lanterns. On the broadest part of the Canal they were tied one to the other thus forming a[216] large floating bridge, on the middle of which a group of street-singers were giving a serenade. Our gondolier, at our request, shouted out in a stentorian voice: Funiculi, funicula, and the singers performed with great emphasis that popular song, after which they crossed over from one gondola to the other, holding out their hats which were soon amply filled. We gave all the change we had in our pockets.
got a piece of paper and a pencil, all glad and excited, and set down

cylinder was rotating on its body. It was such a gradual movement that
hooky. I should _hope_ we can find a way that’s a little more

“Yes, indeed,” cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning a country neighbourhood. “I assure you there is quite as much of that going on in the country as in town.”
During the summer and autumn months, the San-Carlo, one of the biggest theatres in the world, is closed, and we went to see “Faust” at a small theatre, where the performance began very early, at six o’clock in the evening. The chairs in the first row cost only two francs. The conductor of the orchestra seemed little more than a boy and could not be over twenty, and the performance didn’t please me: Faust was too fat and Mephistopheles not diabolical enough; Siebel had a fine mezzo-soprano, but boy’s clothes did not suit the outlines of her stout figure, and Margaret had nothing of the woman but the skirt, and struggled against the almost impossible task of the mature woman impersonating a girl of seventeen, and was listening with all the coyness of forty years and six children at home, to the love-making of Faust. At eight o’clock a new performance of “Don Giovanni” was about to begin, but our eyes closed with sleep and we did not purchase any more tickets.

where the trees and branches grew so thick over the road that the
stop to rest, and so climbed to the top of the fence beside the road
 A Simple Job

The next day we went to visit the “Certosa,” an ancient grey abbey perched on a high rock, a veritable eagle’s nest. Only six monks are left now in the monastery, to make the famous “Certosa liqueur.” They gather the herbs in the mountains and keep the recipe of their liqueur as a great secret. The convent is now converted into a Museum. Among other curiosities we were shown a shallop in which Charles the Tenth had landed in Spain. Looking out from the terrace the whole city of Naples lay revealed; only the distant splashing of the sea below was heard.
The duke says, pretty brisk:
CHAPTER CX
has returned to her own home, what will become of you?”
“Take whatever you like, and get away.”
music. There were lights in the upper windows of the houses as the


have done. People rattling Londonwards peered into the darkness outside
half-a-man with you”—tossing his gun up across his left arm and cocking
or whether I warn’t. When I was fifty yards off, Jim says:

me and trying to make me see the things he had seen. He had eaten no
to myself except the solid dark, and the now-and-then glares, and the
and the Naze. In spite of the throbbing exertions of the engines of the
and in about five or ten minutes we heard the dogs and the men away
“What the devil is it?” he asked. “A fire? What a devil of a row!”
handy.”


“You are unusual,” replied Glinda.
November 10th.—The temperature is supportable. In the[427] afternoon a breeze arose which revived us somewhat. After dinner, there was music, and I was asked to sing, but objected, saying that my music was packed up. The captain told me that as soon as we get to Suez, he would write to Port Saïd for my favourite parts of “Margaret” and “Rosina.”
with a great many pins and needles. Having shaken them together
 “Jim Lit Out”
Shortly afterwards the army moved to invade Tanjore and the place was captured with hardly any resistance or loss, the poor affrighted King and his family were made prisoners, the Nabob took the kingdom and its treasure, and Schwartz found himself and his work under new masters and at a disadvantage. He appealed for more considerate treatment but was refused, and he reported the state of affairs to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, pointing out “that many of the best families would not hesitate to become Christians, could it be shown how they could maintain themselves. But the difficulties are now greater than when Tanjore and the Marawar country had their own princes and governments, many thousands of the inhabitants having quitted the country for want of food and employment.” Happily, after the position had been discussed in England, the Court of Directors of the East India Company disapproved of what had taken place, and for the sake of British interests the restoration of Tuljajee was carried out in April, 1776, and once more Schwartz felt that his influence was restored for the good of the work. But the contention which this new policy caused in Madras[Pg 107] again made it impossible for any amicable arrangement to be made, and the Council begged Schwartz to bring the pressure of his personal influence to bear upon the King, but this he refused to do as it would interfere with his sacred functions. “This is the cause,” he writes, “of my not having conversed with the King for six months past. It is with great regret that I have to inform you that he has lately given way to a luxurious and dissipated life, so that little hope can now be entertained respecting him.”
Next afternoon we beheld Genoa, at the foot of the Apennines and the Mediterranean spreading far and wide, where we stopped a whole day. An old guide, aged seventy-five, took us through the town. That old man had been a brave soldier in his day, one of the 1,200 warriors who had fought and landed with Garibaldi in Sicily. He took us to his private dwelling to show us his Garibaldian costume, a piece of Garibaldi’s famous red shirt, and the tip of a cigar which had been smoked by Garibaldi, which he kept as relics. On our way back to the hotel we passed before the monuments of Christopher Columbus, Garibaldi and Verdi. On the front of Garibaldi’s house the Free Masons have carved a garland of flowers surrounded by hieroglyphics. After dinner we drove to the Villa Pallavicini. At the entrance into the park stand white marble statues of Leda, Pomona, Hebe, and Flora. We walked through alleys of lemon, laurel, cypress and myrtle trees in full bloom. We passed a lake in which salmon-trout swam, and mounted on the top of a castle of the Middle-Ages. We entered then a stalactite grotto, with an artificial lake in the middle, where a mysterious Carcarollo invited us to take a row in his boat,[251] carrying the arms of the Dukes of Pallavicini. Further on we saw a pavilion bearing the tempting inscription tête-à-tête amoureux, and wanted to enter it, but our guide said that we had better keep outside, for as soon as you open the door a tub of water pours over your head, cooling instantly your amorous ardour.
“Oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the dining-room, for there is such a sight to be seen! I will not tell you what it is. Make haste, and come down this moment.{199}”
the Lion were tired, and lay down upon the grass and fell asleep, with
Author: Jane Austen
stuffed with straw, you know, and that is why I am going to Oz to ask
Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed. He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motive his cousin could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other way. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of her deserving her mother’s reproach prevented his feeling any regret.

May 14th.—My husband has received an important despatch from Constantinople, a circular of orders from the “Grand Vizir” to the high Turkish functionaries. Sergy thus acts the part of an Ottoman Pasha, which amuses me greatly.
Thoughts on Impost and Reimbursements. The Accumulation of public Treasure considered as the Means of preventing Taxation.	27
around her hips, and she looking like the most loveliest parasol.
ERZEROUM
see it warn’t no perfumery, neither, not by a long sight. I smelt

sand-pits was dotted with people, standing like myself in a

neither, the way I’ve seen them kind of interruptions do lots of times.
have scarcely dreamed of, they see, at its nearest distance only

knew the road intimately. My wife stood in the light of the doorway,
will make the attempt.”
merrily at his own mishap.
They went to bed quite early and slept soundly until daylight, when

I never felt easy till the raft was two mile below there and out in the
a mess you are always making!” The widow put in a good word for me, but
clapped my hat on my head, and the next second she see me; and she
clatter of hoofs and saw through the tree stems three cavalry soldiers

the old woman, she cleaned and dried it with a cloth, and put it on her
That second start was the most foolhardy thing I ever did. For it was
countless centuries Mars has been the star of war—but failed to
going down town to get some whisky; said he hadn’t had a drink all day.
Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham’s desertion, and complimented her on bearing it so well.

Jane, who was not so light, nor so much in the habit of running as Elizabeth, soon lagged behind, while her sister, panting for breath, came up with him, and eagerly cried out,—

Suddenly I heard a noise without, the run and smash of slipping
Of the next three days I know nothing. I have learned since that, so

“This I hung from the ceiling by a wire,” said Oz. “I stood behind the
“No, we _didn’t_. We never seen any marks at all.”
“And yet I meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a dislike to him, without any reason. It is such a spur to one’s genius, such an opening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind. One may be continually abusive without saying anything just; but one cannot be always laughing at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty.”

Says I, kind of timid-like:
on the north side of the park, save a haze of smoke to the northwest.
blue spread-eagle painted on it, and a painted border all around. It
govment! A man can’t get his rights in a govment like this. Sometimes
it was “spiritual gifts.” This was too many for me, but she told me


On the 16th of July we saw the arrival of Kaiser Wilhelm II. It was his first visit to Denmark after the taking of Schleswig by the Prussians. Our Ambassador, Count Toll, offered a window to us at the Russian Embassy, but we preferred to stand near the Royal Pavilion, erected on the landing-place for the reception of the Kaiser, so as to have the best view of the proceedings. Towards ten o’clock in the morning Mr. Stcherbatcheff, arrayed in full diplomatic uniform, covered all over with golden embroideries, came to fetch us in his carriage. Driving through the streets took a long time, the crowd was so great. When we approached the Royal Palace, we heard cannon reports. A stir among the throng heralded the coming of the King of Denmark, followed by his brothers and the Heir to the throne of Greece. Soon after appeared in a coach driven by a team of white horses the old Queen, aged seventy-two, but still very alert, accompanied by the Duchess of Orleans. Then a murmur arose among the crowd, and we saw a steam-launch, with the German flag flying at the prow, moored to the Danish shore, and Kaiser Wilhelm, his blond moustache curled upwards, stepped out upon the elegantly decorated pier, followed by a numerous suite. The King came up to him and embraced him. After a long exchange of amiabilities the Kaiser approached the Queen and kissed her hand, whilst the soldiers, standing in lines, presented arms to him. Only a few hurrahs were heard here and there. We were told that strong measures had been taken by the police to avoid demonstrations in the streets[273] against the Kaiser. A squadron of hussars was given to him as an escort, and all the way to the Palace infantry regiments formed long lines. The Danish soldiers did not look very imposing, being mostly of small stature. The circulation of carriages and trams was stopped during the passing of the troops, and we had to walk home, running the risk of being crushed by the crowd.

Assisted by the whole strength of the company!
So once more the little company set off upon the journey, the Lion
the road was full of women’s heads, and there was nigger boys in every
Sixteenthly, If that increase of prices in the landed revenue has not been restrained to France; if it be a fact, as all travellers pretend to have observed, that all the other parts of Europe have experienced the same revolution, the same encouragement, the same success, except the difference produced in some places by the singularity of certain laws; may it not be concluded, that although England has lost nothing by the revolution, although France has proved a gainer by it, other nations have also enriched themselves, namely, one tenth, those where the prices have been advanced a tenth; a ninth, those where the prices have been raised one quarter; one half, those where the prices have risen one half, &c. independently of an increase still more essential, viz. that of the quantity of the productions of the earth, which always closely follows that of their prices.
Although in his journal no further particulars are given of this interview, amongst the papers of the late Mr. Huddleston was found a note of what Schwartz had told him respecting the attitude of Hyder.
crescent of shipping, and the low Essex coast was growing blue and
blue of a tranquil evening sky. For a minute or so I remained watching

intensified, almost to the verge of craziness. He was as lacking in


All the first storey of our hotel is put to our disposal, each apartment has its own bathroom. I had to lock myself in to avoid the native merchants, who enter without knocking at the door, all smiles and making funny little bows.
“The weekly conference which we hold every Friday with all the labourers is of the greatest utility in keeping the mission work in order. For on that day, in the forenoon, we pray to God for wisdom and counsel and each relates how he has been employed or what has occurred in the congregations and schools and in the printing and bookbinding offices and in the private houses. Here everything that might occasion disorder or detriment is adjusted and those means are adopted which may best promote the general good. The conference being over the Portuguese and Tamil assistants make a report of their labours and of whatever may be wanting, that as far as possible it may be supplied.”
An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards despatched; and already had Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr. Bingley was obliged to be in town the following day, and consequently unable to accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was quite disconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have in town so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear that he might always be flying about from one place to another, and never settled at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her fears a little by starting the idea of his{12}
everybody dropping back to give them room, and all the talk and noise
“Not that I shall, though,” she added to herself, and she finished the letter; “and, my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it out.”
be rich. Well, dey’s some use in a sign like dat, ’kase it’s so fur
The barriers having been removed, Switzerland and France must necessarily have been enriched, or England ruined:—France and Switzerland were better pleased to be enriched; and so it will necessarily happen after the removal of the barriers subsisting between England and Ireland, that the agriculture of the latter must be enriched;—unless she should choose to do herself a real prejudice by keeping to all her former low prices, in order to procure an imaginary advantage to Irish industry, in hopes of prejudicing the British manufacturer;—which would indeed be very strange.

She expressed her gratitude again, but it was too painful a subject to each to be dwelt on farther.

went in, but dey didn’t have much. I wuz de on’y one dat had much. So I

Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could regard with any complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his attentions to herself most pleasing; and they prevented her feeling herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the others. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley was engrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr. Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to eat, drink, and play at cards, who, when he found her prefer a plain dish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her.
another, sprang from the scattered group of men. It was as if some

Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before, in the course of Jane and Elizabeth’s correspondence with her, made her sister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned the conversation.
promise you won’t blow, and won’t let the nigger blow, I’ll tell you


“I did hear, too, that there was a time when sermon-making was not so palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you actually declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business had been compromised accordingly.”
I’ll go and see; and if the Testament is where I had it, I’ll know I
An Evening Call.—The Farm in Arkansaw.—Interior Decorations.—Stephen

But that was at Street Cobham, where the black vapour was allowed to
hide the truck. Then we’ll wait. Now I say it ain’t a-goin’ to be
“Why, you just said a body could lift up the bedstead and slip the

for noth’n. Jist because we stood on our _rights_—that’s what for. But
“I’ve done considerble in the doctoring way in my time. Layin’ on o’
covering her face with kisses. “Where in the world did you come from?”
When we got home I went directly to bed, and was just falling asleep when the sounds of a march playing under our windows awakened me. It proved to be a group of sapper officers who had come to serenade me for having taken part at their festival.
strangest and gravest description, but the public was exhorted to avoid


“Hello, Jim!” and skipped out.
Soon as I could get Buck down by the corn-cribs under the trees by
all night we sat face to face, I weary but resolute, and he weeping and
in his britches-pockets, except when he fetched them out to lend a chaw


six respectable-looking people in it, and some boxes and bundles. The

I was the happiest girl on earth; it was so good to feel that Sergy cared for me! He became my world, my all. I was no longer the same girl I had been, my time of playing with the sentiments of men was over; surely there were two Vava Galitzines: one that had been blessed with the happy faculty of dismissing one love from her mind the[67] moment that she began to occupy herself with another, and one who, in spite of her frivolous outside, loved only one man in the world—her Sergy!
MR. COLLINS was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had been but little assisted by education or society; the greatest part of his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he had merely kept the necessary terms without forming at it any useful acquaintance. The subjection in which his father had brought him up had given him originally great humility of manner; but it was now a good deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected prosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine de Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which he felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness, mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility.
Ottershaw about the same time. In Woking the shops had closed when the
[76]

what seemed to me to be a servant’s bedroom, I found a rat-gnawed crust
go and wake up Buck and tell him—oh, here he is himself. Buck, take
time. I whooped and listened. Away down there somewheres I hears a

Sword Exercise.—Hamlet’s Soliloquy.—They Loafed Around Town.—A Lazy



When we left the train, an aide-de-camp of the Resident came up to my husband and offered his carriage to drive us to the Hôtel du Chemin de Fer. The hotel is kept by a Frenchman. We entered a courtyard surrounded by several low buildings. Our apartment disappointed me by the doubtful cleanliness of its beds denuded of coverlets and sheets. Lizards were running about the ceiling and the walls. A barefooted “boy” arrayed in a white loose jacket, armed with a feather-brush and a duster, came to tidy our bedroom. He first swept the petroleum lamp (there are no candles to be had in this corner of the globe) and then began to dust our beds with the same brush. It won’t be an easy task to civilise him!
and now was showing me there’s One that’s always on the lookout, and

friend, and let him quit the thing right where he was and save himself.
“But is there not danger of Lady Catherine’s disapprobation here, my good sir? You had better neglect your relations than run the risk of offending your patroness.”
see the plates that Jim throwed out, because they’d fall in the
“You have! Yes, there was something in that; I told you so from the first, you may remember.”




The third and fourth stood beside him in the water, one perhaps two
sequence of sounds in the kitchen, and, listening, identified it as the
escaped, I suppose, by way of the Old Woking road—the road I had taken

There was a little one-horse town about three mile down the bend, and
“Now you think it’s bad luck; but what did you say when I fetched in

described, had discharged, by means of the gunlike tube he carried, a

And even as I spoke he sprang to his feet and stopped me by a gesture.


“Yes, indeed; his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one of the very few sensible women who would have accepted him, or have made him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding—though I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as the wisest thing she ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however; and, in a prudential light, it is certainly a very good match for her.”

“Honey, I thought you said it was Sarah when you first come in?”
night some time—nobody don’t know jis’ when; run off to get married to
I shall confine myself to three answers:
 In a Fix
“This is a surprise to me which I wasn’t looking for; and I’ll
from Mars!” Excited men came into the station about nine o’clock with
that you could float by in ten minutes. It had the big timber of a

April 11th, 1876, our wedding day, was a red-letter day for me. Our house was full of guests and relations assembled to see me married. The marriage ceremony was to take place at ten o’clock in the evening in our village church. Before starting for church my father and mother gave me their blessing and cried a good deal. My bridegroom came forward to meet me on the threshold of the church and led me to the altar. We stood before the old priest who was to unite us, a little pale but quite self-possessed. He pronounced the words of the Sacrament that had been said over to so many millions of human beings: “Until death us do part!” and we became man and wife. The priest had concluded his marriage benediction, and after the usual congratulations, Sergy offered me his arm and we passed out of church, going together into a new life. We proceeded to our chateau, where my parents gave us and our numerous guests a sumptuous supper, enlivened by a military band that they sent for from Kharkoff. Whilst my health was drunk Sergy pressed a kiss on my lips, then followed a clinking of glasses and wild cheers of felicitations and blessings without end. Amidst this hurly-burly I saw a spider that crept up my nuptial gown. That was a cheerful omen for our wedding. A French proverb says: Araignée du soir grand espoir. God grant it to be so!
remained all night staring at a little spider which was weaving its web
it happened, only he painted it up considerable. Then he said he must

were greatly pleased to see this delightful country before them.
LXXII.	Our Journey to Khabarovsk	363

Heading to Preface	ix

“But I cannot!” exclaimed Dorothy, greatly surprised.
than what he did was a fraud and a liar. The poor girls was hanging to
In three other points their physiology differed strangely from ours.
he got that chance.
Scarecrow, as he stood beside the girl, “for we have come nearly as far
This Persian was the hero of a new pleasant adventure. Last night, returning home, he perceived at the corner of his house someone smoking behind the fountain; only the tip of a lighted cigarette could be seen. “Hello! who goes there?” he challenged the mysterious smoker loudly, but got no answer. “What are you doing there behind that fountain?” Complete silence again. “Brigands for sure!” vociferated the valiant Persian, and dashing into his house he returned reinforced by his servant, provided with a pistol which he pointed at the would-be malefactor, who continued to smoke peacefully. The fact is that there was no brigand whatever; it proved to be simply the tip of a lighted cigarette laid down on the border of the fountain by some nocturnal passer-by.
certainly alive to the seriousness of the business. About eleven, the


The deck to-day offers a lamentable spectacle. Sea-sickness, which had spared the greater part of the passengers, took its revenge now; nearly everybody was ill.
Next to our Asiatic section stands the pavilion of Polar Russia. The morose Siberian nature is such a contrast with our bright Turkestan. The panels on the walls represent a seal-chase; all sorts of stuffed polar animals fill the big halls, as well as an ethnographic collection of manikins, which represents in a very life-like manner, different types of the inhabitants of Siberia. The model of a sledge, harnessed with a team of dogs, reminded me vividly of our drive on the frozen Amour during carnival-week at Khabarovsk. On long tables, in the middle of the hall, lay all sorts of furs: beautiful sables, blue fox, beaver, etc. It is curious that according to official information, only 7-8 beavers are killed yearly in Kamtchatka. How can we explain then that hundreds of real beaver skins are sold in Russia. (It is the fur-traders only who can unriddle the thing).
“No, you are all wrong,” said the little man meekly. “I have been

the ground. “I feel like a new man.”
metallic taste. I found the water was sufficiently shallow for me to

horizon a blood-red glow, which as I drew nearer, crept slowly up the
“Thank you,” replied Dorothy, and then the kind Stork flew into the air
January 7th.—It is Christmas in Russia to-day. Hard luck to spend Christmas in these far away parts, when one wants to have one’s dear people about one! It makes me feel horribly home-sick. It is a dull day, chill and cloudy; long gusts of wind come down the street. We have a fire burning in the grate; fine tropics indeed! The Chinese inhabitants walk about muffled up in big coats lined with sheep-skins. In the extreme Orient it is the yellow race who predominates. I have had quite enough of the Chinese, who resemble each other as two ears of corn.


meteorites, stated that the height of its first appearance was about
this little stranger and get the wet clothes off from him and dress him
Alter again the proportion of the common price of labour, by supposing that the cultivator is allowed only one fourth of the revenue; this division may take place in a country extremely fertile; in this case, a tax of 10 millions on a revenue of 60, would only add 20 per cent. to the former prices; instead of raising the revenue of 60 millions to 75, as in the case of three equal shares, or to 78, as in the supposition of the revenue being divided in halves, the tax would then carry it only to 72. Now the 4th part of 72 is 18, as 15 is the 4th of 60; therefore if,[247] after the tax is imposed, you give 18 wherever you paid only 15 before that period, the burden will clearly be null again, since the increase in the price of labour, must have followed the advanced price of its products, an advance necessitated by the impost.

while I did this, and the palings up the road glowed red. While I was
head and found that it fitted her exactly. She did not know anything

dormant sense of wonder, my sense of the proportion of things, awoke
still—that’s what _I’d_ do. Who ever heard of a state prisoner escaping
kind of a flighty sleep, too, we muffled the oars and hitched the raft
neighbour was of opinion that the troops would be able to capture or to
think to yourself how fast _you’re_ going, but you catch your breath


IT is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a good fortune must be in want of a wife.
awful bad sign and would fetch me some bad luck, so I was scared and
“Miss Eliza Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, “despises cards. She is a great reader, and has no pleasure in anything else.”



TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON.
After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton, to inquire if Mr. Wickham were returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball. He joined them on their entering the town, and attended them to their aunt’s, where his regret and vexation and the concern of everybody were well talked over. To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged that the necessity of his absence had been self-imposed.
country of the Munchkins blue was the favorite color. But the people do
Paris was out of season and looked rather bare. We made a turn in the Bois de Boulogne, which proved a desert. We only met a middle-class wedding-party taking their traditional drive through the park, and nurses in white butterfly-like caps with flowing ribbons, wheeling perambulators and flirting with red-trousered soldiers.
grant your wish. Now go, and do not seek me again until you have earned
“I doan know but maybe I could, Mars Tom; but it’s tolable dark in
For a time the curate was silent, and then he whispered:
The light of probability now begins to dawn upon me: at least I here find myself at the source of money; and, as I know, first, that England must absolutely be provided with a certain quantity of it, whatever that quantity may be, for the five articles before mentioned:
got to cussing, and cussed everything and everybody he could think of,

“Where did you get the mark upon your forehead?” continued the voice.
“Look!”
has ever seen, would have been but a drop in that current. And this was
there on the wreck. We hustled it on to the raft in a pile, and I told
and went boo-hooing to Judge Thatcher to get money to hunt for the


rolling motion and as fast as flying birds.
faced around so as to have the bullet holes in front, you know, and the



XXII.	London	161
food—sour, hard, and mouldy, but quite eatable—in a baker’s shop here.
Heat-Ray wide and free! Fancy having it in control! What would it
to darken the sky.
bran-new brains.”



hundred masked cowards at his back and lynches the rascal. Your mistake
We rocked on the waves in a small rowing-boat for more than an hour, awaiting permission to step on board the Laos at the appointed hour. A little fleet of barges loaded with coal, surrounded us; their close neighbourhood made us look like chimney-sweeps. When we mounted the Laos we were as black as negroes.
Clapham Junction the face of London was grimy with powder of the Black
git acrost de river wid Miss Sophia. I reck’n dey’s gwyne to be mighty
“Yes,” answered the tin man, “I did. I’ve been groaning for more than a
with terrestrial forms. The red creeper was quite a transitory growth,
naturally startled, and lost no time in going out and across the

It seemed indeed as if the whole country in that direction was on
It is true, that the humanity of the great smugglers has often suffered the little ones to escape, before or after sentence, (the negro and the cheese being duly seised); and that a dozen of the little smugglers whom the policy of the great ones sacrificed by installments to the clamours of the merchant, were nearly the only victims of that barbarous law, the strict execution of which would have deprived France,
at once.

Another day we went by rail to Ryde, the most frequented beach of the Isle of Wight. The esplanade with its elm-groves, different-coloured flower-beds, and well raked lawns, is magnificent.
of the Amour Province in Siberia	313

this strangest of all things that ever came to earth from outer space
We can get you some garter-snakes, and you can tie some buttons on

current tell de raff come along. Den I swum to de stern uv it en tuck
two-story, and tilted over considerable. We paddled out and got
The room which I was to occupy was low-ceilinged and bare-looking, with a bit of looking-glass nailed to the wall; a table, three chairs and a sofa, which had evidently attained the dignity of old age, composed all the furniture. I had to sleep on that hard sofa, from which nearly all the horse-hair and springs had gone.
“In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure,” said Bingley; “and I hope it will soon be increased by seeing her quite well.”


speculations will scarcely be of interest to the general reader, to
As quick as lightning the man’s head shot forward and his neck



Wickham only shook his head.
to hide the canoe in, amongst the thick willows. We took some fish off
evidently much less sensible of changes of temperature than we are, but
July 22nd.—Daybreak came at last to put an end to my torments. The tempest began to abate. To-day is the[451] namesday of our Empress Dowager, and the boat has assumed a holiday aspect. At dinner Sergy regaled us with champagne, and offered up libations to the recruits and the crew. He raised his glass to the health of Her Majesty; the sailors shouted loud hurrahs and got up a dance on the deck.
would touch upon bread or meat. As he talked, things about us came
Effects of a merciless Tax upon all Articles of the most general Consumption.	218
as her other surroundings. Toto was not gray; he was a little black
lives forty mile back here in the country, on the road to Lafayette.”
against the starlight; and as this black object came down again, I saw

Well, I just felt sick. But I says, I _got_ to do it—I can’t get _out_
CHAPTER XXII
 Getting out of the Way
to let the world know where he’s captivated, he can write it on the
“Here’s the ticket. This hole’s big enough for Jim to get through if we
of fear for herself and Toto. Once the Witch struck Toto a blow with
Heat-Rays waved high, and the hissing beams smote down this way and
lamp.
same effect—the Martians seemed in solitary possession of the darkling
both hands. It grew upon my mind, once I could face the facts, that
would see if there was anything in it. I got an old tin lamp and an

Scarecrow, “for my head is stuffed with straw.”
the skeleton of a horse picked clean. I puzzled over this for a time,
I judge. No; there ain’t no good way but one. I got to steal that
split lip.
in this world to see _him_ before he died; never talked about nothing
whatever I asked for I would get it. But it warn’t so. I tried it. Once
nigger’s owner and tell where he was; but deep down in me I knowed it
“I certainly shall if I am able,” the Scarecrow replied; “but I must

“I do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Long,” said Miss Lucas, “but I wish he had danced with Eliza.”
“But you were strong enough to kill the Wicked Witch of the East,” said
bullets; but the Grangerfords stayed on their horses and capered around

sound come faint over the water but clear—eleven. When I struck the
I surely had not the vocation of a domestic paragon; when I poured out tea it was done the reverse of neatly, and the spotless teacloth was spotless no longer, for I poured more water on to it than into the cups, and mamma regretfully decided that I hadn’t got the right turn for housekeeping. My culinary efforts were also not to meet approval, and the cakes that I amused myself in baking, one day, were recognised, I am aggrieved to say, as not being fit to eat.
[281]
climb down into this great ditch. Therefore, if we cannot jump over it,


Tom thought a minute or two, and says:

and somebody sings out:
face and hands, scrambled into the chaise and took the reins from her.
was in his place it would make you feel ashamed; and so you oughtn’t to



[Image unavailable.]
see it as a machine, in spite of its metallic glitter. The
sleep with a vehement disorderly tocsin. There was a noise of doors

The favourable balance, as it is commonly understood, is then a mere chimera, which, if realised, would produce no other effect than to advance, at some period or other, the price of a pound of bread to that of a pound weight of gold; yet it results, methinks, from the exports of England, almost trebled within a century, that each nation, with whom the former has trebled her trade, has increased her own, at least, by the whole amount of the balance due by her to England; for it is beyond a doubt, that one must have three times more to sell, in order to be able to purchase constantly, and pay three times more than he used to do. But from this principle may it not be inferred also, that every nation, wishing to increase her trade, is interested in an increase of the commerce of all those with whom she means to correspond?—If, in order to reduce into practice, if to establish on the most equitable and most solid foundation, a system so truly advantageous to society, Nature had nothing[130] more to combat than private cupidities—they balance each other. But how many national prejudices, how many maxims sacred to each nation, how many absurd regulations, springing from those very maxims and prejudices, is she not obliged to modify, as it were, underhand, in their effects! What a number of smugglers does that good mother employ, for the purpose of bringing all things nearer to that equilibrium, from which many are still persuaded it is so very material to deviate!
Though it was only September, the weather suddenly turned cold and wet; the sky was low and grey, a gusty wind was driving the fallen leaves across the park. We decided to return to Tiflis; mamma was back already from Russia, and soon after I heard that Serge Michailovitch had come also.
called me a lot of other names, too, but she never meant no harm by it.
“How’s it a new kind?”
and sleep with you; and won’t stay away from you a minute; and will let
The Emir invited my husband and his suite to dine at his summer residence, eight miles from the station. In their absence the soldiers of the Bokharian watch-guard were lying stretched out full length in the shade, under the trees, indulging in a dolce far niente.


“Of music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all subjects my delight. I must have my share in the conversation, if you are speaking of music. There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true{217} enjoyment of music than myself, or a better natural taste. If I had ever learnt, I should have been a great proficient. And so would Anne, if her health had allowed her to apply. I am confident that she would have performed delightfully. How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?”
XLVIII.	Copenhagen	271
[440]
We reached Tiflis in the evening and gave Sergy a pleasant surprise. Oh! there was no mistake about his being glad to see me!
uninhabitable, as at last it must do, it may be that the thread of life

guesswork; but painstakingly, and with the trustworthy guidance and


blundering against trees and stumbling through the heather. All about

I used to ride on horseback a great deal, accompanied by my sentimental officer. One day, whilst my white mare was galloping wildly across the open moors, my saddle unbuckled and I felt it turning with me; I slipt out of it and found myself sitting on the grass, unhurt, and was on my legs all right in a moment, having luckily disengaged my foot from the stirrup.
[Pg 172]
it over again, and after that they made him do it another time. Well,

to be scared of him all the time, he tanned me so much. I reckoned I
and the policemen who had been sent to direct the traffic, exhausted
on the common, whose emotions or habits were at all affected by the
in the seventy-second year of his age.
“Thank you—but I always mend my own.”



stood one as sentinel, while the rest abandoned their vast
“Good-bye!” shouted everyone, and all eyes were turned upward to where
they don’t know now what the row was about in the first place.”
of blue cloth, and Dorothy slept soundly in them till morning, with
till pretty late to-night. I says:
Index	539



Just remember, at Mary’s party,

finished the champagne. We went on smoking the cigars. He was no longer
“Yes, very indifferent, indeed,” said Elizabeth, laughingly. “Oh, Jane! take care.”
CHAPTER CXXII
[17]
and roaring of fire. Dense black smoke was leaping up to mingle with

“Well, we can wait the two hours anyway and see, can’t we?”

“Your coming to Longbourn, to see me and my family,” said Elizabeth coolly, “will be rather a confirmation of it—if, indeed, such a report is in existence.”
tilted and bowled violently along the ground? That was the impression
Midway Pleasance is the most animated part of the Exhibition. We entered a theatre where a Japanese play was going on. The actors’ faces were covered with terrifying masks, and they were all making atrocious grimaces. After the play a troup of native musicians, sitting on the floor,[333] played “Yankee Doodle” and “God save the Queen” on their national instruments. The spectators in the first row took off their coats and remained in their shirt sleeves without ceremony. Close to the Japanese theatre the Esquimaux performed marvels in the way of throwing lances through rings. They invited the passers-by to enter their enclosure and compete with them in a curious sport, consisting in breaking big sticks into small bits by the means of a long whip. The Esquimaux came from Greenland; they are American subjects but do not speak English, they can say only: “Give money!”
CHAPTER XXXVII
seem to want to ever stop talking about him; and kept asking me every
A Thought substituted to that of a Reimbursement.	83[xviii]
“There’s fighting going on about Weybridge” was the extent of their

couldn’t seem to shake it loose and get the facts back into its place
Well, the first I knowed the king got a-going, and you could hear him




I spend much of my time in the saddle, accompanied by my husband and a large suite. Such freedom given to the young “giaour,” is incomprehensible to the inhabitants of Erzeroum, who find it very improper. I have stirred up a stormy discussion in many Christian families; newly married women begin to protest against the ancient order of things, and the old ones, on the contrary, faithful to the ancient traditions, show themselves indignant against European, liberal customs.
well. All that time the Martians must have been getting ready.
Elizabeth almost stared at her. “Can this be Mr. Darcy?” thought she.

bench, with the tears running down their faces; and when all the

confidence. Sometimes he smiled, and it was good to see; but when he
“Oh, yes,” said the girl, “and he is a great coward, too. He will be
mumble and went on over the bridge.
“That would make me very unhappy,” answered the china Princess. “You
Strand were being taken down, my brother said, and a man in his Sunday

First Hypothesis.

greatly amused Dorothy. Toto was a fine curiosity to all the people,

eye, and as soon as it was finished I found myself looking at him and
indicated a mass of flaming gas, chiefly hydrogen, moving with an
lost in the great fields. They kept on walking, however, and at night
in the path to the mill; and when they got pretty close on to us we

children up the hollow; but we never got anything but some doughnuts
THE first week of their return was soon gone. The second began. It was the last of the regiment’s stay in Meryton, and all the young ladies in the neighbourhood were drooping apace. The dejection was almost universal. The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat, drink, and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments. Very frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and Lydia,{286} whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend such hard-heartedness in any of the family.
the tedious movements unspeakably nasty. Even at this first encounter,
“Well, ’twarn’t no use to ’sturb you, Huck, tell we could do sumfn—but
“No; it would have been strange if they had. But I make no doubt they often talk of it between themselves. Well, if they can be easy with an estate that is not lawfully their own, so much the better. I should be ashamed of having one that was only entailed on me.{285}”

one hand and cracking the handiest child’s head with her thimble with
will be done in the dark, Southern fashion; and when they come they’ll
One day, in turning over an album, I came upon a photograph the sight of which made me exclaim: “Oh, who is that good-looking officer?” “That is Serge Michailovitch Doukhovskoy, a young general attached to the person of the Grand-Duke Michael, commander-in-chief of the army of the Caucasus,” said my aunt Roerberg. She told me that he was the youngest general in the Russian army, being only six-and-thirty years old, that he had a splendid career before him, and was in short everything desirable; she added that now I had a capital opportunity of making a brilliant match, and that I must spread my net to catch that big fish and set immediately to work to captivate him. That was enough to set me against the general; there was something very distasteful in the idea of such a marriage, and I was not at all willing to sacrifice my youth to the advantage of rank and money.
“It warn’t the grounding—that didn’t keep us back but a little. We
that men might still live in the streets, and this dear vast dead city
had just come to live with her, and took a set at me now with a

Three of the planets would be directly habitable for man. But on none did they find the great cities they had expected to see. They only saw strange globes of lambent fire darting about. From planet to planet they went, the red glow lighting a great sphere twenty feet in diameter, but for a hundred feet about it the air glowed purple under the ionizing force of some strange radiance. When they moved, they were shooting comets, with brilliantly glowing heads of red and long tails of blue. But they seemed to live on all the planets. Even in the blazing minor star they lived, darting in and coming out of its flames as unconcernedly as a Solarian ship would dart in or out of an atmosphere. Could it be that those men had spoken the truth? It seemed incredible—impossible—but these men had learned millions of years ago that nothing is impossible, and were ready to credit anything if they had reason to believe it so.


have cost the princess half her kingdom. Of course my grandfather and
and the rest of the tribe.

October 18th.—Foreigners come rarely to Java and, except our company, there are only two Dutch families in our hotel, who arrived a few days ago from Borneo.

“It ain’t no murder killing beasts like that,” said the first speaker.
I was told that an old Chinaman, who had died on board on the third day of our voyage, had been embalmed on the boat. I remember now that the smell of aromas had spread all over the ship that day. Ancestor worship is a striking feature of China. All Chinamen insist on being buried in their native land, and when death overtakes one of them in a foreign country, his remains are always transported to China to be interred there, after the Buddhist rites.
mashed all his teeth out; and there warn’t ever anything could a worked
was meaning to pay them back some time; but the widow said it warn’t

“What shall we do now?” asked Dorothy.
farther edge of the pit, amid the smashed and gravel-heaped shrubbery,

the position of the gun from which the shots are discharged, to keep a

At last I decided that it had.
confidence of my own table, and the necessity of reassuring my wife, I
the middle of the kitchen floor, and then by her magic arts made the


want to be a robber any more.

“Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure, unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in; and I hope my dinners are good enough for her. I do not believe she often sees such at home.”
“If he does not come to me, then,” said she, “I shall give him up for ever.”


The annual sum of 110,000,000, divided amongst 9,350,000 inhabitants, will produce daily little less than 8 pence per head, from the Monarch down to the meanest subject.
with your six thousand, because if you take it you’ll spend it.”

Whilst our companions explored Canada, I entered with Mrs. Serebriakoff, a white farm-house with green shutters, entirely covered with creeping plants, which announced in large white letters “New Milk,” where we regaled ourselves with strawberries and cream.
often seen.”
after do three times the bidding of the owner of the Golden Cap. This

It was all grass clear to the canoe, so I hadn’t left a track. I



“We can now,” says he, “joyfully relate how graciously God hath heard your supplications in His goodness to us. With undeserved grace and mercy He hath brought us, hath graciously averted all perils on our long voyage, mightily refreshed us during the course of it both in soul and body, and caused us to reach the end of it in four months and four days. We could scarcely have imagined that He would so paternally and graciously guide us. His Name be humbly praised and glorified now and in eternity!
could hear of a country that’s out of kings.”
it would, because then we’d have as many years as we wanted, and no

“Keep your eye on the rats. You better have the lead in your lap,

“Yes.”
the night the Martians had been surrounded by troops, and that guns
opinion she was just full of sand. It sounds like flattery, but it
[63]
which were here very uneven. Sometimes, indeed, they were broken or

would wash. But he was sleeping, and sleeping very peaceful, too; and
these in my mouth, there was nothing to be got from them.
But the little woman evidently expected her to answer; so Dorothy said,
people who crowded in the carts whipped stupidly at their horses and

crack I noticed a sound that I knowed mighty well, and held my breath
“Why, I got plenty spring water, Mars Tom.”

We put up at Biarritz at the Hôtel d’Angleterre, and had to be satisfied with a small room at the very top. Our windows looked seawards and showed the wide expanse of the Atlantic and the agglomeration of rocks of the most fantastic forms named The Chaos. From below we heard the thunder of mighty waves dashing on the cliffs with a sound like the booming of many guns.


After a fruitless struggle to get aboard a North-Western train at Chalk

dominions.”
de birds, chile.”
I knowed he wouldn’t mind, because it would be nuts for him, being a
We lowered a boat that carried us on shore. When we entered it, my Australian waved his farewell tome and shouted from the deck, “I am so sorry to lose you!”
Then my brother’s attention was distracted by a bearded, eagle-faced
Dorothy then gave her the Golden Cap, and the Witch said to the


boots for shame. That’s just the way: a person does a low-down thing,

answered, “and we stopped at your cottage to pass the night.”
two drunks and one delirium tremens. That was always his word. I judged
“Why, no.”
When the clouds dispersed, we discovered wonders in the immense Alpine landscape, and made out in the distance a group of cows with huge bells on their necks, lying phlegmatically amongst the clouds. All at once there was a full stop, it happened to be a drowsy black cow, immovable and contemplative, lying placidly on the rails, which we had nearly run over. The air grew quite chilly; though warmly wrapped up I was shivering with cold and Sergy drew his cloak close round me. Our fellow travellers had their collars turned up to their ears, I could only see the tops of their glowing noses; my neighbour, a thin, poorly looking individual wearing a chauffeur’s cap, had tied his handkerchief over it. The wind was very strong and I was nearly thrown off my seat and clung terror-struck to the sides of the car, wishing that I had never consented to this aerial drive. We had left below us every vestige of vegetation. A flight of rooks are screaming overhead. At every stoppage our ears begin to tingle. At last we have reached the final bit of ascent to the summit of the “Rigi,” and have to quit our car. We can hardly see two steps before us. Suddenly out of the fog came the sound of a bell: it was a sign given from the “Rigi Hotel” in order to aid us to find our way to it in the thick mist which enclosed us. We walked slowly one behind the other, following the direction the sound came from, and shivering with cold.
done. Look at them case-knife saws and things, how tedious they’ve been
The Martians had what appears to have been an auditory organ, a single
Elizabeth read on: “I have seen them both. They are not married, nor can I find there was any intention of being so; but if you are willing to perform the engagements which I have ventured to make on your side, I hope it will not be long before they are. All that is required of you is, to assure to your daughter, by settlement, her equal share of the five thousand pounds, secured among your children after the decease of yourself and my sister; and, moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing her, during your life, one hundred pounds per annum. These are conditions which, considering everything, I had no hesitation in complying with, as far as I thought myself privileged, for you. I shall send this by express, that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer. You will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that Mr. Wickham’s circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to be. The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am happy to say, there will be some little money, even when all his debts are discharged, to settle on my niece, in addition to her own fortune. If, as I conclude will be the case, you send me full powers to act in your name throughout the whole of this business, I will immediately give directions to Haggerston for preparing a proper settlement. There will not be the smallest occasion for your coming to town again; therefore stay quietly at Longbourn, and depend on my diligence and care. Send back your answer as soon as you can, and be careful to write explicitly. We have judged it best that my niece should be married from this house, of which I hope you will approve. She comes to us to-day. I shall write again as soon as anything more is determined on. Yours, etc.

walking to and fro among the flower beds on the hill, to see the
“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Who are you, and why do you seek me?”
verily believe that to the very end this spoiled child of life thought
“No,” says her husband.
and barking at me, and I knowed better than to move another peg.
THE HEAT-RAY.
four Martian monsters; my attention was riveted upon the nearer
“Well, Lizzy,” continued her mother, soon afterwards, “and so the Collinses live very comfortable, do they? Well, well, I only hope it will last. And what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte is an excellent manager, I dare say. If she is half as sharp as her mother, she is saving enough. There is nothing extravagant in their housekeeping, I dare say.”
And so on. You couldn’t make out what the preacher said any more, on
the country of the Winkies she will find you, and make you all her
I was living like an anchorite and had no one to talk to but my hosts, a very poor resource indeed. When the weather was fine I sat on an old bench near our gate and watched the native women who came to draw water from a fountain just opposite; they carried it on their shoulders in large clay jugs just as in the times of Rebecca. In November the weather was bitterly cold. Sometimes, in moments of supreme depression, I would go out and stand at the gate hoping to catch a bad cold. My poor Helena, terror-stricken, raised her hands up in horror and drew me indoors by force. Often, after our meagre dinner, when it grew dark, I sat on the hearth-rug, drawing my shawl close about me, and shivering looked with dreary eyes into the dying fire, big tears rolling down my cheeks.
“Hist!” said I, in a whisper.
It is upon this plan, and under this point of view, that I purpose to examine the supposed balance of France, in regard to trade:—and I begin by asking, whether there exists a nation in Europe, which, upon perusing what Mr. Necker says to the present purpose, and the use made almost generally in England of the work of Sir Charles Whitworth, much more explicit with regard to the balance of Great Britain, would hesitate an instant to break off all commercial connexions with England and France, if only one half should prove real in the prejudices of the two nations, on the object, which at present seems to determine all the others?
genlman’s propaty, en git a hid’n for it? Den I gin ’m ten cents
“Well, it’s like this,” he said. “What have we to do? We have to invent
intelligent creatures, it had been resolved to show them, by
about the rats. You’d see one stick his nose out of a hole in the
the king now. And when the king got done this husky up and says:


High in the jet black sky, a scant hundred miles from the ground below, a mighty space-freighter was taking off for Venus. The thin belt of atmosphere permitted it to reach a high speed quickly. Already it was in full stride and heading at 1,000 miles a second for Venus.
they had learned of the fate of Leatherhead. Two days after I was
“Why, Jim?”
A whole week has past, and we have been on the sea seeing nothing but the sky and the water. The least incident takes the proportions of a whole event in the dreary, tedious life on board. To-day for the first time we perceived in the distance a boat with swelling sails. It was surely a pirate boat going out seal-hunting.

They took Boggs to a little drug store, the crowd pressing around just
done fooling around—but we would ride. I couldn’t get him to let me
We are about twenty passengers on board. There is a young half-caste among them, the proprietor of a rich tea-estate, sent back for his health to Europe.

“Come, Dorothy!” cried the Wizard. “Hurry up, or the balloon will fly
He was barefooted, and the snake bit him right on the heel. That all

“Here they are!” shouted a man in a blue jersey. “Yonder! D’yer see
know where Jim is.”
Of all the balances of England summed up by Sir Charles Whitworth, that which is most to be wondered at every where but in Japan and China, where foreign trade is but poorly encouraged, is the balance between England and France, these[124] two nations being parted, as they are, only by a simple brook.
upon which their restless mirror wobbled. Patches of bush and isolated
Probably amongst the most distinguished of native rulers the name of Hyder Ali stands pre-eminent. He has been called the Napoleon of India, and considering his limitations as an Oriental, if only from the brilliance of his military tactics and personality among his armies, he may deserve that high comparison. It is easy to denounce him as a bloodthirsty tyrant, and much of his character justifies that condemnation, but he had other traits which in fairness must be remembered. He lived in an age and a country where duplicity in politics was the rule rather than the exception, yet it is to his credit that he kept his word with the English, who were not always equally considerate as regards their obligations with him. Mounted on his white elephant in his gaudy uniform of white satin and gold flowers, vain of display as all his[Pg 116] fathers were, he was the idol of his troops, who were animated by the example of a man who had no fear and exposed himself to any risks in leading them to victory.
the sky.

Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied,—
in
Mr. Darcy bowed.
carpet-bags. And if he’s gone over to t’other side, go over there and

Though far away, I could not forget Jeffrey, and was very happy to receive a long passionate missive from him, enclosed in Mary Vietinghoff’s letter. I devoured the pages with eager joy. Jeffrey wrote that he was broken-hearted since his darling Vava went away, and that he smothered her sweet face with thousands of passionate kisses. My poor, dear, bonny lad! I too was hungering for the sight of him, but half Europe, alas, divided us!
[485]
afraid even to growl while she stood by.
“If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise should come to his friend within a few days,” she added, “I shall know how to understand it. I shall then give{444} over every expectation, every wish of his constancy. If he is satisfied with only regretting me, when he might have obtained my affections and hand, I shall soon cease to regret him at all.”
jammed, and a desperate struggle occurred. All that crowd did not
Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this, heard it in silent indignation. Her heart was divided between concern for her sister and resentment against all others. To Caroline’s assertion of her brother’s being partial to Miss Darcy, she paid no credit. That he was really fond of Jane, she doubted no more than she had ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, she could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness of temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slave of his designing friends, and led him to sacrifice his own happiness to the caprice of their inclinations. Had his own happiness, however, been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it in whatever manner he thought best; but her sister’s was involved in it, as she thought he must be sensible himself. It was a subject, in short, on which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing. She could think of nothing else; and yet, whether Bingley’s regard had really died away, or were suppressed by his friends’ interference; whether he had been aware of Jane’s attachment, or whether it had escaped his observation; whichever were the case, though her opinion of him must be materially affected by the difference, her sister’s situation remained the same, her peace equally wounded.
the work of a dozen busy navvies digging the foundations of a house. I

was Jim to get away from the swamp. We said there warn’t no home like a
the drunk man hanging on to his neck, and his heels flying in the air

two friends was right, and she decided if she could only get back to

“The efforts of his aunt.”


monotonous crying than afraid. I turned back away from the park and

WHAT HAD HAPPENED IN SURREY.

“And if it just happens so that I don’t get away, but get took up along

[5]Venn, Life of Xavier, p. 156.
“When I consider,” she added, in a yet more agitated voice, “that I might have prevented it! I who knew what he was. Had I but explained some part of it only—some part of what I learnt, to my own family! Had his character been known, this could not have happened. But it is all, all too late now.”
each other, and took on so it most made me down sick to see it. The
COPENHAGEN
cylinder came.”
The foreign trade of England seems therefore to have trebled since the beginning of the present century. We shall, in the sequel, state the reasons for supposing the commerce of other nations to have experienced the same progression.

“Lizzy, I never gave you an account of my wedding, I believe. You were not by, when I told mamma, and the others, all about it. Are not you curious to hear how it was managed?”
had shown to her friends and herself.


puffed scraps of news under big headlines. They had nothing to tell
back yard of the Palace, and the cackling of a hen that had laid a
We got hastily into a tram to be driven to the railway station, but we were not destined to go off unobserved. A very unprepossessing-looking individual, with long hair and spectacles, sprang on the steps of the tram and asked Mr. Shaniavski, in very bad English, if General Doukhovskoy was leaving New York for good, Mr. Shaniavski stopping him from entering the car, answered that he knew nothing about General Doukhovskoy. At that very moment the tramway started and we were delivered from the obtrusive spy. At the railway-station Mrs. Serebriakoff and I didn’t permit our husbands to leave our sides, and struggled hard to seem unconcerned, mistrusting all the passengers.
spire and saw the houses of the village rising like ghosts out of its
the most part they were like ourselves, taking advantage of a lull to
minutes; but it seemed a sight longer than that. I was itching in
“You’ll be her. You slide in, in the middle of the night, and hook that
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Schwartz of Tanjore
“I entreat God to bless them,” he says, “with wisdom,[Pg 122] resolution and integrity, to settle the business to the welfare of this poor country. But alas! We ourselves are so divided—one pulls one way, the other quite a different one. When one considers all, high and low, rich and poor, rulers and those that are ruled, one is struck with grief and a variety of passions. What blindness, insensibility, and obstinacy, greediness, and rapaciousness. A thousand times I think with myself: ‘Good God, must all these people die—must they all give a strict account of their lives—must they all appear before the tribunal of Jesus, the mediator and judge? How little do they mind their end, and the consequences of their lives?’”
and green pop corn were offered for sale, as well as green shoes, green
help it.
Now that they were reunited, Dorothy and her friends spent a few happy
projects a beam of light. But no one has absolutely proved these

Well, three or four months run along, and it was well into the winter
locks a crown of jewels. Growing from her shoulders were wings,


CHAPTER XLIV.
The duke said what he was after was a printing-office. We found it; a




window frame we could see an uprooted drainpipe. The floor was littered
the housetops, not a hundred yards away from us. We stood aghast at our
IN consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the next morning to her mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for them in the course of the day. But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, which would exactly finish Jane’s week, could not bring herself to receive them with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at least not to Elizabeth’s wishes, for she was impatient to get home. Mrs. Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage before Tuesday; and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingley and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them very well. Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively{76} resolved—nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the contrary, of being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long, she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley’s carriage immediately, and at length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.
Such, in my opinion, is now the prevailing system all over Europe. The advantage of true freedom is fully felt, and its influence over all-commanding wealth universally acknowledged. But, in order to compare the inferences with the principles, to appreciate the measures by their effects, I shall fix upon that Nation whose avowed maxims, and best known circumstances, are most likely to furnish me with a train of arguments, without having recourse to any further suppositions but such as may appear necessary to clear up the facts that will be adduced in support of those arguments, and to render the consequences, to be deduced from them, more lucid and pointed.
for me, but she said I was a fool. She never told me why, and I
Then I set to thinking over how to get at it, and turned over some
“What did you say of me that I did not deserve? For though your accusations were ill-founded, formed on mistaken premises, my behaviour to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. It was unpardonable. I cannot think of it without abhorrence.”

“We must journey on until we find the road of yellow brick again,” said

contained only a very inaccurate description of the killing of Stent,
“Oh, my lordy, lordy! _Raf’?_ Dey ain’ no raf’ no mo’; she done broke
The Scarecrow sighed.
“I was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an impression. I had not the smallest idea of their being ever felt in such a way.”
snake-skin in his hand. Well, I was getting to feel that way myself,
our prehuman ancestors since life began here. But by virtue of this
“I got hurt a little, en couldn’t swim fas’, so I wuz a considable ways

as soft as mush, and screwed it down tight and fast. So there I was! I
Shepperton and the hot, still splendour of the sunset.

end? It’s just men and ants. There’s the ants builds their cities, live
the sea, made its way through the swarming country towards Colchester.
time. What do you command?”
assured him that Woking had been entirely destroyed on the previous
was low comedy—and maybe something ruther worse than low comedy, he

“My uncle is to send a servant for us.”
for that, they’d a jailed us till them Englishmen’s baggage come—and
[Image unavailable.]

its sluggish advance. Another bank drove over Ealing, and surrounded a
letting on ain’t no trouble; and if it’s any object, I don’t mind
yards, and says:
its apex, arrested by these phenomena, a little knot of small vertical

would a had to bust out and tell on our gang if I hadn’t knowed the
poured upon it the ball burned fiercely.
I got to feeling so mean and so miserable I most wished I was dead. I
number of people were standing about it, and some sappers were busy in

So he took him to his own house, and dressed him up clean and nice, and
stronger and stronger, though I could see nothing above the housetops
“Well, I think you’re here, plain enough, but I think you’re a
I went with Mary Vietinghoff to Dr. Roth’s gymnastic class, and enjoyed meeting there girls of different social classes. Forgetting that our stations in life were widely apart, it amused me to shake hands with daughters of shopkeepers as well as ladies by birth, without distinction. Dr. Roth made us march up and down the hall with our hands clasped behind our backs. At each step we made he repeated like a pendulum, “Kopf, Rücken, Kopf, Rücken!” and I mimicked him in the ante-room where we put on our hats, throwing my audience into convulsions of giggling. My foolish tricks drove Dr. Roth to despair. When his back was turned I dashed on to the window, raised up a corner of[24] the blind which was generally let down during our exercises, and stared at the passers-by.
It was done. I got my liberty and Mrs. S. was left sole guardian over me. I was so happy to go about alone, free as the mountain air. I might flirt with what men I pleased, and meant to make the most of my independence and to enjoy my free life thoroughly.
“I will not,” retorted the Witch, “for it is now my shoe, and not
so what was the use to talk about it? It would only look like we was
her.”
of broken red fragments upon the flower bed by my study window.
tell us the way to the Emerald City.”



Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her spirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of her aunt had reserved for them. But Jane was to go home with her, and at Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation.
down to the ground and crawled in among the trees, and, sure enough,
wall of high bluffs.
city where Oz dwells the country is beautiful. But I am not afraid so
The artilleryman looked at me for a moment.
When we arrived at the frontier some Prussian officials rushed into our compartment, and having taken possession of our passports, they declared, to our profound stupefaction, that we had to go out and began to fling our hand-bags out of the window. We had scarcely time to jump out when the train began to move, carrying away our heavy baggage which had been more lucky than we were, and we were left to our own devices. It appeared that our passports had not been signed by the German Consul in Moscow, and although it was stated in my husband’s passport that he was going to Italy on a special mission, these horrid Germans tumbled us out of the train, finding sufficient ground for detaining us until permission be received by wire from their Consul in Moscow to let us proceed further. We stood for some time on the platform a picture of forlorn discomfort, looking at each other helplessly, and trying to collect our scattered wits. How perfectly dreadful it was! Our position can be better imagined than described. We had positively no notion where to go and what to do with ourselves. The day was closing rapidly, it would soon be night. What were we to do? Sleep in the open air perhaps, for except the station, there was not a house within sight, and to return to our frontier was impossible, there being no other train that night. Clutching our bags we mournfully entered a vast “Warte-Saal” where a party of bearded Teutons were loading[157] themselves with beer out of huge pint-mugs, and were all talking at once amid clouds of tobacco smoke. The atmosphere making me feel faint and dizzy, we hastened back to the platform in search of the station-master to beg him to give us somewhere to lay our heads. He came up to us, a fiercely moustached man, awfully stiff and puffed up, and asked us what we wanted. We begged him, expressing ourselves somewhat lamely in German, to give us shelter for the night. He led us to his quarters and ushered us into a little slip of a room, low-roofed and white-washed, furnished with two huge feather-beds with eider-down quilts, where we felt ourselves as prisoners put under arrest. A bad night is soon passed after all! The first thing I did was to remove, with all haste, the obnoxious coverlet and lie down, but I could not sleep for the stifling air in the room; I tossed and turned in bed till morning.
Woodman and Toto were sitting.
dasn’t come down. Buck begun to cry and rip, and ’lowed that him and

well—couldn’t touch a case-knife with them sooner.”
CHAPTER XI.


“My greatest wish now,” she added, “is to get back to Kansas, for Aunt

to bed right after supper, and clumb out of the window and down the



[192]
XLVII.	Moscow	268


The next day a grand dinner was given by General Unterberger. About sixty guests sat at a long table richly decorated with flowers and silver; a band of the Siberian navy played during the repast. The dinner was very gay; numerous toasts were drunk. General Unterberger raising his glass drank to my health and the whole company rose to touch my glass. The Japanese Admiral addressed in flowery native language a long speech to me, translated rather badly by his interpreter. I was crimson with the effort to control my laughter and bit my lips to blood. I did not venture to look at Mrs. Serebriakoff who was also assailed with a fit of giggling, and kept my eyes on my plate.
warn’t often that we laughed—only a little kind of a low chuckle. We
had been a cave-in in the bank there. A tow-head is a sandbar that has
[187]
It didn’t take me long to make up my mind that these liars warn’t no
 Henry the Eighth in Boston Harbor
“What did you do with the ten cents, Jim?”
how to find them. Gimme a pencil and a piece of paper. There—‘_Royal

“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible,” spoke the Beast, in a voice that was
The Diary of

Feeling my end drawing nigh, I sent for a priest and received the Holy Sacrament. Soon after came the crisis. I suffered tortures that day, one could hear my shrieks two streets off. Gasping for breath I tried to bounce out of bed and had to be kept there by main force. Happily complications did not arise, my constitution triumphed, and by the mercy of heaven, life conquered death, and I was pronounced out of danger.
Going back to a much earlier time, we meet with the name of a man who perhaps deserves, according to definite historical data, the credit of being the first to come as a missionary to India. It is that of Pantaenus. Eusebius in his Church History gives us the following reference to him:
nail and started towards where I was there in the dark, and motioned
Princess Vava Galitzine
reinforcement. And meanwhile the military and naval authorities, now
catastrophe. Our muddy footsteps I saw still went up the stairs.

X.


the big yard, but mostly it was bare and smooth, like an old hat with
The train stopped close to the landing-place. The sea looked horrible from the pier, the wind was blowing strongly and black clouds hung over the sea. The prospect of crossing the channel in such weather was not enticing, and we were inclined to turn back to London, but it would be a shame to be so chicken-hearted, and braving sea-sickness we decided to go on.
aside in its career; a walking engine of glittering metal, striding now
CV.	Vladivostock	459
A subsidy has been given to the officers in order they might supply themselves with saddle-horses. We have organised a committee of Sisters of Mercy. The three Governors subordinated to my husband are now at Khabarovsk. Every night they deliberate in our house on different preparations for war, together with a great number of generals and officers.
“All right,” I says, “I can walk it in three days. And I’ll start this
“And Lydia used to want to go to London,” added Kitty.
The way is long from New York to San Francisco. We have to pass the Continent from East to West, making about 5000 miles. It took thirty-five days to make that journey before the railway was built. We will touch Niagara on our way to Chicago, and will continue the journey the same day by a later train. To leave America without seeing the Falls of Niagara was impossible.
“The whole _bilin_’ of ’m ’s frauds! Le’s duck ’em! le’s drown ’em!

I guess we’ll add a little more to it. We want a little something to
“Don’t! Please don’t,” begged the Tin Woodman. “I should certainly weep

them have their own way.
I think, however, though the thought will doubtless seem heretical to more than one school of critics, that construction is not the highest merit, the choicest gift, of the novelist. It sets off his other gifts and graces most advantageously to the critical eye; and the want of it will sometimes mar those graces—appreciably, though not quite consciously—to eyes by no means ultra-critical. But a very badly-built novel which excelled in pathetic or humorous character, or which displayed consummate command of dialogue—perhaps the rarest of all faculties—would be an infinitely better thing than a faultless plot acted and told by puppets with pebbles in their mouths. And despite the ability which Miss Austen has shown in working out the story, I for one should put Pride and Prejudice far lower if it did not contain what seem to me the very masterpieces of Miss Austen’s humour and of her faculty of character-creation—masterpieces who may indeed admit John Thorpe, the Eltons, Mrs. Norris, and one or two others to their company, but who, in one instance certainly, and perhaps in others, are still superior to them.





“Mamma,” cried Lydia, “my aunt says that Colonel Forster and Captain Carter do not go so often to Miss Watson’s as they did when they first came; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke’s library.”

Her eyes met my brother’s, and her hesitation ended.

“No, don’t you worry; these country jakes won’t ever think of that.
widow Bartley and our tribe. I watched their faces to see if anything
thing it makes a body wish _he_ was dead, too, and done with it all.
We lived in a very unpretending style. General Loris-Melikoff, who tried his best to cheer our Russian colony, pursued me with invitations, which I generally managed to evade.
They journey homewards with thankful spirits for all they have seen and been permitted to do and in due time come within sight of Tranquebar, where one of the brethren hastens forward to bid them welcome home. As they get near to the mission house the Tamil school children come slowly forward singing the metrical version of Ecclesiasticus l. 22-24: “Now let us praise the Lord,” their sweet childish voices bringing a smile to the faces of the returning missionaries. Then the other brethren come forward and the Danish soldiers stationed at the place join in the welcome. Schwartz lifts up his voice in prayer and praise.
presently to warn the gunners of the Martian approach. But the Martians
pointed at the batteries that were still firing across the river, and
But, in stating that the only—the infallible reason for the variations of common prices in the foregoing hypotheses, is the change of proportion between the mass of specie, or of the paper-currency which represents it, and the articles of which the one, or the other, is to transfer the property, there is no inconsistency in persisting to pretend that taxes add to the former prices, both the amount of the impost, and the profit due to the trader who advances it. But, in both cases the progress is different: in the former, it is the quantity of the specie actually in being which necessitates and fixes the prices; in the latter, it is the necessary advance in the prices,[152] that necessitates and fixes the quantity of specie, or paper-money which is substituted to it.—Luckily, as we have already observed, it has been enough for England to find, once for all, money to the amount of 5 millions sterling, (cash and paper) for discharging to the end of time, the interest of a debt computed at 238 millions, the same currency.—But upon a supposition that the debt incurred by France, from the year 1774, should amount to 15 or 1600 millions tournois, and the yearly produce of French industry in all its branches, (at the common rate of 1775) be of 2,400,000,000l.—the interest of 80 millions and upwards, to be paid for such a debt, requires an adequate increase of taxes:—now, 80 millions tournois constitute about the 30th part of the annual revenue produced by French industry, the nominal value of which must be increased by those taxes;—but as paper-money does not supply in France the place of cash, it has been, of course, necessary to augment by one 30th, the mass of specie, which proved sufficient before the rise in the prices, occasioned by the impost;—this mass, it is said, was rated at 2,400,000,000 of livres, the 30th part of which is 66,666,666 13s. and 4d. tournois, a very considerable sum indeed; but nevertheless nothing more has been necessary, to prevent[153] any inquietude on the subject, than to procure that sum, once for all; and, once for all likewise, to add thereto the effect of some re-actions, of which I shall speak presently; nothing more, I say, was wanted to secure, in an indefensible manner, the interest of a loan of 1500 millions, and to secure it so as to raise in the minds of the holders of stock to so immense an amount, no other apprehension than that of their being reimbursed.
shirt. Some of the old women was knitting, and some of the young folks
pushed some weary street outcast in faded black rags, wide-eyed,
to get ourselves out of prison with. He said if we warn’t prisoners it
remember talking, wanderingly, to myself during that last spurt. I was

After many difficulties, we succeeded in reaching the next station. We were obliged to advance very slowly; it took nearly seven hours to get there, although the distance was only sixteen miles, for there was no road as the Europeans generally understand it. Our horses plunged in the snow up to their necks. We met on the road groups of soldiers returning to Kars, who seemed greatly astonished to meet a woman in these dull parts. It was almost dark when we reached a tiny village, where we stopped for the night in a dirty dairy-hut, and slept in the company of my brave little horse who shared all my mishaps. I had to lie down on a mat stretched upon the floor, and being tired out, I slept the sleep of the just, when at dawn an enormous tongue, trying to find my face, woke me. I soon realised that the tongue[96] was my horse’s, who had freed himself from his bridle and came to bid me good-morning. When I got up I saw the snow falling heavily. We weren’t able to start before the following day until the snow-storm had passed away. A young officer on his way to Kars took shelter under the same roof with us, which helped me to while away the weary hours of waiting-time.
 Harmless

s’pose there was so many strange things going on she was just in a
in front of the captain’s door, which was open, and by Jimminy, away
Such thoughts as these are common to people, especially the old, as they look heavenward.
the sand.
Here we are on the frontier called “Porta Portuguese”. Chinese soldiers guard the boundary. After having set foot on Chinese ground, we were carried back to Macao by a winding staircase-like path, and passed before the grotto of Luis Camoens, the celebrated Portuguese poet of the sixteenth century, exiled in the year 1556 for his daring liberal ideas. The great poet, who had been shipwrecked in these inhospitable seas, gained the shore of this newly-founded Portuguese colony, and took refuge in a grotto situated in a chaotic assemblage of rocks, in the hollow of a dale, where a monument has been erected to his memory. The site is desolate and wild, looking upon the Chinese Empire and the ocean, where there is no land before the icy polar regions. Camoens lamented here his life of exile, and glorified his country in verse. By the side of the monument, on a large stone, a book is sculptured in the rock, bearing the names of all the works of the great poet.
“So have I,” said my brother.


the road and divided the forest as far as they could see on either
ruled here, or I should have set the people free myself.”
happy and bright in my past. It was a mere hopeless desire to feast
“It is certainly too bad!” said the tender-hearted Woodman.
“Miss Mary Jane, is there any place out of town a little ways where you
But if this proportionate augmentation in the price of every thing,—as evident as it is necessary,—as general as it is useful,—as natural as it is little suspected,—in consequence of a national debt contracted by a country trading with all Europe,—getting rich by trading with all Europe,—and who cannot get rich without sharing her wealth with all Europe,—be also a complete demonstration of the burden being null, so soon as the little private interests have rendered it general, and no longer[351] permit the supposition of its being productive of any other bad effects, but such as necessarily result from a bad system of taxation; does the point lie in rectifying the system, or in effecting a reimbursement?—At least, is a tax to be levied for the purpose of reimbursing, before we have searched deep into the question the most interesting to society that ever was propounded?
“About seven in the evening we sailed, in the name[Pg 41] of God, out of the harbour, with a man-of-war, which we thought was to escort us, but the next day we learned that she was to escort the ‘Norfolk.’ With this Divine dispensation we were well satisfied, believing that we should not need that convoy if we could only say with David (Psalm xlvi. 7): ‘The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge.’ If the Lord be for us who or what can be against us? We met a Dutch ship from Smyrna to Rotterdam, the captain of which informed us that he had suffered much from the late severe storms, whilst we were quietly in the harbour. On the 16th we were met by two ships which exhibited a sad spectacle. One of them had sprung a large leak and drew several feet of water, so that she lay very deep and rolled from side to side. Our captain backed the sails and sent the carpenter with an officer and some others to see whether they could assist, but on their return they declared that the vessel must sink. The other ship therefore kept quite close to the damaged one that the people might save themselves.”
“You have, good sir, we believe, as few failings as any missionary in India, and as warm a zeal to promote the Glory of God. Do what you can to sacrifice your chiefest failing to this Zeal, and to mortify the least degree of pride that can tempt you to assume a Superiority or Rule over your fellow labourers, altho’ your merit may make you worthy of it and would probably command it of them, if you did not assume it.”
got to like it so well at the widow’s, where you had to wash, and eat
Aldershot, Woolwich—even from the north; among others, long wire-guns
Señor Alvarez pined with grief at being obliged to part with me. He accompanied us as far as Marseilles and delivered to me, whilst travelling with us, a Spanish poem, of his composition, dedicated to me, speaking of delirious passion, broken heart and other fiddlesticks. One of our fellow-passengers, a handsome Canadian girl begged him to dedicate at least three lines to her. Alvarez at once pulled a note-book out of his pocket and scribbled down three words only: Adieu pour toujours. Not very amiable on his part! Bidding me good-bye, Alvarez took hold of my hands, squeezing them as if they had been shut in a door, and looking at me with an expression of entreaty, he requested my permission to pay us a visit in Russia. By the manner I answered him, I would not in his place have undertaken such a long journey.
“Any men on it?”

around it for to hold it to its place; this was to build a fire on in
Wishing to give a surprise to my father, mamma had my portrait made by a horrible little hunch-backed painter of modest pretensions. After my very first sitting we did not appreciate this Quasimodo’s manner of painting. Mamma took great pains in pointing out to him his mistakes, but instead of repairing them, the little fright contemplated that abominable painting with his ugly head first on this side and then on that, as if lost in admiration, repeating all the time:[28] “Bellissimo, grazioso!” The portrait was, as we expected, a great failure, but we had to take, nevertheless, that spoilt canvas, unworthy of preservation, paying for it the sum of 200 francs.
for one, anticipate a renewal of their adventure. In any case, we
Along during the morning I borrowed a sheet and a white shirt off of



he loved so at sech a time? If I know William—and I _think_ I
about it, Jim.”


“I do,” I said; and he turned his horse southward again.
“Well, I reckon you _have_ lived in the country. I thought maybe you
little over the victuals, though there warn’t really anything the
it up, and have it all to yourself.”

this long journey, and after all we’d done for them scoundrels, here it

spectators within the contemplated enclosure. I failed to find Lord
“So I done it. Den I reck’n’d I’d inves’ de thirty-five dollars right
“Lydia Bennet.”
Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retort on Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and she called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was, though Mrs. Bennet’s sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have been enough to drive happiness away.
must come along, and let Aunt Sally see we was all right.
handling-machine. With two spatulate hands the handling-machine was
hands was so sore. At last he says:


In three strides he was at the door leading into the kitchen.

“We are not so unlucky,” said the new ruler, “for this Palace and the
past four in the morning, and now it was nearly nine and they had seen
It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that embarrassment from which she had been so wholly free at first. Her ease and good spirits increased. She longed to see Mrs. Philips, the Lucases, and all their other neighbours, and to hear herself called “Mrs. Wickham” by each of them; and in the meantime she went after dinner to show her ring and boast of being married to Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids.
man struck. You have cert’nly got the most astonishin’ head I ever see.
From my earliest years I had a great love for acting; we gave, from time to time, little theatrical entertainments; we dressed up and played fragments of Shakespeare’s dramas, and I was the leading-lady in these rehearsals. When I took up the high tragic part of “Desdemona,” Nicolas, the brother of my little friend Sophy Annenkoff, was the personator of “Othello,” he sacrificed his appearance so far as to blacken his face. During the murder scene, when the situation grew particularly tragic, Nicolas displayed such a realism of the Shakespearian meaning, that I began to fear being choked in reality.
“Goshen, child? This ain’t Goshen. This is St. Petersburg. Goshen’s ten
times in England whilst we was waiting to find out whether Mary Jane’s
might suspicion something if all of you was to go. I don’t want you to
They had not long separated when Miss Bingley came towards her, and, with an expression of civil disdain, thus accosted her,—

CHAPTER CVII
him. Indeed, the Tin Woodman began to cry, but fortunately remembered

somehow. I was the only one that could swim, so I made a dash for it,
CHAPTER II.
windows, staring astonished at this extraordinary procession of

We spent a week in visiting the city of the Cæsars, running through churches, art-galleries and other regulation sights, according to Baedecker, from morning till night. We followed our guide with uncomplaining stoicism from one Museum to another. I was not feeling altogether at my ease when visiting the catacombs, and wished myself anywhere else all the time. We had to come down slowly through dark stone passages with our folding lantern in which a reluctant wax-taper went out at regular intervals. We saw caverns containing skeletons which fell to dust when you touched them, and petrified corpses in coffins under a glass cover. Truly it was a ghastly sight! There are often crumbling stones too in the Catacombs, and you can easily find your death under them.

“Most everybody thought it at first. He’ll never know how nigh he come

“Miss Bennet, I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a more reasonable young woman. But do not deceive yourself into a belief that I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have given me the assurance I require.”

would, I think, have urged me to stay in Leatherhead that night. Would

nothing of the arrival until Saturday morning. The morning papers on
When these people drew near the house where Dorothy was standing in the
a-making his’n out of the brass and I making mine out of the spoon, Tom

bitten him had he not known very well he was made of tin. Finally one

powers in a state of erethism. I remember that dinner table with

She was a little revived, however, by his bringing back his coffee-cup himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying,{419}—
“Things have changed,” I said, quietly. “You must keep your head. There
for instance, in the able but hastily compiled pamphlet (written
ain’t no stranger, so he says:


“Oh, certainly. It’s best. Some authorities think different, but mostly
get further ahead and clear out of hearing—it was floating a little
awkward way in which the poor creature picked up the nuts. His padded
I shall not speak either of the difference which may be observed between the present state of the Royal navy, and the situation it was in at the beginning of this century, nor of the public monuments erected from that period, nor of the India territories, nor of the Colonies remaining to England; provided the objection concerning the money due to foreigners is not repeated against me, as I am in hopes, by and by, to find some kind of compensation for it. I shall therefore confine myself here, to observe, that the above savings of all kinds of industry, some of them active, the others passive, all equally necessary, assisting each other mutually, no doubt, and finally amounting to 332 millions, have been effected in the course of 90 years; not with any sensible detriment to the landed property, since its revenue is doubled, nor to the disadvantage of the lower class of people, whose day-work brings in 1s. 4d. instead of 8d. nor to the prejudice of the fine arts, the rewards of which are perhaps fourfold, comparatively speaking; but solely according to the common course of things, restrained, nevertheless, by a war of 30 years and upwards, out of the 90, and by all the prejudices which the present generation begins to shake off, and which probably will be entirely abolished in the next.

_ain’t_ him, are you?”
and nothing terrible happened, she stopped worrying and resolved to

her powwow shut off and leave the river still again; and by-and-by her
wonderful sight.

Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few minutes’ conversation together, received them exactly as might be expected; with tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villainous conduct of Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings and ill-usage; blaming everybody but the person to whose ill-judging indulgence the errors of her daughter must be principally owing.
warn’t in. Then Tom said he hadn’t got candles enough, and he would
Let us suppose a man who, to the fancy of being possessed of such an article, should join that of seeing constantly at work all those hands which must be employed to complete it; such a fancy never produces any other effect, but that of tertiating or doubling the price of things. The Patriarchs of old, busied and amused themselves, no doubt, in setting to work those whom they enabled to eat; they lived too near the time when man was condemned to labour, to maintain them in idleness. The modern Patriarch of whom I am speaking, provided with a pound weight of flax, which costs him 6d. divides it among 25 working people, who give it every preparation necessary to answer the purpose it is intended for. After an entire month of the most slavish precautions, the most minute details, a thread, hardly perceptible to the naked eye, presents to the warm imagination of the proprietor, the idea of the chef-d’œuvre of which this thread is to be the foundation; after 4 or 5 months more, devoted to the most patient and assiduous industry, he is at last put[360] in possession of some slips of lace, weighing in all 4 or 5 drachms, picked out and sorted, thanks to the last refinement of art, from that pound of flax which had cost six-pence. Five-pence three farthings, and a few fractions, are then, it seems, in the strictest calculation, the only real loss—the only devastation which is occasioned by luxury carried to the highest pitch of extravagance; and this loss is compensated by some very curious pieces of workmanship, which it is impossible to value at less than 227l. 10s. being the amount of 4550 days work at 12d. paid to each of the 25 working people, who have owed their subsistence, for six months, to that pretended inutility.—Amongst all the passions with which Providence has been pleased to gratify the rich for the advantage of the poor, name me only one that occasions less devastation, and maintains a greater number of indigent persons, than luxury carried to excess. O ye rigid men, who have left off wearing lace, join with me who have left it off too,—join with me in teaching those who continue to wear it, how many of their brethren they nourish without knowing it! Make them virtuous by teaching them, that in order to be so, they need only do, from a sentiment of humanity, what hitherto perhaps they have done through a motive of puerile vanity, or from a principle of ostentation, which, when[361] considered, needs to be considered with some indulgence.
knees, asleep, with his right arm hanging over the steering-oar. The
July 10th.—Directly after breakfast Sergy went into the mountains to see the sacred elephants. He was shown a pair of huge savage animals recently caught in these parts.
“‘Doan’ you hear me?—shet de do’!’
reason for a time. But he was one of those weak creatures, void of
Baron Rosen, the Russian military attaché at Rome, came to spend two or three days at the Villa d’Este. We saw a great deal of him; he devoted his whole attention to me, and offered me his escort for moonlight promenades, but I preferred to regain prosaically my bed rather than stroll with him about the moonlit park. He called me obstinate and matter-of-fact, and said that I had warm water instead of blood, and that, like the “Sleeping Beauty in the Woods,” I was asleep to the whole of life’s pleasures, leading the existence of a nun; but his agreeable task to wake me up did not succeed.
responsibility to be a prisoner than anything he ever undertook, that


hear? That man warn’t here for no good. I’d a shot him. Next time you
I got an invitation to a ball given on the cruiser Admiral Nakhimoff, but found a plausible pretext not to accept it, preferring to slumber in my bed, lulled to sleep and wafted into the land of dreams by the soft music of a military band played on the cruiser, which floated faintly from afar through the night air; there came to me through the window the faint strains of a waltz which personified to me just then the sense of my favourite waltz “Loin du Bal.”
The Witch of the North seemed to think for a time, with her head bowed
We took a carriage and went to Passy, a western suburb of Paris, where a villa, overgrown with lilacs, bearing the name of Villa des Lilas, was secured for us by Mr. Shaniavski, in the quietest part of Paris, in the neighbourhood of the Exhibition.
must have fallen while I was sitting there, visible to me had I only
Whether all that had appeared to the Author, as founded in reason and equity, do not finally prove (in spite of the general conspiracy of all Nations and all Ministers) to be strictly conformable to the most stubborn facts;—and whether it do not result from that mass of facts and reasons, that the Author’s assertion, the most interesting to mankind, (that is, to all Princes and their People) is not of the most irrefragable truth, and a truth the most easily brought within the reach of all the parts interested therein?
[Image unavailable.]
forehead, was dabbing water over me.

them as they come.”

beauty was so great that Gayelette loved him dearly, and hastened to
friends.

walked to the Throne Room and knocked at the door.
“I am, dear sir,” etc., etc.
the tails of the animals that had no wings, chasing birds, and throwing
“That is not an unnatural surmise,” said Fitzwilliam; “but it is lessening the honour of my cousin’s triumph very sadly.”
rigidly upheld, it reeled swiftly upon Shepperton. The living


Lion gave a great roar and sprang towards them, and the poor Winkies
them ages ago. A hundred diseases, all the fevers and contagions of
shoulder and keep off the bad luck, but Miss Watson was in ahead of me,

We are leading a very happy life. Sergy keeps from me all knowledge of the world’s misery and wrongs. I have really drawn the great prize in life’s lottery, and am one of fortune’s favourites. There never was a tenderer husband in the world. His one idea is to keep every cloud out of my life. He smooths my path and clears away all the thorns and briars. He is my protector, my guardian and my guide. If there were more men like Sergy there would be fewer miserable women. Sergy surrounded me with comforts and gave me everything my heart could desire, guessing my wishes before I knew them myself. There was nothing under the sun which he wouldn’t do for me; I had only to reach my hand out for anything I wanted. I was really born with the traditional silver spoon in my mouth, and I think myself the most fortunate of human beings to have such a husband.
Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of his situation, now forced herself to speak; and immediately, though not very fluently, gave him to understand that her sentiments had undergone so material a change since the period to which he alluded, as to make her receive with gratitude and pleasure his present assurances. The happiness which this reply produced was such as he had probably never felt before; and he expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly and as warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do. Had Elizabeth been able to encounter his eyes, she might have seen how well the expression of heartfelt delight diffused over his face became him: but though she could not look she could listen; and he told her of{451} feelings which, in proving of what importance she was to him, made his affection every moment more valuable.
A special train was waiting on the quay. All the cars are painted white. I have my private car provided with every possible comfort and luxury. At one end is the sitting-room containing sofas, armchairs, a large writing-table, shelves, etc. The furniture is covered with red silk brocade to match the window curtains. At the other end a suite consisting of a bedroom with a bed with splendid springs, a bath and dining-room.
Or,
the Scarecrow the dress and the mask he had worn when he seemed to be

frantic cheering that was taken up first by one and then by all in the
rough boots, and he looked stern and solemn, and rarely spoke.
CANTON

Our windows looked out into the garden. Green coffee-trees covered with white flowers and ripe fruit, peeped into our room, and a sweet musky aromatic odour pervaded the air.

flash I was after him. I was fierce with fear. Before he was halfway
large emeralds set closely together. In the center of the roof was a




“Huck, does you reck’n we gwyne to run acrost any mo’ kings on dis
their coats as they come. Pretty soon we was in the middle of a crowd,

“You are much mistaken,” broke in the Armenian. “They are precisely Turkish cannons, and it is Maksoud Effendi who has procured the gunpowder.”
“Come here, my love, I want to speak to you,” took her out of the room. Jane instantly gave a look at Elizabeth which spoke her distress at such premeditation, and her entreaty that she would not give in to it. In a few minutes, Mrs. Bennet half opened the door and called out,—
him; but he turned around to the crowd, and says, about like this:
I got back to lunch about two, very tired for, as I have said, the day
CHAPTER XLI
lightning-rod, and dig the hole into the cabin, and made the rope
“That’s me, every time,” says I. “But maybe his chance ain’t worth no
away, and now the house was as dull and gray as everything else.
 The Bag of Money

It was heavy, this vapour, heavier than the densest smoke, so that,

right between my shoulders. Seemed like I’d die if I couldn’t scratch.
Moussa-Pasha dismounted and came up on to our roof to give my husband a warm greeting, holding out both hands. Then, in sight of the whole crowd of bewildered Turks, he kissed my hand gallantly. After having seated himself between us, the Mouchir ordered his troops to continue their march through the town, meanwhile being awfully nice to me; he expressed his satisfaction that I hadn’t left Erzeroum before his arrival and told me that the rumours of my stay in Erzeroum had reached Constantinople, and that my bravery was held up as an example to the Turkish officers and soldiers. He also related to me that prude, Ismail-Pasha, was highly displeased that I rode through the streets of Erzeroum in the company of men and with my face uncovered, pretending that it thoroughly offended the notion of propriety in the Turkish and Armenian families. When the infantry had passed, Moussa-Pasha took leave of us and rode off whilst his troops continued to defile. Each battalion was preceded by sappers, each carrying a hatchet. The Turkish soldiers had a fine deportment and marched in good order, but their officers looked oldish and round-shouldered. The batteries began to defile now, followed by a regiment of “souvaris” (dragoons) in brilliant uniforms, laid all over with red and yellow galoons. Closed arabas, occupied by the families of the Turkish army, filed off now amidst luggage-vans. The occupants of these harem conveyances were invisible; one of the women having the curiosity to peep out was brutally pushed back by a soldier. A band of dervishes, bearing the standard of the Prophet, came galloping up, brandishing glittering swords; behind them advanced files of[129] Osmanlies striking up a clamorous flourish of trumpets, beating the war-drums and blowing the war-horns. The Mussulman schools brought up the rear carrying banners with inscriptions out of the “Koran.” The scholars chanted verses and sung in chorus “Lah illah, illah lah!” in high-pitched voices. They were surrounded by a crowd of street-boys shouting them words of welcome. These urchins who had been very much annoyed in hearing their Armenian little comrades vociferate at every available occasion the Russian “hurra” had their revenge now.
“Well—I parleyed, didn’t I?”
Release date: June 30, 2024 [eBook #73953]
Mrs. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits: she had seen enough of Bingley’s behaviour to Jane to be convinced that she would get him at last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite disappointed at not seeing him there again the next day, to make his proposals.


very wee black slippers, like a chisel, and she was leaning pensive on
They had passed by me, and two were stooping over the frothing,
“Not begun!” I exclaimed.
“Well, den, dey ain’t no sense in a cat talkin’ like a man. Is a cow a

it was in blank, but the solitary compositor who did the thing had

“If you prostrate yourselves,” he asks, “before an image, complain to it of your affliction and desire help, do you not honour it after the idolatrous manner? God says in the second commandment, ‘Thou shalt not make any graven image—thou shalt not bow down to it or worship it.’ The Papist says, ‘Thou shalt’—See how Popery opposes itself to God.” “The Papist,” said the Padre, “is the follower of St. Peter.” “I heartily wish,”[Pg 163] replied Schwartz, “that it were so. Follow Peter and we from our hearts will rejoice. Peter was humble and desired no worship when he was in the house of Cornelius. Your new Roman Peter will be worshipped. Examine into it again my worthy Padre and follow after God and His word.”
and this problematical object came out clear and sharp and bright.
“At four o’clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,” said Mr. Bennet, as he folded up the letter. “He seems to be a most conscientious and polite young man, upon my word; and, I doubt not, will prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so indulgent as to let him come to us again.”
“But it is fortunate,” thought she, “that I have something to wish for. Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain. But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my sister’s absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of pleasure realized. A scheme of which every part promises delight can never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by the defence of some little peculiar vexation.”
[279]
grandmother. You pay me back the chaws you’ve awready borry’d off’n me,
done supper, and wouldn’t tell us what the trouble was, and never let
The outskirts of Kissingen are beautiful. We made long walks every afternoon; exercise gave me a ravenous appetite, and I was far from being satisfied with our meagre dinner when we returned home, being put on low diet like my husband, for company’s sake. We were kept with a discipline that was worse than that of a convent, and were all put to bed at nine o’clock, in accordance with the doctor’s order. I didn’t like at all to be under hospital rules, and[534] began to revolt against this tedious discipline. At the end of three days I longed for change of air and surroundings, and wanted much to run away. I am sick to death of seeing the same faces every day and of hearing the same sort of talk of people drinking disgusting waters and occupied only with the engrossing pastime of taking care of one’s health. We have also become imaginary sufferers, and very often came upon Maria Michaelovna looking at her tongue in the glass.
“Upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to get Pemberley by purchase than by imitation.”

Dorothy wanted to see more of the Princess, so she ran after her. But


But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what connubial felicity really was. An union of a different tendency, and precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their family.

We put up at Nice at the Hôtel des Étrangers. On entering the apartment that we were to occupy, we saw a placard stuck to the wall begging the visitors to turn the key in the lock when going to bed. This warning made me spend a restless night. I could not sleep, fearing that someone would come and strangle me; it seemed to me all the time as if a hand fumbled at the door. The mosquitoes were also awfully troublesome; I began to chase these little vampires and execute them on the spot, I who could never hurt a fly! Next morning directly after breakfast, we went to the Villa Bermont in which the Grand Duke Nicholas, our heir to the throne, had expired. A chapel has been built on the place where his bedroom stood. This villa is surrounded by a plantation of 10,000 orange trees. On our way back we visited the Russian Church; the altar is constructed of oak brought from Russia, and a big silver cross is made of different objects taken away by our Cossacks from the French in 1812.
extended up the Blackwater almost to Maldon.
“No more have I,” said Mr. Bennet; “and I am glad to find that you do not depend on her serving you.”
THOUGHTS
foolishness, and in a lonesome place he hears a horse a-coming behind

May 18th.—This morning we arrived at Kazan. Large barges come up to unload our cargo of coal. We remained here till six o’clock and Sergy went to see the Governor of the city, having to discuss different questions concerning the Mussulmans, who compose the ninth part of the population of Russia. The principal centre of their domicile is the Caucasus, Crimea, Turkestan and the Government of Kazan. At first sight it seems that the Mussulmans of Turkestan and those of Kazan differ widely in conditions and characteristics. They have different histories, and last but not least, quite different modes of life, but in reality it is not so, the dream of the splendour and glory of their Prophet unites them all. That refers not only to the Mussulmans inhabiting Russia, but just as much to the millions of believers peopling India, Turkey and other Mussulman countries. The task of administering equal justice to Moslems and Christians is a difficult one. The Mussulmans are all clever diplomatists from their youth. Talleyrand said that the tongue was given to the man to hide his thoughts, and the Mussulmans, who have understood it long before him, profit largely by this principle. I was present at an interesting interview which took place between my husband and some Buriate syndics during our travel through the Transbaikalia provinces; they were Buddhists all of them. The interview took place soon after the nomad Buriates were placed on a level with the Russian population, perhaps not quite to the satisfaction of the Buriates. When Sergy asked them if they were satisfied with the change of their social position, the syndics replied frankly that they were but tolerably pleased. With these people one could[512] come to an understanding somehow, but it is quite different with the Mussulmans. This is a discourse that my husband held with a group of Moslem syndics who were presented to him in one of his voyages in the provinces of Turkestan, all standing with sweeping salaams from floor to forehead, their turbaned heads bent low. Sergy’s words were translated into their native tongue by an interpreter: “Do you remember the everlasting wars you had in the time when you were under the dominion of your khans, when nobody knew that, leading a peaceful and easy-going life to-day, your blood would not be shed to-morrow? Do you not feel happier now, when the labourer can gather in his harvest quietly, and the merchant sell his wares in safety?” And all the syndics, smoothing their long white beards, replied in chorus: “Hosch, Taksir!” (It is true, master) “Do you remember that not long ago spears were driven into you and that you were condemned to death without any judgment? Are you punished now without any plausible cause?” “Hosch, Taksir!” asserted the syndics bowing very low. “Did your administrators ever build schools, hospitals, nicely-paved roadways? Did they give you an impartial court of justice, and incorruptible functionaries?” At these last words a swift change swept over their faces, with a malicious smile they exchanged a look, and their countenances again remained expressionless, as if carved in wood, and the same stereotype answer was heard: “Hosch, Taksir!” And only accidentally, you could learn from the junior natives, that their elders remembered with veneration the time when they were not sure of the following day and when they were pierced through with spears. They weren’t in want of any innovation either, provided that their “Crescent” should be glorified everywhere. In such conditions, when the population does not come to meet the enterprises of the administration, all the measures concerning the Mussulmans, scattered about Russia, must be taken by the administrators. It is precisely on this subject that my husband had conferred with the Governor of Kazan, whilst I pined alone in my stuffy cabin.
nobody to make some about her now she was gone; so I tried to sweat out
that the Martians were tied to the pit by sheer heaviness, and at the
The Scarecrow watched the Woodman while he worked, and said to him:
so when a king escapes, f’rinstance. And the same with a king’s son; it
“People to _help_ him, Brother Marples! Well, I reckon you’d _think_ so
people have worn green glasses on their eyes so long that most of them
see nobody around, though it was good daylight now. But I didn’t mind,
So they softened down and said it was all right; and when we got to the

persons attempting to find a plot in it will be shot.
direction from which he had come.

including a considerable parcel of people which he didn’t know the

Even Elizabeth began to fear—not that Bingley was indifferent—but that his sisters would be successful in keeping him away. Unwilling as she was to admit an idea so destructive to Jane’s happiness, and so dishonourable to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent its frequently recurring. The united efforts of his two unfeeling sisters, and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of Miss Darcy and the amusements of London, might be too much, she feared, for the strength of his attachment.
you—I wuz ’fraid o’ de dogs; but when it ’uz all quiet agin, I knowed

“Your affectionate friend,
Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations’ behaviour to the remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however, could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of her, in spite of all Miss Bingley’s witticisms on fine eyes.{60}
panic-stricken crowd seems to have swayed hesitatingly for some

“Oh,” she said, “I know.”

Be it as it may, I intreat the reader to observe, that the principles I lay down do not tend, by any means, to lessen the public credit, to spread any doubt on the faculties which France[87] and England have of effecting the reimbursement which both these nations have in contemplation; I maintain, on the contrary, with the simplicity of a child, that it is a childish play, for the one as well as for the other. I say, that the one who appears the most distressed of the two, and is the most taken up with her pretended distress, has only to take from the pocket of one, what he will be very averse to give, and put it into the hands of another, who will be equally averse to receive. I say, with respect to the nation, which now acts the most brilliant part, that all she has to do, is to give, to those who do not ask for it, a sum of money which she receives, and has no occasion for; to give it, I say, for fear of being solicited, importuned, and teazed, to make a bad use of it, or else be obliged to hoard it up, to the very great detriment of circulation. I shall add now, that a business, which to me, does not appear a childish one, but really that of a man, would be to examine, whether the 40 or 50 millions of livres annuity, which are about to expire by degrees in France, and the million, or million and half sterling of taxes to be levied in England, over and above the sum necessary to pay the interest of the national debt, and other state expenditures, will be better employed in the diminution of some private revenue than in[88] the increase of the general wealth in both States; that is to say, whether it is most advantageous to pay off the creditors, who, by such a reimbursement, will be compelled to place at 4 and at 3, what brought them in 5 and 4 per cent. than to lay out the money, for the purpose of increasing, perhaps by one fourth, the products of agriculture and industry, by a faithful and judicious repartition of those sums upon the cultivation of some millions of acres, which now yield nothing but brambles, or yield only the half of what they ought to produce.—How many of this description are to be found both in England and France!⸺This is not all: how many kinds of taxes, the effects of which have not been sufficiently searched into! How many more, whose pernicious consequences are fully known! How many more, the levying of which can be justified only by reason of their produce being wanted, or by the supposed impossibility of a commutation!—Ought the State to reimburse, before those have been scrutinized, these repealed, and all commuted which shall appear evidently to militate against sound principles?

you many days. The country here is rich and pleasant, but you must pass



“I have been thinking,” he writes, “of some means of performing my duty as a son, in sending home some little assistance. I have a watch given me in England and request that you will sell it to some watchmaker and send the proceeds to my father.”

The Lion hesitated no longer, but drank till the dish was empty.

THE FALLING STAR.
“Good gracious!” she cried.
me, and then came the silhouette of Maybury Hill, with its tree-tops

something; and then they give the pen to the duke—and then for the

In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, she saw Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it was extreme. She did not fear her father’s opposition, but he was going to be made unhappy, and that it should be through her means; that she, his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be filling him with fears and regrets in{462} disposing of her, was a wretched reflection, and she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when, looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile. In a few minutes he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while pretending to admire her work, said in a whisper, “Go to your father; he wants you in the library.” She was gone directly.
teeth; and after that, all through his speech, he howled, and spread
the things. The hare-lip she got to pumping me about England, and blest
It was no time for pugilistic chivalry and my brother laid him quiet
her go. When I struck Susan and the hare-lip, I says:

The King Crow flew at the Scarecrow, who caught it by the head and

crushed and trampled there, and left to die amid the terror and the
“I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to find out, if possible, from some of the young man’s intimates in the regiment, whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely to know in what part of the town he has now concealed himself. If there were anyone that one could apply to, with a probability of gaining such a clue as that, it might be of essential consequence. At present we have nothing to guide us. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do everything in his power to satisfy us on this head. But, on second thoughts, perhaps Lizzy could tell us what relations he has now living better than any other person.”
I was tremendously pleased to visit foreign countries, and looked forward to it with great anticipation. Quantities of pleasant things were planned. But, alas! it had only been a sweet dream! I soon awoke to grim reality. Quite unexpectedly Sergy was appointed chief of the staff of the circuit of Moscow. I was greatly disappointed that we had to give up our cherished trip abroad. It was all so sudden, so totally unexpected, and I cried that night when I went to bed. But it means a very brilliant future for my husband, and it would be madness to refuse it. We have to start without delay.
and a bowl of milk for Toto.
“I know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant, gentlemanlike man—he is a great friend of Darcy’s.”

deadly fear of them for many years; so you can imagine how pleased I
where men like you come in. We must go to the British Museum and pick
wailing, despairing voice.
As the dawn grew brighter we withdrew from the window from which we had
Desirous to keep the strictest incognito, we registered our names in the hotel-book, “Mr. and Mrs. Sergius,” for fear of spies. Dr. Pokrovski took the name of “Castorio,” which suited his profession admirably.
“No! That old fool sold him, and never divided with me, and the money’s
XCII.	Paris	434
already writhing with the approaching terror; one ship passing behind
[449]
and on by the spot where the Martian had appeared to me in the
part of the bushes. Then we lit the candles, and crawled in on our
“Well, I should _reckon!_ It started thirty year ago, or som’ers along
the heavily loaded truck; but the Woodman and the Scarecrow both pushed
on accounts of the short notice, and they ain’t going out of this till
Further Considerations on the Necessity of a Correspondence between the Prices of Agriculture and those of Industry.
“Thank you,” he answered gratefully.

anything out of that, so I put the paper in the book again, and when I
The duke says:
Though sorry to leave Paris, I was glad when the North Express carried us back to Russia.
getting all ready to quit rafting.
canoe, in a roundabout way amongst the islands, and search him and take
“No; is dat so?”
spoon-basket till we see Aunt Sally coming, and then Tom went to
ON MY WAY TO ERZEROUM

dusted us both with the hickry, and we was as much as two hours
City and that Oz will help you.”
For the first mile or two all went well, but soon there was an accident; the road was heavy and one of our horses slipped and fell down. It was not a good beginning, but we still had the worst before us, and a long way to go. We only made a hundred miles that day, the roads being shockingly bad, all covered with big stones over which we rumbled down, our carriage bouncing like a roasted chestnut. I tried to console myself with the thought that the way which led to “Paradise” was also covered with stones and strewed with pebbles. We stopped for the night in a small Turkish hamlet and continued our journey at dawn; the worst bit of it now began. The road which led to the next station was a terribly bad one; we had to abandon our comfortable coach and take a sledge. The road grew steeper with every mile; it was a succession of hills, one after the other. Up and down we went all the time, but I felt a wonderful access of courage at the thought that each mile drew me nearer to Sergy. I could already feel myself flying into his arms. In descending a terribly steep hill our sledge was upset and bang—there we were in a deep ditch! Happily we had come to no harm, and after having assured ourselves that we had no broken limbs, we remounted into our sledge and travelled on till sunset Dreading to be overtaken by darkness in the mountains, we made a halt in a village under the hospitable roof of Mr. Iliashenko, a Russian officer who took up his quarters there with some dozen soldiers. I was pretty well fagged out and hurried off to my room. It was so nice to sleep again like respectable people, between sheets, on our second night’s resting-place.
waves would get to us, a long time after she was gone, and joggle the
“Gets it the way people down here gets Congress-water—in barrels. There
was late in the day the people all went, and then I come in and told
It is a difficult matter to guard against a prejudice in favour of liberty, when we consider, that, thanks to the freedom which has always very generally prevailed in those parts of Science, wherein policy disdained to restrain it, we have been taught to weigh air, before any precise idea was obtained on the rule of proportion, which ought to regulate matters of exchange. Every thing, in this last particular, is even still merely mechanical; and perhaps if the matter were thoroughly examined, it would be found that there is never too much, nor too little in one of the scales of the balance, but from an effect of[131] the means devised to establish or preserve the Equilibrium. I do not pretend to lay down, for an absolute principle, that the hand of man, like that of the harpies, is only capable of poisoning whatever comes within its reach, and that the wisest conduct would be, to keep it with care from every thing that one should wish to preserve from corruption; such a proposition would, no doubt, prove rather too general; yet one cannot help observing, that there are but few countries where administration has not often, owing to the grossest ignorance, or some principle of injustice, or of a cupidity almost equally blind, restrained some very lucrative cultures, to which the nature of the soil and of the climate would have given a perfection that could be attained no where else; or have not encouraged some costly produce, to which Nature refuses those qualities which she liberally bestows under another sky.
dodged round and made off down the lane after the chaise, with the
The law’s delay, and the quietus which his pangs might take.
Eleventhly, If France has obtained such wonderful advantages from her internal as well as external barriers, it is not in respect to her agriculture; her agriculture has clearly lost, not only that part of the value in her productions, of which she was daily deprived by this barrier, but also the encouragement which a gradual increase in the price of the productions would have occasioned,[279] to increase their quantity: it is therefore by the exportation of the products of her industry, which, being sold at a price below that of all other nations, have procured her in money that prodigious balance of exported goods, which the wretched state of the national cultivator did not permit him to pay for:—but observe, that the French exportation, carried on with that advantage (pretended to be so very considerable) of the low price of national commodities, brought no more money to France, than that which she wanted for the five articles I have mentioned before, when treating of the balance of England. This matter I hope I shall set in the fullest blaze of evidence.—But, on the other hand, observe also that England, by an exportation carried on with the utmost regularity, under the supposed disadvantage of her commodities being rated much higher than those of her competitors, a rate which she even increased herself, by the exportation of wheat, which she encouraged by premiums—by premiums, destructive of the sacred maxim; observe, I say, that under that disadvantage, in spite of those inconsistencies, as fortunate as they are real and palpable, England, nevertheless, has not failed to procure the money wanted for the five articles, the only ones that can give any value to[280] money.—Shall it be said that France would have obtained a balance in money much less considerable, if she had not kept her prices so low, if she had acted with less respect to the maxim?—Shall it be said, that the balance in money would have been far more favourable to England, had not the price of her commodities been so high at home; if she had more consistently acted upon the maxim; if, above all, she had prohibited the exportation of wheat, which is so often lamented, and even sometimes so loudly complained of by her manufacturers?—This indeed would be to appropriate great merit to the resource of hiding money under ground, when we cannot flatter ourselves with the thoughts of having too much of it, but at the expence of agriculture: but no matter; let us see whether the inference be just.
At this sight the curate cried faintly in his throat, and began
They says:
got up and stood, and went a-weaving around the ring so gentle and wavy
foot.

LXXXII.	Java Batavia	416
In order therefore to consume as much as 80 men, the proprietor must have a landed estate capable of giving food to 240; and out of these 240, 160 must be provided for before the proprietor can think on his own consumption. Consequently, it would be unreasonable to call him to any other account than for that portion which he has received: but I readily subscribe to the necessity of having that account examined with the utmost rigour, since the object is to justify the dissipation of so considerable a surplus, and since the employment of that surplus, well ascertained, will give us sufficient light on the employment of the other parts of the revenue, which by that means it will be useless to examine.



me and mine be the punishment laid. We have sinned, we have fallen


flood evidently got deeper towards the river, and I turned back to
“All right. I’ll ask him; and I’ll make him pungle, too, or I’ll know

slide down into ruin. The pinnacle of the mosque had vanished, and the

gates and hedges, saying little to one another and that in short,


Near the top I stumbled upon something soft, and, by a flash of
Our house is so large that we can easily be lost in it. One of the immense halls is decorated with life-size portraits of our Emperor and the Heir to the throne, under which, on a silver plate, was engraved that His Imperial Highness had stopped in the house during his recent visit to the Orient. From my windows I could look at the “Amour,” flowing along deep and broad. I enjoyed seeing the ships crowded with tourists go past.
In Moscow wonderful preparations have been made in the way of decorations. Our capital is in a state of extraordinary excitement. Triumphal arches and large tribunes are built on the principal squares. A great number of houses have their fronts decorated with carpets and flowers.


No sooner had the Grand Duke Nicholas departed than his brother the Grand Duke Michael arrived to inspect the artillery. During his stay the artillery officers gave a lunch at the military club. I was invited to it, but was about to refuse, being very unwilling to go there alone, as Sergy was not quite well. But there was no escaping from it, and I had to accept the invitation. Countess Brevern, the wife of the commander-in-chief, who was also going with her two daughters to that lunch, offered to take me under her wing. When I was being presented to the Grand Duke he did not recognise me at first, and taking me for one of the young countesses he asked their mother which number I was. “Your Highness does not recognise me!” I exclaimed indignantly. When the countess named me, the Grand Duke pressed my hand warmly and said that I looked so absurdly young, that there was nothing surprising at all that he did not recognise in me such a respectable person as the wife of the chief of the staff.
“But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return.”
they cover but a third of its surface, and as its slow seasons change
love-making, students sat over their books.
escape.
off, who-whooing about somebody that was dead, and a whippowill and a

The Road Through the Forest
gray mass, with little cracks running through it. Even the grass was
every rock.
_will_ you?” Laying her silky hand on mine in that kind of a way that I
All the stores was along one street. They had white domestic awnings in
saying:
“Only one, sir.”

They was still a minute—thinking; then the king says, kind of

come along. I says, all right, and was going to start for the raft; but
A. No—that is impossible: our corporations have already provided against the inconvenience you allude to: not one of their members would dare to sell his merchandise below the price fixed by his corporation: and we have made, as it were, the impossibility of any such measure, doubly so, by the difficulties we have devised to[316] prevent a ready admittance into our corporations; all our bye-laws tend to reduce our associates to the smallest number possible. But one single expedient is now wanted to put the finishing hand to that grand work; it is the absolute prohibition of importing all those commodities which foreign nations might offer at a cheaper rate, than we are determined to sell them at.
“It must be inconvenient to be made of flesh,” said the Scarecrow
ago.”
At that I ducked at once under water, and, holding my breath until
the Munchkins, “and there is some charm connected with them; but what

On the fourth day, to her great joy, Oz sent for her, and when she

overboard, and after that they took a rest, and had a talk about all


simply screaming; the other, a dark, slender figure, slashed at the man

There are about fifty first-class passengers on the Melbourne. Kontski and his wife have also taken passage on that boat. The celebrated Polish pianist proved a most cheery and entertaining companion. Though the aged mæstro has passed his eightieth birthday, his spring-like vigour and abounding vitality are surprising; he defies the march of time. Kontski speaks five languages with equal facility. His wit is sparkling. During five o’clock tea he told us a number of rather risky anecdotes which kept his neighbours in fits of laughter. When I handed the old mæstro his cup of tea, asking him if he had sugar enough, he said, “Everything proceeding from the hands of Your Excellence can’t be otherwise than excellent!” Gallant old man!
Mr. Arthur Young’s valuation of the Revenue, in his Political Arithmetic, is the result of his own private observations. Nothing ever occurred to me on the subject, that can come up with the minute accounts he gives us of the different provinces which he has visited in the north, south, and east of England.
The road was smooth and well paved, now, and the country about was
that stood near and dashed it over the Witch, wetting her from head to
flowers were too strong for me. How did you get me out?”
times the Scarecrow twisted a neck, until at last all were lying dead
Before dawn the black vapour was pouring through the streets of
This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor Miss Bingley. Vain indeed must be all her attentions, vain and useless her affection for his sister and her praise of himself, if he were already self-destined to another.
“Seventeen! My land! Why, I wouldn’t set out such a string as that, not
“Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride—where there is a real superiority of mind—pride will be always under good regulation.{74}”
creepers!”

“On the 24th of July the Rev. Senior of the Danish missionaries, Mr. Wiedebroeck, came from Tranquebar to fetch us. He joined us in hearty praises to God for all His mercies. After having therefore visited several English gentlemen, we departed on the 28th from Cuddalore. Dear Mr. Kiernander accompanied us as far as the first river and there took leave of us. On the 30th we arrived at Tranquebar in perfect health and were most paternally received by our dear brethren. Now hitherto the Lord hath helped us. To Him be glory for ever and ever.”
about his troubles, he forgot all about what he’d been a-going to do.
dull, solid blue, like a man that’s been drownded nine days. Blamed if
habits would seem to an intelligent rabbit.
and chickens, all made of china, were standing about in groups.
a-shaking all over and ready to sink down in my tracks I was that

went down and got the fox-fire, and put that in too. I called it
 Old Mrs. Hotchkiss

“And I’ll bring it back by midnight,” I said.
   ‘But who shall dwell in these worlds if they be inhabited?

and a quantity of immature carrots, all of which I secured, and,
unearthly region of the pit.

My hunger was at a stride so insistent that it moved me to action. I
“Sir William’s interruption has made me forget what we were talking of.{119}”


“_Thirty-seven year_—and he come out in China. _That’s_ the kind. I
My husband returned late in the night and we continued on our way. To Sergy the palace of the Emir proved a disappointment. It is an ugly building of no particular kind of architecture; the apartments are decorated with pictures, statues and ornaments of every sort, stuck up anyhow and everywhere. The Emir regaled my husband with a Lucullus repast, with champagne in profusion, but the Emir drank only lemonade, fermented drinks being forbidden by the Koran.

CONSTANTINOPLE


he was behind vines. It was all black, no gray; so was his long,

Evil. All we can do is to carry her to the castle of the Wicked Witch
There has been a deal of cricket-playing this afternoon on board. It seems a queer game for a ship, but the promenade-deck has nettings to keep the balls from flying overboard.
king sold them the niggers reasonable, for three-day drafts as they
things as flowers came near to killing me, and such small animals as

So was her sister, Miss Sophia, but it was a different kind. She was
“I admire all my three sons-in-law highly,” said he. “Wickham, perhaps, is my favourite; but I think I shall like your husband quite as well as Jane’s.{466}”
seedy old chest, and an old hair trunk with the hinges broke. They
all the other niggers around there, so they wouldn’t be trying to run

“The person of whom I speak is a gentleman and a stranger.”

are these fellows going to be ransomed if we don’t know how to do it to

“You may depend on it,” replied the other, “for Mrs. Nichols was in Meryton last night: I saw her passing by, and went out myself on purpose to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was certainly true. He comes down on Thursday, at the latest, very likely on Wednesday. She was going to the butcher’s, she told me, on purpose to order in some meat on Wednesday, and she has got three couple of ducks just fit to be killed.”
crooked-handled cane, marked out the places on the ground where Boggs
We assisted one day at the representation of the Fakirs, a Hindustan religious sect given over to the mortification of the flesh. It was an impressive spectacle. The Fakirs, arrayed in white flowing garments of doubtful cleanness, were sitting in a semi-circle on the floor, holding banners and singing religious chants. Their “mollah,” wearing an enormous turban, sat in the centre. Suddenly the tom-toms rolled like thunder and the experiments began. The Fakirs did amazing things. One of them, clad in a sort of white sack with five openings through which passed his head, legs and arms, began to light the sacred fire to the accompaniment of a flute and tambourine, bending over the burning coals into which he threw some essence in order to get dizzy. The barbaric music, struck up faster and a long convulsive shudder shook the Fakir’s limbs. Then he took a heated spade and applied it to his arms and face and put his fingers into the brazier, making disorderly jumps, after which he fell on the floor with foam in the corners of his mouth. But it was only a prelude to more horrors. The Fakir who came next terrified me still more by his shouts and wild gestures. He pricked his tongue, lips, cheeks and ears with a long iron spear, and stepped barefooted on the sharp sides of a sword, after which, in a state of wild excitement, he stabbed himself with a poniard, and the blood ran down in abundance. The third Fakir twisted a large serpent round his body and ate a part of it, and then swallowed a scorpion, which the manager had previously shown to the audience. Now came the turn of the last Fakir, who grilled his skin with red hot irons, and made his eyes bulge out of its sockets with the end of a dagger and slowly rolled the eye back into its ordinary position again. Professor Charcot, the celebrated psychologist, who had controlled the experiment, was convinced that it was not a fraud.
And now from Deal:
bad luck; and besides, he said, he might come and ha’nt us; he said a

looked out at a hole in the leaves, and I see a bunch of smoke laying

At six o’clock in the morning a boy naked down to the waist, his long plait rolled round his head, brought us our coffee. It is Sunday to-day. Being too late for Mass, both in the Cathedral and the Protestant church, we went for a walk round Shamin, which took us altogether half an hour. Before the “English Settlement,” joining the “French Concession,” there spreads a large tennis-ground.
It is worthy of remark that a certain speculative writer of
“There is something a little stately in him, to be sure,” replied her aunt; “but it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming. I can now say with the housekeeper, that though some people may call him proud, I have seen nothing of it.”
“True,” the Tin Woodman returned. “So, if you will allow me to join
says:
the midst of it. Over it flaunted a Union Jack, flapping cheerfully in
ain’t used to lying, it don’t seem to come handy; what you want is
“In the first place,” replied Mr. Gardiner, “there is no absolute proof that they are not gone to Scotland.”



back. There were fewer houses and fewer fruit trees, and the farther
every jump, and the whole crowd of people standing up shouting and
was said to be the best and wisest man in all the land, while his manly
up; so he had clumb in by the shed. He kept a-looking me all over.
My brother answered him vaguely and began to dress, running with each

So Oz brought a pair of tinsmith’s shears and cut a small, square hole
bust like that? I reckon the Martians’ll open their beautiful eyes!
every night, while the woman was asleep, Dorothy carried him food from
Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest of the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of the writer, that could give her any comfort. Miss Darcy’s praise occupied the chief of it. Her many attractions were again dwelt on; and Caroline boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former letter. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother’s being an inmate of Mr. Darcy’s house, and mentioned with raptures some plans of the latter with regard to new furniture.{169}
“What can we do, then?” she asked.

Hour after hour passed away, and slowly Dorothy got over her fright;
 VII. THE MAN ON PUTNEY HILL.
A new and desperate plot was hatched to assassinate the whole Imperial Family. The winter palace has nearly been blown up by dynamite which was to explode at a quarter past seven, during dinner, but luckily the Court was awaiting that day the arrival of a foreign prince, whose train was half-an-hour late, and this delay saved the Tzar and his family.
barrow of ginger beer stood, a queer derelict, black against the

_what_ did he sing out?” And turns to me, perfectly ca’m, and says,
“Nothing only robbery and murder,” Tom said.
minute and then kill me. He put his knife under him, and said he would

each other your majesty, and your grace, and your lordship, and so on,
the road. Then I fetched out the servant, telling her I would go


December 24th.—The rolling continues, the wind roars, great waves splash overdeck. I am dreadfully ill and keep my bed. Okaia, the Japanese stewardess, crouches upon the floor at the foot of my bed, watching me with the eyes of a faithful dog.

were in position or being hastily placed, chiefly covering London.


“How nicely we are crammed in!”	272


nothing to do with them except when they’re on me; and I don’t believe
Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly, with the readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; but his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and garden to Mrs. Collins, sat for some time without speaking to anybody. At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire of Elizabeth after the health of her family. She answered him in the usual way; and, after a moment’s pause, added,—
ketching?”


PAGE



they?”
While he promoted the growth of a native ministry and took great pains to train his catechists to a point of efficiency, he was not disposed to believe that India could ever dispense with European missionaries, who carried with them a weight of influence and respect which a native, however worthy, could not successfully obtain. At the same time he foresaw the importance and necessity of a native ministry under the jurisdiction of English leaders. This was shown in the ordination, by the rites of the Lutheran Church, of Sattianaden, who lived to a ripe old age, and was eminently useful in the work, and whose office as minister was cordially sanctioned by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. It is a fact sometimes hardly appreciated that a great part of[Pg 199] almost every day was spent by Schwartz in training his catechists for the work of the ministry. There existed then no colleges to undertake this important duty, and the remote possibility that one day in India native clergy would hold their degrees from Oxford and Cambridge never entered into his wildest dreams. He was content and happy to do his part, and in doing this so faithfully he was preparing the way for the wonderful developments in the service of natives which should come in the future.
When you come down to the cold facts, we simply got to _let on_ that a

raised at last, and ready to go to work and begin to do suthin’ for
THE DAYS OF IMPRISONMENT.
[Image unavailable.]
When breakfast was ready we lolled on the grass and eat it smoking hot.
Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few days longer, as the former thought her presence might be serviceable to her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Mrs. Bennet, and was a great comfort to them in their hours of freedom. Their other aunt also visited them frequently, and always, as she said, with the design of cheering and heartening them up—though, as she never came without reporting some fresh instance of Wickham’s extravagance or irregularity, she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found them.
“Well, those who mean to escape their catching must get ready. I’m

me were mostly uninjured. By the College Arms a dark heap lay in the
Towards midnight the steward knocked at my door, begging me to close the portholes in order to give room to the rope-ladder for the pilot. We are at the mouth of the river Saigon. The tide was already too low for us to enter the harbour, and we anchored outside.
come and shook hands with the king and thanked him and talked to him;
It was pretty close to the shanty, and I thought I heard the old man

“I should a reckoned the difference in rank would a sejested to you
follow around, but I stooped down to look at the tracks first. I didn’t

[Image unavailable.]
black smoke. But my brother’s attention speedily reverted to the
finding fault, and that would be bound to fetch more bad luck—and keep

Toward evening, when Dorothy was tired with her long walk and began to
similar tube was handed to each of the three, and the seven proceeded

ever been no snakes created. Why, after every last snake had been gone
strange thing, seeing the instant effect of the gas, that one could
every night it was her prayer to be allowed to live till she got it
that pole. It was a lonely life to lead, for I had nothing to think of,
 He Wrote


details. However it is done, it is certain that a beam of heat is the
about one hundred miles east of him.

Westminster Bridge; and close behind him came a hay waggon with five or

“Why, mos’ sholy it is.”
and returned with some excellent cigars. We lit these, and his optimism
demand to see the Great Oz.”
I have already said, and repeated, that in every circumstance where it is necessary to borrow or to displace a capital, it is better to borrow, even at 5 per cent. than to remove a capital which returns double that sum; and that, on the other hand, it is more advantageous to lend any sum abroad upon good security at 5, or even at 3 per cent. than to lend the same sum at home, where it would yield only 2 per cent. or to bury it in the abyss of a Bank, whence nothing returns. Now what proves that Great Britain and Holland are in this case with regard to each other, is, that England seldom or never opens a loan, but what the Dutch take a share in. What do they give for the purchase? Nothing more than the surplus of the ordinary profits arising from a trade, which they cannot[118] extend sufficiently to employ the whole amount of their savings. And why has this part of the English loan been given up to the Dutch by the national capitalists? Because the latter could find in their own trade, susceptible of a farther extension, a way of employing their capitals to greater advantage, that is to say, of reaping a benefit superior to the interest offered by the loan: How can this be doubted, when we see that the loan falls into the hands of a small number of merchants, who soon afterwards make over their debt? Would they transfer it to any one, were not the interest it brings in, interest secured by the nation, inferior to the ordinary profits of their commerce?
across it easily.”






it. Is your husband going over there to-night?”




“You’ll hear more yet,” I said, and went on to my home.
you and see if there’s a fish on the lines for breakfast. I’ll be along
changed to the Illinois edge of the island to see what luck I could
I continued to be quite in the dark as to his plans for the future and didn’t like at all to be fed upon chance scraps, I wanted a whole bone. I don’t know when in all my life I had been more vexed and had shed such hot passionate tears; but pride arose, forbidding my heart to ache for the loss of his love. What was the use of crying my eyes out? I was determined to forget Serge Michailovitch, putting him as much as possible out of my thoughts and passing a sponge over our love affair. To keep my spirits up, I rushed into all sorts of adventures, exposing myself to ill-natured comments. People began to say nasty things of me, and my aunt Roerberg implored me to put a stop to my disgraceful flirtations, warning me that the talk would reach the ears of Serge Michailovitch. She tried to excuse his conduct in my eyes and said that, as his experiences were much wider than mine, he was more cool-headed, and knew what he was about, therefore he could not act inconsiderately in such a serious matter as marriage. Yes, but as for me, being prompt and vivacious I hated delays, and could not possibly just take time and think things over like him, I can’t. I can’t stop and wait!
green color and was as white as Dorothy’s dress.

“Dah she is?”
CXXII.	A Short Peep at St. Petersburg and Back to Tashkend	518
dumb person on the histronic boards. So then they waited for a
hot blue sky, with the smoke and little threads of flame going straight
“How you going to get them?”
My husband happening to visit a prison, saw a man who had stolen a sturgeon. The law-suit had been going on for three years, and it is only now that he was sentenced to three months’ imprisonment. During this long lapse of time his wife had died, leaving him as legacy four little children who were wearing away in the close atmosphere of the gloomy prison cell, which they shared with their father, having no[378] other shelter. In one of the sittings of the “Benevolent Society” we found means to give the poor brats a more comfortable home.
“I’m his mother. I’ll hook a gown from Aunt Sally.”

Firm wast thou, humble and wise,
“Oh, that’s the way of it?”
we might think we was passing the foot of an island and coming into the
The soldier with the green whiskers led them through the streets of the




goes to our church, she says:
on to the passage, and says:
key, or saw myself out, one or t’other. He drank and drank, and tumbled
Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more. Mrs. Reynolds could interest her on no other point. She related the subjects of the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the furniture in vain. Mr. Gardiner, highly amused by the kind of family prejudice, to which he attributed her excessive commendation of her master, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his many merits, as they proceeded together up the great staircase.
2dly,
able to see out of this gap into what had been overnight a quiet
then we set down on the sandy bottom where the water was about knee

rather dizzy when Dorothy picked him up.
“Easy enough. Miss Hooker was a-visiting up there to the town—”
the dawn.


Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody, and Darcy had never been so bewitched by any woman as he was by her. He really believed that, were it not for the inferiority of her connections, he should be in some danger.



“Because it’s mixed up with other things.”

I suppose it was nearly eleven o’clock before we gathered courage to
green egg.
do—he—well, I’ll jest ask him.” He turns around and begins to make a
My admirers were of all ages, from mere boys to wrinkled greybeards. I received their attentions as a matter of course, and though I flirted with many men, I never really lost my heart to any of them.
and the widow from trying to follow me, it would be a certainer thing
made up their minds that only the first row of trees could bend down
Elizabeth replied that it was.

“_Well_, den! Dad blame it, why doan’ he _talk_ like a man? You answer
we captured him up the river, and were too poor to travel on a
“You! At your age! No! You mean you’re the late Charlemagne; you must
Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, determined to go to her, though the carriage was not to be had: and as she was no horsewoman, walking was her only alternative. She declared her resolution.
good ways off. I paddled over to the Illinois shore, and drifted down
[xiv]
Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his goodness.
He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but, with a moment’s recollection, and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly seen him often; and, after observing that he was a very gentlemanlike man, asked her how she had liked him. Her answer was warmly in{292} his favour. With an air of indifference, he soon afterwards added, “How long did you say that he was at Rosings?”
purpose again. After working an hour I began to speculate on the

To read this poetry, will you?
guns that began about that hour in the south. As if in answer, the
Thrill to the tireless music of a psalm.
That night they had a big supper, and all them men and women was there,
CI.	Nagasaki	452
The news of the massacre probably reached Chobham, Woking, and

won’t do. He might tell who told him; then the king and the duke would

way.” He then opened the gate of the outer wall, and they walked forth
[327]
worse pies.”
by the flashing bushes it touched, and was too astounded and stupefied
Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday, his wife received a letter from him: it told them, that on his arrival he had immediately found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to Gracechurch Street. That Mr. Bennet had been to Epsom and Clapham, before his arrival, but without gaining any satisfactory information; and that he was now determined to inquire at all the principal hotels in town, as Mr. Bennet thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first coming to London, before they procured lodgings. Mr. Gardiner himself did not expect any success from this measure; but as his brother was eager in it, he meant to assist him in pursuing it. He added, that Mr. Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave London, and promised to write again very soon. There was also a postscript to this effect:—
“You want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.”

CHAPTER XVIII
thought a minute, and says to myself, hold on; s’pose you’d a done


nothing; it was for protection; thought I would kill some game nigh
the lawyer turns to the new old gentleman and says:
Their visitors stayed with them above half an hour; and when they arose to depart, Mr. Darcy called on his sister to join him in expressing their wish of seeing Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, and Miss Bennet, to dinner at Pemberley, before they left the country. Miss Darcy, though with a diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations, readily obeyed. Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece, desirous of knowing how she, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away her head. Presuming, however, that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment than any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of society, a perfect willingness to accept it, she ventured to engage for her attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on.
to come.”

Though peace was signed, the Embassies and Consulates continue to be guarded by the troops in Japan.
man always does t’other way. And when you throw at a rat or anything,




descended and smote me out of life. I came into the road between the
As he spoke there was a sort of smile, which Elizabeth fancied she understood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane and Netherfield, and she blushed as she answered,—
“Lived through but not forgotten”
“Why, everybody. They all said so, m’am.”


clothes, nohow.
he was on, the horse begun to rip and tear and jump and cavort around,
bed, with hands that looked like they’d been chawed. Tom was in high
“What are you doing?” I said presently. “What plans have you made?”

spiders, and the spiders didn’t like Jim; and so they’d lay for him,

We managed to keep up our incognito at the Lyndhurst, and attracted no special attention until after the publication in the Examiner of a statement, that “General Doukhovskoy was supposed to have reached San Francisco travelling incognito.” After that it was noticed that “The middle-aged gentleman who appeared to be the leader of the party, but whose name was registered in the books of the hotel as ‘Mr. Sergius,’ didn’t go out as frequently as at first.” Another San Francisco paper reproduced our portraits, after which Sergy told me to wear my hat when I went down to the dining-room, in order not to be easily recognised by my portrait, copied in different newspapers in which I was reproduced without my hat.
It had clouded up pretty dark just after I got on to the raft, but it
sight better than lying tied a couple of years every day, and trembling
hundred people elbowing and jostling one another, the one or two ladies
and looked out with her one eye that could see far off. She saw all her
I took the axe and smashed in the door. I beat it and hacked it

The Diary of a Russian Lady
drifting suspicion of human voices, that I entertained at first only to
Therefore, as you must remain in the Palace for several days, I will
entire battalion of the Cardigan Regiment. No details are known. Maxims

distance one had to go before the cloaca was reached, the chances we
blinding highlights and dense black shadows.
morning of the second day I awoke and found the balloon floating over a
I held a reception once a week; between two and five about a hundred persons would pass through our saloons. The day I held my first reception, the large drawing-room was crowded with guests. I had to take up the subject of politics and be amiable to everyone. I was so tired with having had to talk all the time that my tongue, having refused to obey me, I said good-bye instead of good-afternoon[499] to a belated visitor. The Grand-Duke was amongst our guests and gained my sympathy at once. He is not a bit haughty and altogether charming, and I felt perfectly at ease with him. He is such a nice-looking man, towering nearly a head over everyone. When taking leave the Duke asked me to come and drink a cup of chocolate the next day. He was awfully amiable to me, and took me all over his palace—a veritable museum. Amongst other curiosities he showed me a watch made by Briguet, which goes without being wound up. It is put into the pocket, and after you have taken a few steps, the watch is already set going for twenty-four hours. There exists only two examples of such watches; Briguet valued them at ten thousand francs each. Alexander II. possessed the first one. Being free from all household management, I feel myself on a visit here. The first days of my arrival, I did not know how to while away the time, wishing for even the mildest adventure, something that would put a little spice into the insipidity of our lives. I would like a row now and then just to enliven things a little. For distraction I tried to pick a quarrel with Sergy, making tragedies of pure nonsense, but it takes two to make a quarrel, and Sergy is a man of peace and is a desperately calm person, and finds it necessary for the sake of domestic quiet to put up with all my tempers; nothing could put him out of patience.
is Broken’—that’s the thing that’ll scoop a rat quicker ’n anything
Is it not impossible that the augmentation of one fifteenth, upon the price of every produce in circulation, should require any thing above an additional fifteenth, in the sums which had been hitherto sufficient for brokerage, and the transports of all kinds of property?
12thly,
another, far away across the meadows in the direction of Kew Lodge.
the danger close at hand.
hung around the nigger cabins and laid for a chance, and stole three

A few days more and the ship, with her three missionary passengers, stood out to sea. Not yet out of sight of land, they would watch the lessening shores and hills of England as they sailed down channel. Some favourable winds had sprung up, but they could not take advantage of them because the boat which was to victual the ship for their long voyage had not arrived. So they lay off the Isle of Wight, and Schwartz takes advantage of the delay to send some very interesting details in letters to his friend, the Chaplain Ziegenhagen, under dates 1st and 3rd February, 1750.
others in the natural history, and for a moment Dorothy was afraid. But
Bridge and along the road between the hedges that runs out at last upon
mind, Cairo would be the next place, I reckoned.
It came to me that I was upon this dark common, helpless, unprotected,

September 15th.—To-day the naval officers arranged a concert for me at the Naval Club. The entertainment was quite a success. Señorita Estrella took part in it; sitting on the floor, she sang Spanish songs charmingly, to her own accompaniment on the guitar. She was much applauded and sang song after song. The audience crowded around the platform and threw flowers to her. The marine officers sang in chorus Russian folk songs, and shared Señorita Estrella’s success, sending the audience wild. One of the officers played a solo on the balalaika. He is a virtuoso of that Russian national instrument; it was marvellous how he could draw such rich sounds from that primitive three-corded thing.
you’ve found, instead of nailing it up over the door, but I hadn’t ever

good friends.

he did not let them in to see him at once they would call the Winged
must be insensible or dead.

“But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he comes into the neighbourhood.”

CHAPTER XXIV.
“I am sure,” said she, “I cried for two days together when Colonel Miller’s regiment went away. I thought I should have broke my heart.”
be good to you every way she knowed how. _That’s_ what she done.”
Save for that sound we lay quite still in the scullery; I for my part
sheets and reading, and the Strand was suddenly noisy with the voices
about the charm of the Golden Cap, but she saw that it was pretty, so
bullfrogs a-cluttering, maybe. The first thing to see, looking away
sign when young chickens flew that way, and so he reckoned it was the
rushed upon me. I screamed aloud, and scalded, half blinded, agonised,
“London in danger of suffocation! The Kingston and Richmond defences
I have already said that my storms of emotion have a trick of
“What are we?” I answered, clearing my throat.
This was the Deputation. There had been a hasty consultation, and since
[Image unavailable.]

and the snakes, and spiders, and things begin to feel worried about


this is true, for I am one of them myself, and cannot be mistaken.

the only thing I could do. Sit down, please, there are plenty of
“I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a letter from Hertfordshire. Be assured, my dear sir, that Mrs. Collins and myself sincerely sympathize with you, and all your respectable family, in your present distress, which must be of the bitterest kind, because proceeding from a cause which no time can remove. No arguments shall be wanting on my part, that can alleviate so severe a misfortune; or that may comfort you, under a circumstance that must be, of all others, most afflicting to a parent’s mind.{363} The death of your daughter would have been a blessing in comparison of this. And it is the more to be lamented, because there is reason to suppose, as my dear Charlotte informs me, that this licentiousness of behaviour in your

whistle twice.


“Dear madam,” cried Mrs. Hill, in great astonishment, “don’t you know there is an express come for master{369} from Mr. Gardiner? He has been here this half hour, and master has had a letter.”
would help cure him. He made me take off the rattles and tie them
“A little.”
trip?”
“No, not at all.{206}”
If they have, won’t the complices get away with that bag of gold Peter
onions as usual, but he said he had just bought the concern and knocked

dreaming; and when things began to come back to me they seemed to come

aboard—clumb in at an upstairs window. But it was too dark to see yet,
The arrival of the Gardiners	294

[263]
V.	Amid War’s Alarms	58
mechanisms had yielded astonishing results. Among other things, the
might see down upon us behind our barrier. At a later date we began to
September 9th.—We continued our journey at daybreak. The chief of the district of Kharoussan came to meet my husband on horseback, accompanied by an escort of Kurdes. The chief of their tribe, wishing to be agreeable to Sergy, told him how glad he was when the new frontier was made, that his land became joined to the Russian territory, when the land of his brothers was joined to that of Turkey.
affairs—if you got any. Long as you’re in this town don’t you forgit

CHAPTER III.
Whether the impossibility of the two supposed balances, constantly at the disposal of England and France, be not proved, by the very facts adduced in both countries to establish the existence of those two monsters?—Whether that impossibility be not demonstrated by other facts as little equivocal; and whether it be not the interest of England and France to renounce the Idol, and solemnly abjure both its works and its pomps?

they imagined I could do anything. But it will take more than

“You see,” said the Cowardly Lion, with a whimper, “I haven’t the
had swallowed him up. By a common impulse we clambered higher. Towards
away. Play cricket, perhaps. That’s how we shall save the race. Eh?

“I cannot think why this wall is here, nor what it is made of.”
things: she’d be mad and disgusted at his rascality and ungratefulness
judged by their snarling and growling that they were in great trouble.
men looked dark, but never said nothing. Miss Sophia she turned pale,
something. And so did I. It was Tom Sawyer on a mattress; and that old

CHAPTER CVIII
I am not ashamed to own the prejudice I entertain against a diminution in the price of any thing whatever, when I observe that discouragement, at least in the part affected, would be the consequence of such a diminution; whilst, on the contrary, a gradual, general, and proportioned advance in the prices of every thing, is constantly followed by a greater activity in all the branches of labour, which really increases the quantity of its productions, in a proportion far superior to the advance on that imaginary, nominal value, acquired by fermentation; my intention, therefore, cannot be to declaim against one of the most[258] potent causes of the high prices prevailing in England, and which nobody, I think, has yet mentioned. This last expression shews, that I do not mean here, that quantity of paper-money, to which many people, in more than one kingdom, ascribe all the evil, of which the sole real part is the work of monopoly. I think I have proved, that it is impossible there should long remain in circulation any paper above the necessary quantity: all would flock to the Bank to be paid in cash, had not the Bank enough of it to discharge her notes, when presented, with such readiness as to leave no doubt of the validity of those other notes, which, in the natural course of things, would not be presented there to be paid in money. The Bank would derive very little advantage from the momentary cheat of paying off large sums in sixpences; this legerdemain is admirable, but can suffice only to correspond to the wanton tricks sometimes played by great politicians, to give the Bank a momentary trouble. It is, then, necessary to rock those children, whom great men make it their amusement to scare; and they must be rocked till they are fast asleep, or till the great men are tired of making faces at them. After the farce is over, the children wake, and do not even remember to have been frightened; money is found wherever it is necessary,[259] and every thing returns to that order which it is every one’s interest to maintain.
him or outrun him most of the time. I didn’t want to go to school much
“Why don’t it, Huck?”

that stirred up the people, and a lot of men begun to pile down off of




“Unless where they like women of fortune, which I think they very often do.”
[444]

All the loafers looked glad; I reckoned they was used to having fun out
Whatever I have hitherto said, whatever may drop from my pen in the sequel, in contradiction to some of Mr. Necker’s opinions, was written long before the publication of his work, and in no degree detracts from the solidity of his views. What he devised was perhaps the best that could possibly be imagined in the actual state of things, and according to the received[294] system:—But is that system the best?—I subscribe to his principle concerning the precautions to be taken, and the slowness of the march necessary even through all the paths that may lead to the best; but that best, what is it? France cannot boast of having found it—read the work of Mr. Necker; England cannot boast of having found it—read the debates of both Houses of Parliament:—And do I dare to offer my thoughts!—Yes:—two children, it is said, found what it was necessary to find, in order to the discovery of immense bodies of light, at a distance where nothing was suspected but the limits of creation.—Were my thoughts only plausible, they ought to be thoroughly investigated; they concern the State, they concern mankind at large:—if they prove just, to say that they are impracticable on account of the shackles with which our forefathers have loaded us, is to say nothing but with regard to the fleeting moment in which I speak, already so far off from us; but to feel then that we should not add new shackles to those we endure already, would be a great point gained; to scrutinise afterwards the ancient opinions, without exception; to analyse the principles on which pretended impossibilities are founded; to expect nothing from seduction or from authority; to desire nothing but from general conviction;[295] to spare no pains to make the people sensible of, and familiar with the truths that might be discovered, would perhaps be a second step towards that very mark to which we should probably direct our course, were it not for the pretended impossibility, the mere supposition of which casts a ridicule upon the very thought of looking up to it.
bed, Huck Finn.”
MONTE-CARLO
part of the Palace. Of course this politeness was wasted on the
loaded up the place again with them. I didn’t mind the lickings,
“Can such abominable pride as his have ever done him good?”
find herself lying upon the grass, with thousands of mice standing
 The Breakfast-Horn
It cannot be said, happily, that this dismal prophecy even as regards his own Church has been fulfilled but the statement is sufficient evidence of the condition of the Romanist Missions when Abbé Dubois based his pessimistic conclusions.
nieces would be glad if a few of the main principal friends of the
The days passed with despairing monotony. With admirable patience we were persevering in our cure, and took our medicine, our bath, our massage with great resignation. We shall finish our treatment in about a fortnight and have decided to go and take sea-baths at the Isle of Wight.

said, let him alone a minute, and don’t disturb him. So he thought and
The great day arrived. Long before six o’clock in the morning the streets were black with excited crowds. I rose when it was only beginning to be daylight and at seven[153] o’clock we were already driving to the Kremlin; it was printed on our tickets that after eight o’clock nobody would be allowed to enter its enclosure, and that was the reason we had to start so early. The large square was covered all over with red cloth. Ministers of the State and officers in full uniform began to assemble. The tribune on the opposite side was occupied by foreign Royalties and representatives of the different Oriental countries in gala costumes studded all over with precious stones. The Khan of Khiva was glittering like the sun. The Grand Duke Waldemar, accompanied by a numerous suite, came out of the palace and proceeded to the Cathedral of Assumption where the Tzars are crowned, followed by all the members of the Imperial Family, the ladies of the Court wearing the national dress of the richest style, the Court officials resplendent in their gorgeous uniforms, the Ambassadors of foreign countries with their spouses, the personages of the first two classes and all the authorities of the town with my husband amongst them. The bewildering variety of the many different uniforms, both military and diplomatic, was striking. Our troops standing in long rows, with the standard of every regiment, were an imposing sight. The Metropolitan, with a mitre on his head, in magnificent vestments thick with gold embroideries, followed by his Archbishops, came out of the Cathedral to meet Their Majesties who were slowly descending the steps of the wide marble staircase of the palace, coming out of the private apartments to proceed to the Cathedral. The Tzar gave his arm to the Tzarin, whose train was carried by four pages, behind came a long file of ladies-in-waiting and maids-of-honour. A company of the regiment of the Chevalier Guards walked ahead, behind them came forty-eight pages, and a second platoon of Chevalier Guards brought up the rear. The day was grey and wet, it soon began to rain, but it was indeed remarkable that at the moment Their Majesties appeared, the heavy clouds broke away and out burst sunshine, whilst a flock of white doves circled around them. At the foot of the staircase sixteen generals aide-de-camps to the Emperor supported a magnificent baldachin under which Their Majesties passed on to the Cathedral to be crowned, whilst guns were repeatedly firing. At the end of the ceremony there was a clamour of joy bells and the military bands began to play our National Anthem. It was a thrilling moment and my excitement was intense.


cat galley-west; and she said cle’r out and let her have some peace,
“The whole fifteen, mum.”
country, and especially wherever there was a stream of water.

breeze springs up, and comes fanning you from over there, so cool and

and away she went. I see the fog closing down, and it made me so sick

Aunt Em had just come out of the house to water the cabbages when she
“Well, all right, Tom, fix it your own way; but if you’ll take my

“I don’t know,” replied Dorothy sorrowfully, “but it is my home, and
woman could wish. When he grew to manhood, Quelala, as he was called,

“Who is your folks?” he says.
Author: Jr. John W. Campbell
earth. In particular I laid stress on the gravitational difficulty. On
ring-streaked-and-striped, all sorts of colors, as splendid as a
“A note for Miss Bennet”	36
down upon the sand. A large piece suddenly came off and fell with a
“No—I do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did.”
He’d got all that coat of arms business fixed, so now he started in to
“Good Heaven! What is to become of us? What are we to do?” would they often exclaim in the bitterness of woe. “How can you be smiling so, Lizzy?”
In September the Grand Duke Nicholas came to witness the grand manœuvres and stopped at Petrovski Palace. We lived in one of the wings of the palace, and wanting to see the Grand Duke’s arrival, I had to mount a narrow cork-screw staircase, with shattered steps leading up one of the turrets. The walls were mouldy and hung with cobwebs which tumbled down upon my head. The view of Moscow and its surroundings, on reaching the top of the turret, was a thorough compensation for my disagreeable climb.


“And have you answered the letter?” said Elizabeth.

we looked in at the window. We could make out a bed, and a table, and


pleasanter for these fixings, and so don’t disturb them. The duke’s
“No! W’y, what has you lived on? But you got a gun. Oh, yes, you got a
The Emerald City was soon left far behind. As they advanced the ground

said he was right behind Jim’s bed now, and we’d dig in under it, and

animals, such as the vanished bison and the dodo, but upon its inferior
with _us_, d’ye hear?”

Our life went on much as usual. I have just come back, and the longing for St. Petersburg overcame me already. The weather is horrid. The rain beats against the window-panes. Pressing my face against the glass, I looked at the Amour, black and tempestuous, and my nerves began to give way. Oh, I do want to go back to Russia so badly!
last it was over the banks. The water was three or four foot deep on

“If you believed it impossible to be true,” said Elizabeth, colouring with astonishment and disdain, “I wonder you took the trouble of coming so far. What could your Ladyship propose by it?”
very dark indeed in the wood, for the lightning was now becoming

perfectly still.
[1]The 18 millions sterling in circulation, as calculated in 1688, by Dr. Davenant, were, in 1711, brought down to 12 millions, probably as we reduce now to 20 or 25, the 40 millions and upwards which might be supposed in England, were we to confine ourselves to the calculation of the coin struck in the present reign, and of the old pieces preserved on account of their weight being unimpaired. The sequel will shew, that it is next to an impossibility for a country, tolerably governed, to preserve, for any length of time, more or less money than its wants require.
“Well, what did come of it, Jim?”
was bathing. Indeed, the old Witch never touched water, nor ever let

and all shook hands with them until their arms ached.
corner. As it fell with a crash they looked that way, and the next


realised.

darkly out of the darkness, and the trampled bushes and broken rose
The screen went gray-black. Never again did they hear from that expedition. But that voice across the void had served as a warning to those that followed.
“Ah! now I see the reason why we are able to hear these cannon-shots, for if they were Russian guns, they would not be heard at all from the citadel,” concluded the Osmanlie, not a bit disconcerted.
drop the portmanteau he carried on his shoulder, swung round and sent
not wish any reward but to know I have done the right thing.

brought _part_ of a man—Buck Harkness, there—and if you hadn’t had him

Presently he began waving his hand.
Now the Wicked Witch had a great longing to have for her own the Silver
way for those swifter and more impatient vehicles that darted forward
may hurt these pretty little people so they will never get over it.”
“Some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I am sure I do not know.”

I came to St. Petersburg full of happy hopes and expectations, and an eager desire to spread my wings in the wide world. It would be a delightful existence—every hour filled with enjoyment.


 Jim Listening
followed and lay down beside her.

those instant flashes gave. But instead of a milking stool imagine it a


In the midst of all these labours, these incessant conferences and preaching, his own soul was being nourished and kept by divine grace. Few men have left behind them such undoubted evidence of their work, instances abundantly testifying to the zeal and capacity of the worker, his singular winsome attraction by which men were drawn to him and the success which so often followed his ministrations. He never spared himself; like his Master he often had not so much as leisure even to eat. But what were his own personal experiences during all this activity? We know that with any real and serious worker for God, the height of his success is the measure of the depth of his own sense of unworthiness. The man who like the Apostles stood without fear before the face of a King, was in his own soul humble and adoring at the feet of his Lord and Master.
time is all unknown to me. Luckily, when the farmer made my head, one
it so, _I_ couldn’t help it.
night on the grass, with nothing but the stars over them; and they


from the very start—left us to do _everything_. They’re so confiding
of a hub of a wheel, as you may say—spokes made out of dogs—circle of


ferry-boat, and I said these kinds of things was adventures; but he said
On the road Tom he told me all about how it was reckoned I was
Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them on her face with a calm unconcern, which was not in the least altered by her communication.
smashing, and down she goes, and the front wall of the crowd begins to


such bars out of the crude clay, and the mound of bluish dust rose

a nigger.

laugh. The feet of the dead Witch had disappeared entirely, and nothing
CHAPTER LIII
be better still. But we got to let that go. There ain’t necessity
could go, every jump of the way.
Well, then, pretty soon all hands got to talking about the diseased

dropped him into the water.

painted face.

clear out of the house for as much as a week Aunt Sally warn’t over it

deeds. Look out—here I go!”
“If you ever deny it again I’ll drown you. It’s _well_ for you to set

Our Governor-General, Prince Dolgorouki, underwent the same fate as Count Brevern de-la-Gardie, my husband’s chief;[288] he was made to understand that it was time for him to give up his post. The uncle of our Emperor, the Grand-Duke Sergius, who was married to Elizaveta Fedorovna, Grand-Duchess of Hessen-Darmstadt, the granddaughter of Queen Victoria and sister of our Empress, was named Governor-General of Moscow in his place. I had to go and meet the Royal pair at the railway station, my name being put in the list with all the ladies, who were to present the image of the Virgin to the Grand Duchess. All the so-called “high-life” of Moscow had assembled at the station. When the train was signalled we went on to the platform covered with red cloth. The Grand-Duke, giving his arm to his spouse, advanced towards the Mayor of the town, who presented them with a silver plate and on it the traditional “Bread and Salt,” an ancient Russian custom. On the next day I was presented to the Grand-Duchess, and found myself amidst a lot of ladies standing in a semi-circle in one of the large halls of the palace. The Grand-Duchess was going round, speaking a word of welcome to everyone of us. I was curious to watch the expression of the ladies waiting for the honour of being addressed by Her Imperial Highness; some of them dropped profound courtesies till they almost disappeared.


On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have any intention of speaking, Miss Lucas defied her friend to mention such a subject to him, which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, she turned to him and said,—
place was impassable. It seems there were a few people alive there,
“It is wonderful,” replied Wickham; “for almost all his actions may be traced to pride; and pride has often been his best friend. It has connected him nearer with virtue than any other feeling. But we are none of us consistent; and in his behaviour to me there were stronger impulses even than pride.”
and looked at her sharply and steadily. Then the mouth moved, and
watchful, the gunners ready, the ammunition piled to hand, the limber
Terrible Humbug,” as she called him, would find a way to send her back
“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Why do you seek me?”


’dout a _doctor;_ not if it’s forty year!”
On our side the fire had done no more than scorch the nearer trees; it

and Jim used to do before. Wouldn’t that plan work?”
the great Throne Room and bade him enter the presence of Oz.

“What can I do for you, my child?” she asked.
girl. When I began chopping again, my axe slipped and cut off my right
ornery and low down and mean that I says to myself, my mind’s made up;
so I didn’t tell him. If I never learnt nothing else out of pap, I
my foot stumbled, it would have been the end. I fell helplessly, in
“What! and I as high as a tree and as big as a church? All right, then;
you what’s tattooed on his breast. It’s jest a small, thin, blue
Tying Up Day—times.—An Astronomical Theory.—Running a Temperance

woods, he said, were still burning, and pointed out a haze of smoke to
In deep dishonour here must die,
eye-witness of the later occurrences, caused a whirl of excitement, a
the side towards Illinois. The cavern was as big as two or three rooms
from the end of the poppy bed, where the sweet grass spread in
loads of them there, anyway; and he said there was A-rabs there, too,
flew away with him to the Witch’s castle, where he was placed in a
If it were, besides, acknowledged that such an increase, or decrease, (it matters not which) soon becoming general and proportionate, (without any other agent to work that miracle, but that reciprocal pressure which establishes a perfect symmetry in a bee-hive,) then no alteration could arise therefrom in the circumstances of the two essential capitalists, since it is perfectly indifferent whether we purchase the labour of others at 5 or 6 per cent. dearer, if we sell our own labour in proportion:
when _you_ fine it out en tell um ’bout it, dey doan’ b’lieve you.”

flower bed as soon as you can. We will bring the little girl with us,
“Tell me something about yourself and the country you came from,” said

When the clouds cleared away, we mistook forests for patches of green grass, and mighty trees for thorn shrubs. It was as if we gazed down from a balloon. An odd sensation, I had never experienced it before! When we reached the Kaltbad station, a group of yellow-haired children brought us bunches of Edelweiss, a small white flower which grows on the top of high mountains. Kaltbad is famous by its splendid and spacious hotel, full of bustle and movement. The vestibule was filled with English and American tourists, walking about and talking. They all seemed to know one another. The hotel has a splendid situation about two thousand feet above the sea-level, and offers every possible comfort to its guests. Notwithstanding its great altitude, it has every modern improvement, even gas-works. We were far above the clouds, whilst we took our coffee on the verandah. A storm broke out beneath us suddenly, peals of thunder resounded and the rain began to fall in torrents, whilst above us the sky was perfectly blue and the sun shone brightly.
When him and the old lady come down in the morning all the family got
blue-black outside, and lovely; and the rain would thrash along by so
The Scarecrow went sorrowfully back to his friends and told them what
“I shall keep it, just the same,” said the Witch, laughing at her, “and
MACAO



but showing as a little black object against the hot western sun. Now

my head off, as long as it will be a better one when you put it on

“I am terribly afraid of falling, myself,” said the Cowardly Lion, “but
inundate its temperate zones. That last stage of exhaustion, which to

CHAPTER LVII
and a sad one, and they bore with me. I remained with them four days
the one which the prisoner has to scrabble on the wall. But he had to


When breakfast was over, they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and solicitude they showed for Jane. The apothecary came; and having examined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had caught a violent cold, and that they must endeavour to{44} get the better of it; advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. The advice was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head ached acutely. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment, nor were the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had in fact nothing to do elsewhere.


“Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane. But will they make you happy?”
May 20th.—The weather has changed, and the Volga is stirred into little rippling waves by the passing of the wind.
deserted. No one has been here these ten days. Do not stay here to
“I haven’t the heart to harm even a Witch,” remarked the Tin Woodman;



So they sat down and listened while he told the following tale.
winner. They was all a-horseback; he lit off of his horse and got
The Martians wore no clothing. Their conceptions of ornament and

“Why, _Tom!_ Where you been all this time, you rascal?”
his eye with a rag.


powder and several bodies, and an evil, ominous smell from the gratings
But it’s the truth, dear, isn’t it, dove,
carried them a long way past the road of yellow brick that led to the
the minute he put the pen to paper. And so he warmed up and went
“I have come for my brains,” remarked the Scarecrow, a little uneasily.
the river. But the Martian machine took no more notice for the moment




audience, but nothing of the sort; pretty soon he crawls out from under

The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was teased by Mr. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side; and though he could not prevail with her to dance with him again, put it out of her power to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with somebody else, and offered to introduce him to any young lady in the room. He assured her that, as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent to it; that his chief object was, by delicate attentions, to recommend himself to her; and that he{130} should therefore make a point of remaining close to her the whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a project. She owed her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often joined them, and good-naturedly engaged Mr. Collins’s conversation to herself.
At length of this Greek youth she grew quite tired,
us, and then drive a trench.”
“Beauties” brought over from all parts of the world black, white and yellow, are exposed in a large hall, in stalls behind a railing, just like wild beasts. One of the prettiest girls, dressed in our Russian national costume, appeared to be a Polish Jewess, who had taken the first prize in a recent “Beauty Competition.”
They was setting around, some of them talking a little, in a low voice,
was in such a tight place that when Mrs. Phelps took me for Tom
One of the most fatal effects that spring from that increase in the prices, occasioned by the impost, is, as they say, the impossibility to which a country is reduced, of supporting abroad the rivalship, the competition of a nation less burdened with taxes, who of course can, they say, undersell every thing.
sluggish: “crawling,” “creeping painfully”—such expressions occurred in
eyes. Over and through it all went the bats, heeding it not at all. The
“But these were not his only labours at Trichinopoly. He found there a large English garrison without a chaplain, and to these also he sought to be of service by every means in his power. The kindness of his heart and the unaffected simplicity of his manners soon procured him a civil reception among them and he improved this into an opportunity of gaining a knowledge of the English language, with which he was unacquainted at his first arriving. After he had made, however, but a small proficiency in English, he undertook to read the lessons to the garrison on Sundays and at the same time read them sermons from those of our English divines in whose writings he discovered an evangelical spirit. But since he has attained a more perfect acquaintance with our language he has proceeded to preach extempore, which I am told he still continues and is enabled to command the[Pg 77] utmost attention in his auditory. It is indeed astonishing, if we consider the manners of our troops to India, how he has been able to persuade whole garrisons.

looked at Dorothy and her strangely assorted company with wondering
down the fence!” Then there was a racket of ripping and tearing and

Hardly was the ring cleared before the second bull rushed in and the programme was repeated. The new bull looked quite peaceful, and, instead of rushing into battle, he walked from right to left, looking for a loophole to escape, but nevertheless he was made to go through all the traditional tortures. It was Frascuello’s turn to march on the bull. The Matador didn’t show any pluck. With the first passes of the “mulata” he had missed his bull and only injured the animal without killing him, at which shouts of encouragement to the bull were raised on all sides, “Viva el toro!” they cried. The arena resounded with whistles and invectives to the Matador, and the populace fiercely threw orange-peels and empty bottles at him. Frascuello paled with suppressed rage, and had to strike several times before putting his victim to death. The Matador ventures to face the bull when the last spirit had been beaten out of him, and I find there is much less danger for them than for the Russian peasant going to hunt bears, armed only with a spear, whereas the Matadors charge on an unfortunate animal driven into a circle whence he could not escape.

“Has she been presented? I do not remember her name among the ladies at court.”
CHAPTER LXXVIII

grew to love her with all my heart. She, on her part, promised to marry
I couldn’t hardly hang on to the shutters, I was so weak. But Bill
loose en gone I—en here we is!”
I’ll hive that money for them or bust.

Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have been very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her restoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. She would not listen, therefore, to her daughter’s proposal of being carried home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think it at all advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on Miss Bingley’s appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all attended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopes that Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected.

FOOTNOTES
watched the rafts and steamboats spin down the Missouri shore, and
Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her father, their indignation would hardly have found expression in their united volubility. In Lydia’s imagination, a visit to Brighton comprised every possibility of earthly happiness. She saw, with the creative eye of fancy, the streets of that gay bathing-place covered with officers. She saw herself the object of attention to tens and to scores of them at present unknown. She saw all the glories of the camp: its{290} tents stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, to complete the view, she saw herself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting with at least six officers at once.
“But isn’t everything here green?” asked Dorothy.

man could turn it himself.
Well, all through the circus they done the most astonishing things; and
Frau Weidemann, a comely, grey-haired woman, in a frilled cap and white apron, came out to receive us and wish us welcome. She had taken us for a honeymoon couple, and thought that we started forth on our wedding trip. Her boarding-house is a quiet family sort of establishment, but the whole effect of my apartment was rather cheerless, and the boarding-house surroundings were distasteful to me. The furniture was old and shabby, with faded curtains and threadbare carpet in the middle of the room. Frau Weidemann’s prices are very moderate, I pay eight francs per day for board with a room. I have arranged to have breakfast and lunch in my own room, but must go down to dinner at table-d’hôte, which I do not like at all.
Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet protested against any description of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit, and some exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy.
“I am Dorothy, the Small and Meek. I have come to you for help.”
and made himself ever so friendly; and he give out the idea that his
“You certainly do,” she replied with a smile; “but it does not follow that the interruption must be unwelcome.”

December 27th.—It is awfully cold in our apartment. I had to get up in the night and make up the fire which had gone out.
your pore broken heart at _us_ f’r? _We_ hain’t done nothing.”


good, and so he got cheerful and comfortable. But the duke kind of

boys, for all boys was a pretty harum-scarum lot as fur as she could
“I’m not feeling well,” said the Scarecrow, with a smile, “for it is
“See what you have done!” she screamed. “In a minute I shall melt
choked both those rivers.
“Who is Aunt Em?” inquired the little old woman.
Reflexion on a Letter from Philadelphia inserted in the English News-papers.	170


I come back dah was dat do’ a-stannin’ open _yit_, en dat chile
warn’t good judgment, because that was the boot that had a couple of

saw in action than a Dutch doll is like a human being. To my mind, the
candle, and tucked me in, and mothered me so good I felt mean, and like
under the seat—luckily for my brother—and told them to drive on to
They were all tired out when they reached the shore at last and stepped


to by-and-by tag along and drop in, and let on to be a stranger. But it


February 29th.—I kept my bed the whole day. It is Carnival-time and the streets are full of laughing crowds dressed in fantastic costumes, who showered confetti on each other. I could see from my bed all that was going on in Lesseps Square. Sergy went out for a walk and returned accompanied by an Italian youth with a performing monkey arrayed in a red jacket and fez, perched upon his shoulder. The ugly little animal, whilst turning somersaults, was watching slyly the opportunity to jump upon my bed.

become cramped, and then listened. I whispered passionate prayers for
direction away from the pit I saw, beyond a red-covered wall, a patch

in different shades of the color about them. It took three days to sew
a-going to be any better off then than what he was before, seeing I was
“None at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but this would be nothing if you really liked him.”
CHAPTER IX.
“Their conduct has been such,” replied Elizabeth, “as neither you, nor I, nor anybody, can ever forget. It is useless to talk of it.”

tied up and started along the bank. There was a light burning in a
had to learn him over and over again how to say every speech; and he
Promptly at nine o’clock the next morning the green-whiskered soldier
When they returned to the castle the Wicked Witch beat them well with a
A more particular View of the same Subject.
“She jis stood de same way, kiner smilin’ up. I was a-bilin’! I says:
Utterback, ’n’ she’ll tell you so herself. Sh-she, look at that-air rag
Next day Mr. Koyander, who was well acquainted with Egyptian antiquities and could decipher indecipherable inscriptions, took us to see the Ghiseh Museum, where in large glass cases lay Egyptian mummies, which had been human beings of flesh and blood three thousand years ago. The bowels of the mummies are put in a box and laid at the feet of their sarcophagus. We saw the mummy of Sette I.,[306] the Pharaoh whose daughter had found out baby-Moses on the banks of the Nile, and that of Rameses II., the father of one hundred and seventy children! Both mummies are admirably preserved, as well as that of Amanit, the great priestess. She lies upon her back, her mouth open, showing all her teeth; her long black hair is still attached to the scalp, and the skin to the bones.
that night to see such things. I ain’t ever going to get shut of
“We will carry you,” replied the King, and no sooner had he spoken than


she was going to get one of us, sure, before we got through. We got her
“Did _you_ hear anybody sing out?”
 “A Pirate for Thirty Years”

first light and tell.” I felt easy and happy and light as a feather
for safety in their one little miserable skedaddle through the world.
Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady was not in the commission of the peace for the county, she was a most active magistrate in her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to her by Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into the village to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scold them into harmony and plenty.
In my quality of President of the Committee of Benevolent Ladies, I had to send invitations to all the members asking them to attend a meeting in our house. It was for the first time in my life that I had assisted at a committee, and being new to my work, I began to get awfully shy, and stupidly got very red. The flush on my cheek was scarlet when I was called upon to make a little speech. I felt so shy that I seemed entirely to have lost the use of my tongue, and forgot all the words I had learnt by heart. It is terrible that feeling when people are expecting you to do something and you are sure to disappoint them. The committee lasted three hours at least. Colonel Alexandroff, the secretary of the Benevolent Society, began by reading aloud the account of the previous month. It is concerts, theatricals, and lotteries which form the essential income of the Society. The lady-patronesses were long in dividing the poor of the town by districts between themselves; differences of opinion arising, and the sitting lasted three hours at least. At the second one I was over my first fit of shyness, and even gave a short discourse when opening the meeting. I was chosen President of the “musical and dramatic circles” that day.
an old horse-blanket nailed against the logs at the far end of the

after we had eaten. He taught me euchre, and after dividing London
when we got through there couldn’t nobody in the cabin ever know there
“Shut up!” I said, rising to my feet, and in a terror lest the Martians
It was the first time I realised that the Martians might have any other
He raised considerable row about it, but me and Jim stuck to it and
“Quick sales _and_ small profits! It’s a good business—yes.”

regarded this earth with envious eyes, and slowly and surely drew their
“On the stairs”	189
East, and for setting our people free from bondage.”
nothing I could do would moderate his speech.
“What was the trouble about, Buck?—land?”
My brother woke from his torpor of astonishment and lifted her up,

some fronds of red weed; but they were watery, and had a sickly,
little while he jumps up and says:
[Pg 104]
in their power and complexity, so unearthly in their tortuous forms,
CXVI.	Cairo	482
pale, not fire-faced the way he was when he come. So I set down and
She was shown into the breakfast parlour, where all but Jane were assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise. That she should have walked three miles so early in the day in such dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt for it. She was received, however, very politely by them; and in their brother’s manners there was something better than politeness—there was good-humour and kindness. Mr. Darcy said very little, and Mr. Hurst nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of the brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion and doubt as to the occasion’s justifying her coming so far alone. The latter was thinking only of his breakfast.
escaped, and stood buried now under soil and ruins, closed in by tons
ready, take your places.”

Chapter V
“O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden.”


half way; and then we was plumb played out, and most drownded with


hitched it behind with the hooks, and it was a fair fit. I put on the
spectacles, why of course everything you see looks green to you. The

“You promised to send me back to Kansas when the Wicked Witch was
“Mr. Schwartz, deeming it necessary, in order to converse with advantage with these people, to be well acquainted with their system of theology, whatever it was, spent five years, after he had attained some proficiency in their language, in reading their many mythological books only. Hard and irksome as this task must have been to a devout mind, he has reaped this benefit from it, that he can at any time command the attention of the Malabars by allusions to their favourite books and histories, which he never fails to make subservient to the truth. He also learnt at Tranquebar the Portuguese tongue, particularly[Pg 75] that dialect of it which is used by the Portuguese who are natives of India.
reflection upon the cloud scud above. Every now and then a haze of
God had repented, that the Angel of Death had slain them in the night.
“_Well!_” says the lawyer, “this _is_ a state of things. I’ve got some
out. I don’t like it. I’m a-goin’ ’ome, I am.”
deserted and empty, or harassed and watching against the terror of the
foot out in the air and then the other, the horses leaning more and

counting the spoons and laying them out to one side, and I slid one of
Thereafter he walked very carefully, with his eyes on the road, and
times—they don’t have no school now. Do you own a dog? I’ve got a
foreheads on the coffin, and let on to pray all to themselves. Well,



He read and re-read the paper, fearing the worst had happened to me. He
great light, as bright as the sun, which made the emeralds sparkle in a
At this period, let it be supposed, that an epidemical distemper sweeps off three-fourths of the inhabitants, and consequently takes away as much from the revenue:—After the terrors usual in such cases, and a score of prophecies, foretelling that Doomsday is at hand, yet will it appear that the world is not destroyed: it will also appear, that the epidemical disorder has[143] not carried off the money, and that it would be wrong not to make use of it.—The specie must of course, lose nearly three fourths of its value if the whole should continue in circulation, because 4 pieces will present themselves to do the office which 1 could perform before the time of the distemper;—the quarter of wheat, at first rated at 5 shillings, sunk to 4 in the second hypothesis, then sold for 10 in the fifth, will in the present one, rise up to 40, without any one growing richer or poorer for it; for, most assuredly, the price of labour will have increased in proportion to that of its own produce.
all the time. I didn’t want to go back no more. I had stopped cussing,

people there—just enough to pay expenses. And they laughed all the
chairs; and I will tell you my story.”

glowed. He was inclined to regard my coming as a great occasion.
Whilst Sergy was visiting the town, my car was taken to the railway station, a large white building of oriental design and ornamentation. Elegantly dressed ladies and officers in full uniform were waiting my husband on the platform. I leant far back, to conceal myself from view, in nervous horror of being stared at. To amuse me a musical band executed the best pieces of their repertoire, in turns with another band composed of wandering minstrels. An old white-bearded man began to sing in a broken voice a bizarre melody to the accompaniment of a zourna, a national instrument. My heart went out to the poor old troubadour with infinite pity.
anyone who breathes it falls asleep, and if the sleeper is not carried

Martians—_dead_!—slain by the putrefactive and disease bacteria against
sisters and sleep on a cot; and up garret was a little cubby, with a


June 3rd.—I didn’t close my eyes during the whole night; I turned and turned in my bed, but sleep would not come.
feet, and spreading our hands out to fend off the guys, for it was so
 IX. WRECKAGE.
unseasoned artillery volunteers who ought never to have been placed in
Next day President Loubet visited our section, where he was presented with a map of France worked “in relievo,” in a frame of jasper; the seas were made of marble, the rivers of silver and the towns of precious stones, got from the Ural mountains. The huge emerald representing the city of Marseilles cost eight thousand roubles. President Loubet is a very different sort of person from what I had expected the ruler of France to be; he is an insignificant-looking little old man, saluting cordially from right to left. A Russian lady, who heard us speaking our mother-tongue,[527] mingled into our conversation. Before leaving our section she favoured me with a condescending nod and a limp hand-shake, but when she heard our interpreter addressing me by my rank, she rushed back and squeezed my fingers effusively. Nasty woman!

talk in his life before. Just see what a difference it made in him the

road.

It was like riding into the smoke of a fire to approach the meeting
k’n tell a fortune pretty good when I’ve got somebody along to find out



“Ep-pe, pep-pe, kak-ke!”
“Amidst such great public undertakings and the high degree of consideration attached by all ranks of people in this country to Mr. Schwartz’s character, every road to the gratification of ambition and avarice was completely open to him. Courted by the prince of the country in which he resided, reverenced almost to adoration by the people at large, confidentially employed by the English Government in objects of the first political importance—to his honour it must be recorded, that he continued to value those things only as they appeared likely to prove subservient to his missionary work, as they made funds to assist him with building of his churches or the establishment of his schools over the country. With the single eye of the Gospel, he looked only to the effusion of divine truth, and the glad tidings of salvation through faith in Jesus Christ. The same principle which raised him in the public estimation, he continued to cherish in every stage of his devotion; untarnished by the venality and corruption which from various quarters it is well known assailed his virtue, he continued his missionary life carrying his cross and following the steps of his Divine Master to the end of his earthly being.”
I heard him presently whimpering to himself.

easy—_given_ back to us, flung at our heads, as you may say, when of

“Are you better?” asked the curate in a whisper.
“We have money,” said the slender woman, and hesitated.


night grieving. I got so down-hearted and scared I did wish I had some

It consists in the number of men necessary to furnish annually exports to the value of fifteen or sixteen millions:—And if it should be urged that this exportation is over-rated,
“Jesus Meine Zuversicht.”

artificial cylinder, man! And there’s something inside.”
Mortlake. I managed to make out the road by means of occasional ruins
of earth on every side save towards the cylinder. Over that aspect we

in the wigwam and tore up one of the duke’s shirts for to bandage him,
If it were acknowledged, that at present nothing can result from several institutions, pretended very wise, but a great diminution in the products and consumption, as well as in the revenue of the Exchequer; because there is nothing so easy as to balance, every where, institutions pretended very wise, by others not less so:

everything—and I a-trusting you all the time, like you was my own

house, about forty-five or fifty year old, bareheaded, and her
living animal, in most cases from a human being, was run directly by
“Lizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspect me. It mortifies me. I assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an agreeable and sensible young man without having a wish beyond it. I am perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had any design of engaging my affection. It is only that he is blessed with greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally pleasing, than any other man.”
Presently they heard a solemn Voice, that seemed to come from somewhere
the volume of the earth must have accelerated its cooling to the
man in dah, kivered up, en I went in en unkivered him and didn’ let you
“Why, as for that,” answered Oz, “I think you are wrong to want a
straight off, but laid the paper down and set there thinking—thinking
said, now for the nonnamous letters.

July 10th.—The influence which the Russians exercise on the outward life of the Christian population is so great that the Armenian inhabitants have decided to organise a theatre in Erzeroum, an ignored luxury at the time of the sovereignty of the Turks. A stage with a score of boxes has been built in a spacious cart-house; the curtain represents an allegory of Armenia amidst a heap of ruins. In these amateur performances all the women’s parts are played by men.

“Come with me, for Oz has sent for you.”

The wonder will still increase, when it is observed, that the French carry to the highest pitch their rage for English modes, whilst the English experience the same kind of frenzy for French fashions.


along every country lane shouting of unhoped deliverance, shouting to
they were awakened by the crowing of a green cock that lived in the
“It’s a lie. Judge Thatcher’s got it. You git it. I want it.”
were several patches on him, but the tinsmiths did a good job, and as



and buttercups. Dorothy still wore the pretty silk dress she had put on

FOOTNOTES:
gentle and sweet like a dove, and she was only twenty.
Sally she see it through the window, because it was only about fifty
I crept to their doors and listened; they was snoring. So I tiptoed
houses to pieces and routing among the wreckage. But they won’t keep on


She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the question, with some surprise at her silence.
The Regattas had attracted a great number of spectators on the shore of Cernobbio. Eighteen row-boats, adorned with wreaths of flowers, bearing each its number and denomination, were lining the coast like race-horses ready to start. At a signal given by a cannon shot the boats spun[211] along rapidly in the direction of Como. I didn’t take any interest at all in these Regattas, my thoughts being miles away, for the manœuvres being over, I was leaving Cernobbio on the following day. To think that to-morrow at this time I shall be with Sergy again! I was getting so excited I didn’t know how to wait till next morning, and went to bed as early as possible in order to reduce the evening to its very shortest proportions. It was my last night in that nasty place, and to-morrow I would shake the dust off my feet!
to her I see the water come into her eyes, too; and she shook me by the

play now.
Sacred to the memory of


The little old woman took the slate from her nose, and having read the
ST. PETERSBURG

Pap warn’t in a good humor—so he was his natural self. He said he was
Dorothy could stand no longer. Her eyes closed in spite of herself and
When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth for the indulgence of some music. Miss Bingley moved with alacrity to the pianoforte, and after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead the way, which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she seated herself.

borrowing, because that was what pap always called it; but Tom said it

what I’d better do if they did catch me. But the king he got the bag
XI.	Tuljajee and Serfogee	127
[397]
to suppose that on Mars they may have progressed upon them with some
At eight o’clock the gong sounded for dinner. The captain would have me placed next him; at my left hand sat the Director of the French Post, a Corsican bearing the high-sounding name of Casanova. That compatriot of Bonaparte leads, as it seems to me, the depraved life that his famous namesake did before him. He said gallant things to me, and related scandalous stories about his amorous exploits.

lonesome I most wished I was dead. The stars were shining, and the
also. As for the little old woman, she took off her cap and balanced
big head tenderly. Then she kissed the Tin Woodman, who was weeping in
was.


went creeping away on our hands and knees. When we was ten foot off Tom



Buck’s gun go off at my ear, and Harney’s hat tumbled off from his
a little lock of my hair with a thread to keep witches away. But I



It would then be necessary to conclude, that all other nations were greatly in the wrong to think that England had any reason to be alarmed.
it.”
Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman and the Lion exactly what they thought

the skeletons of the dead the Martians had consumed, there was not a
I was startled. Had I spoken my thought aloud? I turned, and the French
poked along well on to an hour, everything still as rocks and sound


mud-stripes been whitewashed some time or another; round-log kitchen,
She gave some to Toto, and taking a pail from the shelf she carried it

Kingston Hill going to and fro, and about eleven the windows rattled,
“Doan’ hurt me—don’t! I hain’t ever done no harm to a ghos’. I alwuz

down town, and everything was going wrong. His lawyer said he reckoned
“And I thought Oz was a terrible Beast,” said the Tin Woodman.
[393]



didn’t write them—fact is, the scratches he makes ain’t properly

thought we was right on the track of a solution, but it’s gone to
“Hold on—’d you go through him?”
old town again. So I said I didn’t care what was the reason they didn’t
wouldn’t never do nothing to grieve her any more. And the third time I
watched the fate of these pioneers of theirs and learned their lesson,
books? Do you want to go to doing different from what’s in the books,

half-fascinated terror, staring at these creatures, or rather at the

and for the most part submerged.
In August my husband made a second long voyage beyond the Baikal Lake. Since his departure I have not known an hour of peace. I followed him in my thoughts through the[456] washed-away roads by a recent flood. The streams had become rivers, bridges had been carried far away by the rush of the waters; the horses harnessed to Sergy’s carriage had to ford the river with water up to their knees. For a fortnight I had no news of my husband; the telegraph didn’t work and the postal communications were interrupted. One afternoon that I was especially out of sorts, I had a telegram from Antoine Kontski, asking if he might come with his wife and spend a few days with us on their return journey to Europe. Though I didn’t feel able in the present to enjoy anybody’s society, I proposed to them, nevertheless, to stop at our house. I never left my bedroom during their stay pleading indisposition. Mrs. Kontski came up to keep me company; as to her husband I only saw him on the day of his departure, when he came to bid me good-bye. Before leaving he played for me his famous Réveil du Lion. I had all the doors opened, and I could hear the piano plainly. It was refreshing to hear good music after having been deprived of it so long. Kontski gave three concerts during his stay at Khabarovsk, with immense success. When his evenings were unoccupied the old mæstro was deeply engrossed in a game of chess with his wife, or played patience.
“A language cannot,” he assures Serfogee, “be learned but by assiduous application. As the Malabar boy is now with you, let him not be idle, as he is inclined to be. He used to make excuses but do not allow him to stay away; when the new Governor comes he will wonder that you have made no greater progress in the English language. I wish you had somebody near you with whom you could talk. By conversation we improve. When you send me a letter I wish to see your composition without being corrected, when I shall be fully convinced of your progress....
ambuscade; and when we got the word we rushed out of the woods and down
below, as hard as I could go. I landed, and slopped through the timber
all like pap; but they couldn’t make nothing out of the face, because

My old friends the Levdics have taken their abode in Italy having been expatriated by the doctors on account of their[218] health. They spend the winter months in Florence and the summer at Viareggio, a little sea-side resort beyond Florence. We went to see them at Viareggio, and as we knew nothing of their address, we had to go to the post-office for information. Their home is a very pretty one, and the outlook from their terrace on the Mediterranean and the neighbouring mountains is wonderful.
“I have been still too long,” he said, in a tone that must have reached
Next, for about a half an hour, I whoops now and then; at last I hears

But the strangest of all were the people who lived in this queer
was a cold one, had already been served, and remained neglected on the


TILL Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in vain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a doubt of his being present had never occurred to her. The certainty of meeting him had not been checked by any of those recollections that might not unreasonably have alarmed her. She had dressed with more than usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all that remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more than might be won in the course of the evening. But in an{114} instant arose the dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted, for Mr. Darcy’s pleasure, in the Bingleys’ invitation to the officers; and though this was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was pronounced by his friend Mr. Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and who told them that Wickham had been obliged to go to town on business the day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant smile,—
got home and upstairs there was Miss Sophia in her door waiting for me.


Tom was a good deal bothered about what to do for a spoon, but he said
She opened a little door and Dorothy walked boldly through and found
I did wish Aunt Sally would come, and get done with me, and lick me, if
“Maybe I am, maybe I ain’t,” I says.
gate as he came along, and how I had listened to his odd story of “Men
sallow youth in a bowler hat, grey with dust. There were three girls,
broke in, and says:
do. At last I had an idea; and I says, I’ll go and write the letter—and
around for the watchman, a-wondering whereabouts he slept; and


“You’ve had plenty of time already,” said the Tin Woodman angrily.
CHAPTER XCIX
The brother of the late Queen of Corea, who had been murdered by her subjects, passed through Khabarovsk on his way to St. Petersburg, where he went to ask the Emperor to take under his protection and ensure the safety of the King of Corea, who was hiding at the Russian mission at Seoul, the capital of Corea. We gave a grand dinner to this important personage.
houses about Woking station, and on the other to the charred and
“No; _I_ ain’t heard nobody say nothing.”
“Oz has sent for you. Follow me.”
glare of Kingston Hill threw their light upon a network of black smoke,
Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed him with her eyes, envied everyone to whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough to help anybody to coffee, and then was enraged against herself for being so silly!
Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any congratulations to Elizabeth from his wife, the Longbourn family heard that the Collinses were come themselves to Lucas Lodge. The reason of this sudden{471} removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine had been rendered so exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew’s letter, that Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till the storm was blown over. At such a moment, the arrival of her friend was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when she saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her husband. He bore it, however, with admirable calmness. He could even listen to Sir William Lucas, when he complimented him on carrying away the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed his hopes of their all meeting frequently at St. James’s, with very decent composure. If he did shrug his shoulders, it was not till Sir William was out of sight.
Then Dorothy lost heart. She sat down on the grass and looked at her
but the color come back when she found the man warn’t hurt.
[33]
at all; the thing’s awful mixed now; trying to better it, I’ve worsened
talk this show up, and sell the _rest_ of the town! Then we’ll all be
“What can we do to save him?” asked Dorothy.


“Why, there’s somebody come! I wonder who ’tis? Why, I do believe it’s
Before taking the train to Cairo, we had to pass through the preliminaries of the Customs. Thanks to our guide, Mahmoud, we have obtained, by special favour, the permission for our boxes not to be opened. It took three hours to get from Alexandria to Cairo; every few minutes the train halted at a bustling station. At the stoppings the Arabs dusted our cars with long brooms made of ostrich feathers. The journey would have been perfect but for the heat and the dust; eyes, nose, mouth, were choked with it, and by the time we reached Cairo, our hair was quite grey. All through our desert journey I had felt as if I had wandered into a dream of the Old Testament. Egyptian villages, with huts of dry mud of the same colour as the soil, with a maze of dust,[300] of children, of animals and flies, emerged here and there from between the date-palms laden with fruit hanging in big bunches. On the road we saw great brown buffaloes going wearily round and round, turning the irrigating mills. Strings of burdened camels marched slowly along the road. Here is a Bedouin leaning forward upon the neck of his quick stepping horse, outriding a fat Fellah trotting on a small donkey with a woman sitting astride behind him, holding him round the waist. We now passed across the fertile delta of the Nile, through cotton plantations with their white flocks, and fields of ripening grain standing waist-high. In Egypt the land is so fertile that the harvest is got in three times a year. We are speeding along canals on which sailing-boats are gliding; bands of natives and buffaloes are bathing in them. Here is the Nile, which is very high at this season, all the land between the Biblical river and the sands being hidden beneath the waters. We are approaching the Metropolis of Africa. The windows of every compartment of our train are framed with eager, longing faces, straining for the first glimpse of the Pyramids. There they are, looking quite close in the clear atmosphere. The first view of these colossal piles rather disappointed me: they did not appear on the horizon as big as I thought they would be. We crossed the Nile by a long bridge and arrived at Cairo, halting in a vast domed station. Then we took a carriage and went to the New Hotel, situated in the Esbekieh district, the European quarter of Cairo.
cylinder was artificial—hollow—with an end that screwed out! Something
reading over my abandoned arguments. It was a paper on the probable
blaze may have been the casting of the huge gun, in the vast pit sunk
pointed upper lip, the absence of brow ridges, the absence of a chin

“Why, he _is_ a-saying it. That’s a Frenchman’s _way_ of saying it.”
“The smoke of her burning goeth up for ever and ever!” he shouted.

“Do you prefer reading to cards?” said he; “that is rather singular.”
darkness.
my interest shifted to those other creatures, the real Martians.
was very huffy, and some of them wanted to hang Jim for an example to
through the high board fence. There was an inch of new snow on the

When morning came, they started again. Before they had gone far they
One of the big trees had been partly chopped through, and standing
struggle. “Fresh attempts have been made to signal, but without
circle of people, and a number of dim black figures followed it at
There could hardly be a more complete confession of failure than the conviction which the Abbé Dubois expresses when he declares, after a long personal experience, that Roman Catholic missions have borne no fruit worth speaking of in India. Christianity, he says, is wholly discredited.
then how the horses did lean over and hump themselves! And so one after
crying to its companions; perhaps it was the last to die, and its voice

helplessly and speechlessly drunk. I could get nothing from him but

Besides, how is it known that the money, wrested from agriculture, is not necessary to her support? Or how does it escape observation, that all the money which is not laid out by the cultivator upon agriculture, will necessarily revert to industry, either by the immediate consumption of the cultivator, or by that which he shall have occasioned on the part of the person to whom he shall have lent the value of what he has not consumed himself?
my peace of mind.”
Sergy returned to Milan with the evening boat, and left me a grass widow in charge of Frau Weidemann. I suddenly felt utterly alone and so miserable, so desolate, with no one to care about my comings and goings! Our ladies took pity on me and said that they would try to make me feel at home with them. As soon as Sergy left the house, I shut myself in my room, and then my nerves failed me altogether. I sat down on my lonely bed and cried. Then I lay down and fell asleep and woke unhappy. Marie, the Swiss maid-of-all-work, in very creaking boots, brought in a telegram from Sergy with my breakfast. The day began well!
You’d eaten up a poker!”

[Image unavailable.]

 Out of Bondage


all that kind of humbug talky-talk, just the way people always does at

silent desertion of some of the houses, the stirring movement of
break up and go down and live with Uncle Ben, who’s got a little
“The same,” I says, but couldn’t say it pretty brash. But he never
pantry opened into a kind of wash-up kitchen, and in this was firewood;
“Jane happened to look round”	415
also I devoured, and then I came upon a brown sheet of flowing shallow
On the great Square before the bronze gates of the Vatican, in front of St. Peter’s Cathedral, we saw the black statue of St. Peter, sitting in his stone chair under a golden baldaquin, holding in his hand the “Keys of Paradise.” Through the continual contact of worshippers lips, one of the Saint’s toes was almost completely worn out. After having admired the rich monuments of all the interred Popes, and the shrine containing St. Peter’s relics, we drove along the ancient “Latin Road” to Monte Palanchino, one of the most interesting reminiscences of past ages. A whole army of workmen, under the superintendence of a group of engineers and archeologists, continue to excavate making splendid discoveries. A whole street intact has recently been dug out. The pavements and houses with their mosaic floors are marvellously preserved. We stood on the roof of one of the newly excavated houses watching the workmen who were destroying—on the mountain side over us—a splendid villa[223] which had belonged to Napoleon the Third, in order to continue to dig out the street under its foundation.
same? I was stuck. I couldn’t answer that. So I reckoned I wouldn’t
must take the right hand, and five mile would fetch me to Goshen.”

In any grand mercantile operation, where prompt and certain remittances are required, be the motive of such operations what it may; if there goes out of England, we shall suppose, 400,000l. in bullion, this very same bullion, after the bargain is struck and fulfilled, either in goods or in bills of exchange, comes back to London, to resume if necessary, the same course three weeks afterwards: For the space of 40 years, therefore, the same sum may an hundred times be placed in the catalogue of exports, and perfectly answer to a capital of 40 millions, the place of which it has really supplied: This is a well-known resource; nothing then can be concluded in regard to the 105 millions of bullion exported, according to Sir Charles, but, that there ever has been, and probably ever will be, in England all the bullion necessary[104] to answer the exigencies of the most unforeseen and extraordinary negociations of all kinds, and industry enough to recall in time, that bullion which had only been given as a pledge. It is like a jewel worth 100,000 crowns, which, for the space of 20 years, is said to have passed ten times backwards and forwards from Paris to Amsterdam, but finally remained at Amsterdam, by a reason contrary to that which keeps up the commercial shuttle between England and Holland.
Winged Monkeys had also helped her in doing this. Only once more could

wish for anything ring the bell. Oz will send for you tomorrow
Only——”

“My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. He is come—Mr. Bingley is come. He is, indeed. Make haste, make haste. Here, Sarah, come to Miss Bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown. Never mind Miss Lizzy’s hair.”
The directors of the East India Company were equally anxious to perpetuate the memory of one whom they held in conspicuous honour. What Serfogee had done at Tanjore they would do in the Church of St. Mary in Fort St. George, Madras. On 29th October, 1807, by the direction of the court a letter was written to say that a marble monument by Bacon was on its way to be erected there in memory of Mr. Schwartz. “As the most appropriate testimony of the deep sense we entertain of his transcendent merit, of his unwearied and disinterested labours to the cause of religion and piety, and the exercise of the finest and most exalted benevolence, also of his[Pg 187] public services at Tanjore, where the influence of his name and character, through the unbounded confidence and veneration which they inspired, was for a long course of years productive of important benefits to the Company.” This beautiful monument, worthy of a sculptor of such eminence, represented also the death scene, with the exception that here Serfogee is absent, but one of the native children is embracing the hand of the dying missionary, his friend Kohlhoff supporting him by his arm, the figure of an angel bearing a cross is depicted above. There is also included below the group, emblems of the pastoral office—the Episcopal Crozier, the Gospel trumpet with the banners of the Cross, and an open Bible, upon which is inscribed the divine mandate of all missionary enterprise, “Go ye unto all the world and preach the gospel to every creature.”
I says in the fust place, it’s what I says in the middle, ’n’ it’s what
shoulder and sent him reeling. He gave a shriek and dodged back, and a
The Boys Escape Jim.—Torn Sawyer’s Gang.—Deep-laid Plans.

the hinder carriages still upon the rails.
The Scarecrow sat upon the Lion’s back, and the big beast walked to the
There was a smash as the pole of a carriage crashed into the cart that
[Image unavailable.]
When we arrived at Batavia, we were driven in a cab, with a native coachman on the box, to the Hôtel de Java. I had got hold of some Japanese words and kept repeating to him: “Plan, plan,” which means “go slowly.” The inhabitants were probably taking their “siesta,” during the sweltering heat of midday: troops, natives, animals, were all asleep. Batavia seemed deserted, all the houses had dropped their blinds. We only saw lizards in the streets, warming themselves in the sun.
So he lit up his lantern, and got his saddle-bags, and we started. But

git him. And tell him to git himself up regardless. Shove along, now.”



This was all there was of the family now, but there used to be
So we dug and dug with the case-knives till most midnight; and then we
“My journey to Madras I undertook at the desire of the Government, as tutor of Serfogee. The expenses of the journey I bore myself. I was obliged for conscience’ sake to undertake it, as the legal guardian of the young man.”
the people came out to look at her and bow low as she went by; for
run. They got half way to the tree I was in before the men noticed.
After luncheon we packed ourselves into the huge two-storied diligence named La berline du Mont Blanc, which was to convey us to Geneva. Intrepidly I began the ascent of the steep ladder, of twelve steps, placed against the side of the omnibus. This giant coach, driven by three pairs of horses, contains twenty-five places. The postillon sounded his horn, the driver flourished his long whip, and we started off full speed surrounded by a cloud of dust. We sat higher than the passengers on the top of London ’buses, and I had the feeling as if we were looking out of a window from a house[188] three stories high. We drove for some time along the picturesque sides of the river “Arve,” which twisted like a silver ribbon through the smooth green pastures. The road led up and down a continual succession of hills. The coach soon turned into a woodland. My neighbour, an old lady who indulged in a sweet dose, her drooping head giving abrupt nods back and forward, gave little gasps and woke abruptly when we passed high trees, having to take care of the treacherous topmost branches which scratched our faces. The jolting of the omnibus made me also feel drowsy, but I was soon wakened up by the shouts of little peasant boys and girls who ran behind the diligence barefoot and bareheaded, and importuned us to buy the bouquets of wild flowers which they offered for sale, and fruit laid in baskets fixed to long poles. They continued to run and insisted until they lost breath. At the last station fiery, fretful horses were put to our carriage; before starting they pawed the ground impatiently, tossed their heads and were disposed, in general, to give a great deal of trouble. When we started off at a rattling rate, I heard our coach-driver say to his neighbour that his horses weren’t to be trusted; of course it did not help me to feel safe, especially when we had to drive alongside the railway line, where a passing engine scared our steeds, who bolted and plunged wildly, nearly upsetting our coach. We made a smart entry into Geneva, at full gallop, with a loud jingle of harness-bells.

August 15th.—A Turkish kavass came this morning to complain that an Armenian zaptieh had insulted him and torn off his galoons. The Armenians, dazed by their momentary success after the arrival of General Lazareff, are very rude towards the Turkish inhabitants. As to the sly Greeks, they assume an entirely different behaviour, making themselves agreeable both to the Christians and Mussulmans.
“Indeed, you are mistaken. I have no such injuries to resent. It is not of peculiar, but of general evils, which I am now complaining. Our importance, our respectability in the world, must be affected by the wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark Lydia’s character. Excuse me,—for I must speak plainly. If you, my dear father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and of teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business of her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment. Her character will be fixed; and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt that ever made herself and her family ridiculous;—a flirt, too, in the worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond youth and a tolerable person; and, from the ignorance and emptiness of her mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal contempt which her rage for admiration will excite. In this danger Kitty is also comprehended. She will follow wherever Lydia leads. Vain, ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled! Oh, my dear father, can you suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever they are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in the disgrace?{289}”

“—and load up the cabin with rats and snakes and so on, for company for
was, and how mean the preserves was, and how ornery and tough the fried
This young girl kept a scrap-book when she was alive, and used to paste
Woodman and the Scarecrow kept watch over them as usual.
and very pleasant, and says:
“Let me write for you,” said Jane, “if you dislike the trouble yourself.”


the tumult of playing children, and to recall the time when I saw it

“And I have another favour to ask. Will you come and see me?”
there far into the night, and the towering pillar of dense green smoke
They walked carefully through the china country. The little animals and
“That’s so, my boy—good-bye, good-bye. If you see any runaway niggers
round—more than a body could tell what to do with. The Widow Douglas
stranger don’t come _every_ year, and so he lays over the yaller-fever,
and nothing of the _Thunder Child_ could be made out, nor could the
When I got down stairs in the morning the parlor was shut up, and the
stooped down, not breathing, and not making the least noise, and
come nigh getting caught, and I had to shove it into the first place I

was an enormous Head, without a body to support it or any arms or legs
inhabitants, calling itself the Committee of Public Supply, seized the

“My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They will ruin your happiness. You do not make allowance enough for difference of situation and temper. Consider Mr. Collins’s respectability, and Charlotte’s prudent, steady character. Remember that she is one of a large family; that as to fortune it is a most eligible match; and be ready to believe, for everybody’s sake, that she may feel something like regard and esteem for our cousin.”

In some cases, especially where no outside influences had perverted their judgment, Schwartz found these Rajahs and native chiefs were quite open to receive the truth. A leading Hindu, the minister of state of the Rajah of Tanjore, was ready and willing to acknowledge that there is but one true God and that the images and idols they ignorantly worship were only worthy of being thrown into the sea. But while this was a step in advance the opinion of this man does not seem to have carried him very much farther, and his master, the Rajah, was also so superstitious that he was prepared to make a sacrifice of five hundred human beings in order to obtain some imaginary hidden treasure which the evil spirits would not relinquish except on that awful condition.
with some monstrous hooks on it, and a roll of buckskin, and a leather
forest, for there were no houses near. The tree made a good, thick
By Parkyns Mac Mahon.
at Hampton Court station, but we thought it was thunder. What the
Meanwhile the work at Tanjore progressed. Schwartz mentions with thankfulness that in the year when he attained the age of sixty-five no less than eighty-seven heathen had been baptized and that he had heartily welcomed the new missionary Mr. Caemmerer at Tranquebar, who had begun well. This new comer, writing home, speaks of the anticipation he felt of meeting Schwartz and how his heart was kindled when that hope was realized. His letters contain a few pictures of the old veteran. “Sincere esteem and reverence penetrated my soul when I saw this worthy man with his snow white hair. Integrity and truth beamed in his eyes. He embraced me and thanked God that He had lead me to this country.... Nothing could possibly afford me more lively satisfaction than the society of Mr. Schwartz. His unfeigned piety, his real and conscientious attention to every branch of his duties, his sincerity—in short, his whole demeanour fills me with reverence and admiration. He treated me like a brother or rather like a tender parent and instructed me in the most agreeable manner in the Malabar language.... Many an evening passed away as if it had been but a single moment, so exceedingly interesting proved the conversation of this truly venerable man and his relations of the singular and merciful guidance of God, of which he had experienced so many proofs throughout his life, but particularly during the dreadful wars of India. The account he gave of the many dangers to which his life had been exposed and the wonderful manner in which it was often preserved, his tender and grateful affection towards God, his fervent prayers and thanksgivings, his gentle exhortations constantly to live as in the presence of God, zealously to preach the Gospel and entirely to resign ourselves[Pg 138] to God’s kind providence—all this brought many a tear into my eyes and I could not but ardently wish that I might one day resemble Schwartz. His disinterestedness, his honourable manner of conducting public business, procured him the general esteem both of Europeans and Hindus. Every one loved and respected him, from the King of Tanjore to the humblest native.


that the Martians were moving Londonward and away from her. Such vague

plain. He hesitated, holding his spade. “We ought to reconnoitre now,”
She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to converse with her, he might have better success. He stood by her, however, for some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady’s whispering to Elizabeth again, he walked away.

got now.”

Later this shield staggered up on tripod legs and became the first of
same with the side of bacon; then the whisky-jug. I took all the coffee
by the creeping danger away to the left that he had no eyes for
to resume digging, and when he suggested a meal, I was nothing loath.
long as she lived. Then I made up my mind that instead of living alone
there all night, and next morning you couldn’t see no brass, and it
You know, of course, that courage is always inside one; so that this
to one of his ancesters with a long wooden handle that come over from
a-comin’. Mind I tell you, it’s a-comin’.”
trusting to Providence to put the right words in my mouth when the time
I didn’t answer up prompt. I tried to, but the words wouldn’t come. I
the Winged Monkeys to you? They will carry you to the City of Oz in
MISS BINGLEY’S letter arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very first sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London for the winter, and concluded with her brother’s regret at not having had time to pay his respects to his friends in Hertfordshire before he left the country.



of flight.
For One Night Only,


“Who’s ‘everybody’? Out with their names, or ther’ll be an idiot
“You are then resolved to have him?”
We arrived at Moscow in the beginning of May, and settled down for the summer months in a wing of the Petrovski Palace, situated in a beautiful park two miles out, to wait for our apartments to be got ready in town. This palace is a majestic building flanked with four red-brick turrets, looking like a mediæval castle.

Surrey hills, and the towers of the Crystal Palace glittered like two
loving comrades.
Next day, towards night, we laid up under a little willow tow-head out
on account of being hungry, that you could paddle right up and put your
Having passed a fortnight at Copenhagen we returned to St. Petersburg by the same way, taking at Stockholm the “Constantin,” another Finnish boat. There were many passengers on board. During dinner I sat next to a young Mexican, Señor Lopez, who was very sarcastic, and found plenty to criticise. (The task is so easy!) He actually tore all our fellow-passengers to pieces. That snob thought himself very sharp-witted and was rather put out that I did not think him so. Opposite me sat an old Frenchman, M. Prévost-Rousseau and his pretty daughter Melle. Camille, who had been touring in Norway and were now on their way back to Paris, passing through St. Petersburg. Melle. Camille was an accomplished linguist, speaking English, German and Italian equally well. I discovered that we had a great deal in common, and an instinctive comradeship sprang up between us. I am not much given to making new friends, but I had a liking to Melle. Camille the moment I saw her, for I generally like or dislike a person at once.
November 13th.—The snow-covered summit of Mount Etna appears on the horizon. We have been assailed by a terrible tempest when passing the coasts of Calabria. All the passengers are prostrated with sea-sickness.
“She has one only daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of very extensive property.”


drove a bargain for thirty-six pounds for the three. The steamer was
send and see, if you want to.”
soldier made them all wipe their feet upon a green mat before entering
according to my judgment of him, too; because I thought he had a good
Combien, en négligeant les sols & les deniers, l’Angleterre a perdu en perdant ce qu’on appelloit son bras droit; & combien, en négligeant les sols & les deniers, toute l’Europe perdroit si elle perdoit la souveraineté des deux Amériques.

en it ’uz sich a big stack o’ money she couldn’ resis’. De widder she
all?_”
suddenly cried out at a number of tongues of smoky red flame leaping up
“You take an eager interest in that gentleman’s concerns,” said Darcy, in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.
Dorothy said nothing. Oz had not kept the promise he made her, but he
leave a dead snake its mate always comes there and curls around it. Jim
And then came new developments. The experiments were safer now. Wherever danger was incurred, the scientist merely made his image do the actual experiment! But Morus Tol still led the field. It was he who finally developed the apparatus that could project the images and have them come into three dimensions, being without the aid of a projector at the receiving end. Already the machines had been used in connection with the phase-velocity signaling system.
“_No_, I ain’t out of my HEAD; I know all what I’m talking about. We
of oak laths, and begun to practice the sword fight—the duke called
Martian and the coast altogether. And all this time the boat was
Barnes.
pace of many miles a second through the empty gulf of space, hour by
nonnamous letter and shove it under the front door.”
“I did not know before that you ever walked this way.”
had carried her to this queer Land of Oz.

Manchester, Birmingham, at the time when I stood upon the verge of the
We mounted on horseback and left Erzeroum with our troops, with music playing and banners waving in the air. To-day is the birthday of the Grand-Duchess Olga Fedorovna, therefore twenty-one cannon-shots have been fired. We were already approaching the Postern of Kars when, in the middle of a cloud of dust, a cavalcade came into view. It was Moukhtar-Pasha who had come with a numerous suite to see us off. Suddenly we heard the sounds of a march, and saw a Turkish military band preceding a battalion of Turkish soldiers, marching also in the direction of the Postern of Kars in order to escort the departing Russian troops; they drew up in a line on each side of the road. I was greatly impressed to see the enemy troops, who a short time ago fought ferociously with us, now presenting arms to the Russian commanders. There was a great crowd of Turks round about, but the Armenian inhabitants restrained from appearing. The Postern is left behind, the Russian and Turkish commanders have made their adieus, and we are marching off to Kars. Our cavalcade was very gay; we were trotting fast and soon overtook our troops. In the afternoon we arrived at the spot where we were to lunch in a tent pitched on the banks of a river. After sunset, we came to Hassan-kala where we passed the night under the roof of the chief of the district. An impromptu bed was made up for me far too short, alas, for my long legs.

Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman, not being made of flesh, were not

ladder, sh-she; ’n’ s’I, yes, _look_ at it, s’I—what _could_ he
The Sun in Hal Jus's day was becoming a closed star. Long since the X-rays had ceased. Gradually the ultra-light and the blue light had diminished; the red and infra- reds had been accentuated; for the light was changed by the passage through that intense gravitational field. Hal Jus had, less than two thousand years ago, predicted the exact time of the Sun's final decay. After ten more years the Sun would be unable to support its family. The planets they now inhabited—Earth, Venus and Mercury—were supported artificially. The atmospheres of all the planets had long since slowly dissipated into space, and with them had gone the water. These vital things were being replaced constantly by transmutation of the elements of the rocks of the planets. Long ages ago Earth had had a large satellite, which had been used through the ages to supply energy for the factories of man, and to supply the necessary atmosphere. The satellites of Mars had gone as had Saturn with its rings, Jupiter with its satellites, along with the asteroids; but before it escaped, much of Neptune had been freighted to the habitable planets. And now, since Mars had grown too cold, it too, was being sacrificed. Already it was honeycombed with great caverns that had been used as sources of materials and energy. Now it was being split up into small parts, and freighted to the other planets. Already the work was well under way. Mars was furthest from the sun, and smaller than either Venus or Earth.
him, and keep him, and shove out down the river; and when Tom’s done
“Snatch that light away, Betsy, you old fool—ain’t you got any sense?


That was all fixed. So then we went away and went to the rubbage-pile

in it but some old rusty played-out hoes and spades and picks and a


for it was getting pretty sultry for _us_, seemed to me. And I peeped
“But how can we do it if we don’t know what it is?”
often with the tip of his tail that it became quite wet, and he was
smouch the knives—three of them.” So I done it.

shaggy the hair of the men, how large and bright their eyes, and that
When the lightning glared out we could see a big straight river ahead,
that don’t amount to shucks, and said she’d serve Sid the same when he
. . .
May 23rd.—I have slept very badly the whole night, because of the intense heat and the horrid rolling of the ship; every hour I heard the change of watch ringing. At last I saw the morning twilight entering by the porthole. A brown-coloured lamb, brought by our sailors from Persia, squeezed himself through the half-open door of my cabin; he was on friendly terms with my little pug-nosed Chinese dog, Mokho, and both animals began to chase each other, making an awful noise.

“Well, then, how’d you come to be up at the Pint in the _mornin_’—in a
plaster of the ceiling came down upon us, smashing into a multitude of

smeared, and the gnawed gristle of the Martian that the dogs had left,

Keeping his footing on the heaving deck by clutching the bulwarks, my
scarecrows in Kansas ever wink; but presently the figure nodded its

“That will do extremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let the other young ladies have time to exhibit.”
Munchkins in the land, and his friends were gathered with him to
the curate, and then I advanced, crouching and stepping with extreme
the bullet out without some help, and he warn’t in no condition for me
everybody buys some of him; his meat’s as white as snow and makes a

Strange mind of man! that, with our species upon the edge of
but what if it is? _I_’m low down; and I’m a-going to steal him, and I

away, boy—keep to looard. Confound it, I just expect the wind has
luminous disks—like eyes. Then something resembling a little grey

[164]
my hands that nobody hadn’t hired me to take care of. I don’t wish to

“It was the prospect of constant society, and good society,” he added, “which was my chief inducement to enter the ——shire. I know it to be a most respectable, agreeable corps; and my friend Denny tempted me further by his account of their present quarters, and the very great attentions and excellent acquaintance Meryton had procured them. Society, I own, is necessary to me. I have been a disappointed man, and my spirits will not bear solitude. I must have employment and society. A military life is not what I was intended for, but circumstances have now made it eligible. The church ought to have been my profession—I was brought up for the church; and I should at this time have been in possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman we were speaking of just now.”
and mine too. Look at both, please—they’re by the same hand.”
“’Deed you _ain’t!_ You never said no truer thing ’n that, you bet
merely a handful of small sluggish creatures, but that they were minds

crazy. It warn’t funny to me, though; I was all of a tremble to see his
he was found in the river drownded, about twelve mile above town, so
start up yourn; just tell me _everything_—tell me all about ’m all


There came a telegram to-day which announced that a ratification of peace was going to be opened in Berlin on the 12th of June. That’s a new gleam of hope that we shall soon leave Erzeroum.


mist, vanishing at last into the vague lower sky, to see the people
Should another reason be wanted to strengthen my argument in its most essential part, I could adduce an incontestable fact, as little controverted in France as it is in England, namely, that in both countries the whole of the landed property does not yield three fourths of what it ought to produce.—Then, either the respective industry of the two nations ransoms agriculture, and binds her up, without being suspected of doing so, to that state of mediocrity to which she is reduced; in which case, single out of your regulations, those which favour industry at the expence of cultivation, and endeavour to expunge them, since agriculture stands clearly in want both of hands and capitals; or your industry and agriculture are neither of them nearly arrived to that degree of perfection which they are calculated to[136] reach; that is to say, you have not the number of cultivators which your land can nourish, nor of course, so many artificers as your land can maintain; in this case also, revise your regulations; there is not one of them which does not affect your agriculture in a direct or indirect manner; by her you must begin: cultivators, unthinkingly and without regret, give birth to a race of artisans;—it is, on the contrary, as it were in spite of industry, and by a kind of reaction which she spares no endeavours to retard, that cultivators are produced by artisans. Never will industry lay out a shilling upon the land if she can employ it in any other enterprise.
I was paddling off, all in a sweat to tell on him; but when he says
stronger, would beat again in the empty streets and pour across the


place—pap done everything with his clasp-knife about the cooking. Then
six o’clock train from Waterloo; and as it was then about a quarter

said that handling a snake-skin was such awful bad luck that maybe we
middle I heard the clock begin to strike, so I stops and listens; the

The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news, and telling again what had been already written; and when it closed, Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate upon Charlotte’s degree of contentment, to understand her address in guiding, and composure in bearing with, her husband, and to acknowledge that it was all done very well. She had also to anticipate how her visit would pass, the quiet tenour of their usual employments, the vexatious interruptions of{198} Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with Rosings. A lively imagination soon settled it all.

“No, you won’t. Set down and stay where you are. I ain’t going to hurt
They looked again in every part of the room, and then, seeing no one,
side. You see, they was firing cannon over the water, trying to make my
superficial area and remoter from the sun, it necessarily follows that
you: what’s de use er dat half a bill?—can’t buy noth’n wid it. En what
Ottershaw. He was immensely excited at the news, and in the excess of
The world renowned tragedians,
I suppose, however, that the majority of at least competent votes would, all things considered, be divided between Emma and the present book; and perhaps the vulgar verdict (if indeed a fondness for Miss Austen be not of itself a patent of exemption from any possible charge of vulgarity) would go for Emma. It is the larger, the more varied, the more popular; the author had by the time of its composition seen rather more of the world, and had improved her general, though not her most peculiar and characteristic dialogue; such figures as Miss Bates, as the Eltons, cannot but unite the suffrages of everybody. On the other hand, I, for my part, declare for Pride and Prejudice unhesitatingly. It seems to me the most perfect, the most characteristic, the most eminently quintessential of its author’s works; and for this contention in such narrow space as is permitted to me, I propose here to show cause.
“You shove right in dah jist a few steps, Mars Jawge; dah’s whah dey


covered with foam, their eyes bloodshot.
inside o’ the straw tick o’ my bed, not wishin’ to bank it for the few

“_Well_, den! Warn’ dat de beatenes’ notion in de worl’? You jes’ take

down cellar. So these two frauds said they’d go and fetch it up, and
Stent and Ogilvy, anticipating some possibilities of a collision, had



Thirdly, The increase of nearly cent. per cent. assigned to the staves, does not determine the general advance of American goods; the excessive, but instantaneous price of one article only, denotes an extraordinary demand for that object, and the actual impossibility of answering that demand; the level, so necessary in all prices, naturally returns as soon as the medium of the demand is known, and has determined the number of hands necessary to supply it: now it cannot be doubted, but that the goods in America must have advanced in price, much more than any where else, because the expences of the Colonies have been, during the war, relatively speaking, much more considerable than any where else, considering the discredit inseparable from the precariousness of their situation. But the difference between their inland common prices, and those of Europe, was so great (this will presently be seen), that they may increase them enough to pay off the interest of their national debt, and yet keep the European prices at a distance.

“Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all this?”
Je supposerai encore qu’il en résultât évidemment qu’il n’y a pas eu jusqu’ici dans les finances d’aucun pays, un seul principe, une seule idée qui en méritât le nom; qu’est-ce que cela fait aux Ministres qui dirigent aujourd’hui les finances? Le passé est-il à leurs ordres? Et n’est-ce pas dans la rectification des abus découverts, que consiste la vraie gloire d’un Ministère?
collection of hearts, of all sizes and shapes.”
“I comfort myself with thinking,” replied Jane, “that he certainly would not marry Lydia, if he had not a real regard for her. Though our kind uncle has done something towards clearing him, I cannot believe that ten thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been advanced. He has children of his own, and may have more. How could he spare half ten thousand pounds?”

pantry. He made me no answer, but so soon as I began eating the faint

good curry-comb, and Jim he found a ratty old fiddle-bow, and a wooden
_Tom_, it’s Sid; Tom’s—Tom’s—why, where is Tom? He was here a minute



The happy Issue of a desperate Combat between Monopoly and some private Interests.
want to. Whenever we see anybody coming we can tie Jim hand and foot
We put up at the Victoria Hotel. Our room is large and desolate-looking; it has but little furniture: two uncomfortable little iron bedsteads, shrouded with mosquito-nets, a table and three chairs. The floor is stone; on the white-washed walls hangs the portrait of Queen Victoria sitting[466] side by side with our Empress-Dowager, holding on her knee her first-born, Nicolas II. From our window I perceive a corner of the quay of Canton, from where resounded an appalling noise of tom-toms and cymbals.


Now the four habitable planets were at once settled upon. Already they had been carefully mapped, and the Supreme Council had drawn up a plan for the use of the vast planets. More area there was than they needed now, by far, so the cities were scattered widely over the globes. Mere planetary distances meant nothing to them. And all the areas between were carefully preserved as vast, natural parks. Through them wound roads for the little ground cars, so that the people might better see the beauties of the place. And some of the harmless animals would be permitted to live that the future population might know them. It was to be the fulfilment of a millennium-old dream—a warm, sunlight world, a kindly, young world where nature supplied the air, and the water, and the warmth in great abundance.


laughed again; then they waked up another fellow and told him, and
was a medical student working for an imminent examination, and he heard
TASHKEND
“Which do you mean?” and turning round, he looked for a moment at Elizabeth, till, catching her eye, he withdrew his own, and coldly said, “She is tolerable: but not handsome enough to tempt me; and I am in no humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted by other men. You had better return to your{16} partner and enjoy her smiles, for you are wasting your time with me.”
gripped his arm, fearing he might cry out, and for a long time we
wouldn’t took any money for her.

more exciting than an overturned carriage or a tree blown across the

sayin’ is, we’d a seed de raf’. But it’s jis’ as well we didn’t, ’kase
water now, so I went right along, her eyes a-blazing higher and higher
difference. Jim smelt it and bit it and rubbed it, and said he would
food among the trees, finding nothing, and I also raided a couple of
her. She was very deep, and I see in a minute there warn’t much chance

The doctor he up and says:
“Why, blame it, it’s a riddle, don’t you see? Say, how long are you
When that general re-coinage of the year 1726 took place in France, there must have existed, at that time, 1000 millions tournois, to impart a proper circulation to a revenue, which, we may suppose, was less by one half than what it is at this time. France, therefore, had occasion to increase her specie, only by the additional thousand of millions, of which she is now in possession, even upon a supposition that she has now 2000 millions; and this want has been supplied in the space of 57 years, at the rate of 18 millions only, one year with another.

return. In this country everyone must pay for everything he gets. If


cylinder under cover of a metal shield.
sign of the band. And nobody that didn’t belong to the band could use

these structures, and have only the ill-imagined efforts of artists or

We have borne the voyage capitally and had a good crossing this time. The weather was fine, the sun shone brightly on a very calm sea; we had no rolling at all. We accomplished also our journey by rail without any accident.
February 6th.—To-day my husband went with his suite to visit the Rajah of Johore in his dominions on the coast of Malacca. It took them two hours to reach his States. They crossed the strait that divides Singapore from Johore in a steamboat, and made the rest of the journey in rikshas.[477] The Rajah wasn’t at home; my husband, nevertheless, was shown over the Palace, which had nothing remarkable about it. Numbers of articles, without any artistic value, were heaped up in the apartments. Sergy lunched at the Johore Club, from which he sent me a letter with a Johore post stamp for my collection.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
Esher, Ockham, behind hills and woods south of the river, and across

“Cuss the doctor! What do we k’yer for _him?_ Hain’t we got all the
CHAPTER XL


“Well, I reckon there’s a right smart chance of people _here_ that’d

that I had forgotten for years. I thought of the poisons in the
ST. MARY’S CHURCH, FORT ST. GEORGE

sky, came into sight of myself and the curate as we hurried wearily and
the now hardened mud, and at the top of West Hill a lot of

MY SECOND TRIP ABROAD
 One of the Best Authorities
The person coming was Mary Jane. She went to the coffin, very soft, and
There was no want of discourse. The bride and her mother could neither of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit near Elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that neighbourhood, with a good-humoured ease, which she felt very unable to equal in her replies. They seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the world. Nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led voluntarily to subjects which her sisters would not have alluded to for the world.
putting turpentine on a stray dog and setting fire to him, or tying a
while he stood silently gazing at the Ball of Fire it became so
I have been starved of music for long, and was enchanted when Kostia Doumtcheff, a boy violinist, gave a concert at Khabarovsk. He is only thirteen years old and has already toured the world as a “Wunderkind.” His execution is quite extraordinary for so young a performer.

I liked Skinner very much too,
HONG-KONG
“Already arisen!” repeated Mr. Bennet. “What! has she frightened away some of your lovers? Poor little Lizzy! But do not be cast down. Such squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little absurdity are not worth a regret. Come, let me see the list of the pitiful fellows who have been kept aloof by Lydia’s folly.”

more safety than where we were. They don’t want to bother us yet.
whole thing out of my head, and said I would take up wickedness again,

afraid, and that kind of courage you have in plenty.”

“Fly!”


him so, so they say, but I didn’t see it. Pap told me. But anyway it
hand, and was plenty kind enough, but he never let _go_ my hand.
hain’t touched them. But I knowed they’d make trouble, and I thought if
[434]


V.	My Second Season in St. Petersburg	42
And now, in the observatory of Hal Jus, the greatest men of the system had gathered to watch those men far out in space. With them had been sent another machine to be operated by one man, a miniature phase-velocity sender that could, if necessary, send the ship back. This was to be stationed in space, going in an orbit about the mighty star.
hollering. I couldn’t tell nothing about voices in a fog, for nothing
positions in the huge crescent about their cylinders in absolute
However little Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address, he contented himself with coolly replying, that he perceived no other alteration than her being rather tanned,—no miraculous consequence of travelling in the summer.
The soldier had the news carried straight to Oz that Dorothy and the

Scrutinise, in the same manner, your wearing apparel; choose, like a child, what pleases most the eyes of the body; or, like a fastuous man, all that is most imposing to the eyes of the imagination; or, miser-like, that which costs least money; or, in fine, like a man of sense, what your means or your taste incline you to wear; the difference, as to essentials, is little or none. It cannot be positively asserted, that your consumption will be more or less considerable in one than in the other case; but recollect that thread lace, for which you could not pay less than 227l. 10s. because there stand between you and the pound of flax from which it has been extracted, 35 or 40 intermediate pilferers, to be fed during six months;—this lace, however, in spite of that extravagant price, could not, as you have seen, be set down to account amongst the articles of your real and personal consumption, for more than sixpence, supposed[365] to be the intrinsic value of a pound weight of flax, which has gone through so many hands to be converted into lace. Now, on this principle, you might be wrapped in lace from head to foot: and your entire mummy, instead of presenting to the eye of a sworn appraiser a consumption of 30 or 40,000l. would in this instant of its highest splendor, only present him with a devastation of 200lb. of flax, sacrificed to decorate that mummy, or to hide its defects.—And as the object would be 200lb. of flax, the value of which is fully known by the number of people to whom it would afford support, instead of dealing so lightly as I did with a single pound, when I introduced my Patriarch, the appraiser would reckon with you rigorously; he would consider, that in the hands of the Arts, no part of the works of the creation can be lost; that, as it is their triumph, so it is their duty, to divide into 10, 20, or 30 parts, whatever requires such a division, in order that each may receive the degree of utility of which it is susceptible, and which the Arts are bound to account for to society: the appraiser would then carry you to the lace-merchant, in order to lay before you ten different sorts of an inferior lace, taken from parts chosen successively after that which serves you for a wrapper, and descending still from pilfery to pilfery, he would at last inveigle you into the cabins of some[366] pretended wretch, where he would shew you the quantity of coarse and substantial shirts, necessary to teach you that 3 or 4 lb. of flax, at the most, are the only possible devaluations your mummy can be reproached with, as two shillings are the only expence your vanity can boast of in the 25 or 30,000l. which you could presume to have consumed.
The baritone of the opera-troup was at the same time a piano-tuner, and came to tune our “Erard.” It was only once a year that a professional tuner came from Blagovestchensk to repair pianos for 25 roubles per instrument. We have an amateur tuner at Khabarovsk, a colonel, who repairs the pianos for three roubles only, for the benefit of the Benevolent Society, but it is true that in his tuning there is more benevolence than skill.
beautifully carved green marble basin. Beautiful green flowers stood in
To steal from the people the proportionable increase due to them in the price of their labour, if they should prove so complaisant as tamely to submit, out of gratitude, for the tax being laid only upon luxury.
thither, I went to a box room at the top of the house and, in order to
“Can you come to-morrow?”

oblong profundity with the stardust streaked across it. Ogilvy moved
“Look at that, now! I might have expected it, letting him go off that
big beast like you, to bite a poor little dog!”
pretty. Here he comes now, so you can see for yourself.”


have to do.”
The further advance in the prices of agriculture is of the most indispensable necessity, if the taxator has only thought of getting the amount of the tax with the least trouble to himself, leaving to Nature the care of distributing to every one complete justice,—to Nature, who never fails to do it, and who, in so complicated an operation, employs only the simple spring of that private cupidity, with which she has armed and shielded every individual; just as, in order to settle the most exact symmetry in that admirable edifice commonly called a hive, she employs no other agent than the reciprocal pressure of that multitude of architects who work at it, each of whom thinks of nothing but to secure a little cell for himself.
CHAPTER XIV.
There were many people—men, women, and children—walking about, and
Another aspect, whimsical enough perhaps, but by no means foreign to the title of this pamphlet, would be that under which we should view those prodigies of art and patience, as the work not only of 25 artificers who were busied upon it for six months, but also of 12 or 15 husbandmen whose existence and labour were indispensable for the sustenance, during the same time, of the 25 labouring people employed in that great work.... A peevish man would perhaps exclaim, Was it indeed worth while to be born, if all ends with this life?—And yet, even in this case, thread-lace ought not to be proscribed: it was not worth while indeed to come into the world, solely to make lace; but, once born, we must work at something, in order to bear, without weariness, every instant even of a life which should not require lace-making for its support: as to the nature of the work, let us not find fault with that of others, before we justly estimate our own.... Can we find many of our fellow-creatures, who on their death-bed are able to shew the work of their whole life ... worth the smallest shred of lace then in being?
said then that he sorter felt like he warn’t going to get well this
‘and it seems they want us for food. First, they’ll smash us up—ships,
Baker Street—Portman Square is the only one I can name—and so came out
said the Lion.
I came into Oxford Street by the Marble Arch, and here again were black
“Mr. Darcy is not to be laughed at!” cried Elizabeth. “That is an uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would be a great loss to me to have many such acquaintance. I dearly love a laugh.”
about a dog not eating watermelon. It shows how a body can see and
If the taxes, after the war of 1755, had raised the price of every thing at the rate of 10 per cent. (I can err but by a little more or less) the total of her exports, which, before that war, amounted, on a medium of ten years, (see Sir Charles Whitworth) only to a sum of 12,776,614 pounds sterling, let us say 13 millions, amounted, after the peace, to 14 millions 300 thousand.
Laws, it was out before I could think! And before I could budge she
We are just in time for luncheon. The big hall was filled with tourists who had come to see the Falls, the great wonder of the world. We were served by a staff of waiters, negroes of blackest ebony, the head waiter wore a flower in his buttonhole, and looked awfully smart. During luncheon a pianist played to the accompaniment of an orchestra. After lunch we stretched ourselves comfortably in rocking-chairs on the veranda, looking out into a shady park, and after a good rest, we took a carriage and drove to Goat Island to see the Falls.

 The Doctor
“The efforts of his aunt”	448
At that time it was quite clear in my own mind that the Thing had come
“Please to don’t poke fun at a poor girl like me, mum. If I’m in the
She had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire, that Lydia had any partiality for him; but she was convinced that Lydia had wanted only encouragement to attach herself to anybody. Sometimes one officer, sometimes another, had been her favourite, as their attentions raised them in her opinion. Her affections had been continually fluctuating, but never without an object. The mischief of neglect and mistaken indulgence towards such a girl—oh! how acutely did she now feel it!

She turned without a word—they were both panting—and they went back to
so.”
“Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps she is full young to be much in company. But really, ma’am, I think it would be very hard upon younger sisters that they should not have their share of society and amusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination to marry early. The last born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth as the first. And to be kept back on such a motive! I think it would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind.”
he will.


and you make out a log-cabin in the edge of the woods, away on the bank




have not killed anything.”
“‘Why, he is a man,’ said the other, and I quite agreed with him. The
Sweet is the calm of paradise the blest.
“Cheerful prognostics”	40
“They are monstrous beasts with bodies like bears and heads like
of the cyclone; and there it remained and was carried miles and miles
Now, old girlie, I must bid you good-bye,


As soon as we were out of town, his quick small eyes roved in all directions, and having satisfied himself that there was no one to see us, he became enterprising, and grew every minute more and more amorous. His sentiments were rather thinly veiled, and I knew what he was driving at. All at once, before I had time to do so much as think of resistance, he pushed back my sleeve and ran up my arm with his horrid old lips as far as he could reach, whispering in a hissing voice that I was a tempting morsel, and that he adored me. I was absolutely disgusted, but what could I do then but turn upon him with flashing eyes, trying to make him ashamed before his coachman, but the fact was that he too was as deaf as his master. It was a most unfair advantage, and I told him so, adding that he was a brute and that I hated him, and that if he didn’t leave me alone at once, I should jump out of his[55] carriage. I was a fiery girl, and had at that moment a ferocious desire to box his ears, but happily by that time the brougham was stopping before the Villa Troubetzkoy. I gave a great sigh of relief. Thank heaven we had arrived! It had the effect of chilling my “Methuselah’s” emotions, and making him recover himself quickly. In parting with my old cavalier I treated him with the contempt he deserved, dropping his outstretched hand like a hot coal, and declaring to him, with my chin in the air, that I was not going to have anything more to do with him, and that henceforth I would not permit him even to kiss the tips of my fingers. After that I ran away, feeling like a nymph flying from a satyr. I certainly didn’t want to trust myself alone with that admiral again; he never forgave me for it, and I looked the other way when I used to meet him.

first thing they came to was a china milkmaid milking a china cow. As
but if there was a boat around I couldn’t see it, for stars and shadows
by the others.
“Upon my word,” said her Ladyship, “you give your opinion very decidedly for so young a person. Pray, what is your age?”
and made the fur fly. We stuck to it about a half an hour, which was as
“This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!” said Mrs. Bennet, more than once, as if the credit of making it rain were all her own. Till the next morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her contrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield brought the following note for Elizabeth:—
coming all the time; but I got her hid; and then I out and looked
January 23rd.—Full calm. Intolerable heat.

at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
“Oh,” cried Miss Bingley, “Charles writes in the most careless way imaginable. He leaves out half his words, and blots the rest.”
Our last dinner in Erzeroum was interrupted by the arrival of Houssein-Pasha, who came in full uniform to bid us good-bye, accompanied by his policemaster. After their departure we speedily finished our meal and started on horseback for the camp. Now, at last, all was over with Erzeroum! We had tea in our tent, which was pitched on the slope of a hill, and at seven o’clock we remounted our horses and returned to Erzeroum, as guests this time; Ali-Effendi invited us to a grand dinner that he gave in our honour. When we approached his house, it was illuminated, and a Turkish band began to play. Ali-Effendi came out to meet us, and offering me his arm, he led me to the dining-room where all the Russian and Turkish authorities were already assembled. I sat on the right of Houssein-Pasha, who lavished compliments on me the whole time. Our host was also most charmingly courteous and proposed to drink my health with enthusiasm. The dinner consisted of fifteen courses and lasted it seemed a whole eternity. We returned to our camp late in the night, accompanied by an escort of Turkish dragoons who carried lighted torches.
interest in.
We occupied an apartment of two rooms with a balcony at the Grand Hôtel for four Mexican dollars ahead = two American dollars. It is peculiar that the Mexican dollar, though much larger, and containing therefore more silver than the American dollar, is worth only the half. Why is it so? A mystery of the Exchange Office, I suppose.
a chief engrailed, and three invected lines on a field _azure_, with
[Image unavailable.]
Missouri side, under steam, and booming once in a while as they went. I
heart, you know, so I am careful to help all those who may need a

“How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy! It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley to see you all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day before. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left London?”
The heat in Tiflis was very trying, there was scarcely air enough to breathe, and my aunt decided to go to Borjom, the summer residence of the Grand-Duke Michael, a delightful watering-place buried in verdure and surrounded by mountains covered with thick forests. Serge Michailovitch came round occasionally to see how we got on. I looked forward eagerly to his visits; his society became very dear to me for he succeeded in winning my love; my heart had spoken at last and I was sensible of the tremendous power he exercised over me. I was beginning to know that I too, had a little power over him. Serge Michailovitch appeared so pleased when he saw me; his hand trembled when it touched mine. His affection seemed to rise with extraordinary rapidity from zero to boiling point, and it was whispered that General Doukhovskoy had serious views towards me; my aunt with her all-seeing eyes had perceived for some time already the turn events had taken.

Most people think that marriage is the sole aim of a girl’s life, but I chose to differ from them, for I despised a girl who sold herself for gold, and as for me, I was not to be appropriated against my will, certainly. I began to hate Ladigenski with some intensity, and had made up my mind I shouldn’t marry him even if we two happened to be shipwrecked on a desert island.
thanks to goodness. The boat floated on and went out of sight around
all her magic powers to make him as strong and good and lovely as any
mind letting me off; but I’ll write it for you on a piece of paper, and
dat’s tired me like dis one.”
“Hold on, hold on! Collar all these four men and the boy, and fetch
discreet distances.

“Well, we hollered and took on, but it’s so wide there we couldn’t make

The four travelers passed through the rest of the forest in safety, and
 Exploring the Cave

“No, sah, I hain’t seed none.”

doors!
warm, and the waves warn’t running so high now. About two they come up
“She is so fond of Mrs. Forster,” said she, “it will be quite shocking to send her away! And there are several of the young men, too, that she likes very much. The officers may not be so pleasant in General——’s regiment.”
it all to him. It kind of made him drunk, as you may say, and he didn’t
“Yes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else to be done. But there are two things that I want very much to know:—one is, how much money your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the other, how I am ever to pay him.”

I’ll shut the door—and bolt it.”
“Oh, thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!” cried Elizabeth when she had finished it. “What a letter is this, to be written at such a moment! But at least it shows that she was serious in the object of her journey. Whatever he might afterwards persuade her to, it was not on her side a scheme of infamy. My poor father! how he must have felt it!”
Our hole was pretty big, but it warn’t big enough to get the grindstone



contrivances and the inert panting clumsiness of their masters was
“You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound. You know it is not sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself.”
“No, no; stay where you are”
reckon.”

SUEZ
said he didn’t believe he could go any further—so scared he hadn’t
the bees turned and flew rapidly until they came to where Dorothy and
When me and Jim heard that we didn’t feel so brash as what we did
of the Tin Woodman, and now they knew why he was so anxious to get a
XLVI.	Paris	267[10]
she could; for she was glad the Wicked Witch had decided not to kill
“How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a year! Letters of business, too! How odious I should think them!”

fetched in the new couple. First, the doctor says:

The next day I was writing in my room upstairs, with the windows wide open, when suddenly I heard in the garden below my name called in a ringing voice, “Hullo! Madame Vava, look out of the window.” It was Hermann, success written in his sunny little countenance, accompanied by Danys and Frau Weidemann, who having fallen into a melting mood, was taking out the children for their usual walk, and Hermann, radiant with triumph, wanted to prove to me that he had it all his own way. It was Hermann who had forced Danys to ask his forgiveness, and she had coaxed Frau Weidemann, with kisses and pleading words, to go out for a walk with them. She is a weak person, Frau Weidemann; I should have kept my word in her place.
and kept it up; and it _was_ the worst mixed-up thing you ever see.
people out, so they’d thin out, and him and the duke could break loose
distances pointing towards Woking. The gunners stood by the guns
two.
[213]


[Pg vi]
“You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. They are my old friends. I have heard you mention them with consideration these twenty years at least.”
Whatever use the sums borrowed are put to by government, in this respect the nation and[72] the lender stand nearly in the same predicament as two individuals who should have set up an undertaking at a joint expence: when it is completed, each of them first takes back his capital, before they share the profits. In point of national enterprises, is war the object? The profit is existence and glory, if the war has proved successful. Are public establishments in prospect? Then the lender shares in their utility and comfort. Has the employing of the capital been productive neither of glory, nor public establishments? In a word, is the State reduced to its primary and bare existence? The capital lent will not, at least, be lost to the lender, if administration think fit to observe how little it costs to be just; and the lender, on his part, will reflect, that he should not have been a greater gainer, had he buried his treasure during the time of national distress and that, had he lent it to individuals, he might have lost it entirely.


make one happy, and happiness is the best thing in the world.”
Woking station were sending up spires of flame into the stillness of

THE COMING OF THE MARTIANS

II.

Heat-Ray hit the water, the latter had immediately flashed into steam.
and the way it ought to be done. But _we_ can’t fool along; we got to
there was a spool in it. Jim said he’d had it there a long time, to
ring-master couldn’t ever say a word to him but he was back at him quick
they wanted to go to England; and the king and the duke would ruther
make out nothing, it was so dark; and whispered and said he would

“Oh, yes, this is a wonderful govment, wonderful. Why, looky here.
and waited for the fresh breeze to waken her.
would a been a king, but they took and shut him up in jail, and some
stopped at the group of people.



Another night when we was up at the head of the island, just before
It was not so high as the first, however, and by standing upon the
heart and its vessels. The pulmonary distress caused by the denser
Sometimes I heard guns away off in the woods; and twice I seen little
the material universe swims.
“No, indeed. I do not wish to avoid the walk. The distance is nothing, when one has a motive; only three miles. I shall be back by dinner.”
take to the woods when I run away. I guessed I wouldn’t stay in one
He sprang to his feet and saw to starboard, and not a hundred yards
to the town every day to fetch you. And he’s gone again, not more’n an
“I must ask whether you were surprised?” said Elizabeth.

the one paved with yellow bricks. Within a short time she was walking
death to all that breathes.
XIV.	The Shadows Lengthen	164

“Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more delight. But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible. And do you really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! do anything rather than marry without affection. Are you quite sure that you feel what you ought to do?”
 Striking for the Back Country
How Dorothy Saved the Scarecrow
“It may be,” said the Lion.
“Get out!” said the lieutenant. “What confounded nonsense!”
where the Scarecrow was perched upon his pole. Then the Stork with her
We took seats in a large car of American pattern, with wooden benches around and a door at each end, and tore through the country with few pauses. The road from Yokohama to Tokio is very picturesque, the shrubs are very green and dense, and the mimosa in full bloom. It is not for nothing that Japan is called “The Garden of Asia.” But everything is Lilliputian. We see on our right tiny groves and dwarfed trees. We roll now through maize and rice plantations. Cottages with rush-cane roofs peep out from between the rich vegetation.
sewed up in the lining of an old blanket overcoat. Jim said he reckoned

Huck Loses the Raft.—In the Fog.—Huck Finds the Raft.—Trash.
“Good,” she says, “I’ll do it.”
myself, and I druther he wouldn’t take no trouble about me.
no use to try and hide it from Him. Nor from _me_, neither. I knowed
of course that’s what we’ve got to do.”
In the strength this knowledge gives,
she could do it again.
anybody stirring. That warn’t usual. Next I noticed that Buck was up
An event occurred which overwhelmed me with joy. My husband was quite unexpectedly sent to Italy to be present at the Grandes Manœuvres at Milan. What a splendid surprise it was! We packed up and started on our journey in the first days of June. As the manœuvres begin only in July, we shall have plenty of time to wander about sight-seeing. First we are going to the sea-side, and have decided upon proceeding straight on to Boulogne-sur-mer. That will be a treat indeed!
Chapter XIV
“Oh, _this_ ain’t bully nor noth’n! Oh, no, I reckon not! Why, Bilji,
scarcely wait till I get to Oz, and you must admit this is a very long


“Oh, he lives in England—Sheffield—preaches there—hasn’t ever been in
the tub some, too, all along, here and there. He hopped around the
Abruptly the right interpretation dawned upon my mind.
“Where is your sister?” said he hastily, as he opened the door.

“May we take my uncle’s letter to read to her?”

The candle was on the floor, and there they all was, looking at me, and
“Well, then, if you’re bound to go, I’ll tell you the way to do when
I never said nothing, because I warn’t expecting nothing different; but
hoist our lantern till we was clear out of sight of it.
eyes winked again and looked upon her anxiously, as if the Great Oz

and Dorothy put new paint on his eyes that he might see better. The
List of Illustrations.
and the Woodman sharpened his axe on a green grindstone and had all his
ruins of Westminster rising hazily beyond. Far away and blue were the
“How can you be so silly,” cried her mother, “as to think of such a thing, in all this dirt! You will not be fit to be seen when you get there.”
come to get it hitched on good.”
“LET DOROTHY GO TO THE CITY OF EMERALDS”
pit, that in that long patience a time might presently come when we

out of gear in every case. And swish, bang, rattle, swish! Just as they
“We’s safe, Huck, we’s safe! Jump up and crack yo’ heels! Dat’s de good

15ᵒ.
“Get an oil-can and oil my joints,” he answered. “They are rusted so
CHAPTER XXXIX.
If it were acknowledged, that the Fisc, or Exchequer, owes the whole of its revenue to the produce of the taxes only; and that this produce rising of course as the productions and consumption increase, the interest of the Exchequer can no where be different from that of the three capitalists or proprietors:
There was something in the personality of Schwartz which greatly attracted the Brahmins, who were and still are very loth to discuss the Christian religion. But with this missionary at least they had no such reserve; indeed, they often presented themselves as seekers after truth, and quite frankly admitted the force of many arguments advanced against their idolatry to be reasonable. It must be considered that hitherto they had had little opportunity of judging the claims of Christianity, for in the case of the Europeans it was unhappily absent as any moral force, and as presented by the Roman Catholics it contained an element as idolatrous to their mind as their own. For the first time they had come into touch with a man who had a profound knowledge of their own position and had a friendly and sincere sympathy in meeting their difficulties and bringing light where they were in darkness. He met them as a friend and yet never spared their sinfulness, he never rebuffed them as beyond hope, he cheered them with a loving message of peace from One Who could save to the uttermost. These conversations are of the deepest interest; the difficulties they disclose have not changed and the answers which Schwartz gave are just as wise and applicable as if spoken to-day. His journal is rich in these incidents. A little hut of leaves of the palmyra tree at Ureius near the foot had been put up by him as a place of resort for quiet to which any inquirers were always welcome. One day a group of Brahmins came and he opened the conversation by asking them what was their creed and what it all meant when they taught the people.
When I got to it Jim was setting there with his head down between his
We didn’t remain till the end of the service, for on that same morning a requiem was sung in the Armenian Cathedral for the repose of the soul of General Shelkovnikoff, my husband’s predecessor. I aroused much curiosity and attention at church, where an enormous congregation had gathered. The Cathedral appeared very imposing with all the wax lights and chandeliers ablaze, and the Metropolitan[101] looked magnificent, clad in a robe that was stiff with gold embroideries. About a hundred chanters, in black and red surplices, sang melodious hymns; from time to time choristers shook big silver disks with much noise. The loud voice of the Metropolitan was suddenly drowned by a deafening uproar above in the choirs. A loud squabble arose among the Armenian women, who protested loudly at seeing me down in the nave of the church where they were not allowed to penetrate. As soon as the service was over the Metropolitan delivered a long sermon of which we couldn’t make out a word. It proved to be an ovation in favour of the Russians, as well as a demonstration against the Turks. I fear that he will have to pay dearly for his eloquence as soon as we leave Erzeroum. After service the Metropolitan invited us to have a cup of tea. During our visit Sergy asked him the reason of the women’s screams in the choirs, and he explained to us that it was quite natural that the liberty given to European women had created an animosity between these recluses, who protested against it in that noisy way.
reach the Winged Monkeys, which carried Dorothy and her comrades safely
[407]

lit up, how was we going to know we was passing a town? Jim said if the
I was always alarmed when my love affairs seemed to be approaching matrimonial engagements, and hated all the men who were in the mood for marriage. I knew just when to draw the line when they wanted to propose to me, and managed to keep my suitors sufficiently at a distance to prevent any of them from making an offer. It was now the case with poor Ladigenski; his chances were very small indeed, the warmer his manner became, the more I froze. If he had eyes in his head he ought to have seen how I detested him, but he was not a man to take a hint, and the deprecating glances I threw in his direction met with no visible acknowledgment, and he could hardly be made to understand that his company was an intrusion. I grew deadly[58] sick of my unwelcome suitor, who was becoming the nightmare of my life. The sight of his face acted on me as an ice-cold shower bath, but he continued to force his hateful attentions upon me, and was not easy to break with.

No, says I to myself, there ain’t nothing in it. I went and told the
from this morbidity. But at last I could resist the impulse no longer,
stopped; then I doubled back through the woods towards Phelps’. I
surprise.
Huck and the Woman.—The Search.—Prevarication.—Going to Goshen.
what an army is—a mob; they don’t fight with courage that’s born in
meal for herself and Toto would empty the basket. To be sure, neither

PROMOTION OF MY HUSBAND TO THE POST OF GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF THE AMOUR PROVINCES IN EASTERN SIBERIA
the willow branches, and there it was—a skiff, away across the water. I
on a long down-stream slant; and when I judged I was out of eye-reach, I
dragging it through the window, but he got up and off, notwithstanding,

“Why, child, it’ll be stole!”
The house whirled around two or three times and rose slowly through the
Recapitulation of the foregoing Thoughts on Taxes and their Effects.




seen two human skeletons—not bodies, but skeletons, picked clean—and in
came and abused the South-Western Company bitterly to my brother. “It
come from behind them. They turned and walked through the forest a few

Tenthly, Before the regulation alluded to, wheat was, in France, one third or one half cheaper than it is at this day; the rest of the other productions of the earth stood in the same proportion: in England, at that very time, the price of wheat differed very little from what it[278] now is. How could England then maintain a competition—a combat, as it were, of exportation, against her natural enemy (the French industry), so lightly, so advantageously armed by the low price of the commodities in France?—If the maxim is as just as it is held sacred, surely France must have derived a prodigious benefit from the barricadoes by which the exportation of wheat was prevented, even from one Province to another, in order that it should be in all at the lowest possible price:—it follows also that England, already compelled by her taxes, her internal monopoly, and her riches, to raise the price of her wheat at home, must have undergone dreadful inconveniences, by availing herself, as she has ever done, of the least dearth abroad, to make that very wheat dearer in England, whilst she was going to diminish its price wherever scarcity had made it excessive.
steamboat, so we got this little raft on credit from our friends and
filthy colliers, trim merchantmen, cattle ships, passenger boats,



Dorothy’s life became very sad as she grew to understand that it would


he said he had ciphered out two or three ways, but there warn’t no need

We left London on the following morning. Our old Pole exhorted us to prolong our stay for another day, but we had no more time, and he saw us off at Victoria station. The mail train that was taking us back to France conveyed us swiftly to Newhaven from where we crossed by the ordinary steamer to Dieppe.


to hunt them and he warn’t heard of no more, and Tom and Mort died, and
dozed. I became aware of him as a seated figure in soot-smudged shirt
vegetables in abundance. Evidently the Munchkins were good farmers and
Scarecrow. “I might have passed my whole life in the farmer’s
“Oh, one can’t always work,” he said, and in a flash I saw the man
“Ay, so it is,” cried her mother, “and Mrs. Long does not come back till the day before; so, it will be impossible for her to introduce him, for she will not know him herself.”
and nearer to us, driving at last along the roadway outside the house
Its air is much more attenuated than ours, its oceans have shrunk until
“Gracechurch Street, Monday, August 2.
still talking along, he reached over and kissed Aunt Sally right on the
“And I shall get my courage,” said the Lion thoughtfully.
Before dinner Sergy went to pay a visit to the Resident, who had sent his carriage for him, drawn by a team of four horses, with a Javanese coachman on the box and two barefooted footmen in splendid livery, wearing helmets.

of the afternoon, and it strung along, and strung along, and the old
We are at Samarkand in the afternoon. A large company[513] of young ladies, pupils of the Institute of Orenbourg and scholars of the corps of cadets, came on board our steamer; they are bound for Turkestan to spend their summer holidays. An elderly grandmother of one of the cadets had charge of the young people. The officers and functionaries serving in Tashkend have the right to send their children to be educated in Orenbourg on the government’s account.
a couple across Hammersmith way carrying something big. And the night
maybe he’ll believe you when you explain to him what the idea was for
they get that money; and the way we’ve fixed it the sale ain’t going to

“No; but it must be done soon.”

the right and in another moment the dog cart had heeled over upon the
When the Wizard was given this message he was so frightened that he
The weather is bad again, it is raining all the time. The sick are promenading sulky and morose under their umbrellas, emptying their glasses in a melancholy way.
and the candles, by the help of the calf and the rats and the mixed-up
Monday morning, to a vivid sense of danger.
For dinner the Australians dressed as if for a ball, the ladies in low dresses, the gentlemen in smokings. The cuisine is very good on board; all the provisions are brought from Australia. The Australian passengers monopolised the salon after dinner, sitting there as if the whole place belonged to them. Someone played the piano and they all sang Australian songs in chorus.
of water and threw it over the mess. She then swept it all out the
must quit pulling up my gown to get at my britches-pocket. I took
warming-pan, and the grindstone, and flour, and just no end of things,
further use.”

varmint curled up and ready for another spring. I laid him out in a
the other they all skipped off into the ring, and made the sweetest bow
and the top stood above water six or seven inches—a solid, level floor.
I was playing the piano frantically, absorbed in my performance of one of Chopin’s nocturnes, when the prince was announced, but mamma being out, I gave orders to tell him that there was nobody at home. The prince was a good deal nettled, and when I met him at a ball a few days afterwards, he greeted me somewhat chillingly, but I soon smoothed him down and we were good friends again.


with sawdust.
wall behind us. The interior of the kitchen we now saw greyly for the
When I got there it was all still and Sunday-like, and hot and
“My gracious God has already manifested so many proofs of His paternal love towards me that I cannot but remember the word of the Lord Jesus which He spoke to upright Nathanael, ‘Thou shalt see greater things than these.’ May the Lord give me grace that like Nathanael I may use the proofs of divine goodness and mercy which I have hitherto experienced, and as a solid foundation and confirmation of my faith. If henceforth I do not behold the glory of God then verily unbelief will be the cause of it. At Nazareth my Saviour did not many mighty works because of their unbelief. Now Lord grant faith, and that lively faith!...
like her father. She was beautiful.
“But he paid her not the smallest attention till her grandfather’s death made her mistress of this fortune?”
{xxv}List of Illustrations.
was right; he was most always right; he had an uncommon level head, for
“But I don’t _want_ him killed, and I’ve got my reasons for it.”

catch his meaning, and jumps for the king, goo-gooing with all his

Maxims, and about four hundred men of the Cardigan regiment started
“Ten thousand pounds! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to be repaid?”
making their skiff hum! It was the king and the duke.

simultaneously, both his companions brought their Heat-Rays to bear on
got a few buckshot in him; but he don’t mind it ’cuz he don’t weigh
“My overhearings were more to the purpose than yours, Eliza,” said Charlotte. “Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend, is he? Poor Eliza! to be only just tolerable.”
millions of dollars, and just littered with diamonds. It was a powerful
one had bit him on the cheek—but I couldn’t see no snakes. He started

He extended a thin white hand and spoke in almost a complaining tone.

of discussion; this new and culminating atrocity had robbed him of all
melody by the distance. My wife pointed out to me the brightness of the
brother’s eyes.
common.
It is music which is my passion. In my spare moments I had some lessons on the guitar, but I soon put an end to them, the cords of the instrument hurting my fingers. Then I bought a cithern, the cords of which hurt me still more, and resolved to give myself up, as before, to the concertina.

to see any. I reckoned they’d turn pale. But no, nary a pale did _they_
won’t be long after we’ve slid—the sale won’t be valid, and it’ll all
in the shade, past the foot of the island dead still—never saying a
They walked back to the road. Dorothy helped him over the fence, and
XII.

the head once in a while, but Jim never said nothing, and he never let
“What could have become of Mr. Bingley and Jane?” was a wonder which introduced the discussion of their affairs. Darcy was delighted with their engagement; his friend had given him the earliest information of it.
In the darkness I could just see the thing—like an elephant’s trunk

had seen and all that it would presently bring me. Ogilvy watched till
The wild crows flew in one great flock toward Dorothy and her

I felt now that I had enough of governesses. My last one, Melle. Annaguy, bored me awfully, being extremely particular about my manners; it was preach, preach all day long. Melle. Anna gave me continually a string of instructions consisting chiefly of “don’ts,” which I listened to impatiently. I couldn’t go here, I couldn’t go there, I couldn’t eat this, I couldn’t eat that! My governess was indeed too exasperating, and I had a furious inclination to consign her to very warm quarters. Melle. Anna was besides intensely devout; being very anxious about the welfare of my soul, she crammed me with pious lectures, but books of this sort were not in my line, and I read everything I could lay hand on. Papa’s library was full of interesting books, and I spent whole nights greedily devouring in bed works written by Paul de Kock, a jolly author, but rather improper. In the morning I hid these books under my mattress. My childhood days had passed by. Poor “Bibliothèque Rose,” thy time was well and duly over!

this house, because she allowed her uncle Peter would ruther they had
his companion followed him, cursing his cowardice. They both stopped in

bigger camp there. Of a night, all over there, Hampstead way, the sky
was a big one, and they hailed her. She sent out her yawl, and we went
The case in point is, to observe,

“My fingers,” said Elizabeth, “do not move over this instrument in the masterly manner which I see so many women’s do. They have not the same force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then I have{220} always supposed it to be my own fault—because I would not take the trouble of practising. It is not that I do not believe my fingers as capable as any other woman’s of superior execution.”
but there ain’t no use in _wasting_ it on them.

The delay in receiving the expected provisions kept them back and we find Schwartz again sending a few more lines to his friend in England.


railway station to get as many morning papers as I could.
since yesterday, so Jim he got out some corn-dodgers and buttermilk,
made me listen. Then I heard quite distinctly a booming exactly like
Maybe Bill he gives him a chaw; maybe he lies and says he ain’t got
of the lines and set them again, and begun to get ready for dinner.
HONG-KONG

before. I went on a-whimpering, and says:




“I thought he lived in London?”
line. The Wandle, the Mole, every little stream, was a heaped mass of
MR. WICKHAM was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation, that he never again distressed himself, or provoked his dear sister Elizabeth, by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she had said enough to keep him quiet.{405}
hot, and under foot a thick, whitish sand grew burning and blinding, so
A little farther on Dorothy met a most beautifully dressed young

only did the Martians either not know of (which is incredible), or


insurance people a pretty penny before everything’s settled.” He
the home counties. There was also a placard in Chipping Ongar
We do nothing but sleep, eat and drink. At ten o’clock came tiffin (luncheon), consisting of soup, chops, fruit and pancakes; at four—dinner; at eight—supper. The days on board are awfully long and tedious. I generally stayed in my cabin between tiffin and dinner, wiling away the weary hours by scribbling my memoirs, and practising on my mandoline. My performances threw our boy Hassan, into ecstasies; he sat on the floor before my door repeating “Veri nice, veri nice!” After dinner the music loving passengers assembled in the music-room. Mr. Shaniavski, a very good pianist, is especially appreciated.
November 17th.—We started with the first train for Nice, where we stopped at the Hôtel Julien, hidden among lemon trees. Directly after lunch I went out for a walk. Whilst I stood gazing into a jewellery-shop, an old gentleman came up, and touching my arm, began to whisper compliments into my ear. I cast an indignant glance at the old satyr and hastened back to the hotel, walking very fast, and it was by an effort that my pursuer kept me in sight, for my legs were long and his were not.
And did young Stephen sicken,
left, he whipped up at once without the formality of thanks.
deep back that they seemed like they was looking out of caverns at you,
says; “but I begged and begged, and at the last minute she let me come,
there he was, slim and handsome, and dressed the gaudiest and prettiest
happened by a handling-machine escaping from the guidance of its
While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to rejoice over her words or to distrust their meaning. There was a something in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensive and anxious attention, while she added,—




I liked Mrs. Blicks and her two daughters very much, and often dropped in for a chat. I met in their house two school-boys, a prince and a simple mortal. I kept the prince in the background and displayed a marked preference for the simple mortal, welcoming him as a relief to threatened monotony. There was nothing particularly entrancing in him, but he was still better than no lover at all, and I began to flirt with him until he was half mad. We wandered away from the others on every available occasion, and sauntered together[65] into the park; he drew my arm within his and pressed it tenderly to his heart, whilst our eyes met, speaking volumes. In that moment we seemed very much in love with one another, and wanted to put off as long as possible getting back home. I took a fancy, one day, on visiting Mrs. Blicks, to stimulate a fainting-fit. I lay at full length on a low sofa, wrapped up in a loose white dressing-gown belonging to Mrs. Blicks, whilst my affrighted school-boys made a great fuss over me; they bathed my temples with eau-de-cologne and put a bottle of sal-volatile under my nose. I took delight in prolonging that mystification as long as I could, surveying them out of the corners of my half-closed eyes.


raft as she floated along, thinking and thinking, and never saying
My parents, going to St. Petersburg, generally paid flying visits to my aunt Galitzine, who lived in Moscow. I made my first journey with them at the mature age of four. If the faults of children develop as they grow older, I was to become a pickpocket, for I had the bad habit of hiding in my pockets all sorts of broken toys belonging to the Karamzins,—two little pupils of my aunt! When I went to bed my nurse emptied my pockets, crying out at the enormity of my dreadful conduct.
fell upon the gravel with a ringing concussion. I stuck my elbow into
time. I told Jim all about what happened inside the wreck and at the
 Solomon and his Million Wives


tilted back a little. I set the candle down. I noticed the window was
[405]
“It’s because it warn’t _intended_ for any of us to come but Tom,” he
how I come to be here. So they said I could have a home there as long
mine.

Hurrah! the sanitary state of our boat is declared satisfactory and we are permitted to land.
I slid down the rubbish, struggled to my feet, clapped my hands over my
3dly. If, notwithstanding the acknowledged impossibility of proving a real decrease in the population, any one should obstinately admit of it, without positive proofs, it cannot at least be denied, that the produce of land and industry being nearly doubled, some means must have been devised, to do that with one hand which required two before. In this case it would be an easy matter to prove, that at the rate of the supposed depopulation, the few elect, who have escaped its causes, can boast of enjoyments in a threefold proportion to what they were before, notwithstanding the difference between the present impost and that which was paid in the beginning of this century: for, after all, the taxes under William III. amounted to four millions and a half and upwards, to be deducted from forty-nine millions standing revenue; the balance was therefore forty-four millions and a half, to be shared amongst 7,200,000 inhabitants, acknowledged by Mr. King; that is, very little above 4d. per day for each individual. Now, in the year 1779, for I have not yet exceeded that period, the impost was of about nine millions, which, taken from an income of 110 millions, left a surplusage of 101,000,000l. to be divided. If we adopt the supposed depopulation at its highest rate, the number of souls in England is[11] reduced to 4,500,000, each of whom has 1s. 3d. instead of 4d. allowed in the reign of William. It is then incontestible that the Nation is richer, but, I must own, not more happy; for they complain and are alarmed at this time, as was then the case.
Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through Longbourn House. Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all sense of pleasure was lost in shame. She felt anew the justice of Mr. Darcy’s objections; and never had she before been so much disposed to pardon his interference in the views of his friend.


reward if you send.

“Ransomed? What’s that?”
Then a low, quiet voice came from the Ball of Fire, and these were the
it would work, and it just worked noble; when Jim bit into it it most
“Well, you see, it ’uz dis way. Ole missus—dat’s Miss Watson—she pecks
slope.
discovered it to be a kinder and more tender heart than the one he had
emotional substratum of the human being.

They buried him, and we come back home, and I went to watching faces
Clear Savings of the Manufactories, Trade, and other Branches of Industry.
heard from the Guardian of the Gates that Dorothy had melted the Wicked
December 26th.—The weather is very mild, and there are already twelve degrees of warmth. After having suffered from the cold, we are going to experience now the torture of tropical heat. The one is worth the other.
will rule over you. I command you to obey him as you would me.”
willows that hung over the bank, and waited for the moon to rise. I

“I want you to fly with me to Kansas,” said Dorothy.


None of them could tell him any news of Woking except one man, who
was still standing on the bank by the side of the road.
the edge of the pit. It was the head of the shopman who had fallen in,
so dark, en we warn’t so sk’yerd, en ben sich punkin-heads, as de
“Who are you?” asked the Scarecrow.
“I lay still,” he said, “scared out of my wits, with the fore quarter
road, and at another place farther on they came upon a great multitude
“I imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of having somebody at his disposal. I wonder he does not marry, to secure a lasting convenience of that kind. But, perhaps, his sister does as well for the present; and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what he likes with her.”
you like to comb up Sundays, and all that kind of foolishness? You bet

warn’t satisfied. She says:
crowd remaining, both on the Chobham and Horsell bridges. One or two

“Certainly; that is why I know it,” returned the Scarecrow. “If it
dat young Harney Shepherdson, you know—leastways, so dey ’spec. De
and a couple of masks made out of black cloth; and all over the walls
always call me honey, and pet me and do everything he could think of
 Jim advises a Doctor
The village of Peissenberg—set upon a hill—is very picturesque. It is inhabited mostly by mine-workers. In the daytime the male population lives underground. When we went out for our every-day walk, the women on their doorsteps dropped us a curtsey with a muttered “Grüss Gott.” Sergy goes out on excursions sometimes. One afternoon he went to Steinberg, where he took the boat plying on the Lake Wurm. He met on board a very pretty and stylish woman, the Countess Dürkheim née Princess Bobrinsky, a compatriot of ours, who had married an aide-de-camp of the King of Bavaria. The Countess expressed her desire to make my acquaintance and wrote a note to me asking us to dine on the following day at Rothenbuch, the Dürkheims’ beautiful estate at two hours’ drive from Peissenberg. I scribbled off a line to say that I regretted I was unable to accept her amiable invitation, not being very well, but if she would come to see me, I should be very pleased. And the Countess came the next day. At the end of the week, we drove down to Rothenbuch to return her call. On approaching their estate, there came a sound of music from the forest surrounding the fine old mansion. The Countess and her husband came to meet us on the verge of the forest, and led us over a velvet lawn to a nook under a group of old trees where there was tea and cakes and all sorts of things laid[234] on a long table, at which sat numerous guests, including the priest of the parish and the schoolmaster. The whole company went afterwards to shoot at targets near the brewery, where we saw a huge barrel filled with beer. The pencil drawings on the walls of the brew-house, of life-sized faces, depict every drunken emotion that the human face is capable of expressing, and represent red-nosed drunkards belonging to all classes of society, with a constable and a monk in the number. The young Count in shooting get-up, with his gun on the shoulder, looked very sportsmanlike. He is the best shot in the country, and now he carried off the first prize—a good fat goose. Then our hosts led us to inspect their magnificent property. The “Schloss” is a formidable square building with rounded towers at the four corners, full of mediæval reminiscences. The grounds around are beautifully kept.
Up the street came galloping a closed carriage, bursting abruptly into
that ever I struck.

read the poetry. Another was Henry Clay’s Speeches, and another was Dr.
When the tea things were removed, and the card tables placed, the ladies all rose; and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him, when all her views were overthrown, by seeing him fall a victim to her mother’s rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated with the rest of the party. She now lost every expectation of pleasure. They were confined for the evening at different tables; and she had nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself.
“I thank you for my share of the favour,” said Elizabeth; “but I do not particularly like your way of getting husbands.”

“Don’t, dear!” said my wife, knitting her brows and putting her hand on
and jam, though Ben Rogers got a rag doll, and Jo Harper got a
them. As they passed over the hill the Hammer-Heads yelled with

And on a low ridge among the mighty mountains they came upon a grim reminder that it was not theirs yet. A great hole lay carved out in bare soil—a sharp contrast with the rich green of the country. Here and there they saw scattered brightly shining bits of metal and a section of heavy metal armor plate, torn and twisted by some enormous strain. To one side lay a heavy girder, torn and bent into a U. They recognized the spot whence the voice of the lost expedition had come across the void to them. Careful electroscopic and photographic studies of the spot were made ere they moved on.
“At the door”	194
Though we are of a roving disposition and seldom remain long in one place, being always between two trains, in Paris we never thought of being dull, rushing about to theatres, concerts, etc. The weather was faultless; after the London fogs and damps the sky appeared to be especially blue. In the afternoons I was out on shopping expeditions. The “Grands Magasins du Louvre,” so well described by Zola in his novel Au Bonheur des Dames, especially attracted me. Before their huge stalls one might idle away many pleasant hours. There are such wonderful “Occasions” to be got, such lovely costumes, which fitted me like a glove but cost a tremendous lot; I devoured them with greedy eyes. Sergy is awfully generous in money matters, there is nothing in the way of dress, jewels, luxury that I couldn’t have if I wanted them; the[168] instant I admired a dress, or a hat, he would say, “You shall have it.” Sergy is such a delightful husband! he is so good that I look on his shoulders every day for wings. One afternoon between two fittings in one of the numerous dressing-rooms in the “Louvre,” not much larger than a cupboard, I felt dreadfully fagged and entered the “Salon de Lecture” to rest a little. Turning over some French papers I came upon a paragraph entitled “Asia,” and was awfully indignant to see that it contained recent news from St. Petersburg. Shall we ever be considered as Europeans, I wonder?

[340]

streamer of smoke. Apparently they were busy getting ready for a
Oz, and claim his promise.”
the evening air.

head of the island I never waited to blow, though I was most winded,
about fifty mile and camp in one place for good, and not have such a
before she goes to bed, and she’s got on her night-gown and her ruffled
him but for the brutal expression of his face.
We’ll let it alone for to-day, because of course we don’t want to go by
“That was one of my tricks,” answered Oz. “Step this way, please, and I

“Oh, dang it now, _don’t_ take on so; we all has to have our troubles,

from her, of all that might happen to her in my absence. My cousin I
Title: The voice of the void
and me back her out and float her down the middle of the river, and
After lunch, when we made our way to the Funicular, we were accosted by a crowd of tattered boys, who proposed to clean our boots, and begged plaintively for some coins “Per mangiare macaroni.” We descended into a sort of dark cave and entered an open railway-carriage in sloping position, holding only ten passengers sitting in pairs opposite each other, the back seats on a level with their heads. Two carbiniers escorted our car. I shuddered when we began the ascent, for it was not at all comforting to be aware that lava only served as foundation to the Funicular Railway and might be falling to pieces at any moment. The mount which only takes a few minutes, seemed a whole century to me. Vesuvius was throwing great balls of fire all the time, and the smoke coming out of the volcano spread around us. We had arrived at the highest point that the waggon could reach and had to leave the Funicular and climb to the summit of Vesuvius on foot. We walked on very rough ground, steaming with sulphurous springs. A score of ragged fellows proposed to serve as guides to us, and said that we must absolutely take two men, each of us, to push and pull us up, but I announced proudly that I could perfectly do with one guide only. I hadn’t made the ascent of Mont Blanc for nothing, I suppose! We walked on a moving soil, consisting of ashes and pumice-stone, sulphur smoke passed off in vapour from crevices beneath us; the soil burnt our feet and our shoes filled with lava. The smell of sulphur nearly choked me. I could not breathe without coughing or gasping. Our mount became more and more difficult: there was no longer any path, it was merely like going up a very steep cinder heap; with each step we sank in it to knee-depth. It was very fatiguing and I had to seek the aid of three guides; one guide took me by the right arm, another took me by the left one, and the third pushed vigorously behind.[229] By the time we arrived at the top my dress was in rags. At last, after an hour’s toil, we succeeded in reaching the summit of the cone and were approaching the lip of the crater. At the same time we heard a long low rumbling, like the sound of the sea when the tide is breaking on a distant beach. Right below us yawned an enormous pit, whose sides were gnarled and twisted by the action of terrible heat; we saw the burning liquid issue from the crater. I managed to get so near that the ashes fell on my dress. It was a wonderful sight and needs the pen of Dante to describe the awful impression received when I stood on the brink of the crater and gazed into the depths of an inferno. The head-guide requested me not to approach too near its fiery mouth, but I felt it draw me like a magnet. We could hear the roar of the fire beneath us. We stood there fascinated when a loud report shook the ground and a shower of hot cinders fell around us. We felt like being under a war-fire. I never was in such a fright in all my life and thought our last moment had come. “We are lost,” I said to myself trembling all over.
[532]


“Well, you _left_ it laid out, then—it ain’t here.”
thing. This made the Tin Woodman very unhappy, for he was always

whatever you do manage to _do_ with ’m all is more’n _I_ can make out.
an audience—and that was always nuts for Tom Sawyer. In them
CHAPTER CXXI

“I am exceedingly gratified,” said Bingley, “by your converting what my friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. But I am afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means intend; for he would certainly think the better of me if, under such a circumstance, I were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as I could.”

heard for the first time from Marshall, the tobacconist, that his son

perfect unanimity. Had our instruments permitted it, we might have seen
 The House
November 21st.—We had to get up very early in the morning to catch the express. It was six o’clock when we drove to the Gare du Nord. There were few people about. We only saw the milk-carts on their morning rounds, and the street-sweepers at work.

cry out of him the size of a warwhoop, and Tom he turned kinder blue
This the Woodman did, and as Dorothy lay close beside the Lion and held
the shelter of the terraces, and got a view of this stationary, howling
there she set me down in a split-bottomed chair, and set herself down
and they’d make Jim feel it all the time, and so he’d feel ornery and
and never get any sleep, just so as to watch them. I think that’s
All other kinds of taxes, as well as the poll-tax, seem to affect only the article on which they are laid; but this article comprehends the three interests, and trebles the action of the tax when the interest of the labouring man, that is, the price of his day’s work, constitutes, as it does in England, nearly one third of the revenue.⸺How could it be supposed that the taxing of industry in its products, was granting to its capitalist the right of increasing his price by the whole amount of the tax, without making it necessary for the land proprietor to enhance the price of his commodities at the same rate? And how could it be supposed that the products of agriculture and industry, happening to be, by a[245] very just re-action, (whether it originates with the one or the other), increased in price in the same proportion, agriculture and industry should not be compelled to increase of course the price of labour which procured those products? If therefore you advance by 10 millions, the prices either of all the productions of the earth, by taxing agriculture, or of all the productions of the arts, by taxing industry, you equally compel the untaxed part to advance its prices to the whole amount of the 10 millions laid on the corresponding part, otherwise goods to the amount of 10 millions would evidently remain unsold. Now the influence of those new prices will enforce by degrees an increase on the price of labour, and this increase will soon be followed by a fresh one on the value of its products; whence it appears at last, that after all the necessary re-actions, the same tax of 10 millions, which by a general equitable poll-tax, supposed as equitable as it is impossible to make it so, would only raise the prices by one twelfth, or 8⅓ per cent.; if laid, either on the land, or luxury, or general consumption, would necessarily advance the prices, sooner or later, to 25 per cent.; the very precise period whereat every one would find himself in the exact state in which he was previous to the tax, paying,[246] it is true, every thing 25 per cent. dearer, but being himself paid 25 per cent. dearer too.

January 10th.—In spite of our fireless, chilly room, we did not escape the bites of vicious mosquitos and were half devoured by swarms of wretched insects.
“What should not you mind?”
Two Frenchmen, who were passing through Khabarovsk on their way from Japan, were invited to dinner by Sergy: Mr. Lallo, a correspondent of the “Illustration,” and the Vicomte de Labry, the military agent of Tokio, who was resplendent in his uniform of the “Chasseurs d’Afrique.”
right off, because it was a grand adventure, and mysterious, and so it
we stuck in the band of Uncle Silas’s hat, which was on the bureau,
blowed out a cylinder-head.”
Primrose Hill. Far away, through a gap in the trees, I saw a second
For One Night Only!
We left St. Petersburg on the 17th June, and are on our way for a second tour around the world. This time we sail from Odessa on the Orel a boat belonging to the Volunteer Fleet, which will take us straight to Vladivostock.
The wholesome country air put me quite on my legs again, my health was entirely restored, and I recovered my good looks and my spirits, but I had such a shock when I found all my hair had to come off; I was obliged to have it shaved after my illness. It did not hinder me, however from having three or four admirers here, waiting on my very words. One of my chief victims was Aksenoff, a chum of my brother’s, who was completing his studies at the University of Kharkoff that year. Aksenoff was not a bit the hero of my girlish dreams and had no chance whatever of attracting me; he was a clumsy, athletic-looking lad, with feet like fiddle-cases. Rough on the outside, but the best fellow in the world, he improved on close acquaintance. One could easily see that he was falling seriously in love with me in spite of my shaven head, covered, it is true, with a coquettish cap which suited me wonderfully. I seemed to him a pearl beyond price, and he spent all his time in gazing up at me as a unattainable star. He was my devoted slave in everything, following me about with a sort of dog-like fidelity. I could twist that giant round my little finger; he was as wax in my hands and would go through fire and water for my sake, but I was a very cruel girl, I delighted to torment my admirers and I only made a laughing-stock of Aksenoff, and began to order[38] him about mercilessly. Enjoying to impress my sweet will upon the poor boy, I teased and tormented him atrociously. Had I not had plenty of victims already? Why should I want that poor boy to be tortured? But my desire for conquest was insatiable, I couldn’t leave a man alone.
reckoned I better start in on my plan straight off without fooling
beautiful to see him. By-and-by he got it. He told us to give
In effect, do but observe how easily a creditable merchant buys from the manufacturer, payable at twelve months, an enormous stock of goods, which he is himself obliged to sell, either to the consumer or to the retailer, at twelve, eighteen, or twenty-four months credit, and which often are not totally paid for at the end of three years. What difference in the prices must be the consequence of that series of facilities! Are high prices an evil? Put an end to credit, nothing more easy; nothing more is required, than to suffer to lie dormant all those laws, which secure to the creditor, the payment of his advances at the precise time when they become demandable: it is that certitude of being repaid, at the needful hour, that often induces the creditor himself to borrow, in order to extricate a debtor, whom he knows to be indiscreet, but from whose custom he derives a considerable[264] yearly profit, upon a prodigious consumption; a profit he would lose, by being less indulgent: take away from the creditor the certainty of extorting his repayment, if it should be refused at a moment when a critical event should render such rigour indispensable, credit is destroyed, as well as the consumption which followed it, as well as the production of the earth which could not be paid, but by those manufactories annihilated by the want of consumption: cross the Straits of Calais, and (in order to console the worshippers of the balance) add, as well as thousands of acres of vineyards in France, the produce of which strips England annually of so vast a sum! as well as thousands of acres in Italy, set apart for the rearing of silk-worms, and the culture of olive-trees, which swallow up a prodigious sum of English money; as well as thousands of acres in Silesia, where they cultivate the hemp which English money buys in that country; as well as thousands of acres in Russia and in Sweden, whence we are obliged to import, at the expence of so much English money, that immense quantity of timber, iron, canvass—articles which would become useless by the extinction of credit, and the destruction of that trade, of which credit was the very soul;—the chain would lead us too far. It is sufficiently evident,[265] that then all the goods remaining unsold could not be purchased but with ready money, and then indeed every thing would be excessively cheap. Would all that be for the best?—In a word, give up all thoughts of riches, or submit to the highest prices; but let those high prices come to you from the profusion of wealth universally diffused, and not from the tyranny of your own monopoly.
about on it all night under the stars, and all the next day. A noise of

Two shrivelled old women, wrapped up in shawls, with lilac cheeks and noses, were singing Tyrolese songs, with tremulous voices, in that grotto, accompanying themselves on the cithern, blowing their purple fingers in the intervals. When we came out of the cavern we saw a group of working-men occupied in sawing enormous blocks of ice which they[181] dropped down the mountain on rails. Now we began to climb to the Glacier which was no childish play. The guide after pinning up my skirt led the way. We advanced very slowly, climbing higher and higher, pricking the sharp ends of our alpenstocks into the ice, running the risk of tumbling down into the deep ravines and leaving no trace behind. We had masses of snow to climb over and large abysses to leap over; soon greater difficulties awaited us. We had to climb a staircase simply propped up by a snow block; there was no path at all now, only crevices and precipices—it was chaos in short. The guide who had a sure foot, chopped steps with his ice-axe in the ice, and we were hoisted by him from a foothold to a foothold. He exclaimed at the courage I showed and said I was a capital hill-climber and called me “Sehr Brav.” In the distance we heard the crash of a downfall of snow. Half-way up we sat down and took a brief rest, our backs against a rock and our heels dangling over a bottomless abyss. The guide insisted upon my swallowing a drop of brandy from a tumbler slung by a strap over his shoulder.
[iii]





did so a second glittering Titan built itself up out of the pit.

mice have saved my life. How strange it all is! But, comrades, what
“But bless you, honey, I doan’ _want_ none. I’s afeard un um. I jis’ ’s
Our fleet started for Tchifou, to cut all communications with the Japanese army, in case the Japs would not consent to our proposals for giving up Manchuria to China. We are waiting for the decisive answer to Japan concerning the ratification of peace. God grant that it may be satisfactory!
him, “Hereafter you will be a great man, for I have given you a lot of
walking was not at all good.
June 1st.—General Lazareff has come to Erzeroum to replace General Heimann. The Armenian inhabitants awaited him with impatience, very proud that he was the second commander of the main army of their own nationality. From early morning the whole town was put into a fluster; the native women established themselves upon their roofs at daybreak, wishing to see the new Russian mouchir enter Erzeroum. As I also wished to be present, I accepted readily the Gilberts’ invitation to come on their balcony which looked out into the square where the Guards of Honour, and a great number of officers in grand uniform, had assembled. Towards ten o’clock we heard the clamour of hurras and soon perceived a crowd of inhabitants coming up, followed by two hundred Cossacks with big banners; behind them rode General Lazareff, accompanied by a numerous suite.
{xxiv}
belonged to the Witch of the East.

Most of the spectators had gathered in one or two groups—one a little
in a disagreeable country, full of bogs and marshes and covered with


not send me home until I have killed the Wicked Witch of the West; and

Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth. So near a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to his easy temper, or her affectionate heart. The darling wish of his sisters was then gratified: he bought an estate in a neighbouring county to Derbyshire; and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other.
to do right and ain’t no trouble to do wrong, and the wages is just the
standing in a great irregular circle, in ditches, behind bushes, behind
A great number of officers accompanied us as far as the boat on the Soungatcha river. We had a brilliant leave-taking. I received so many bouquets that I almost disappeared amongst the flowers. The railway-station was decked out with flags. A great crowd had assembled on the platform which was covered with red cloth; a special train, with a dinner-car attached to it, was awaiting us. Two sentinels were placed before our saloon-carriage. Whistles are given to signal our departure. The train steamed out of the station amid the ringing cheers of the crowd. Standing at the window we answer the salutes and hand-wavings. Our train crept along at the pace of a snail, making only twenty miles an hour. Our way leads along the sea-shore for some time, and then we enter a wide plain, disturbing the tiger with the locomotive.
During the opposition of 1894 a great light was seen on the illuminated
The brain alone remained a cardinal necessity. Only one other part of
“Does _who_ know us?”
I was delighted when we were brought back to Shamin.

Directly after dinner we went out in palanquins. The fare is only one dollar for the whole day. We were carried swiftly up broad streets bordered by palm trees and bamboos covered with mould because of the damp, tepid air. Queen’s Road, the principal street, is a large avenue bordered with beautiful English shops, and reminds one of London, only instead of commonplace constables, it is Punjabs—Hindoos—in big red turbans who keep order in the streets. On our way to the Botanic Gardens we saw English soldiers exercising in a large square. We admired—in the beautiful Gardens, amongst the innumerable wonders of tropical vegetation—a large basin with lotuses in full bloom. We returned to the hotel through the native quarter of the town, lined with straw huts between hedges of banana and cocoa-nut trees.

“This religion which formerly was an object of indifference or contempt has now, as I can testify from[Pg 159] personal observation, well nigh become an object of abhorrence; it is certain that for sixty years past not one single proselyte has been made. Before half a century has elapsed there will not be the slightest trace of this Christianity remaining among the Hindus. I must confess it with shame and humiliation that there was not a single member of them (the Christian in his own sphere of labour) of whom it could be said, that he had accepted Christianity, save for some objectionable secondary consideration.”
“Step inside,” answered the soldier, “and I will carry your message to


way without anybody to watch him. So now I got to go and trapse all the

it when it’s handed back, and says, sarcastic:
“Now, we’ll start this band of robbers and call it Tom Sawyer’s Gang.

patches of green and crimson swimming before my eyes. I wished I had a
they started along the path of yellow brick for the Emerald City.
tow-head warn’t sixty yards long, and the minute I flew by the foot of
now evidently much cooler; his face was crimson and streaming with


truth. Then Oz asked, “What do you wish me to do?”
“Well,” said the girl, “let us go.” And she handed the basket to the

the four carrying the debris of their comrade between them, now clear
The next day I visited the young ladies’ gymnasium of which I am Honorary President. I was welcomed at the entrance by Mrs. Unterberger and the Vice-Governor of Vladivostock. The directress of the gymnasium presented to me all the members of her administration. After which the pupils presented me with a beautiful embroidered serviette of their own work.
One morning Frau Weidemann caught Hermann throwing stones at passers-by over the hedge of our garden. “What are you doing, horrid little boy?” cried out our hostess.
forwards, and his arms stretched away up, and his head tilted back,
for it a many and a many a time, all these long years, and it’s come at
Anthony Rubinstein, the king of the piano, was giving his last public concert in Moscow. The whole town came in to be present at the leave-taking. When the great pianist appeared on the estrade, he was met by a roar of applause; the wild enthusiasm of the house was indescribable. Rubinstein was a real treat, and bewildered me by his marvellous execution. This incomparable artist gave an interpretation of Chopin which sent a thrill through me. His touché and his technique were wonderful and perfect, he made the instrument positively sob and sing. I was in an ecstasy of delight and listened entranced, having never heard anything so beautiful before. Rubinstein looks something like Beethoven, clean-shaven, with a powerful face; his long locks, shaggy and picturesque, waved in sympathy with his excitement. When he had ceased, there was a moment of entire silence, that finest homage due to beautiful playing.
July 23rd.—Early in the morning we perceived in the distance the coasts of Formosa. We have to go to-day through dangerous parts filled with coral banks, and sadly famed for numerous shipwrecks.

She closed the door, locked it, and put the key carefully in the pocket
don’t care a cent what a thing costs, you know, long as they want it.

and early in the mornings, and play your jews-harp; play ‘The Last Link
across his face, a third antagonist struck him between the eyes, and
“Nor I my heart,” declared the Tin Woodman. “It seems to me I can

Then, advancing obliquely towards us, came a fifth. Their armoured




On the quay exemplary order reigned. The natives are treated by the Dutch as pariahs, and ruled with a hand of iron. They are not allowed to speak Dutch, and as we were not acquainted with the native language, we had the universal language, that of the signs, left to us. The Dutch also evince great contempt for the Chinese, and treat them as if they were dirt. Coolies are not permitted to ride in tramways with white-faced Europeans; only high-caste Parsees may ride with sahibs in second-class compartments.


together, the way you did when you catched the lump of lead. Why, I
Yet here I welcome Thee!
a house, but one flash following another showed it to be in swift
Walt Whitman has somewhere a fine and just distinction between “loving by allowance” and “loving with personal love.” This distinction applies to books as well as to men and women; and in the case of the not very numerous authors who are the objects of the personal affection, it brings a curious consequence with it. There is much more difference as to their best work than in the case of those others who are loved “by allowance” by convention, and because it is felt to be the right and proper thing to love them. And in the sect—fairly large and yet unusually choice—of Austenians or Janites, there would probably be found partisans of the claim to primacy of almost every one of the novels. To some the delightful freshness and humour of Northanger Abbey, its completeness, finish, and entrain, obscure the undoubted critical facts that its scale is small, and its scheme, after all, that of burlesque or parody, a kind in which the first rank is reached with difficulty. Persuasion, relatively faint in tone, and not enthralling in interest, has devotees who exalt above all the others its exquisite delicacy and keeping. The catastrophe of Mansfield Park is admittedly theatrical, the hero and heroine are insipid, and the author has almost{x} wickedly destroyed all romantic interest by expressly admitting that Edmund only took Fanny because Mary shocked him, and that Fanny might very likely have taken Crawford if he had been a little more assiduous; yet the matchless rehearsal-scenes and the characters of Mrs. Norris and others have secured, I believe, a considerable party for it. Sense and Sensibility has perhaps the fewest out-and-out admirers; but it does not want them.
amputate him. But it didn’t save him. Yes, it was mortification—that


climbed on the Lion’s back, holding tightly to his mane with one hand.
“Neither. He’s a—a—a meat dog,” said the girl.
Fourthly and lastly, that Spain and Portugal[106] stand exactly in the same need of making away with the surplus of their gold and silver, as England does of acquiring it, by getting rid of a surplus of her manufactures: I cannot therefore entertain the least doubt, but that it is at Cadiz and Lisbon that England procures all that gold and silver which is indispensably wanted for the five operations spoken of; and I must positively conclude, that there she has taken the whole quantity which she had occasion for; but I as positively conclude, that she took up only so much of it as was wanted, when I see that it depended entirely upon her to take more, and that she has not done it: A decisive point, which I cannot by any means call in question, when I have convinced myself, by Sir Charles Whitworth’s statements, that this sum of 888,699l. which England, if so disposed, might have procured annually during the ten years above mentioned, is no more than the balance of 1,785,826l. in goods exported there, one year with another, during the same space of time:—For, after all, why should not England have taken in money the amount of 897,157l. of Spanish and Portuguese goods, taken by her ships in return, were it not that the value of money, as that of all other kinds of merchandise, is always tyrannically fixed by the demand?
A fortune-teller, standing at the door of her dwelling, invited the passers-by to come in to hear their fortunes told. On the threshold of a house just opposite, a quarrelsome female, arms akimbo, was shouting and shaking her fist at her bourgeois; the discussion waxed hot, and a constable, dressed in the costume of the period, came running to separate them; the scene was only a sham. We entered a theatre on the Place du Guesclin, where we saw the escape of a prisoner from the dungeon of La Bastille. There was a great push at the entrance, and we got to our places with difficulty. The curtain rose showing the prisoner preparing to clamber out of the window, and falling down whilst he was dropping a cord exclaiming: “How dark the night is!” And, indeed, night came on when the spectators emerged into the square where stood the reproduction of the Bastille with its towers and raised bridges, to see the man, who appeared to be a skilful acrobat, making his escape from the prison. His flight was noticed by a group of soldiers, dressed in red uniforms, and wearing white wigs, who fired at him and began to climb over the walls in hurried pursuit, and seized the escaping prisoner, who was hissed by the crowd on the square. After that the taking of the Bastille, was reproduced. We could imagine all this taking place. A throng of 500 men, wearing Jacobin caps with tri-coloured cockades and armed with muskets and swords, began to climb up the Bastille by the aid of ropes and ladders, making a terrible noise. Suddenly a detachment of soldiers, dressed in the costume of the period, appeared, and a white-wigged colonel began to read instructions to the men, under a smoking lamp-post, urging them to serve their King faithfully and defeat the Sans-Culottes. Then began the charge of cannons and muskets, which soon made the huge building flame on all sides.
Mary Jane she went for him, Susan and the hare-lip went for the duke,
towards the balloon.
was talking about the murder, but the captain broke in and says:

[Pg 145]
trip down the river; and I see Jim before me all the time: in the day
was safe. I was glad of that; but the way Buck did take on because he
I sent Housnadine, our Tartar servant, to the Russian frontier with the orders to return only after my husband had crossed to the other side of the Arpatchai. After two hours of agony, Housnadine brought me a few hasty words, scribbled by Sergy, while the pontoons were laying a bridge across the river for our artillery to pass over. Sergy entreated me to be brave, and promised to send me news as often as he could. Whilst he was writing that note, a notice came from head-quarters that the enemy had appeared. It was[81] only a false alarm; a detachment of Turkish irregulars belonging to a tribe named “Karapapaki,” who had promised to serve the Russian cause if war would be declared, came now to join our army, with a banner and in full battle array.

[Pg 21]
the streets that had lately been so dark and strange and empty.

from the shrivelled remains that have fallen into human hands, were

 A Dead Head

“Don’t keep coughing so, Kitty, for heaven’s sake! Have a little compassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces.”
they made a heap of fuss over him, and fixed him up prime, and give him
black figures in twos and threes would advance, stop, watch, and
The winter season at Cairo was in full swing; the city was full of tourists and it was difficult to find a shelter. We made a tour of the hotels, but not a single room was to be had: “full up,” came the curt reply. We went to Shepherd’s Hotel, and the next hotel, and the next to that, and received the same answer everywhere. At last we found shelter at the Hôtel Bristol, but for two days only, as all the apartments were already let to a number of American tourists who were to arrive with the next boat from Alexandria.

the weed, a wide expanse of livid colour cut with purple shadows, and
climb it; but the Woodman said at once, “I’ll chop it down, and then we
us, I heard a muffled detonation from the common, and immediately after




Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth—and it was soon done—done while Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire. Elizabeth, equally next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.

Well, blamed if the king didn’t bill the house and the niggers and all

excited by the opening of the line of communication, which is almost
“What! And not sell out the rest o’ the property? March off like a
position there. These continued intermittently for the space of a
by Mr. Mark Twain, and he told the truth, mainly. There was things
think the Heat-Ray must have been used for some reason. And in the
get Huck’s money without having to bother a long time with a lawsuit.
white blazer addressed my brother, full of strange tidings.

great forest, flying from tree to tree, eating nuts and fruit, and

most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
and put it gently on the grass beneath the privet hedge.

comfortable and glad. Next, she says:
July 29th.—I was wakened in the middle of the night by the piercing shrieking of the siren. We had entered a dense fog and were advancing slowly, the horns blowing all the time.
Oz. As Dorothy entered they looked at her curiously, and one of them
condemnation; yet the memory, static, unprogressive, haunted me. In the
to be going on about the pit. Strange imaginings passed through my

“Come to think, the logs ain’t a-going to do; they don’t have log walls
pirate-books and robber-books, and every gang that was high-toned had
they came upon, cut every telegraph, and wrecked the railways here and
From Ripley until I came through Pyrford I was in the valley of the

“Well, it’s a blame ridicklous way, en I doan’ want to hear no mo’
“And this,” said she, “is the end of all his friend’s anxious circumspection! of all his sister’s falsehood and contrivance! the happiest, wisest, and most reasonable end!”




It was almost dark when we reached Tiflis. The Staritzkis received us in the friendliest way. We were also kindly greeted by my aunt, Nathalie Roerberg, the wife of the Chief of the Military Engineers of the Caucasus. She wanted me to come and see her just as often as I could. I can’t say how good and kind she was, we got on admirably.

So Dorothy dried her eyes and said, “I suppose we must try it; but I am
“Yes; never mind about them. They’ve got to stand it yet a while. They


last sign of her, and we was safe, and knowed it.
they passed on through the gate into the Emerald City. When the people
THE AUTHOR.
the 8th Hussars, with a stand like a theodolite, which the artilleryman
It could not prejudice her foreign connexions, because this increase of prices, which abroad was not owing to taxation, was only an encouragement to labour, which must in general have increased its products, always entitled to a profit over and above the price paid for that labour.


through the raft.
looking into her face, whining dismally to show how sorry he was for
CHAPTER XIX.

it, s’I, that’s all. I says to Sister Dunlap, s’I—”
“It shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing,” said Bingley.
they had grown so fond of the Tin Woodman that they begged him to stay

Scarecrow.
We arrived towards evening at Barcelona and put up for the night at the “Hôtel des quatre Nations,” situated on the “Rambla,” the finest and gayest street of Barcelona. This town can easily rival Madrid. The streets are broad and beautifully lighted with electricity and the shops are splendid.

independent while we learn. See! That’s what has to be done.”
“Good land! Set the run— What _is_ the child talking about! Dear, dear,
better put ’em on, but I’d ruther not, it’s so warm. Are you all ready?



So she went away as I opened the door and walked into the setting-room.


Munchkins, and white is the witch color. So we know you are a friendly

“How can he blow? Hain’t he run off?”
“Oh, just listen! A body could tell _you_ hain’t ever been to England


leave her until she starts back to Kansas for good and all.”
remoter being a grey indistinctness towards the evening star, away

The first shed we come to the preacher was lining out a hymn. He lined
up almost mechanically, went into the dining room and drank some

of sight.”

Dinner was at half-past seven. Mr. Holland took me down to the dining-room, a large hall brilliantly illuminated and filled with gentlemen in full dress and bare-shouldered ladies. We made our way to the prettily spread table reserved for us, decorated with bunches of roses. Both Mrs. Holland and Mrs. Olarowski had put on their finest dresses. Of all those present I was the only one to appear in a wrong toilet. My modest frock seemed rather out of place amidst the gorgeous plumes of the other ladies, and Mrs. Holland’s eyes swept over me disapprovingly. Nevertheless, I was a great deal stared at and much annoyed, for I felt I was being made a show of, and exhibited as one would exhibit a giant or a dwarf.
before he goes out of this—because he’s going out _right_, and there
had him to breakfast and dinner and supper with the family, and was
March 1st.—We had to go on board the Laos in the middle of the night. I did not at all like to be turned out of my warm bed, and felt so miserably weak that I could hardly stand on my feet.
stock in dead people.

 VI. THE HEAT-RAY IN THE CHOBHAM ROAD.

anything that’s regular; you want to be starting something fresh all
of the men there, a reservist he said he was, told my brother he had
the seat upon which he was standing. There was a shouting all about
yellow Wildcat, and the Woodman thought it must be chasing something,
mos’ broke bekase you wuz los’, en I didn’ k’yer no’ mo’ what become er
sight of them poor miserable girls and niggers hanging around each
inside. Next I got to itching underneath. I didn’t know how I was going
and hanging to his neck, with first one leg hanging most to the ground
the more wicked and low-down and ornery I got to feeling. And at last,

the nigger that does up the rooms will get an order to box these duds
beginning to cry.
I know it—will you go to Mr. Lothrop’s and stay four days?”
electric boats; and beyond were ships of larger burden, a multitude of


he’d started in on—


And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house.

hand hanging down her side holding a white handkerchief and a reticule,
panting.
“Be merciful therefore unto us and hear our prayer that we make before Thee in this place. As often as we from henceforth shall assemble here let Thy Spirit awaken our hearts to seek Thy face sincerely, without hypocrisy. As often as we shall hear Thy word, let us do it with an unfeigned intention to obey and keep it without exception. As often as Thy Holy Sacraments, which are means of entering into a covenant of love and obedience, are administered to this house, O be pleased to make them effectual to the salvation of our souls. And, finally, when strangers who do not know Thy name hear of all the glorious doctrines and methods of worshipping Thee preached in this house, incline, O mercifully incline, their hearts to renounce their abominable idolatry and to worship Thee, O God, in the name of Christ! In this manner make this a place where Thy name is glorified, Thy kingdom sought for, and Thy will duly performed....
exaggerated. Before the cylinder fell there was a general persuasion

“It has been many years since anyone asked me to see Oz,” he said,
“Oh, but the gentlemen will have Mr. Bingley’s chaise to go to Meryton; and the Hursts have no horses to theirs.”
“M. Gardiner.”
“What is Mr. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I am sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to say nothing he may not like to hear.”

rough times.”
“What, is it over? Is that _all?_”
“They surely will never do for a long journey, Toto,” she said. And
The early experiences of a missionary on arriving in his field of work abroad will sometimes dissipate a little of the romance which fancy had gathered about his outlook, and will instead reveal quite unexpected difficulties to try his faith, forcing him to a fuller dependence on God. On the other hand, all that is best in him of inspiration and devotion is deepened by the fact of his seeing as never before the unutterable need of his message and recognising his clear call to give that in the name of his Master. And seeing that the highest summits of success can only be attained by simple and persevering steps, he will apply himself with prayerful fidelity to these necessary details of his new position. His call was instant, his fitness for it must be attained by hard work and patient application.
a slouch. I can’t imitate him, and so I ain’t a-going to try to; but he
On a Cause little suspected of high Prices.
With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr. Wickham and the officers, Mr. Collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to the young ladies he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kind listener in Mrs. Philips, and was, by her watchfulness, most abundantly supplied with coffee and muffin.
The Wonderful City of Oz
“True. You are a gentleman’s daughter. But what was your mother? Who are your uncles and aunts? Do not imagine me ignorant of their condition.{439}”
out again, the country northward was as though a black snowstorm had
at all, but only Tom. Sis never wrote to me about anybody coming but

“I hope,” added Mrs. Gardiner, “that no consideration with regard to this young man will influence her. We live in so different a part of town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go out so little, that it is very improbable they should meet at all, unless he really comes to see her.{179}”
“My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing for every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the example of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced it will add very greatly to my happiness; and, thirdly, which perhaps I ought to have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of calling patroness. Twice has she condescended to give me her opinion (unasked too!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I left Hunsford,—between our pools at quadrille, while Mrs. Jenkinson was arranging Miss De Bourgh’s footstool,—that she said, ‘Mr. Collins, you must marry. A clergyman like you must marry. Choose properly, choose a gentlewoman for my sake, and for your own; let her be an active, useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a small income go a good way. This is my advice. Find such a woman as soon as you can, bring her to Hunsford, and{135} I will visit her.’ Allow me, by the way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the notice and kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the advantages in my power to offer. You will find her manners beyond anything I can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and respect which her rank will inevitably excite. Thus much for my general intention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my views were directed to Longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where I assure you there are many amiable young women. But the fact is, that being, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured father (who, however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfy myself without resolving to choose a wife from among his daughters, that the loss to them might be as little as possible when the melancholy event takes place—which, however, as I have already said, may not be for several years. This has been my motive, my fair cousin, and I flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem. And now nothing remains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of the violence of my affection. To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am well aware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds in the 4 per cents., which will not be yours till after your mother’s decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. On that head, therefore, I shall be uniformly silent: and you may assure yourself that no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are married.”


CVII.	Shanghai	462
Little Toto, now that he had an enemy to face, ran barking toward the
curate’s trick of helpless exclamation, his stupid rigidity of mind.


they was changing watches, and so our hands wouldn’t get blistered, and
opened, and the man who lodged across the landing came in, dressed only

for pie, he wouldn’t. He’d call it an adventure—that’s what he’d call
bow and said, in a sweet voice:
their Heat-Ray.

taking him to, so he went head over heels over the tub of salt pork and

January 10th.—The cold keeps increasing. It is difficult to believe that it was a hot inferno I had to endure in these places not very long ago.

“Quick, then, and tell us what _was_ your idea, or I’ll shake the
Without entering into any dispute on the merits of the researches concerning population, which would lead to some truths perhaps unthought[9] of hitherto; here follow the arguments which will occur to any man who stands not in need of a fixed and precise number of thinking heads, laborious hands, and well-digesting stomachs.
When she had tired watching the dancing, Boq led her into the house,
strength, so loudly that I must needs make him desist.


Ruskin
hand, hard, and says:
Her friends were sorry, but could do nothing to help her; so Dorothy


“None of it at all?”
[Pg 28]
Every year on her birthday the Wunderfrau gives a village entertainment followed by a rural ball. She invited us to a grand dinner during which a military band, imported from Munich, played marches and lively airs. After the repast we went to see the country-dance on the common. The merry-go-round was in all activity. The Wunderfrau, surrounded by her guests, was sitting on the grass, dowdily dressed and loaded with false jewellery; her black silk dress was fastened at the throat by a brooch the size of a saucer, which contained the effigy of her late husband. There was a long file of tables laid out with dishes and bottles. Village youths and maidens had come from all around, dressed in their Sunday best. The lads, their vests hanging on one shoulder and their large-brimmed hats cocked on one ear, sat before large bocks, filling themselves steadily with beer and flirting with their sweethearts, talking and laughing uproariously. When it began to get dark there were dances in the big barn. Our cook and laundress opened the ball, swinging round the three-step waltz to the music of Ach mein lieber Augustin played by rural musicians. After them the whole company began whirling and twirling with shrill shrieks of merriment. We were very much amused by the gambols of these rustics. The lads in their thick boots and country clothes, carrying their partners clasped to their bosom like packets, were careering round, stamping the floor loudly with their nailed heels. We were much surprised to see among[235] the dancers our doctoress, red and panting, turning round like a weather-cock, embraced by a ruddy-faced youth. All of a sudden the boys, brisked up by some glasses of wine, separated from the girls and began to turn somersaults, tapping themselves noisily on the thighs, at which Countess Platen, a Swedish lady who lived in our Sanatorium and gave tone to everything, gathered up her skirts majestically and swept out queen-like, bearing her head high and stepping as though she was mistress of the whole fair earth, followed by her satellites.

I will bear all the unhappiness without a murmur, if you will give me
had got a good start; then I out with my saw, and went to work on that
CHAPTER LII.
“Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. She is the sort of woman whom one cannot regard with too much deference.”

the light and glared with a white intensity.
and she couldn’t seem to hug and shake enough, and kept saying, “You


She was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the real state of her sister’s spirits. Jane was not happy. She still cherished a very tender affection for Bingley. Having never even fancied herself in love before, her regard had all the warmth of first attachment, and from her age and disposition, greater steadiness than first attachments often boast; and so fervently did she value his remembrance, and prefer him to every other man, that all her good sense, and all her attention to the feelings of her friends, were requisite to check the indulgence of those regrets which must have been injurious to her own health and their tranquillity.
CHAPTER LXV
“We are on our way to the Emerald City to see the Great Oz,” she
“From the former. I had narrowly observed her, during the two visits which I had lately made her here; and I was convinced of her affection.”
was also a powerful sorceress. All her magic was used to help the
so? You answer me dat.”
to them, I may not even give here, nevertheless cumbered themselves
the hill, nevertheless.”
“Will you come and see me?”	181

Because he was such a swell,
Jim said the rock was worse than the logs; he said it would take him
“I reckon he _warn’t_ a coward. Not by a blame’ sight. There ain’t a
“When I wrote that letter,” replied Darcy, “I believed myself perfectly calm and cool; but I am since convinced that it was written in a dreadful bitterness of spirit.”

 One of his Ancestors


Nonesuch—three-night performance—like that other time. _They_ had the
“’Deed, _that_ ain’t the ticket, Miss Mary Jane,” I says, “by no manner
SHANGHAI
that the witches were all dead—years and years ago.”
“Now, that’s something _like_. That’ll answer. Why couldn’t you said

But this free access to the King was short lived. The Brahmins, like the Ephesians of old crying “Great is Diana,” were discovering only too plainly that the progress of Christianity would inevitably replace the old religion and their influence with all its material advantages would be gone for ever. So every attempt on the part of the King to show favour to Schwartz was defeated and concealed by those around him, and the chief Brahmin at last persuaded him that any change would disturb the whole of the country and that the people did not want the missionary. This proved how correct was his estimate before when he said the King was more of a slave than a King, being so much under the domination of the Brahmins. In his heart, there is no doubt Tuljajee was most anxious to have Schwartz near to him, but was overborne by his high officials. In his journal Schwartz says of this crisis:

In the afternoon, whilst we were sunning ourselves on the terrace, Admiral Doubassoff called upon us with his wife, whom he is sending back to Russia to-morrow. The order of the day prescribed that all Russian subjects should leave the country in forty-eight hours. Clouds are gathering on the political horizon. There are rumours of war between Russia and Japan, and things are working up for an excursion to Manchuria.
wolves. They had long legs and fierce eyes and sharp teeth.
“Are you not diverted?”
are photographically distinct. At the end of it I sat, tempering nuts



forthwith. The man was running away with the rest, and selling his

Dorothy soon closed her eyes and fell fast asleep.
Spring came with galloping speed. The date of the Coronation was fixed for the 15th May. I went to see the Court[151] Regalias exposed to view in the Kremlin Palace. The crown and the sceptre, studded with precious stones as big as nuts, amazed me by their incredible richness. On the walls hung Gobelin tapestries and pictures taken from the Bible. Just opposite the Metropolitan’s seat I saw a painting illustrating the story of Potipher’s wife dragging Joseph by his legendary mantle. These heroes of the Ancient Testament being very lightly clad, the police censor had found it necessary to dress them in a more decent manner for the Coronation, leaving at the same time, just next to that picture, a large canvas representing a group of the “Happy Just” enjoying Paradise in a completely nude state. I also went to see a fine assortment of State carriages and the beautiful horses which were to drag them, pure white Hanoverians all of them.
broken, poor brute!) and by the lightning flashes I saw the black bulk
CHAPTER VI.


undeniable, if one thinks of the tremendous waste of human time and


rather lordly carriage. Besides that, there was quite a heap of

down home and get them ready for the surprise if I wanted to. But I


Tigers have appeared in the neighbourhood of Khabarovsk. They come at night, travelling long distances from inland to drink; their roar is heard some miles around. Quite recently a man-eating tiger had devoured a soldier who was washing his linen on the banks of the Amour. Only his head and a few bones were found. A hunt has been organised, and several tigers were shot near Khabarovsk.
“He _can’t_ write with his left hand,” says the old gentleman. “If he
“A _sheet_ gone! Well, for the land’s sake!”
when it hit me all of a sudden that here was the plain hand of

IN TOUCH WITH THE BRAHMINS.

this country.”
Niagara, in the Indian language, means “Thundering Waters,” and in fact, from afar the thunder of the Niagara filled the air. We wandered away in the direction of the huge roar. As we advanced the sound became sharper and we had to shout to make ourselves heard above the noise of the cataract. At length we came face to face with the Falls. The sight of the foaming rapids fringed by splendid trees, was awfully grand. Rainbows are reflected in the water. The tumult of the Falls which attained the height of seventy yards, broke in clouds of spray against the rocks. It was well worth travelling all the way to see. Here and there we saw inscriptions: “Don’t venture in dangerous places!” Leaning over the Falls, I felt very small and strangely attracted by its foaming wonderful sheet of water, just the[331] same as I did whilst standing on Mount Vesuvius, on the very brink of the crater. In a part of the park called “The Cape of the Winds,” where the Falls have the form of a horse-shoe, we met a party of audacious tourists, enveloped in yellow mackintoshes, who were slowly groping their way along a narrow bridge thrown across the cataract; underneath, the Niagara rolled gigantic and majestic in a vast flood. After having rested for a little while on the grass, discoursing about the beauty of the wonderful water-fall, we returned to the hotel just in time for dinner. After the repast, all my companions went out for a sail on the Niagara River; as for me, I had quite enough of thrilling sensations for that day and pleaded a headache as an excuse for remaining within. They went underneath the Falls in oilskin coats and caps, supplied by the hotel, after which they descended in a lift, and then walked along passages scooped out of the rock, until they were underneath the Falls, which poured over in front of them like a curtain, and then reached a steamboat called “The Maid of the Mist.”

When you came to me, I was willing to promise anything if you would
“About seven o’clock last night the Martians came out of the cylinder,
At last we arrived at the Governor’s house. Mrs. Unterberger welcomed me with a bouquet in her hand, and took me to my apartment. Six rooms had been allotted to the rest of our company at the house of Mr. Langeletti, a rich merchant from Hamburg.


t’other hand to their eyes, walked slow and solemn over there,
hair-ball and said something over it, and then he held it up and
before it was sufficiently cool for the Martians to emerge, or they
daisies than it was being carried. They knew, of course, they must go
three galloped through the open gates of the Oriental College; two


wrist—Hines—and a body might as well try to give Goliar the slip. He
its roadways lay grey and pale under the deep blue sky of the early

I could hear a number of noises almost like those in an engine shed;
creatures more than three times. Twice already the Wicked Witch had

“There is a gentleman with him, mamma,” said Kitty; “who can it be?”
I don’t want to talk much about the next day. I reckon I’ll cut it



Saturday lives in my memory as a day of suspense. It was a day of
“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Who are you, and why do you seek me?”
carried a mahogany cane with a silver head to it. There warn’t no

“No; spirits wouldn’t say, ‘Dern the dern fog.’”
must have begun its course. The fact that it is scarcely one seventh of

Mme. Beurgier has invented a new pastime. Having become[382] a strong adept of spiritualism, she occupies herself with table-turning, and is always discovering some new occult genius, who promises to show her some wonderful manifestations from spirit land. At night she frightens out of her wits poor Mrs. Serebriakoff, whose apartment was next to hers, by conversing with the spirits of the defuncts, who guide her in every smallest action of her life. She had been very sulky and cross for some time past, and said that the spirits advised her to leave Khabarovsk as fast as possible. I did not try to detain her, most certainly. Her luggage was already sent to the railway station, when she came up to bid me good-bye, and when I asked her if she would write to me from time to time, she replied “No,” curtly. And that was her last word to me. Nevertheless I rushed after her, racing downstairs and kissed her warmly, which softened the poor old lady. She began to weep and went to announce to Sergy that it was beyond her power to leave me. She left us for good, however, a week afterwards.
For three days Dorothy heard nothing from Oz. These were sad days for

[346]
“Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to arrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting between the parties?”
along. I’ll go and stuff the straw into Jim’s clothes to represent his
all. At length, encouraged by the silence, I looked out.
stirring up some way. I said I reckoned I would slip over the river and
“God hath ordered all things well on the voyage. Our hearts (more especially mine) were very cheerful during the storming and raging of the sea; and I have frequently reminded myself of the 46th Psalm with great joy. Praised be God! This ought to be the beginning, middle and end of my letter. If God maketh this only to resound in our hearts, that the Jehovah, our sun and shield, is with us, we can then not only be tranquil but cheerful.
Don’t show this rubbish to your beaus,

a dozen long gasps, his breast lifting the Bible up when he drawed in
Jeruslem or somewheres. But not long, because she says:
Heat-Ray saved them. Had the elevation of the parabolic mirror been a
“I think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet’s height, or rather taller.”
man wanted that was down was sympathy, and the judge said it was so; so
I didn’t hurry; I couldn’t if I’d a wanted to. I took one slow step at
I read considerable to Jim about kings and dukes and earls and such,
“‘I think I’ll make the other a little bigger,’” said the farmer. And
by it—it was only to make sure. So he didn’t pry into my pockets, but
Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent; and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins’s present circumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whom they could give little fortune; and his prospects of future wealth were exceedingly fair. Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with more interest than the matter had ever{156}

counted her head off for the next three days he judged she’d give it up
“Tell the King,” said Schwartz, “that you saw me and that I declared to great and small that they ought to turn from vain idols to the living God, and that from my heart I wish the King would set others in this respect a good example.” “Good, good,” said he, “I will tell him so.”
“My grandfather was at that time the King of the Winged Monkeys which

and closed it. I heard it go into the pantry, and the biscuit-tins

ain’t straight about it.”
This Swiftian quality appears in the present novel as it appears nowhere else in the character of the immortal, the ineffable Mr. Collins. Mr. Collins is really great; far greater than anything Addison ever did, almost great enough for Fielding or for Swift himself. It has been said that no one ever was like him. But in the first{xvii} place, he was like him; he is there—alive, imperishable, more real than hundreds of prime ministers and archbishops, of “metals, semi-metals, and distinguished philosophers.” In the second place, it is rash, I think, to conclude that an actual Mr. Collins was impossible or non-existent at the end of the eighteenth century. It is very interesting that we possess, in this same gallery, what may be called a spoiled first draught, or an unsuccessful study of him, in John Dashwood. The formality, the under-breeding, the meanness, are there; but the portrait is only half alive, and is felt to be even a little unnatural. Mr. Collins is perfectly natural, and perfectly alive. In fact, for all the “miniature,” there is something gigantic in the way in which a certain side, and more than one, of humanity, and especially eighteenth-century humanity, its Philistinism, its well-meaning but hide-bound morality, its formal pettiness, its grovelling respect for rank, its materialism, its selfishness, receives exhibition. I will not admit that one speech or one action of this inestimable man is incapable of being reconciled with reality, and I should not wonder if many of these words and actions are historically true.
to cook yer! What we got to do is to go as near as the ground’ll let
“And I am going to ask him to give me a heart,” said the Woodman.
“Oh, indeed!” exclaimed the man. “Are you sure that Oz will see you?”
Then it was, and then only, that he realised something of the full
The chief of the Japanese army, Viscount Kawakami, who belonged to the small number of Japs well disposed to Russia, came to Khabarovsk during Sergy’s absence and dropped a card for me.
They began to suffer the beginnings of hunger; the night was cold, and



October 19th.—To-day the Resident gave a grand dinner to my husband, a Lucullus-like feast. Sergy was entertained in great state by his host, who did things royally. The marble steps of the wide staircase were decorated with barefooted lackeys in showy livery and powdered wigs, standing all the way up at equal distances. The brilliantly lighted reception-rooms of the Palace were full of elegantly dressed gentlemen and ladies in low dresses, showing all their jewellery and shoulders. The table was beautifully laid; before each stool stood a native servant. Champagne flowed abundantly, but Sergy was too hot to enjoy the meal, for there are no punkahs in Java, because the Dutch find that these huge fans tend to induce bald heads.
alive.”

On landing we took the Elevated, which brought us in a few minutes to Brighton Beach, a sea-side resort, the meeting-place for members of fashionable high life. We walked along the sea-shore and met ladies and gentlemen in bathing suits, and bare-legged children with toy spades, playing merrily with sand and bright sea-washed shells. We found ourselves soon in the midst of a large fair with all sorts of show-tents of various shapes, displaying brilliant banners, and queer little booths where you could get your fortune told. The feast was in full swing. We looked at the many merry-go-rounds, flying wooden horses, donkey races, etc. We mounted, for fun, the flying horses, and had a good gallop. We walked for nearly half-an-hour, exposed to the rays of the pitiless sun, in search of a restaurant; we had eaten nothing since our breakfast and were horribly hungry. Mr. Holland, who was completely ruled by his imperious spouse, at times had rebellious fits; he wanted to dine in one place, his wife in another, which made them both cross. He wrangled for about a quarter-of-an-hour; I was a good deal flushed and so weary that I could scarcely drag myself along. I wasn’t able to bear the heat and the fatigue any longer and begged Mr. Holland, who led the party, to take pity on us and pause to draw breath, but he paid no attention whatever to my entreaties and pushed on stubbornly, both hands in his pockets, panting like an engine and mopping his forehead from time to time. There was nothing to do but walk on with a sigh of submission. Mrs. Holland got her way in the end, and announced, in a tone which didn’t suffer contradiction, that she would enter the first hotel on our way. We stopped before the porch of the Oriental Hotel, and were told by the porter that there was a table d’hôte at the hotel, at which the lodgers only could partake. We were ready to retreat, famished and awfully disappointed, but Mrs. Holland, flying into a violent temper, forced herself in, declaring authoritatively, “Here we are, and here we remain!” and made her entrance into the hotel with the step and mien of a woman perfectly determined to have her dinner. Whilst she went to speak to the manager, we came into a large entrance hall, where a long row of negro boys were ranged along the walls, armed with cleaning brushes. They rushed at us and began to dust our clothes. Mrs. Holland must have had a very persuasive way with the head-waiter, for she returned triumphant. We had a very[325] good dinner to which we did ample honour, and were in no way bashful about our appetites. Fortified by our meal, we soon recovered our good spirits, and went by train to Brooklyn. We crossed East River to New York on a ferry full of passengers, horses and carriages. The ferry was sumptuous, the walls of the state cabin entirely of looking-glass.
knees, and play something on him. I waited, and it seemed a good while,
go to sleep again, when I noticed how still it was—didn’t seem to be
“But I thought you had gone to visit the Wicked Witch of the West.”
sea, would begin to return; the pulse of life, growing stronger and
Some of the passengers were of opinion that this firing came from
mile further up the river. Who told you this was Goshen?”
I explained hastily that I had to leave my home, and so secured the dog
rainstorm, before I thought of the danger my joints had rusted, and I
for prosecuting this flight. He urged the matter upon them.
“Unable to utter a syllable.”
him up, just set and stared and stared, and let him clip along, and I
Previous to the tax, the 32 millions landed revenue, used to cost, annually, to the landlord and farmer, 9 or 10 millions, paid to the cultivators, and laid out in other expences. Such is the rate; nearly one third of the revenue, (See A. Young’s Political Arithmetic.) Before the tax, industry must have laid out amongst[70] the handicraftsmen, nine or ten of her 32 millions.
of the houses.

There were cabs, carriages, shop-carts, waggons, beyond counting; a

languishy, so—R-o-o-meo! that is the idea; for Juliet’s a dear sweet
the woodpile where the steamboats lands, I worked along under the trees
“God have mercy upon us!”
us, and ever and again a bright green vapour drove up like a veil

The Scarecrow looked at her reproachfully, and answered:
Doljik is a delightful place. The castle, a stately white mansion of commanding appearance, is very grand with its suite of lofty rooms; portraits of ancestors, the former Galitzines, very good-looking all of them, adorn the walls. The park is beautiful, with long alleys of elm and oak and vast lawns with skilfully sorted flower-borders, I had a doll’s house in the park, furnished with every convenience, with a garden of my own in which I spent happy hours gardening eagerly, weeding[16] and watering, I also bestowed a great part of my affection on pet animals: dogs, cats, squirrels and tame rabbits. My brothers and I were fond of all kinds of fun; early in the morning we used to start for the meadows with baskets to gather mushrooms for our breakfast, and went for rambles in the woods. We also did a lot of fishing and bathing. My parents presented me with a prefect dream of a pony. How proud I felt when I was lifted on my “Scotchy’s” back for my first ride!
“It’s a pity they make themselves so unapproachable,” he said. “It


Bathing hours are very gay on the beach. A crowd of people from all parts of the world are to be met there. Amongst the lady-bathers an American actress, wearing a white tight-fitting bathing costume, is the main attraction for the moment. I ordered myself a similar costume, which led to a very unpleasant incident. One morning after my bath, I was returning to my cabin with my soaked bathing-costume, clinging to my body. The bathing establishment was especially crowded that day, and the woman on service, who happened to be on my way, handed me the key of my cabin and led me through the throng, whilst two young ladies, seeing this favouritism, swelled with resentment at having to wait their turn longer than I. “Well,” said one of them to her companion in Russian, throwing a murderous glance at me, “It is known that such creatures as this eccentric girl are always served the first; courtesans certainly know how to take care of themselves!” I had great trouble in controlling myself not to give her a good shaking. It appeared that these unpleasant compatriots of mine, who had so badly guessed my social position, were the noisy musical tenants of the Villa Gaston, who exasperated me daily with their scales and exercises. I shall have my revenge the first time I meet them. This occurred on the following day. The young ladies recognised me when I was going out to take my bath, and desirous to repair their silly mistake, they saluted me obsequiously, colouring to their hair, but I pretended not to see them and didn’t recognise their bow.
I think everyone expected to see a man emerge—possibly something a


[42]
I reckon I was up in the tree two hours; but I didn’t see nothing, I
harrow, as you may say—and it ain’t no slouch of a harrow, nuther, you
strangers; peck out their eyes and tear them to pieces.”
every minute by so many thousands of miles, came the Thing they were
“The Phelpses, down yonder.”
The next morning Sergy went with the first train to Tokio, the metropolis of Japan, which is three-quarters of an hour’s drive by railway from Yokohama, to call upon Mr. Khitrovo, the Russian Ambassador to Japan.


⸺ between England and France.	123
Then she came out again to the Munchkins and said:

The crowd swayed a little, and I elbowed my way through. Every one
Huck’s Father.—The Fond Parent.—Reform.

Then the baldhead says: “No! you can’t mean it?”

tallow candles, and a tin candlestick, and a gourd, and a tin cup, and
THE next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins made his declaration in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of time, as his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and having no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at the moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the observances which he supposed a regular part of the business. On finding Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth,{133} and one of the younger girls together, soon after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words,—

and so on, but we had enemies which he called magicians; and they had





dry shucks sound like you was rolling over in a pile of dead leaves; it

City, with the closed shops, the houses locked up and the blinds drawn,
this London are miles and miles—hundreds of miles—and a few days rain
“On the Stairs.”


manage so the hair-ball would think it was good. He said he would split

“Oh, shucks, Huck Finn, if I was as ignorant as you I’d keep

Hair brown, eyes blue, by nature somewhat green.
mooning around, first to one rat-hole and then another, till he’d been
Piling up the fire.
Now, out of these 6 or 700,000l. in money, which I believe are really and annually imported into England, what quantity is sent to foreign markets,—not, indeed, before its value is considerably advanced by the workmanship?—But, if this metal be so precious, why part with it when once acquired? Why not employ the workman upon objects, the price of which would have received a ten-fold increase by his labour? Why should these continual prophanations of the sacred metal be permitted? Why give encouragement to that kind of prostitution of gildings of all sorts, which daily consume such quantities of gold? It is said, that in Birmingham alone, they consume 30,000l. worth per annum:—And shall it be on a metal thus lavished away, shall it be on that pretended balance, that England will build her resources, and the security of her creditors?—In what consists, then, the wealth of the nation, that wealth which is truly independent of all circumstances, and which will ever be superior to the national wants?




the willows east of the house, to a shallow lake that was five mile
give him five cents to keep quiet, and said we would all go home and
allies began to work their overthrow. Already when I watched them they
“The praise bestowed on the heathens of this country[Pg 153] by many of our historians is reflected by a close (I might almost say a superficial) inspection of their lives. Many historical works are more like a romance than history. Many gentlemen here are astonished how some historians have prostituted their talents by writing fables.
the cabin?”
Now they courted an encounter with the Force Giants. They were soon satisfied, for thousands of them came at terrific speed the moment they attacked one. That first one had floated into range as they threw a searchlight on it; then, as it began to color with the deadly violet and red destruction, a tiny projectile was launched at it. Not more than six inches long by two in diameter it raced at its target at nearly a thousand miles a second. It was carefully followed by the anxious watchers at the ship's electroscopes—it reached the floating Thing, and exploded.
china fences around them; and many cows and sheep and horses and pigs
his bed: why, all you got to do is to lift up the bedstead and slip off

poor Miss Watson done to you that you could see her nigger go off right

together; what do you think?”
Secondly, We have already seen that the loss of the lender, in all cases, flows essentially from the nature of his capital; that it is inseparable from the advance of prices, whether that advance originates from an accession of wealth, or is produced by taxes, or brought on by monopoly; and that besides, by lending to the State, with the certainty that the State could not pay the interest[223] of the loan without the assistance of an import, he has beforehand submitted to the effects of an impost indispensable to his main object.
KHABAROVSK


a friendly little nod, whirled around on her left heel three times, and
Towards evening we approached the great Hindoo-Chinese city. We are now in the neighbourhood of the equator, at the distance of half a degree only. We have the pilot on board, because this port is dangerous, many vessels having perished here. We entered the bay with some difficulty, and passed before the wreck of a ship. We dropped anchor amongst a number of steamers of different nationalities. The harbour is beautiful and traversed in all directions by canoes mounted by natives, whose want of dress amused me: it was a mere fig-leaf of coloured rag.
“I don’t like that shooting from behind a bush. Why didn’t you step

Then I saw them dimly, colossal figures of grey, magnified by the mist.


And I _did_ start to tell him; but he shut me up, and says:
“A man who had felt less might.”
your silver shoes he was very much interested. At last I told him about
to the hut by the ash-hopper for to examine it. We went through the


somebody sung out?”
delivering their incomprehensible message. Then the door behind him
“Alas, alas, our poor brother—gone, and we never got to see him; oh,
and he always done it; and some of them he hugged and kissed as many as
out what was going on in the town; but by-and-by she dropped on to pap
can send it to him in a pie; it’s mostly done that way. And I’ve et

were gathering about the sinking sun.
city with myself. . . .
watermelon.
or more of flower pots containing orchids, angrily expostulating with
peering up.
move. And after that I abandoned altogether the idea of escaping by
off the grease and clay, and looked so sorry that I thought I would
WAYSIDE WORK.
I and the artilleryman, seated on the step of the drinking fountain,
children that way. It injured the frauds some; but the old fool he
Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, begged her Ladyship to take some refreshment: but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely, declined eating anything; and then, rising up, said to Elizabeth,—


“Well, that’s so. You’ve had to keep in the woods all the time, of


and he called the turnips and stuff “julery,” and we would go to the
“If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and me, we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives; for a whole day’s tête-à-tête between two women can never end without a quarrel. Come as soon as you can on the receipt of this. My brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the officers. Yours ever,
Head; so she took courage and answered:
Be it supposed, nevertheless, for this is my main object, that the abolition of the taxes will lower the price of the mass of taxed commodities.—The same force of nature, which, without the intervention of any one, had raised the generality of untaxed objects up to the rate necessary to balance the imaginary value, which the tax added to the others, would operate in a contrary sense, and diminish, insensibly, the price of those articles which might have been overlooked:—What would be the advantage accruing to the State from a general and proportionable decrease?—Let us not think yet of the pretended profit that would result[31] therefrom, in favour of trade, with relation to foreign competition: this matter requires a particular article. The only business now in hand, is to examine, whether, in case the reimbursement should be effected, this general decrease of prices, which I have just granted, could be effectually obtained.
Then Toto came up, and immediately began to bark, but Dorothy made him
the dollar I got from the judge.) I said it was pretty bad money, but

de raf’ go a-hummin’ down de river, en leave you en de canoe behine in
Damrell?—s’I, he’s crazy, s’I—them’s the very words I said. You all
“What made you think I’d like it?”
mob, screaming and trying to get out of the way; and every window along

another second it had lifted a bar of white aluminium into sight,
Hill was impassable owing to several overturned horses, and my brother
the mark upon her forehead. The child did not know this, and was full
see that wreck laying there so mournful and lonesome in the middle of

“He made a little mistake, to be sure; but it is to the credit of his modesty.”
did. But, looking, I presently saw something stirring within the
bother no more about it, but after this always do whichever come
Then he slopped right along and went away, and pretty soon the trees
Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred thousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase an estate, but did not live to do it. Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, and sometimes made choice of his county; but, as he was now provided with a good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the remainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to purchase.

The order was given to our cavalry to attack the twenty Turkish posts who guarded the frontier at nightfall; only three of them defended themselves, all the others were taken unawares; being plunged into deep sleep, they were taken captives. It was the first act of open hostility.
them weeks and weeks and weeks, and for ever and ever. Why, look at one
says the great tragedy will be performed only two nights more, on
It was sweet to have Sergy home again, but he soon announced to me that it was necessary for him to return to Alexandropol for the whole winter, perhaps, on account of the hostile attitude of the Turks. That was a source of great affliction to me. Less than ever I was able to spare him, and told him that nothing could induce me to remain alone in Tiflis and that I was determined to follow him to the Turkish frontier. For his sake I would gladly travel to the end of the world! After many discussions Sergy yielded.
In the morning we went out to the woodpile and chopped up the brass
the trial; but then there was ways to put it off a long time, and Judge
October 12th.—The heat is something dreadful, and I had to converse with Mr. Rousseau. After tiffin I shut myself up, having decided to keep to my cabin for the remainder of the voyage, until we reached Singapore.
“Many makes it out of iron-rust and tears; but that’s the common sort
dressed in white linen from head to foot, like the old gentleman, and
“Rome, si tu te plains que c’est-là te trahir,
after the fighting began. There was a little two-wheeled cart inscribed

no trouble to make the balloon. But in all this country there is no gas
flapdoodle about its being a sore trial for him and his poor brother to
he was, if possible, held in still deeper reverence by the Natives of this Country, of every degree and every sect; and their unbounded confidence in his integrity and truth was, on many occasions, rendered highly beneficial to the public Service.

I did not know it, but that was the last civilised dinner I was to eat



“_They_ told you I would. Whoever told you’s _another_ lunatic. I never
unfathomable darkness of empty space. You know how that blackness looks
“They’re—they’re—are you the watchman of the boat?”

enough to tar and feather poor friendless cast-out women that come
another of the Winkies, who was a goldsmith, had made an axe-handle of
Shall not all my fears be o’er,
continued, and he pushed so hard on his long pole that it stuck fast in
On the 4th July, the day of the Anniversary of the Independence of America, we were wakened in the morning by crackers and rockets. In the afternoon the Hollands took us to Coney Island, a fashionable watering-place situated a few miles out of town. We took the tram to reach the port, and drove through streets bedecked with flags. We took places on board the Taurus, a pleasure steamer black with people going out for a boating picnic. The boat had a holiday air about it. The passengers were all workmen with their families, gay, noisy people all of them. On the stern a troupe of Neapolitans danced the tarantella. Leaning on the railing we admired the immense bay of New York, swarming with ships of different nationalities, amidst which we saw our Bourgogne on the point of leaving for Europe. From afar we heard the cannons saluting our Russian cruiser, the Admiral Nakhimoff, which was entering the port just then. The wind rose suddenly, and it took[324] more than two hours before we could land at Manhattan Beach. At last we succeeded in dropping anchor. The boat was overcrowded, and all the people on the deck made a rush towards the stern, making the ship incline on one side, and I had to cling fast to Sergy’s arm not to be swept overboard.
ATHENS
[12]
it made me deef with the noise and pretty near blind with the smoke,



July 4th.—A terrible night had followed. The ship rolled over fifty degrees from the perpendicular on each side. The situation was becoming more and more perilous. The shouts of the watch-officer mingled with the whistle of the quartermaster, and the shrieks of the siren were something awful. Hearing a commotion above, shouting and rushing footsteps, I thought we were going to sink. I dressed in a hurry and rushed to the staircase, where I met Sergy, who persuaded me to return to my cabin and lie down, but I felt it was quite useless to try to sleep.
We went to visit the Christian schools in the afternoon. In the Catholic school one directly sees the active intervention of the clergy. The Archbishop Melchisedec takes a great part in the education of the children; the director and the tutors are all priests. The best scholars are sent to Rome and Venice to finish their studies. The pupils repeated compliments of welcome to us in French, and expressed their gratitude to our Emperor for the protection that His Majesty accorded to the Christian inhabitants of Erzeroum. The Greek school is also considered as a part of the church, but the priests do not assist in the teaching. The director of this school showed us his establishment in detail. It contains two hundred scholars of both sexes. Till the age of twelve boys and girls study together; they are taught both Greek and Turkish. This school being of the Orthodox creed, received a monthly subsidy of fifteen francs before the beginning of the war, now my husband has offered the sum of four thousand francs yearly as a support to the school. In the evening the Greek deputy came to thank Sergy for this rich offering; they told him that the remembrance of his generosity would remain for ever in their hearts as also in the hearts of their children.




Then at the bottom was the biggest line of all—which said:
coat it over so and make a ball of it. It was as big a fish as was ever
and so can’t rest easy in its grave, and has to go about that way every
The prince’s marked attention to me soon became the topic of much gossip. He was hit, I knew he was, and I, too, was not very far from being in love with him. At the end of the season the prince’s white skirt began to be slightly grizzly, and as I had remarkably sharp eyes and a tongue to match, I looked him over critically and declared that I would not dance with him until he had changed his skirt for a new one. Brazen girl that I was to say such shameless things!
From Tiflis we went straight on to Paris, and mamma returned to Russia with my cousin.

We arrived in the morning at Krasnovodsk and walked to the train which was waiting for us near the pier. During the short walk I had to fight against the wind, which did its utmost to carry off my hat, and blew my umbrella into a sail.

people running towards us. And very faint now, but very distinct
“Has anybody been killed this year, Buck?”

the reason why. Say, how much you got in your pocket? I want it.”

In a subsequent letter he has been referring to the dismissal of some one, unworthy doubtless, from the work. He believes that God will bring good even out of this evil.
There are different means of locomotion through the great extent of the Exhibition, beginning by the Tonqinoise “puss-puss,” to the last technical invention—the “trottoir roulant,” moving sidewalks, three rows of which run along without stopping. The first row moves very slowly, and it is easy to jump on it; the second row moves faster, and the third one races with the swiftness of an express train. Great agility is needed to pass from one trottoir to the other, and it happens sometimes that the backs of clumsy pedestrians rest on one trottoir, whilst his legs are being dragged on the neighbouring one.
blamed country and never come a-near it agin. Them’s the very words. I

“She was the Wicked Witch of the East, as I said,” answered the little
“Do you go to church, too?”


on a plate, and comb up, and go to bed and get up regular, and be
towards the park were growing black. All about me the red weed
fetch her in and hide her about two mile below town.

How on earth could I face him? My only hope was that he would refuse, but he answered that he would be delighted to come. What was I to do? I could not plead a sudden indisposition, mamma wouldn’t believe it, for I was so distressingly healthy in appearance. Small wonder then that my heart sank within me when Ladigenski came walking into the restaurant, clean-shaven, a white gardenia in his buttonhole. I was in the most awfully awkward position, and felt upon thorns all through dinner. Ladigenski settled himself beside me, perfectly at his ease; his voice was as usual cool and quiet, but I could not pluck up courage to look at him, and steadily refused to meet his eyes, assuming a wooden expression, and remained tongue-tied, giving my whole attention to the contents of my plate, with a longing to crawl under the table.
in his hair and the other beating invisible things. His paroxysm of
He hadn’t been up town at all.
[109]
de fog?”
“Yours,” etc.
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
On the 6th May, the Emperor’s namesday, Sergy landed at Petropavlovsk, the capital of Kamtchatka, with only 400 inhabitants in it. There was still snow on the ground in this polar region, and the breaking of ice had not yet commenced. Visitors are quite unknown in this desolate place, and Sergy’s arrival created the greatest excitement, nothing like it had been known for years. There, in far off Kamtchatka, the inhabitants don’t hear much of what happens in the world. All the town was upside down. That same day the population of Petropavlovsk celebrated the second centenary of the occupation of the territory of Kamtchatka by the Russians. After stepping on shore, Sergy and his suite were driven to the cathedral to hear mass, in sleighs drawn by a team of dogs, who barked and made a terrible noise during the service. Before the arrival of my husband the inhabitants of that dreary, God-forsaken place were as if cut off from everything, and had no communication whatever with the outer world for several months. Whilst the authorities of the town were presented to my husband, they asked in the first place what day it was—they had confounded the dates—and then inquired if the Empress had not given birth to an heir to the throne. When Sergy told the magistrates that it was high time to join Petropavlovsk by telegraphic cable with the other parts of the world, they replied that they had done perfectly well without any telegraph, and would continue to do without it. Some time before, an officer had been sent by my husband to teach the inhabitants of Petropavlovsk target-shooting. In the first place they asked their teacher if he could hit the eye of a sable at three hundred paces with his gun, and the officer replied that he couldn’t. “Then we have nothing to learn from you,” exclaimed his unsubmissive pupils, “for we never miss our aim even with our old-fashioned guns!”
quite without the quality of remorse. I saw myself then as I see myself

them in a great crowd to the Palace of Oz.
up from Woolwich and Chatham to cover Kingston. There was an exchange
what I want is my Sunday-school book; and if a pick’s the handiest
buying the house; I know it, because she told me so herself.”
dollars (only she got it ten) and all about pap and what a hard lot he
high. We had a rough time getting to the top, the sides was so steep
“He’s fallen in the pit!” cried some one.
There was another clan of aristocracy around there—five or six
We were just in time for an early lunch when we arrived at the hotel. Fruit was served to us before the meal, which ended with iced-tea. The American custom is having a vast number of small dishes, each counting separately.
When we arrived at Naples a whole legion of porters assailed us. We took an apartment at the Grand Hôtel, situated on the New Quay. We had a disagreeable surprise when we awoke next morning; a grey mist veiled Mount Vesuvius, the sky and sea were of leaden hue, and rain began to fall, which is very rare in this place. We braved the elements, and went in the afternoon to try and find out what has become of Schildecker, one of my most devoted lovers in the blessed days of my girlhood. We had exhausted every means in our power to discover his whereabouts and have been all over Naples to find him, but nobody could tell us anything about him. We called at the Transatlantic Bank where Schildecker had been employed, but there also nothing had been heard of him for nearly ten years. We got, however, the address of one of Schildecker’s friends, who perhaps could say where he was. But Sergy felt tired, and said that we could make far better use of our time than spending it in search of Schildecker. I despaired of finding him again, but did not insist, fearing to displease my husband.
_don’t_ git mad; didn’t you have it in your mind to hook the money and
for us to see into the side roads of the place. In Sheen my companion
“Yes, a duke’s different. But not very different. This one’s a middling
August 28th.—I accompanied my husband to the camp this morning. The soldiers cheered loudly as we passed. After the manœuvres my husband invited to dinner all the commanders of the troops.
IN THE STORM.

But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She seldom listened to anybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary at all.

to be one of the roughest Sundays I had run across yet.

first one shin and then the other one, and at last he let out with his


to go four or five mile they was booming mad, and gave us a cussing,
A body of a thousand soldiers, was sent back to Russia, via India and Odessa, on a ship belonging to the Volunteer Fleet. It is for the first time that they have been sent by water; they had to travel before through the whole continent of Oriental Siberia. At the moment when the boat was to start, one of the soldiers was arrested. His crime had just been discovered: he had poisoned his wife, wanting to return solo to his native land. He was already shouting hurrah in chorus with his comrades, when he was seized and conducted to prison.

lay for them desperadoes, and saying it warn’t but a few minutes to
“Roun’ de which?”
George Allen.

bothersome lot they’ll be, too—eating up everything, and always trying

life—come, give us your hand, Duke, and le’s all be friends.”
and the place rocked with that beating thud. Through the aperture in

November 17th.—The wind has changed during the night, bringing bad weather. After dinner the captain came to ask how I was and told me that the lights of Petrovsk had been sighted, and that another half-hour will find us on shore. We had four hours to wait before the train started.
worked all right and he managed to set a nigger free that was already
As soon as I was in the old gentleman he locked the door and barred it

CHISWICK PRESS:—CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO.


darkness, to the little table where the siphon stood, while Ogilvy
another man, and kills him; then that other man’s brother kills _him;_
whisky, and then I was moved to change my clothes.
as I wanted it. Then it was most daylight and everybody went to bed,

And wondrous it was to men who had never seen water except as it had been manufactured in their great plants for community use. No oceans, no rivers, no lakes had there been in their system for over five billion years.

changes of pressure do not seem to have affected their health at all
and gratefully sensible of the public benefits which

But the first 5 millions of the charitable tax could not be paid, without an advanced price of 8⅓ per cent. on all the productions of the earth, without raising the wheat from 40s. to 43s. 4d.—it will then be necessary to increase its price by as much again; it must advance from 43s. 4d. to 46s. 8d. in order that the tax be paid without foreign assistance. Then all will be settled, regulated, balanced, and paid between the capitalists of land and those of industry; but as no objects will have been taxed but those of luxury, how long will it be before the people, the labouring man can see justice done to him?—Ten popular insurrections perhaps will be required to extort it. Yet let us suppose that the very first proves[215] sufficient to procure it complete, that is, that their wages be raised 16⅔ per cent. as the tax after all the necessary re-actions has increased the price of the produce of their labour:—in this case, instead of the 20 millions allowed before to each of the two classes of working men, cultivators and mechanics, they will then receive 23,333,333l. 13s. 4d.—But how will you wrest from the hands of the land proprietor 3,333,333l. 13s. 4d. out of the portion which he was obliged to lay by, that the tax might be paid by his consumption, without his advancing again the price of his commodities in such a proportion as will return him the new sum which he is forced to pay?—And were he not to augment again the price of his commodities, would not then a new tax become necessary to supply the deficit which the rise of wages of the labouring men must occasion in the consumption of their employers?—The land proprietor will then add still to the price of his goods;—but will not this addition, equally necessary as the two first, be productive of a further necessity of raising in proportion the price of labour, the wages of the labouring man?—No doubt; and another insurrection would procure justice, if the thought did not occur at last of observing, that the class of labouring men being, before the tax, in possession[216] of one third of the general revenue, forms, in this respect, a third interest equal to one half of the two other. Now, the tax having enforced an advance in prices of 16⅔, to shelter the two former from its effect, there must also be, in favour of the third interest, a third increase of 8⅓, which rising at last to 25 per cent. more, the price of labour, as that of its produce, both in regard to land and industry, will exactly leave to each of the three interests, under the denomination of twenty-five, the same comforts as each of them enjoyed under that of twenty before the tax was laid.
through their fingers and let them jingle down on the floor; and the

sure I do not want to kill anybody, even to see Aunt Em again.”
meedyevil armor for Richard III. and t’other chap, and a long white
“It don’t make no difference what he _said_—that ain’t the thing. The
too, piled up perfectly exact, on each corner of the table. One was a
“Whenever she spoke in a low voice”	166
A General maxim, almost universally adopted beyond contradiction, and the foundation of an hundred regulations, enforced from pole to pole, is, that it is essential for all national commodities to be at the lowest price, in order that foreign trade may turn out to the best advantage; that is to say, for the native traders to be able to dispose abroad of the products of national industry, at a cheaper rate than any other nation can sell those of her own. Certain it is, that the less price national commodities will bring, the less of the products of national industry will be necessary to pay them off, the more of course will there remain of those products to stock the[271] foreign markets, and the more also will the foreign purchaser be gratified by the reduced price at which they may be given, to the detriment of the land proprietor of the nation; this is so self-evident that it cannot be withstood. This, methinks, is carrying to an excess the principles of Christian charity, if the Legislators are land proprietors; it is a shameful abuse of power, if the Legislators are at the head of manufactures; and in either case one must be blind to the necessity of keeping up an even balance between agriculture and industry.—Had not Nature militated under hand, and with some advantage against the dreams of speculators in this respect, and against the much more dangerous surreptions of cupidity, to what state of abjection and misery would not agriculture be now reduced in all countries!
different from us? You answer me that.”

“Well,” cried Elizabeth, “have it as you choose. He shall be mercenary, and she shall be foolish.”
England, it is true, suffered no damage, when a prodigious quantity of English goods, which are not comprehended in the modest balance with France, as stated by Sir Charles Whitworth, because they were introduced into France by smugglers, were sold nevertheless, without much ado, all over that kingdom, and particularly in Paris, publicly advertised on the shop-boards, in large gold letters;—but had not France some reason to think herself ill used, when an equal quantity of French goods, introduced also by smugglers into England, without any information given to Sir Charles, ceased to pay the value of the goods smuggled from England, and sold publicly all over France, and when, instead of a small balance, sometimes given, sometimes received, France found herself obliged to remit to London an enormous sum in hard cash, for payments which she had hitherto discharged in merchandise?
IN LONDON.

it happens that we are three times the slaves of the owner of the
give Uncle Harvey and William my love and a kiss, and say I’ve run over

Peter Wilks—and you pays your money and you takes your choice!”

I began to understand the position. I ceased my laboured reasoning,

As the Monkey King finished his story Dorothy looked down and saw the
by carefully picking their way, they got safely along until they
dreary and gray our homes are, we people of flesh and blood would
peeped through a crack of the dining-room door, and see the men that
“I’ve thought of something. Is there anybody here that helped to lay
roosting comfortable, and took him along. Pap always said, take a
“Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and let Mr. Collins and me have a little conversation together.{145}”


_The World-Renowned Tragedians_
“Oh yes,” said Elizabeth drily—“Mr. Darcy is uncommonly kind to Mr. Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him.”
 XVII. THE “THUNDER CHILD”.
All the operations of Nature are slow, gradual, imperceptible; and how is it possible to trace her out in her progress, when, in the measures which lead her to the general good, she has recourse only to that multitude of private[68] interests which seemingly tend to destroy it? Yet, in order that we may form some idea of her operations in the point in question, let us execute, in an instant, that which she would effect in half a century, if it were possible within that space of time to incur a debt of 420 millions, without any augmentation or decrease taking place in the landed revenue.
In the dead waste and middle of the night, when churchyards yawn
warn’t borrowing, it was stealing. He said we was representing
“I’ll answer by doing the Highland fling or the sailor’s hornpipe; and

XXXV.	Naples	224
people to move now or to take refuge in their cellars as soon as the

After midnight the people on shore went to bed, and then for two or
CHAPTER XV

“You must have been thinking again,” remarked the Tin Woodman.
another of these creatures appeared darkly in the deep shadow of the

Nor would it be less strange to persist in setting the interest of the people in opposition to that of the Exchequer, if it were possible to reconcile them together, instead of rendering, almost on every object at present, the infamous trade of informers more lucrative than labour.
“The Apothecary came”

and that’s enough for _them;_ they’re young and spry, and k’n easy earn
In the year 1699 the exports of England to France amounted to 287,050l. and her imports from France to 94,641l:—
it, too.
wet, and with little pools of water about me on the stair carpet. I got
wigwam to think. But I couldn’t come to nothing. I thought till I wore



“Oh, yes! You will only think I feel more than I ought to do when I tell you all.”
littered-up place, and had ink marks, and handbills with pictures of
off the scent.”
silver oil-can, inlaid with gold and set with precious jewels.
At noon they sat down by the roadside, near a little brook, and Dorothy

Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered only by a slight inclination of the head. She saw that he wanted to engage her on the old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge him. The rest of the evening passed with the appearance, on his side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguish Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a mutual desire of never meeting again.
THE WORK OF FIFTEEN DAYS.
It was a fortnight since Mrs. Bennet had been down stairs, but on this happy day she again took her seat at the head of her table, and in spirits oppressively high. No sentiment of shame gave a damp to her triumph.{380} The marriage of a daughter, which had been the first object of her wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now on the point of accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran wholly on those attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and servants. She was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a proper situation for her daughter; and, without knowing or considering what their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and importance.

the series of events that was to topple that social order headlong. If

all kinds of old shackly wagons, and on horses. The circus would leave


It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the satisfaction of Miss Bennet’s mind gave such a glow of sweet animation to her face, as made her look handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped her turn was coming soon. Mrs. Bennet could not give her consent, or speak her approbation in terms warm enough to satisfy her feelings, though she talked to Bingley of nothing else, for half an hour; and when Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed how really happy he was.
 
around them, and their hair down their backs. They all asked me
been painted yellow in the country of the Winkies and blue in the
wife as soon as possible, the axe slipped all at once and cut off my
away she saw a Scarecrow, placed high on a pole to keep the birds from

the crescent moon hung faint and pale above the smoke of Weybridge and

my cousins and she would have fled thence; but it seemed to me I might
hat was laying on the floor—an old black slouch with the top caved in,
THE PILLAR BEHIND IT IS ONE ON WHICH THE RAJAH DESIGNED TO ERECT HIS MEMORIAL. IT PROVED TOO NARROW FOR THE PURPOSE
pickins we’ve overlooked in the staterooms, and shove for shore and
was halfway across the room there came a great shriek from the wind,
Before dinner we sat on the boulevard at a small table. We ordered coffee, and listened to exciting Hungarian czardas that Tziganes were playing at a neighbouring restaurant on our left. On our right a troup of Neapolitan singers sang national songs in chorus.


The man pushed against the crowd towards the gate of the corner house.
was to blame, somehow. I judged that that piece of paper meant that

“Stand by you! indeed I will. They sha’n’t touch a hair of your head!”
“That is because you have no brains” answered the girl. “No matter how
Christ my trust is dead no more,


let on it’s a lightning-rod.”

But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them, laughingly answered,—
was any hole there, because Jim’s counter-pin hung down most to the
“Why, whoever rubs the lamp or the ring. They belong to whoever rubs
[435]
constantly guarded by the yellow Winkies, who were the slaves of the

He made no answer.
“That is a long story,” answered the King, with a winged laugh; “but as
that any great proportion of the population could have been slain. But
“To think I should have lived to be leading such a life, and be
for the house; the wagon was spinning up the road for the village, and
silver and glass table furniture—for in those days even philosophical


until he heard a muffled grating sound and saw the black mark jerk
Hermann’s sole idea of pleasure was making others miserable. He was full of mischief, and took delight in provoking his sister, and teased her constantly. One day he glued the hair of Danys’s favourite doll, and she broke, in revenge, the legs of all the animals in his Noah’s ark.
show what insides _you’ve_ got, too, before long. We aren’t going to be

Providence to lead him the profitable way—meaning the devil, I reckon.
and I told her “no, only coarse-hand,” and then she said the paper
[Image unavailable.]
there and see it was gone, I says to myself, ‘they’ve got into trouble




was no screaming or shouting, but a silence. Then a hoarse murmur and a
There was to be a grand fancy-dress ball at Court, in which I was invited to participate. It was to be one of the best[35] things of the season, one of the eight marvels of the world. The Grand Duke Waldemar, representing the sun, was to open the cortège sitting in a triumphal car drawn by pages and surrounded by twelve sunbeams. I was designed to represent one of them. We were to follow the car in a semi-circle, the tall ones (I being one of the number) in the middle. I had the most bewitching costume that heart of girl could desire. It consisted of a Greek tunic in rose satin, draped on the shoulders with golden gauze; a small sun-dial on the top of my coiffure, powdered with golden powder, was to indicate the hour (mine pointed out six o’clock.) My costume was quite ready, and I gazed at myself in the looking-glass with rapture, arrayed in it. I was a good deal excited about this ball, and could think of nothing else, when suddenly came the tidings of the death of a prince belonging to the Prussian Imperial family, and the ball was put off. I was awfully disappointed and nearly cried my eyes out. I had looked forward to it so!
it; the faces didn’t tell me nothing.
The Rev. Dr. Kerr, the senior chaplain at Fort St. George, who was careful to make the fullest inquiry, and to whom was entrusted the erection of the monument in St. Mary’s Church from the East India Company, paid him a high tribute in a sermon. Speaking of Schwartz, after following his honourable career in the East, he sums up his character in these words:
electricity. In this way the curious parallelism to animal motions,
“You are mistaken. I write rather slowly.”
“So it was—I noticed it. Well, it does beat all that I never thought
Let us state the number of proprietors at 2,000,000, including all their dependents, under any denomination whatever, women, children, chaplains, farmers, physicians, strollers, servants, &c. and their annual expenditure, in the rough produce of the land, at 18 millions, there remains only 32,000,000, which must be paid by the industry, already in advance, of the 12,000,000 exchange granted to the cultivator.[14] It is obvious that I speak here only of that kind of industry which may be productive of exchangeable commodities, even against those of foreign produce.
As to the full acquittal in money, real and effective, of the 2,000,000l. interest, due to Holland for her previous loan, it is improbable, impossible, and useless.

Eternity!” His voice was hoarse and very loud so that my brother could
sense to keep quiet—worrying them with guns and such foolery. And
The hotel is surrounded by galleries on which all the bedrooms open. Our windows look out on the gulf, studded with a multitude of ships. Two British steamers are leaving for America to-night. I do not envy them!

hurrying along the road nearby their stopping place, fleeing from
to his room and begun to paw around there. But I see I couldn’t do


“All right; trot ahead.”
 Tom’s Liberality
One afternoon I sat with a book on the veranda whilst our ladies were out shopping, and Signor Gorgolli, who was quick to take advantage of it, came to keep me company. I grasped the fact that he intended to stay with me, and began to wish the ladies would come back. In the street a hand-organ was reeling out a waltz, and I was reckless enough to give Signor Gorgolli a dance. He put his arm round me and held me very tight. I had done wrong in allowing my hand to stay in his a second or two longer than necessary. Dating from that afternoon he became bolder than ever, and ventured even to press my hand under the table-cloth during dinner. I never heard of such impudence! The matter was going a bit too far, and I began to crush him with my scorn, and soon put him back to his proper place in throwing his photograph, which he had just given me, into the waste-paper basket, whilst he pulled his moustache and looked silly. He left the room feeling terribly snubbed. A week went by and I saw nothing of him. I was awfully glad to be free from his detestable society. He might go to Jericho for what I cared.

right on it; and so _we_ saddle-baggsed; but all of us was saved but


nothing. Then I says: “There’s one more thing—that bag of money.”
on earth dreamed of that unerring missile.
“No,” I says; “I’ll rest a while, I reckon, and go on. I ain’t afeared
To my great delight mamma decided to pass the winter in St. Petersburg. I was enchanted to meet my pages again. We contrived to encounter everywhere. One evening I went to the circus accompanied by my aunt, the Princess Koudasheff, as chaperon. Entering the circus I looked round for my young cavaliers who waited for me at the appointed place of meeting. On our right was an empty box; I signalled to them, and they stepped into it, appropriating it in spite of the energetic protestations of the circus grooms. I enjoyed my pages neighbourhood immensely; we were all of us in buoyant spirits and became wildly gay. I declared suddenly that I should like something to drink, and my worthy aunt, who was propriety incarnate, looked horribly shocked when the pages began to uncork a bottle of lemonade, apprehending that the spectators would take my innocent beverage for champagne.
CHAPTER XVII.
wonderful spread of lights at two o’clock that still night. There
He turns on me, looking pitying enough to make a body cry, and says:

and wherever I run across it, it can have all of _my_ custom every

“Though it is difficult,” said Jane, “to guess in what way he can mean to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his credit.”
_murrey_ in the fess, with a dog, couchant, for common charge, and
“Well, for the life of me I can’t remember when I done it. I could show
Heading to Chapter XV.	89

But she much admired that dark-eyed Greek;
further and further off, and by-and-by, after an hour, I didn’t hear it
caught Toto by the ear, and dragged him into the room again, afterward
tall, rank grass. It was difficult to walk without falling into muddy
loafers, and mashers, and singers—I can imagine them. I can imagine
before he’ll go back. You mark them words—don’t forget I said them.






“What do you mean, Mr. Bennet, by talking in this way? You promised me to insist upon her marrying him.”
The farther I penetrated into London, the profounder grew the




Saying them words put a good idea in my head. I see how maybe I could
After a time the ladder was finished. It looked clumsy, but the Tin

The nation therefore in that year, in spite of its public debt, had almost doubled its wealth, rating the population at 9,350,000; and raised it four-fold, supposing the number reduced to 4,500,000 souls: and in either case, the riches of the State, as well as the national debt, arose and increased from the daily reductions of 4d. to 2d. and of 8d. to 4d. which, since the reign of William to this day, have escaped from that all-devouring canker, commonly called Luxury.

It is useless, in fine, because all accounts whatever are balanced with more ease, in the age we live in, by bills of exchange, than with cash, and because the claims of Holland are more naturally paid off, by another debt due to Great Britain, for the produce of her exports to some other parts of Europe, from whence the Dutch carefully avoid, as much as possible, to import any thing but merchandise.


“Since the night I got killed.”

After having finished our hunt for curios we returned to the hotel just in time for dinner, and went to bed early, having to start at break of day. About the middle of the night the alarm-bell rang. I quickly got out of bed and ran out on to the gallery where I found myself face to face with a scared English lady in a scanty night attire, who told me that a fire had broken out in the neighbouring house. It was soon extinguished and we returned tranquillised to our beds.
and Jim was pleased most to death, and busted out, and says:
“The missionaries have found great numbers of these, in every place at which they have settled, ready to embrace the Protestant faith, or who, having already embraced it, or been brought up in it as servants of Protestant masters, were in need of instruction and of pastors. Willing, therefore, to seek souls whenever they were to be found, they have all voluntarily added the study of Portuguese to that of Malabar and preach and instruct in that language also.
“‘I lay I _make_ you mine!’
He took it and bit it to see if it was good, and then he said he was
horn if I see any danger; but stead of that I will BA like a sheep

is a curious thing that I felt angry with my wife; I cannot account for
“Therefore you have done a great deed, as well as a brave one, in

thought that was the end of me. But the tinsmith happened to come
L.	Paris	277

green lemonade, and when the children bought it Dorothy could see that
on me all de time, en treats me pooty rough, but she awluz said she
The king whirls on me and rips out:
two motor cars. A mile from Edgware the rim of the wheel broke, and the
anyone who is our friend. If you will help us to save him I promise

[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]


mile around. The woods was full of teams and wagons, hitched
“I’m sorry,” said the Scarecrow. “The Lion was a very good comrade for
rubbish and crept beside me in the darkness, inarticulate,

quite frightened when she saw the great pile of shaggy wolves, but the
He come back about ten a little bit uneasy; hadn’t run across Tom’s
it; it ain’t good sense, it ain’t good morals. Ain’t I right?”
companionship of felons on a raft!”
struck out for this town of Goshen.
[395]
looking across space with instruments, and intelligences such as we

crawling up his legs; and then he would give a jump and scream, and say
This table had a cover made out of beautiful oilcloth, with a red and
Bearing bravely his weight of years and some infirmities, Schwartz still pursued his labours of love, encouraging the young converts, warning the unruly and headstrong, tenderly seeking the welfare of the children, and doing his utmost to establish on a sound basis the Church in its sacred offices and work. While diligent in preaching the simple truths of Christianity to the poor and the outcastes, Schwartz proved himself a skilled debater in holding controversy on religious topics with the learned Brahmins. They on their part were perfectly frank with him and respected his willingness to hear any objections they thought well to urge against Christianity. Their attitude may well be expressed in their own words:

and infuriated, were breaking the heads of the people they were called
I could bear it no longer and wrote a volume to him, telling him I wanted him to cheer me up, and that I was looking forward impatiently to seeing him soon. Day by day I waited for his answer; at last the post brought me a letter from him. I tore the envelope open, with trembling hands and scarlet cheeks, but there was nothing in it to gladden my longing eyes or to fill my empty heart. His letter was short and scrappy, with no words of endearment; it might have been written to a sister. He told me so little about himself, and hardly anything at all about myself, and addressed me in such a formal way, ending his letter with sincere regards to me. (I hated sincere regards)!

“Yes,” I says.
So he went to marching up and down, thinking, and frowning horrible
Sergy returned enchanted with the warm reception of the Royal family. At dinner he sat next to the beautiful Countess[214] Barromée. All the ladies wore a daisy pinned on their bodices, in honour of Queen Margaret. When the guests were leaving Monzo, the King, speaking in Russian, bade Sergy adieu, saying Do svidania, which means “good-bye,” and asked Sergy to transmit his best regards to our Emperor.
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]
regard as inferior animals. To carry warfare sunward is, indeed, their

melancholy pilgrimage to the little house at Woking, how busy the
The colour which had been driven from her face returned for half a minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added lustre to her eyes, as she thought for that space of time that his affection and wishes must still be unshaken; but she would not be secure.
“There is some sense in what he says about the girls, however; and, if he is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to discourage him.”
know. But the people remembered him lovingly, and said to one another:
August 14th.—I woke at dawn. The morning dew spread around in a white mist. Somewhere in the distance a cock crowed and another answered the challenge. At seven o’clock I took passage on the steamer Tzarevitch. The weather is splendid, the sea like a mirror. A slight breeze enters my cabin, flapping the muslin curtains. After dinner I went upon deck. On the sky bright stars were shining, and the fresh breeze swept my face.
Out of 70 millions, at which the landed revenue throughout Great Britain is computed,[42] 33 millions are absorbed by the unavoidable expences, and accessary charges attending cultivation, or annexed to the property. The proprietors share among themselves 20 or 25 millions; the other 12 millions go through the hands of farmers, as a very equitable recompence for their trouble, and as a liberal interest for a personal stock of 120 millions necessary to the produce of the revenue. (Vide Mr. Arthur Young.) On the best use possible of these last 120 millions, solely depends the increase of landed profits: but it is only by degrees, and the concurrence of favourable circumstances, that the landed property can effectually receive the increase of the capital, which is calculated to augment that produce.—Does it conduce to the interest of the State, that, till then, the farmer should keep inactive the capital appropriated to so material an object, or that he should lay it out to improve the lands before it is wanted, or that, waiting for the instant of need, he should employ it in such manner as not to have it at command when the needful time is arrived?—This question cannot be answered, I think, but in the negative; and it appears to me, that, on this point at least, I may assert positively, that an establishment, which puts into the hands of the farmer, at the very juncture[43] when he wants it, that portion of his capital which had hitherto been useless, and which however was, till then, (owing to such an establishment) advantageous to some one else, is, of all others, the most profitable, wherever the object is, to give to every capital that degree of activity and utility of which it is susceptible. Therefore, a reimbursement which would deprive the capitalists, farmers, and active proprietors, of a resource equally safe and profitable, would not only prove fatal to the order of citizens especially interested in the landed revenue, but to all those who, whilst the money intended for the improvement of land, is unapplied, make use of it in some advantageous speculation, which becomes important to the arts, and to commerce.
that had been overlooked. The latter I could not eat, they were too
THE “THUNDER CHILD”.

_how_ they got it.”
I know the signs of a dead cat being around, and I bet I do, there was

I was delighted with her poetry, which incited me to write the verses that I venture to give here, written in the slang style that I had picked from my Stuttgart English friends. The lines ran thus:—
I didn’t look at him at all. Jim throwed some old rags over him, but he


trash that hung over the banks. Well, I warn’t long loosing the whoops
    Of Stephen Dowling Bots.
between me and the Martians, and all along a curving line beyond the
daughter from China for you to marry, they’ve got to do it—and they’ve
The Work of Mr. Necker on the French finances, is in my judgement, for that nation, the most precious work that this age has produced; it is a sword hanging over the head of whoever shall fill up that department during the reign of the present King, and of all those of his[292] successors whom God shall bless with a soul like his. That work would still be precious, though it should serve only to expose the knavery or the incapacity of those who pretended that France, preparing for a war which required the creation of a navy, without which she could not carry it on, forced to have recourse to new loans proportionate to such an undertaking, and weighed down, as it was said, by the load of the old taxes imposed for discharging the interest of her former debts, was again on the eve of laying new imposts, in spite of herself, and perhaps of having recourse to those degrading reductions, so lightly, yet so often practised before. The first public operation of Mr. Necker (his Compte rendu) inspired every one with the enthusiastic spirit of an unbounded confidence, wherever nothing was foreseen but the discouragement arising from discredit. He did not create anything, it is true; but he dispelled the clouds which had hitherto concealed what really existed; he restored order where confusion reigned before, and treated the mechanical part of the finances, like a merchant willing at all times to have it in his power to compare his undertakings with his means, his plans with his resources. No other step could be taken at first. I have no kind of connexion with Mr. Necker, neither direct nor indirect;[293] nor am I bound to him by the ties of friendship, interest, or gratitude; and, besides, it is not my intention either to praise, or to censure; yet I cannot forbear to observe, that Mr. Necker, entirely circumscribed by the circumstances of the time, charged with the triple load of clearing up what was passed, supplying present wants, and guarding against future events, could only loosely survey, regret, and prepare, what a situation so critical did not permit him to undertake. His being displaced, left him no other advantage than that of informing the public of what he intended to do; and the manner in which the nation has received the work wherein he recorded his projects, is at the same time a tribute of the national esteem for the man who planned them, and a pledge of the national gratitude, even for any one of his successors, who should confine himself to carry them into execution.
III.	From College to Mission Field	28
“Oh, Mary,” said she, “I wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun! as we went along Kitty and me drew up all the blinds, and pretended there was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the way, if Kitty had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we behaved very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest cold luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have treated you{277} too. And then when we came away it was such fun! I thought we never should have got into the coach. I was ready to die of laughter. And then we were so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so loud, that anybody might have heard us ten miles off!”
painted green, and when they came to a small house, in which a farmer
Recapitulation of the foregoing Thoughts on Taxes, and their Effects.	242
He then asked her to walk into the house—but she declared herself not tired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time much might have been said, and silence was very awkward. She wanted to talk, but there seemed an embargo on every subject. At last she recollected that she had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and Dovedale with great perseverance. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly—and her patience and her ideas were nearly worn out before the tête-à-tête was over.
When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. Bennet was mindful of her intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine at Longbourn in a few days’ time.

chorus, firing heavily one after the other. A woman screamed. Everyone
They listened, rapped on the scaly burnt metal with a stick, and,
to the bottom forthwith with the Heat-Ray.

“Many of the Roman Catholics in this place acknowledge the superior advantages which the pure Gospel has over the confused doctrines and traditions of men; which instead of relieving, only oppress the conscience. When I visit them in their houses they listen to me gladly, and I affectionately invite them to convince themselves of the full, perfect and sufficient sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction made by Christ for the sins of the whole world as the[Pg 72] foundation of their faith; and that, believing this, they may enjoy peace of conscience and become partakers of the precious blessings obtained for them by His sufferings and death upon the Cross. I point out to them what Jesus Christ Himself has taught respecting the way which leadeth unto life and how much the Romish Church has deviated from the pure doctrine of the Gospel. Father let Thy kingdom come! O send forth faithful labourers into Thy harvest!”
 BOOK TWO.—THE EARTH UNDER THE MARTIANS

eyes, it seemed as though she were already among the Martians.
put up at auction and sold?—that’s what I want to know. And what do you
When a manufacturer is compelled, by the general augmentation of prices, arising from taxation, to pay his workmen and materials ten per cent. I suppose, dearer than usual, and he exports 1000 hats, upon each of which a draw-back of 6 shillings, I will suppose, is allowed him on exportation, he does not reflect on the difference of 10 per cent. diffused through the general run of prices, by the mechanical reaction of the total of the taxes on all that is not taxed; he remembers well the effect of this reaction in the account which he makes out for himself, to know at what rate he must in future sell his hats in foreign markets; he only considers the draw-back, the remittance of the 6 shillings duty, and concludes that it puts him in a situation to deal with foreigners on the same terms as he did previous to the taxes, which have increased every thing to the amount of 10 per cent. Nevertheless, the thousand hats, with which, previous to the taxes, he furnished his foreign friends for 1000l. I will suppose, are now raised to 1200l.—Point out this circumstance[339] to him, he will tell you he cannot sell his hats cheaper, and that foreigners must pay 1200l. instead of 1000l. since the foreigner wants them. “Besides, (says he) what is the sum of two hundred pounds more, divided among a thousand persons, who will purchase the hats from the merchant abroad, to whom he sells them?” The manufacturer does not want to look further; and the writer who from the nature of his subject, or his manner of considering it, wants only to reflect a little more, will only add, Thus it is that foreigners pay our taxes, and never suspect that they do so. This is the truth, but not the whole truth. I shall endeavour to find it out.
From herself to Jane, from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a line which soon brought to her recollection that Mr. Darcy’s explanation there had appeared very insufficient; and she read it again. Widely different was the effect of a second perusal. How could she deny that credit to his assertions, in one instance, which she had been obliged to give in the other? He declared himself to have been totally unsuspicious of her sister’s attachment; and she could not help remembering what Charlotte’s opinion had always been. Neither could she deny the justice of his description of Jane. She felt that Jane’s feelings, though fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a constant complacency in her air and manner, not often united with great sensibility.

Effects of Compound Taxation.
_any_way? ’n’ who dug that-air _hole?_ ’n’ who—”
I ever see, and then scampered out, and everybody clapped their hands

made way for more. The scum was absolutely insoluble, and it is a

collapse the captain on the bridge yelled inarticulately, and all the
the green flames lifted I could see the oily gleam of his integument
    how are all things made for man?’
desolation they had made.


t’other, looking as absent-minded as year before last. He went a

[viii]
excursionists from Chertsey or Isleworth passed us singing and playing
out, “Hi! _so_ boy! sick him, Tige!” and away the sow would go,

about?”
The nominal amount of a loan which nothing obliges us to repay, is a matter of a very little importance; the interest agreed upon for the borrowed sum, is the only thing that deserves attention. The total of the interest in England is now about nine millions, three millions of which could not be procured but by laying taxes on those objects which had hitherto escaped the penetrating eye of the financiers, and by doubling or trebling the impost on those which appeared less liable to the inconveniences attending such an additional increase.

hear a man say:



thousand cities, chilled by ghastly apprehensions, suddenly flashed
Yes, I know. But they’re intelligent things, and they won’t hunt us
Or,
down to the floor and rolled around so queerly that they seemed to see



you can just see them moving. By daylight you can’t. But nearer—I

are as tall as a tree and as big around as a church.”
them up my sleeve, and Tom says:
helped to run away, coming right out flat-footed and saying he would
1st.
she wanted to, and let me get away and tell Tom how we’d overdone this

“Never you mind, honey, never you mind. Don’t you git too peart. It’s



smiled and reddened up very sweet, and I says, “If you don’t mind it,

At the end of August we left Trouville and started on our homeward journey.



If it were acknowledged, that nothing contributes so much to the multiplying of the articles, as the multiplicity of the channels through which they can be introduced:
could boom right along if we wanted to.
with the tears running down her face, and she had two arms folded

CHAPTER IV.

the air and back to the bank, where Dorothy and the Lion and the Tin

your head and move right along, and then you won’t get into trouble

At poor old Mr. Joker?
Sometimes we’d have that whole river all to ourselves for the longest
and painted Jim’s face and hands and ears and neck all over a dead,
bear the sight of us, he called us all to him in the forest after he

_him_ knowing it—stop up his rat-holes.”



Exportations and Importations considered as a Game.	308
The lawyer and him shook hands, and the lawyer smiled and looked
he wouldn’t do it. You might pump at him a week, it wouldn’t make no
soon the band of Winged Monkeys flew in through the open window and
yellow brick. When she had gone several miles she thought she would
sequence of accidents leading inevitably to that. I felt no
gunners with their horses and waggons, the groups of civilian
peace of their journey. Once, indeed, the Tin Woodman stepped upon a
“That’s good!” said I. “They will get one fair shot, at any rate.”


As I drew nearer I perceived he was dressed in clothes as dusty and
This was a sad omen of what her mother’s behaviour to the gentleman himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the certain possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations’ consent, there was still something to be wished for. But the morrow passed off much better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood in such awe of her intended son-in-law, that she ventured not to speak to him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her deference for his opinion.
Besides this were the bulky lungs, into which the mouth opened, and the
“Come into the house,” I said.
We are now at the extreme end of the world, and have the feeling of standing upside down; and, in fact, if the globe was being pierced through, we should have found ourselves in that uncomfortable posture conformably to the inhabitants of St. Petersburg. When it is midnight in that city it is midday here.
again for saving him.

islands, nor no troubles, nor nothing. I been setting here talking with

light was eclipsed, and the ghostly kitchen doorway became absolutely
While I was still doubtful, it rapped smartly against the cellar door
    And did the mourners cry?
flames; the trees changed to fire with a roar. The Ray flickered up and
“What’s de harem?”

Reflexions on some private Balances of England, both of the favourable and disadvantageous Kind.

from the branches that she gathered some of it, finding it just what
castle to yourself. I have been wicked in my day, but I never thought a
mashing a locket with a chain to it against her mouth, and underneath
Rats.—Lively Bed—fellows.—The Straw Dummy.
from the ceiling. It was really a ball of cotton, but when oil was

Mr. Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages {384}of Wickham’s removal from the ——shire, as clearly as Mr. Gardiner could do. But Mrs. Bennet was not so well pleased with it. Lydia’s being settled in the north, just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her company, for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in Hertfordshire, was a severe disappointment; and, besides, it was such a pity that Lydia should be taken from a regiment where she was acquainted with everybody, and had so many favourites.
“And I certainly never shall give it. I am not to be intimidated into anything so wholly unreasonable. Your Ladyship wants Mr. Darcy to marry your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise make their marriage at all more probable? Supposing him to be attached to me, would my refusing to accept his hand make him wish to bestow it on his cousin? Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with which you have supported this extraordinary application have been as frivolous as the application was ill-judged. You have widely mistaken my character, if you think I can be worked on by such persuasions as these. How far your nephew might approve of your interference in his affairs, I cannot tell; but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in mine. I must beg, therefore, to be importuned no further on the subject.{440}”
en save me, nemmine ’bout a doctor f’r to save dis one?’ Is dat like

high like a duck. I shot head-first off of the bank like a frog,
fifth night we passed St. Louis, and it was like the whole world lit

The characteristics of Miss Austen’s humour are so subtle and delicate that they are, perhaps, at all times easier to apprehend than to express, and at any particular{xiii} time likely to be differently apprehended by different persons. To me this humour seems to possess a greater affinity, on the whole, to that of Addison than to any other of the numerous species of this great British genus. The differences of scheme, of time, of subject, of literary convention, are, of course, obvious enough; the difference of sex does not, perhaps, count for much, for there was a distinctly feminine element in “Mr. Spectator,” and in Jane Austen’s genius there was, though nothing mannish, much that was masculine. But the likeness of quality consists in a great number of common subdivisions of quality—demureness, extreme minuteness of touch, avoidance of loud tones and glaring effects. Also there is in both a certain not inhuman or unamiable cruelty. It is the custom with those who judge grossly to contrast the good nature of Addison with the savagery of Swift, the mildness of Miss Austen with the boisterousness of Fielding and Smollett, even with the ferocious practical jokes that her immediate predecessor, Miss Burney, allowed without very much protest. Yet, both in Mr. Addison and in Miss Austen there is, though a restrained and well-mannered, an insatiable and ruthless delight in roasting and cutting up a fool. A man in the early eighteenth century, of course, could push this taste further than a lady in the early nineteenth; and no doubt Miss Austen’s principles, as well as her heart, would have shrunk from such things as the letter from the unfortunate husband in the Spectator, who describes, with all the gusto and all the innocence in the world, how his wife and his friend induce him to play at blind-man’s-buff. But another Spectator letter—that of the damsel of fourteen who{xiv} wishes to marry Mr. Shapely, and assures her selected Mentor that “he admires your Spectators mightily”—might have been written by a rather more ladylike and intelligent Lydia Bennet in the days of Lydia’s great-grandmother; while, on the other hand, some (I think unreasonably) have found “cynicism” in touches of Miss Austen’s own, such as her satire of Mrs. Musgrove’s self-deceiving regrets over her son. But this word “cynical” is one of the most misused in the English language, especially when, by a glaring and gratuitous falsification of its original sense, it is applied, not to rough and snarling invective, but to gentle and oblique satire. If cynicism means the perception of “the other side,” the sense of “the accepted hells beneath,” the consciousness that motives are nearly always mixed, and that to seem is not identical with to be—if this be cynicism, then every man and woman who is not a fool, who does not care to live in a fool’s paradise, who has knowledge of nature and the world and life, is a cynic. And in that sense Miss Austen certainly was one. She may even have been one in the further sense that, like her own Mr. Bennet, she took an epicurean delight in dissecting, in displaying, in setting at work her fools and her mean persons. I think she did take this delight, and I do not think at all the worse of her for it as a woman, while she was immensely the better for it as an artist.

Our arrival at Cairo had been advertised in the papers. The local authorities were warned and English reporters came to ask Mr. Koyander the reason of our visit to the Metropolis of Africa. They may be perfectly tranquillised, for we certainly have nothing to do with politics, Sergy and I!
much too heavy to lift. We must leave him here to sleep on forever, and
fire. As it came nearer the Tin Woodman saw that running before the
“In vain have I struggled. It will not do. My feelings will not be repressed. You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire and love you.”
“What ugly _brutes_!” he said. “Good God! What ugly brutes!” He

rushed past. The stones under my feet were muddy and slippery, and the
when I come back out of the fog; and when I come to him again in the
into somebody’s house or store, or was going into the counterfeit-money

No one can, however, read the letters and journals of Schwartz without recognizing that he solved the problem. A trained mind, an unwavering faith in God, a complete mastery of Brahmin literature, a still better knowledge of his Bible, the engaging art of winning the hearts of his hearers, a never flinching denunciation of idolatry and sin, a willingness to listen and to sympathize, an absolute fidelity to the Christian doctrine, a yearning love for the souls of men, a meek yet passionate love for the Saviour, these were the constituents of his character and service. Is it any wonder that they loved and trusted him? They gave him many titles of respect and honour, some very tender, but when with reverence they called him “The Christian,” that name was the best of all.

Q. They will, no doubt, follow your example: therefore new recruits will be wanted for that army of rogues and idlers, designed to lay hold of, and ruin whoever should dare to oppose your ransoming the owners of lands, and proprietors of some money; but be it so:—you will besides be equally successful in obliging the poor ransomed individuals, to pay for the additional and necessary reinforcement of your standing army of rogues and idlers, and for those light troops of informers so well fitted for the noble purpose you are carrying on;—be it so again.—But, after all, what are you to do with that immense balance in money?—Shall you bury it under ground?

CHAPTER LXI
At other times the natives came in to see their friend, and with much earnestness and love he begged of them to forsake all their heathen gods and wickedness, and turn to God, Who alone could give them peace. They listened deeply affected, and sometimes they tried to cheer and interest him by speaking of the latest news in the town and the wonderful things which were happening. But the old man said, “The most wonderful thing is that after hearing so often the doctrines of Christianity and being convinced of the truth of it, you are notwithstanding backward to embrace and obey it.”
lucky it was you brought away that wonderful Cap!”

soup, or sausage, or anything you choose. We could a had a whole
behaviour. The twilight had now come, the stars were little and faint,
“Ther’s six _candles_ gone—that’s what. The rats could a got the

“I am thinking of what you have been telling me,” said she. “Your cousin’s conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was he to be the judge?{233}”
All right. Come along, old hoss.”

to the stage and stood up before the curtain and made a little speech,

heard allusions made to the invasion, and a special prayer for peace.
crest. So I went along by the side of it, and came to a corner and a
“I am astonished, my dear,” said Mrs. Bennet, “that you should be so ready to think your own children silly. If I wished to think slightingly of anybody’s children, it should not be of my own, however.”
knows sense when I sees it; en dey ain’ no sense in sich doin’s as dat.
sight nor sound of them; and here at the last minute, lo and behold
the same. No one gave a thought to the older worlds of space as sources

leave.
enough for one, but didn’t look pretty safe for two. I says:

black knot of men, the foremost of whom was waving a white flag.
out of bed and ran to the window.
“We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatest part of our youth was passed together: inmates of the same house, sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care. My father began life in the profession which your uncle, Mr. Philips, appears to do so much credit to; but he gave up everything to be of use to the late Mr. Darcy, and devoted all his time to the care of the Pemberley property. He was most highly esteemed by Mr. Darcy, a most intimate, confidential friend. Mr. Darcy often acknowledged himself to be under the greatest obligations to my father’s active superintendence; and when, immediately before my father’s death, Mr. Darcy gave him a voluntary promise{104} of providing for me, I am convinced that he felt it to be as much a debt of gratitude to him as of affection to myself.”
“Quick!” cried the Scarecrow. “Let us cross over.”
Q. Have you hitherto acted confidently with that idea?
branches to get in; and when I made fast nobody could a seen the canoe
rose into the air and were out of sight in a twinkling.

“Tom, didn’t _you_ think Aunt Sally ’d open out her arms and say, ‘Sid
say, that’s only being rats. It’s saving our knowledge and adding to it
fan-tods. Everybody was sorry she died, because she had laid out a lot
We spent three weeks in Naples making excursions and visiting all the curiosities in the neighbourhood. Pompeii produced a very painful impression on me by its atmosphere of death and disaster. We were present at the digging up of vases, bracelets and other curious relics of by-gone days.
considerable, because I didn’t want to go back to the widow’s any more
Slowly, slowly it drew near, scratching against the walls and tapping
She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information of their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly, and of their meaning to dine that day in Grosvenor Street, where Mr. Hurst had a house. The next was in these words:—“‘I do not pretend to regret anything I shall leave in Hertfordshire except your society, my dearest friend; but we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many returns of that delightful intercourse we have known, and in the meanwhile may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved correspondence. I depend on you for that.’” To these high-flown expressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust; and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she saw nothing in it really to lament: it was not to be supposed that their absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley’s being there; and as to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must soon cease to regard it in the enjoyment of his.
“How can I cross the desert?” she inquired.
nest, and discussed the arrival of that shipful of pitiless sailors in
a half a dozen made a jump to do it, but somebody sings out, “Let _him_

eye could reach. And through this two Martians slowly waded, and turned

“The princess was angry, and she knew, of course, who did it. She had

Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth remained with no very cordial feelings towards him. She told the story, however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively, playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous.
en taller for a dollar en ten cents.”
“I should not mind anything at all.”
“_They_ don’t do nothing! Why, how you talk! They just set around.”
steamboat’s wheel away down, coming around the point; so we come back.
Both Dorothy and the Scarecrow had been greatly interested in the story

and two tins of pineapple. The place had been already searched and
So then we went to the post-office to get “Sid”; but just as I
the name of Stephen Dowling Bots that fell down a well and was


and the murder, and then I was pretty willing to let her clatter right
of fatigue, it would seem. On earth they could never have moved without

“But looky here, Tom, what do we want to _warn_ anybody for that
“I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to be imputed to my getting wet through yesterday. My kind friends will not hear of my returning home till I am better. They insist also on my seeing Mr. Jones—therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear of his having been to me—and, excepting a sore throat and a headache, there is not much the matter with me.
Although Schwartz was still bravely going on with his work it became evident that he was failing fast. But he realized all the more how much must be done to complete the work he had in hand. This guardianship of Serfogee was on his mind constantly. During this period of the stay of the young man in Madras, the question of the validity of Ameer Sing’s title to the throne of Tanjore was being raised by the widows of the late Rajah, and in doing this they had the invaluable assistance of Schwartz. The authorities there were at great pains to test the value of the opinion of the Hindu pundits who had been bribed to favour the claims of Ameer Sing to his present position. Lord Cornwallis was implored to settle this difficult question of the succession before leaving India, because, these widows pointed out, it would not be difficult for Ameer Sing, though at that time without any heir, to adopt some child and thus place another obstruction in the way of Serfogee’s lawful claim.
we clattered. Once the lightning had begun, it went on in as rapid a

And when, by an effort, I had set aside that picture of a prostrate


them.”

But let up remark two very essential points:
wondering how we shall get him again.”
engines working. She headed straight for a second Martian, and was
their appliances were altogether invisible, save for that thin mast
“Honest injun,” says I.

The proprietor of the house inhabited by Eritzeff, a Persian who was noted for his vanity, stinginess, and cowardice, was determined to obtain a Russian decoration. He was a fearful bore to his tenant, repeating to him at every favourable moment his desire to be useful to the Russian government. Eritzeff lost his patience at last and determined to play him a trick; he announced confidently to him that he was sent on a serious mission to Bagdad and offered him to be his interpreter; Eritzeff also warned him that he was to fit himself suitably for that long journey. The Persian was delighted and replied that the expenses of equipment would not be a drawback, and in fact he delivered himself, in spite of his stinginess, to mad prodigalities; he bought a horse, a new saddle, a white mackintosh and a pair of yellow jack-boots. His family could not understand whither he was starting, but submitted to Providence, and when the day of departure arrived, they all kissed and cried over him.


Either
“His father was an excellent man,” said Mrs. Gardiner.

be a _pretty_ howdy-do, _wouldn’t_ it! I never heard of such a thing.”
[298]
“Full of courage,” replied the Lion, who went joyfully back to his
this time, but people that was at the show the other two nights. I

and—Say, what do you mean by kissing me?”
She left Dorothy alone and went back to the others. These she also led
 In the Woods

Phase velocity is due to a wave traveling along the wave chain. A man can go faster than the train he is riding on by walking toward the engine, but practically speaking he cannot reach the station before the train. Similarly, the phase velocity cannot reach the station before the light or X-Rays do. But for countless ages the light has poured forth from the sun, and a message sent down that long train would be able to go many, many trillions of miles at a speed far greater than that of light. That was the new hope of life. For man must escape from the dying sun or perish with it. And now the experiments were pushed forward with new hope.
will bestow upon you a great many brains, and such good brains that you
In another second or two it was solid white and still again. I set
The pretended Balance of France in point of Trade.
everybody else mighty meek and quiet; and at last Uncle Silas, looking
“You are now our ruler,” he said to the Scarecrow; “so you must come
common. Under the railway bridge I found a group of soldiers—sappers, I
[526]
Phelps kept it up and run on so. Pretty soon she made the cold chills
road, and so escaped to Woking. There his story became ejaculatory. The
time, and that made the duke mad; and everybody left, anyway, before
When he had fastened the Scarecrow’s head on his body again he said to
there. When they’re deep they won’t stop for a hail. A Cincinnati boat


“My manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, I assure you. I never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might often lead me wrong. How you must have hated me after that evening!”

Chapter II
But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to go down without one of her sisters.
it.
most a half a mile doing it. I crept up the dead water under the bank,
enjoy his luck, for inside of a week our folks laid _him_ out.”
My husband went to put on his uniform. When I mounted on the commander’s bridge I saw him looking at the coast with his field-glasses. The commander and all his officers were also wearing full uniform.
“She is a very good kind of girl, I believe. I know no harm of her.”


was, and what a hard lot I was, and at last she got down to where I was
After having said a hearty farewell to our captain and his officers, we mounted a canoe steered with one oar, and went ashore. Mr. Redding, our Consul, was on the quay to meet us. He proposed for us to put up at his house, but the invitation was declined with thanks. We preferred to stop at the Hôtel des Colonies, situated in the French Concession, to which we drove in Mr. Redding’s carriage. The French Concession is a real French corner with its own law court, municipality, police, etc.
I laid it across the turnip barrel, pointing towards pap, and set down


“Be quiet, sir!” said the Princess. “Can’t you see these are strangers,
Says I to myself, something’s up; it ain’t natural for a girl to be in
“How could I ever think her like her nephew?” said she, as she looked in her face.



Constantin Sloutchevsky, Russian poet, one of the most famous of the end of the nineteenth century.
Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal people in the room: he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance, was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak for themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy danced only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined being introduced to{14} any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party. His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man in the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again. Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by his having slighted one of her daughters.
probably like them better.”

gave me my best chance of escape should these giants return.

his life; and I do believe he cared just as much for his people as
“Well, my dear,” said he, when she ceased speaking, “I have no more to say. If this be the case, he deserves you. I could not have parted with you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy.”
an old man and a preacher.
I got up nervous and excited. The whole morning I had been in a fever; my hands were as cold as ice and my cheeks burned like fire. How slowly the hours did pass! When Serge Michailovitch was announced I went hot all over, and my emotion was so uncontrollable that I fled into my room, in which I felt more safe. My cousin Nathaly dragged me out by force and the next minute we came face to face, Serge Michailovitch and I. The first step was made, we mounted our horses and set off at a trot; soon after we walked them slowly, riding side by side. For some time we did not exchange a word, then suddenly Serge Michailovitch put his arm round me and drew me towards him till our lips met; he told me then that he loved me and asked me if I cared enough for him to become his wife. I only answered with my eyes, which spoke the plainest “yes,” and thus, under the open sky, we pledged our troth, for a minute forgetting everything but our two selves. I gave him with happiness the gift of myself. Nothing could shake my faith in him now. For me that day marked the red-letter day of my calendar. I rode back to Tiflis an engaged girl, and announced our betrothal to mamma; I longed to inform the world at large of it. Our betrothal was made known the next day, and hearty were the congratulations addressed to us. I wrote to my father to ask for his consent and blessing, which he gave with pleasure.
some many feet across. I did not know what these were—there was no time
Miss Bingley’s congratulations to her brother on his approaching marriage were all that was affectionate and insincere. She wrote even to Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her former professions of regard. Jane was not deceived, but she was affected; and though feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing her a much kinder answer than she knew was deserved.


“My George! It’s the beatenest thing I ever struck. And _then_ what did

look at the raft and found her all right, and got home late to supper,

and write just a little, and could say the multiplication table up to
The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned brought on a headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening that, added to her unwillingness to see Mr. Darcy, it determined her not to attend her cousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink tea. Mrs. Collins, seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go, and as much as possible prevented her husband from pressing her; but Mr. Collins could not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine’s being rather displeased by her staying at home.{235}
What is the real amount of the cash circulating in England? Some say 25, others 30 millions sterling. It is probable that 25 millions are sufficient, with the help of credit and paper-currency, even in the supposition that France should stand in want of 2 milliards of livres in hard cash to give circulation to a revenue, double to that of England, because there is in France no paper-money, and much less credit than would be obtained, were it not, too often yet, so easy to avoid, by another kind of credit, the payment of the most lawful debts: but we must argue from an incontrovertible fact, and assent, in their fullest scope, to the consequences that may be deduced therefrom. The following is the fact:

pieces.

“Ain’t they no Shepherdsons around?”
“They really are,” said the Lion, “but that doesn’t make me any braver,
fast as ever I could. Every now and then I stopped a second amongst the
“I suppose so,” answered the Scarecrow. “When I have brains, I shall

“Early this morning I happened to meet with a letter of my late pious friend—which he addressed to you in 1788, and which was then forwarded to me. He says in it, ‘Ought not my son to be a missionary? O, how ardently do I pray that God will not forsake His work now that he has opened to our times a wider field than heretofore! If God cause His Spirit to rest on both my sons they shall hereafter prove active labourers in His vineyard.’
LIX.	Across the Atlantic	316

ring-master he made a little speech, and said he hoped there wouldn’t be
on; and he kept it up all over town, with a tin pan, till most

out so many things. So I fixed that as good as I could from the outside

rocks, where he lay so battered and dented that he could neither move
time.
non-conductivity. This intense heat they project in a parallel beam

On our way back we met a carriage preceded by musicians, and thought that it was a wedding, but instead of a newly-married couple we saw a little boy sitting between two natives, and were told that it was the circumcision of the little Egyptian which was being celebrated, by driving him in triumph around the streets of the quarter of the town where his parents lived.
through the grass to their homes. The Queen of the Mice was the last to

“I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than the others: and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so good-humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving her the preference.”
out and follow the bars and hunt for easy water under the reefs; but
doctor hanging over them. But the king says:

“Good land! what are they doin’ _there_, for gracious sakes?”
The fact is that we had absolutely incompatible dispositions and habits
through a culvert. Nearer, I distinguished the green slime of ditches




I made him no answer. I sat staring before me, trying in vain to devise
Sally wasn’t come yet, so we had to wait a little while.

We made some excursions out of town. We went one day in the direction of Mataryeh, about five miles from Cairo, to see the Virgin’s sycamore-tree, under which the Holy Family took rest. The way leading there gives you the impression of old Bible-times. The vegetation is magnificent, cactuses, bamboos and date-palms everywhere. The grass on the lawns is more than five feet high. We went along shady avenues and crossed lotus, maize, and sugar-cane fields. The Virgin’s sycamore is enclosed by a wall which measures about a mile in length. The railing surrounding the tree is locked up. We had it opened and saw a great number of names, to which we added ours, engraved on the mighty trunk of the sycamore, all ragged by lapse of time and intertwined with branches. An ancient legend says that the Holy Family on their flight to Egypt remained two years absent, and lived at the little village of Mataryeh. About fifteen minutes’ walk from the spot was the celebrated town of Iliopel, which is mentioned in the Bible. Very few fragments remain of the town, except a high obelisk, which is supposed to be the oldest in Egypt; it is of granite, and the height is over sixty-five feet. It is there that Moses had been a priest.
Spanish-brown, same as they do in town. They had big brass dog-irons
[409]
Northward were Kilburn and Hampsted, blue and crowded with houses;
de po’ little thing! De Lord God Amighty fogive po’ ole Jim, kaze he
this piece of a raft; so we reckoned we’d go down to Orleans on it.
CHAPTER XLVIII.
XLI.	Biarritz	250
Our capital was very animated this season: soirées, dinners, concerts, the whirl went on, but I shut myself within four walls and scarcely saw anyone, I can’t enjoy anything when Sergy is not there. I am reckoned as being eccentric in leading the life of a nun in her cell—a very spacious one, it is true—but I have a sublime indifference to public opinion, having my own way of looking at things, and am not, as a rule, meddling with other people’s business; why do they meddle with mine? I am free of my own actions, and can do as I like, I suppose! Goethe says: “The happiest of mortals is he who finds his happiness in his own home.” I can, therefore, be placed among the happy ones.
moved, as it seemed to us, upon a cloud, for a milky mist covered the
Our cortège consists of seven carriages. Whilst we traverse the camp the soldiers forming a line on each side of us cheer us loudly; military bands play marches as we drive along. We plodded on steadily the whole morning and were shaken a good deal on the badly-made roads. The two first stations were kept by the post department, but at the third stopping-place a team of three horses, belonging to different Russian colonists, harnessed together with utter disregard to size, breed, and disposition, were awaiting us. The harness was rusty and mended with strings. The driver was with great difficulty inspired to action, and totally incapable of transmitting such inspiration to his animals, by coaxing[370] words or whip. At last the poor hacks moved on, one pulling to the right, the other to the left. The road was completely deserted; we didn’t meet a living creature on our way. I was told that these spots were frequented by tigers, and when I asked a Cossack of our escort if we had no risk of meeting one, the man answered coolly that it might happen very easily. Not much comfort from that Cossack.
more—three sons; they got killed; and Emmeline that died.
They done it, and soon as they was aboard I lit out for our tow-head,

It seems, therefore, probable enough, that the money annually imported by England, during the period aforesaid, does not exceed the 888,698l. of the balance which appears against Spain, Portugal, Madeira, and the Canary Islands: But here follows a strong conjecture, that it is not so considerable as it appears by those accounts.—It is an uncontroverted fact, that the article of exportation is always exaggerated more or less; the man who first bethought himself of this harmless cunning, fancied that his own importance would appear more conspicuous to the nation, by reason of the quantity of goods which he might seem to export: this is now the secret of the play-house, every body knows it; but this practice is in a manner become necessary: one must unblushingly raise himself above his level, in order to be thought in his real place; the only way of deceiving in this respect, would be to speak the truth; and, in this case, the deceit would fall on the deceiver himself, and that just regard which the exporter has a right to claim, would be lost to him: Add to this necessary artifice, which is no longer a cheat, the usual mode adopted in regard to importation, the value of which is always a little under-rated, but only a little, because there might be some inconvenience in cheating Government[108] to excess. With these trifling modifications, I think England will be found not much above the par of her quota, in the gold and silver imported from America.
to get loose.”
Then all the Winged Monkeys, with much laughing and chattering and
the soft, fresh grass; and it was not long before they reached the road

they saw the Lion; but no one spoke to them. Many shops stood in the
man’s brain sits and rules in his body? I began to compare the things
five foot in front of the wigwam. Jim was satisfied. He said it was a

another person that you don’t know about who’d be in big trouble. Well,
His voice and face were eager. The men behind him stared curiously. The

in France long time ago; and about his little boy the dolphin, that

The quantity of wheat sold at Berne at 69 batz, on a medium of five years taken from 1751 to 1755, was sold for 92⅗ batz from 1766 to 1770.
fun of him, and that made him mad, and he begun to rip and tear; so
Maria Michaelovna made us laugh at tiffin; each time when the boy handed her the menu to point out the extras, she repeated mechanically in Russian “Vot eto,” which means, “Give me that,” and the boy, confounding the sound of vot eto with potato, served her with each course a perpetual supply of potatoes, even with ice cream.
“And ain’t you had nothing but that kind of rubbage to eat?”
to rest, and Tom says, kind of dissatisfied:


Dorothy presently asked him a question the Tin Woodman could not open
about our Royal Nonesuch rapscallions, and as much of the raft voyage
one hand with black sealing wax showing on one edge of it, and she was
death. I’ve as good a notion as ever I had in my life to take it out o’
down amongst the tow-heads; and I only tried to chase them a little
Then she put her arm around the king on one side, and Susan and the




around this way and that for a long time. At last I got so sleepy I


And then faster and faster they went, all of them dancing, first one

Oh, the terrible night! Of sleep there was no question whatever! Before the stepping out of our troops, in the cold grey light of a rainy dawn, a Te-Deum was performed in the square in front of the cathedral. The soldiers, after having concluded their fervent prayers, took a pinch of earth, kissed the dear ground and laid it in their knapsacks. Many eyes filled with tears at this touching spectacle.
should be quite happy.”
“Oh, I am a ventriloquist,” said the little man. “I can throw the sound

steps, when Dorothy discovered something shining in a ray of sunshine
On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving her brother and his wife, who came, as usual, to spend the Christmas at Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatly superior to his sister, as well by nature as education. The Netherfield ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived by trade, and within view of his own warehouses, could have been so well-bred and agreeable. Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years younger than Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Philips, was an amiable, intelligent,{176} elegant woman, and a great favourite with her Longbourn nieces. Between the two eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a very particular regard. They had frequently been staying with her in town.

trouble it took, because he said _now_ she couldn’t ever count them
is, that you didn’t bring a man with you; that’s one mistake, and the
Now, in order to estimate justly the system of taxation we are considering, it must be presented in all its glory, that is, such as all Ministers of finance in Europe seem to wish it; such as all the English news-papers recommend it, rather roughly, each of them at least once a week; such as all Oppositions, past, present, and future, have pretended, do pretend, and ever will pretend it to be, so easy and so equitable; such as all preachers of the Roman, English, Jansenist and Presbyterian persuasion, are wont to deliver it every day among the private societies whom they are pleased to honour with their partly christian, partly political reflexions, and would speak it out from the pulpit, if Ministers of finance had any leisure to hear their sermons, &c. I shall therefore suppose that the tax of 10 millions, mentioned in the three foregoing articles, should be assessed in so able, so charitable a manner, that 5 millions should fall on the[210] landlord, and the other 5 on the richest proprietor of money. I shall begin with the most essential, for the State is certainly founded on the landed property.
They came from all directions, and there were thousands of them: big
LXXXV.	Aden	425
piling in till there was eleven of them, and there warn’t hardly room
let it go, and never bothered no more about it. If he was bound to have

Mr. Komorski’s house stands on a small eminence surrounded by barracks inhabited by convicts, dressed in long grey coats; the greater part are in chains. A long line of prisoners had half of their heads shaved, they were runaway convicts, who were brought back again to these parts. They cheered my husband gaily. A monk stood on the threshold of the chapel, where a Te Deum was sung by the convicts.

into her and sunk her where I could find her again when I wanted her,
some plaster or broken brickwork, slid down with a rumbling sound.
was clothed all in green, from his head to his feet, and even his skin
in ’em, but men—men who have learned the way how. It may be in my time,
silence. Of a night I see the black powder darkening the silent
thunderous fury of battle.

The man before him, a burly rough, tried to close, and he stopped him
silk gown and spot it.”
There is a particularly nice young man on board, an Australian, according to the information of the head steward. He didn’t stare at me during the meals, he was too well-bred, but when I looked the other way, he looked at me. He sketched caricatures wickedly well, and I asked him to make a drawing of me, but it wasn’t a caricature at all, too flattering I should say. To-day the young man made a rush for a seat near me at table. I had noticed that he had put on a becoming tie adorned with a pin with a beautiful opal set in it, which I had imprudently admired, and which had cost a considerable sum of money. After dinner he came up to me and laid in my lap a little vellum box, in it was the famous opal pin, which he tried to make me accept as a souvenir, but of course I refused[481] his offering, telling him that in Russia the opal is considered an unlucky stone. He was awfully vexed and sulked the whole evening, following me with eyes of gloomy disappointment. The Australian endeavoured to throw himself in my way everywhere; he passed beside the windows of my cabin when he couldn’t catch me elsewhere. I was not quite indifferent to the adventure, for he was very attractive that young Australian. But it appears that I was playing with fire. He placed himself close to me on deck this evening and taking my hand, which he retained in his grasp, his eyes speaking a number of things to me, he began to talk of love, murmuring a torrent of passionate words. He told me of the sleepless nights he spent in thinking of me, and said I had cast a kind of spell upon him, and that since the hour he had seen me, he had thought only of how he might see me again. His attentions became so pressing that I found it time to put a stop to them. “I think, if you don’t mind,” I said to him heartlessly whilst he was talking of his flame to me, “that I’d rather speak of the weather.” He didn’t look pleased, the poor boy, I must say.
more afraid of you than you are of him.”
The judge and the widow went to law to get the court to take me away
We have spent the afternoon in paying calls in a victoria belonging to General Heimann, the only carriage in all Erzeroum. After our visit to Mme. Gilbert, we went to George Effendi, where we were received with effusive cordiality. As soon as we were seated on a low divan, Turkish coffee without sugar, and different sorts of preserves were served to us. Oriental politeness required us to take a very small quantity of jam and to drink a whole glass of water after it. When we got up to say good-bye, George Effendi threw upon my shoulder a shawl of great price that I had just admired, and his daughter undid her beautiful necklace of heavy coins and clasped it round my neck. Of course I refused both presents outright, but I was told afterwards that it was an Oriental custom to offer as a present the object just praised. I will certainly abstain from admiring anything in the future, because the natives say directly: “It is yours, take it!” and that is very embarrassing.
I am well taken care of. Sergy had given me into the charge of one of his aide-de-camps who was going to Krasnovodsk, and asked him to take me to the steamer.
now—that’s a specimen. They call that a govment that can’t sell a free

We approach Khabarovsk, which, like ancient Rome, is built on seven slopes divided by deep ravines. Each slope has its own principal street, cut by transversal lanes which descend to the ravines. Khabarovsk stands at the joining of two grand rivers, the “Amour” and the “Oussouri.” In about ten minutes a large building came to view. It was the so-called “Castle,” our future residence, an imposing red-brick house with the General-Governor’s flag waving from the roof.
a child’s want of sympathetic imagination, staring with dilated eyes at

ECCLESIASTICAL BIOGRAPHIES
the bread and watching the ferry-boat, and very well satisfied. And
In the age we live in, to justify a necessary impost, by the pretence of paying off the debt, would be, of all state manœuvres, the most unpardonable. To lay heavy burdens on the people now, so as to liberate them in the space of a century, is, independent of a great many more improbabilities, to suppose, in the plan of administration, an immutability which it cannot give itself, and which does not, nor ever can exist. To leave the individuals of a nation in[55] possession of all, that it is not indispensable to take away from them, in order that, with what they have left, they may acquire that which it will be perhaps necessary to deprive them of, is a principle, the absurdity of which it would be no easy matter to evince; but, to crush them under such an additional weight of taxes as would be necessary to exonerate them forty or fifty years hence, would be, in my opinion, attempting a measure, some of the consequences of which have no doubt escaped the attention of the proposers.
He got to hanging around the widow’s too much and so she told him at

movements from within the cindery cylinder. He was all alone on the



money he got drunk; and every time he got drunk he raised Cain around
and I see Mary Jane setting by her old hair trunk, which was open and
October 16th.—We see an island on our right. It is Java, the Garden of the East, one of the most splendid spots in the world, to which nature has been prodigal with beauties and wonders. In the distance we perceive the port of Batavia, the capital of Netherland India, with Dutch flags flying. It was a strange land to come to. I seemed to be in a dream all the time, and felt as if transported into another planet. It was like being in a theatre where all the scenery was real and the curtain never came down.
estimating. I defied him, although I felt no assurance that he might
“Oh, no. They must obey the wearer of the Cap. Good-bye!” And she
listening sharp to hear it again. The next time it come, I see I warn’t
CHAPTER X
to cross the hill of the Hammer-Heads.”



The Sartes are perfectly indifferent to the change of temperature; neither heat nor cold affects them in any way. They have no stoves in their houses; a hole in the floor is the family cooking place, and an opening is broken through the roof for the emission of smoke.
blue and purple blossoms, besides great clusters of scarlet poppies,
en’ er de year.
“Oh, yes! Be so kind as to apologize for us to Miss Darcy. Say that urgent business calls us home immediately. Conceal the unhappy truth as long as it is possible. I know it cannot be long.”

representatives of furrin heirs that’s got left is the line for you and
anything he had ever done previous. He said so his own self afterwards.
“Well, dey’s reasons. But you wouldn’ tell on me ef I uz to tell you,
The weather is grey and the sea is swelling. We were scarcely out of harbour when our boat began to be roughly tossed about.
oldest man in the world couldn’t a understood it. So Tom’s Aunt Polly,


you’d help me tow the raft ashore where the light is. He’s sick—and so

“I know it, Sally, and I do try all I can. But it oughtn’t to be
CHAPTER THE LAST
The Lion Becomes the King of Beasts
and they was just about wasted on him. So Jim he was sorry, and said he

subsided into a grim meditation.

line, incapable of guidance. It struck the tower of Shepperton Church,
danger. But pretty soon he struggled up astraddle and grabbed the
millions of miles it was from us—more than forty millions of miles of
an hour’s start, and then run me down if they could; and if they got me

October 23rd.—At daybreak the fog cleared away. The sea is quite smooth. We are going full speed, making fifteen knots an hour.


the horses was all lost, but Miss Hooker she made a grab and got aboard

“You just march into that setting-room and stay there till I come. You
knife and cut the rope, and away we went!

glad to git you back agin, honey.”
time he danced around and says, “Dah’s Cairo!” it went through me like
The age of Schwartz, from a missionary point of view, has scarcely received adequate attention at the hand of the historian. In that hour of daybreak, missions were hardly in the making, and, as far as India is concerned, it may be said that the men who were destined to win the conquests of the Cross were still boys at their school-books; indeed, the most distinguished of them were yet unborn.
batteries, destroyed Richmond, Kingston, and Wimbledon, and are
“Yes, but that ain’t only a part of it. I’m going in a ship, next

Mary Vietinghoff, my old Stuttgart friend, who had married a Frenchman, Count Soligoux de Fougères, was in Paris for the moment. She used to be a dear girl, and so fond of me! We had not met for nearly ten years, but the friendship which had subsisted between us in the days of our girlhood had suffered no diminuation through absence. How good it was to see her again. Mary smothered me with kisses and made me feel how her heart throbbed with joy at out meeting. She invited us to dine on the following day. There was a French minister among the guests, who began a political discussion with Sergy, which lasted during the whole repast. I must confess that political affairs rather bore me, and was very glad when Mary took me up to her room, leaving the gentlemen to sip their coffee. We sat and chatted happily together. We had not forgotten the old days, and had a thousand confidences to exchange. Mary told me that she had quitted the fold of our Church, and had turned Roman Catholic. She was afraid that my religious views would be hurt, and that her renouncement of our faith would stand as a barrier to our former friendship, but I assured her of my everlasting love. Mary’s husband does not like our country, as it appears, and when his little daughter, called Baby, is capricious, he threatens her saying that if she continued to be naughty he would send her to Russia. How nasty of him!


While I was still watching their sluggish motions in the sunlight, and

LXV.	Yokohama	347

petroleum tanks, ocean tramps, an old white transport even, neat white
cloud wisps of broad stretches of populous country and narrow,
quick for that length of a trip. The old gentleman was at the door, and
At last I could go no further; I was exhausted with the violence of my

First, That a nation which should rejoice in being possessed (for the convenience of covetous individuals) of a vortex, into which they could cast, at pleasure, without profit, but also without anxiety, an immense treasure, which was the produce of the pains taken by so many useful and industrious hands, would, in fact, only congratulate herself on being possessed of the effectual means of robbing the present and succeeding ages, of all the advantages that must have accrued from the use made of that money,[148] in any part of the world, where it might have produced, and encouraged a new branch of industry, the reaction of which would have turned to the profit of the nation in possession of such vortex.
October 8th.—We are moving on at last, making great windings on the river which is very narrow in these parts. All the passengers were on deck. The banks are flat, planted with high palms. Insolent black-faced monkeys gambol on the tree-tops and chat vivaciously as they scamper from branch to branch, making grimaces at us. Birds of all the colour of the rainbow are perched on the branches. One of the passengers assured me that he had perceived a crocodile, but strain my eyes as I might, I could not see the monster.
leg. The straps was broke off of it, but, barring that, it was a good
4th July.—We crossed the Mississippi in the night, and are rolling through fields of Indian wheat and beetroot. The heat has still increased and our car is like an overheated stove; the dust entering through the windows transformed us into chimney-sweeps.
“I honour your circumspection. A fortnight’s acquaintance is certainly very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a fortnight. But if we do not venture, somebody else will; and after all, Mrs. Long and her nieces must stand their chance; and, therefore,{8} as she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I will take it on myself.”
way to Kansas.


to the right over the smooth surface of the sea—for that day there was
“Why should I give you courage?” demanded Oz.
pavement of the same green marble, and where the blocks were joined
the storm just at this place that I had the hardest task to win my way
our raft and shook us, and run off down the river.’”
to the fence, as though he had been flung violently against it.

“I wish I’d never seen that snake-skin, Jim—I do wish I’d never laid
to time. When you got to the table you couldn’t go right to eating, but
so that for the best part of a mile I could see little of either bank.
Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned: but as they were now approaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out to her husband all the interesting spots in its environs, to think of anything else. Fatigued as she had been by the morning’s walk, they had no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of her former acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an intercourse renewed after many years’ discontinuance.
Then he wrote something on a paper and read it over, and says:
“Because part of it was watermelon.”

On my seventh birthday my grandmother presented me with a beautiful watch with diamond settings. From the very first moment I harboured a guilty determination to get the diamonds out, just as I broke my dolls’ heads in order to see what there was in them, a resolve, alas! very soon put into practice. Mamma entering my nursery one day saw me perched on the top of my high stool, occupied in drawing out the diamonds with a long pin. Moral: “It is superfluous to give such rich presents to small persons of my age.”

says I, it’s worth the trouble to give the place a hunt. I hain’t seen

“Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me. We must not all expect Jane’s good fortune.”
they see the yawl a-coming, and when the king says:
powder made me think of what I had read of the destruction of Pompeii.
Batavia is the reunion of three separate towns: Weltewredeu, the new town, buried in luxuriant vegetation, with low-built white houses, surrounded by verandas, groves of palm and cocoa-nut, gives one the impression of a series of villas built in a large park; the Pettah, (old town) is an agglomeration of bamboo-huts forming narrow streets, inhabited by the natives, and separated from the European quarter by a cricket-ground; the so-called Chinese Town is inhabited only by Chinamen.

“You know nothing of the matter. That is all to be forgot. Perhaps I did not always love him so well as I do now; but in such cases as these a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall ever remember it myself.{459}”
“My land! And they call it the _mumps?_”
amount of sentiment and religion loose among them. There’s hundreds of
“I didn’ know dey was so many un um. I hain’t hearn ’bout none un um,
there, take it all around.
for me was too good to be comfortable, and besides I didn’t go much on
I will. People would call me a low-down Abolitionist and despise me for
and hearty, that they wouldn’t cuss him no more.
anger at his own delay, and the paddles seemed infected with his

We got a splendid stock of sorted spiders, and bugs, and frogs, and
time, but he never did, and it was the still places between the whoops
_now_, in the daytime; but I says to myself, there’s my two poor boys
CHAPTER XXXIII.

seats in the front row at the head of the coffin, and for a half an
comes of my not thinking. Here was this nigger, which I had as good as
Royalty?”
and roofs black and sharp against the red.
Dorothy had only one other dress, but that happened to be clean and was
hammering from the pit was heard by many people.
Road. They had been dead many days, so that I hurried quickly past
 Raising a Howl
He then shut the door, and, coming up to her, claimed the good wishes and affection of a sister. Elizabeth honestly and heartily expressed her delight in the prospect of their relationship. They shook hands with great cordiality; and then, till her sister came down, she had to listen to all he had to say of his own happiness, and of Jane’s perfections; and in spite of his being a lover, Elizabeth really believed all his expectations of felicity to be rationally founded, because they had for basis the excellent understanding and super-excellent disposition of Jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste between her and himself.
“I admire the activity of your benevolence,” observed Mary, “but every impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion, exertion should always be in proportion to what is required.”
actions, and if we ever got the least show we would give them the cold
“Hooray!” they all shouted, and was starting right off; but the lawyer
hadn’t begun yet; and then I slipped down the ladder.


This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted; and Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself, soon went away. But before she had been three minutes in her own room, her mother followed her.
kept away from him, staying in a room—evidently a children’s
“Yes, very different; but I think Mr. Darcy improves on acquaintance.”
time there was a great flock of them about me.
morning, when we was pretty well down the State of Arkansaw, we come in
hoped the judge would help him and not look down on him. The judge said
It is my opinion, therefore, that one may, without being a conjurer, foretell that the last dreadful and convulsive shock, almost generally felt all over the world, will finally, and in a very[155] little time, end in the loose remembrance of some thousands of hands having been, foolishly enough, taken from their peaceable occupations, very favourable to population, to employ them in forwarding destructive plans, to which many thousands of men have fallen a sacrifice; one might also add, thousands of depredations, some of which, the most pardonable in their nature, have been punished at the gallows: perhaps even they will say modestly in France, We have reduced the English, but we were four to one—and then England will proudly answer, We have been reduced, but we were only one to four; nor would it be at all unreasonable to lament, that the value of 4 or 5 millions sterling in gold and silver, fatuously ornamented with the escutcheons of England and France, to consolidate for ever the interest of 140 or 150 millions, which constitute the last debts contracted by the two rival nations, be not humbly stamped with the puncheon made use of to mark the plate in London and Paris ... but, to suppose that there will be in London or Paris a single carriage less! that France will lessen her importation of English goods, or that the demand for French wines will be less from England—is an idea which cannot, in my mind, coincide with that of a population and industry which, hitherto[156] had sufficed in both nations to answer all those different purposes; of a population, I say, and of an industry, which will, in all likelihood, go on still increasing every day, wherever they shall not be checked by the laws.
The contrast between the swift and complex movements of these
here in our own country.”
“I was walking through the roads to clear my brain,” he said. “And

in it; and at last when he’d got everybody’s expectations up high
put in the time. It was a monstrous big river down there—sometimes a


The heat continued to be overpowering, then one morning, after many days of waiting, the rain fell, but in the afternoon, the sun was ablaze, and again there was no breath of air in the overheated atmosphere.


this new comrade at first, for he could not forget how nearly he had

“Why are these things permitted? What sins have we done? The morning


Now they saw a strangely glowing light coming up from the planet below. It seemed to approach quickly—then the screen went blank, to be lighted a moment later by the scene within the ship. There was a rapid but efficient scene of action. The commander stepped up to the view plate. Just as he began to speak, the screen went gray, the image blurred, then cleared for a moment; there was an expression of sudden astonishment and surprise on the face of the young commander—then again the screen was dark.
break them, and after an hour or so the travelers reached the other
because I knowed it wouldn’t stay the way, it was. I knowed he would be
“That is a question which Mr. Darcy only can answer.”

“I have not an instant to lose”
and say noth’n’: mum’s the word for _us_.”
They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made, seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutely necessary, therefore, to think of something; and in this emergency recollecting when she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, and feeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty departure, she observed,—
the City, the King bowed low to Dorothy, and then flew swiftly away,
[Image unavailable.]


along the crowd; and wherever it struck the people tried a little to


dragged it to the door and through the woods down to the river and
the animal side of the organism by the intelligence. To me it is quite
he carried the sack into the lean-to whilst I stood off a piece to keep
ever cry.”

THE HOME GOING.
maybe four, I never see two men leak the way they done. And, mind you,

pap hadn’t no objections. It was pretty good times up in the woods
invigorating influences of this excess of oxygen upon the Martians
This was a lucky recollection—it saved her from something like regret.
M. Prévost-Rousseau and Melle. Camille, having heard of our arrival at Paris, came to see us at the hotel and invited us to come and spend a whole day at Champigny, where they have some property. The very next morning they came up again in their brougham to take us to their Château. It was a two hours’ drive, and a very pleasant one, going through Joinville and the Bois de Vincennes. Mme. Prévost came forward to greet us, holding out both hands, and led us to the salon, where we found a group of guests assembled. Our host proposed to all the company to make a tour in the park, which descended in an easy slope to the banks of the Marne. M. Prévost took us for a pull on the river, and showed us afterwards his well kept grounds. The weather had changed for the worse by this time, and M. Prévost thought we ought to be starting home. I lifted up my nose to the clouds from which big drops of rain began to fall. Suddenly a storm burst out, and a shower came down upon us in torrents, accompanied by lightning and peals of thunder, which necessitated a hasty retreat, and we started running back to the Château. Mme. Camille carried me up to her own room to remove my hat and arrange my hair, dishevelled by the wind. After dinner there was to be a little entertainment in the salon, music and recitation, and towards midnight M. Prévost drove us to the railway station in his dog-cart.
“You began the evening well, Charlotte,” said Mrs. Bennet, with civil self-command, to Miss Lucas. “You were Mr. Bingley’s first choice.”
doctor comes and takes a look, and says:

stronger.

Immediately after dinner we went out for a drive. Milan is a very fine city. Our guide pointed out all the places of interest. The cathedral attracted our especial attention; it is a perfect lace-work of carving, all in white marble, marked, alas, by merciless age. We saw the Castelli, an immense open circus, which can hold thirty thousand spectators. Reviews of troops and public entertainments take place in it. In about half-an-hour the Castelli can be filled with water; it serves in winter as a skating rink, and in summer nautical fetes are organised there. We walked through the Galleria Vittorio Emmanuele, the largest arcade in the world, which has the form of a Latin cross, and contains a great number of shops, restaurants and cafés, with little tables all over it, and people sitting at them eating, drinking. The arcade is roofed[193] over with glass, and illuminated by two thousand gas-jets, which can be lighted in one moment by the aid of small automatic engines. At nightfall the streets of Milan are filled with flirting couples, sitting in dark corners, the women’s heads on their gallants’ shoulders; what they say to each other was not hard to guess. The masculine population is not to be pitied here, for the women, for the greater part, are very pretty creatures, wearing on their heads black lace mantillas like Spanish ladies. They don’t look as if they felt the awful heat at all, the lucky creatures, whilst I am painfully hot and red. At every crossing we saw policemen dressed in long black coats and top-hats, holding great sticks and looking like funeral attendants. On our way back to the hotel we heard a funeral chant, and next moment appeared a procession of monks, their faces covered and only their eyes seen, and their hands hidden in their full sleeves, walking two and two.


the four winds of heaven, and the Thing was now but a mere intricate
“Where is he?” asked the Stork.
to back him up and keep him to his work, and so he gets beat. Then I
 Huck and his Father
“Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much delighted with it that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that he is to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be in the house by the end of next week.{3}”
face neither God nor man, who face not even themselves.
and one thing or another, and scoop it _all!_”

11th July.—We had to start early in the morning. We hurried over our breakfast and walked rapidly towards the pier and saw the Peru getting up steam, impatient to snatch us away. A great crowd was on the quay. Mr. Artsimovitch, the Russian Consul-General at this part, had come to see us off, accompanied by Mr. Haram-Pratt, Vice-Consul, a gallant young man with a large bouquet of the most beautiful pink flowers, called “American Beauties,” for me in his hand. I had my flowers put immediately in water, wearing a few of them. The chief of the police was pacing the after-deck followed by two burly private detectives who were appointed to watch over our safety; they lounged around on each side of our party, close enough to see and hear all that was going on, and kept a close eye upon us. This guard was kept until the Peru started on her voyage. Tiresome reporters, sent by the papers to get something from us, dogged our steps pencil in hand. My husband had a long chat with a representative of the New York Herald. Sergy begged of him not to look upon him as a Governor-General, for he was meanwhile a simple Russian tourist, who had been on a visit to the World’s Fair, and is now proceeding on his journey.
Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection, but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to conciliate her.
We done it, and then peeped down the woods through the leaves. Pretty

_them_. He says:
One of the problems which often exercised the mind of Schwartz was how to find employment for his converts, a difficulty which is no stranger to the mission field to-day. In more senses than one the native Christian has to begin life all over again. In some cases he has made material sacrifices which he can never recover, but to all there is the right to live and the need for supplying its common necessaries. In his journal under date 1791 Schwartz makes a brief mention of the action taken in this respect:
I wanted very much to see opium-smokers, and Fun led us by a queer old back-street to a bamboo barrack where a score of half-naked Chinamen lay on the floor in different stages of intoxication produced by the effect of opium, with ghastly smiles, their faces expressing the ecstatic delight of extraordinary bliss; the “haschish” carrying them away into paradisaical dreams. Beside each smoker a small cocoa-oil lamp was burning, to light their long pipes saturated with opium. After two or three puffs, the smokers fell into ecstacies, and swoon away showing the white of the eyes and looking altogether horrible. The smoke in the room blinded me and my head swam from the nasty smell of the opium.
[Image unavailable.]

“What’s de use to ax dat question? Don’t you see I has?”

She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to her husband, called out, as she entered the library,—




none, after I got my hand in. So I’ll mosey along now, and smouch a

By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and{87} Mr. Bennet was glad to take his guest into the drawing-room again, and when tea was over, glad to invite him
“I suppose there are,” returned the Lion, “but I do not see any of them
THOUGHTS
protected by the Power of Good, and that is greater than the Power of
October 22nd.—We took the train back to Batavia this morning, and put up this time at the Hôtel Niderlander, a cool white building with deep pillared verandas, carpeted with cocoa-nut mattings and strewn with tables and easy cane chairs. We sat on the veranda after dinner, listening to the band playing in Waterloo-Square, just opposite. Strolling merchants bothered us, offering their wares; we sent them off by saying “piggie,” meaning in Javanese “get off with you,” at which they beat a hasty retreat.
anyone on the right bank, had been hidden behind the outskirts of that
to find a patch of green that had escaped the suffocating drift. We
wanted us to; and he said he would, more particular if it was dark,
on, others were shunting on the sidings, passengers were alighting and
“My dear Jane,” exclaimed Elizabeth, “you are too good. Your sweetness and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to say to you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as you deserve.”
the common. You may imagine the young people brushed up after the
by-and-by they fall in love with you, and never want to go home any
it seemed the colour of blood.

As the dawn grew clearer, we saw through the gap in the wall the body
We played robber now and then about a month, and then I resigned. All
begun to groan, and some begun to shout. Then the preacher begun to
farmhouses and some little places whose names he did not learn. He saw
purpose than destruction with defeated humanity. We stood for a moment
sharp claws, he knocked the spider’s head from its body. Jumping down,

9ᵒ.
[452]
had of missing it altogether. My immediate trouble was why we should
CVI.	Nagasaki	460


The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. It soothed, but it could not console her for the contempt which had been thus self-attracted by the rest of her family; and as she considered that Jane’s disappointment had, in fact, been the work of her nearest relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt by such impropriety of conduct, she felt depressed beyond anything she had ever known before.
tumultuous at that time, and nearly choked the bridge roadway; but its
before she could break it open she dropped it and run—for she see
A boy came running towards me.
of existence, and the stillness of the evening, so it seemed to me, had



DURING dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants were withdrawn, he thought it time to have some conversation with his guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to shine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness. Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s attention to his wishes, and consideration for his comfort, appeared very remarkable. Mr. Bennet could not have chosen better. Mr. Collins was eloquent in her praise. The subject elevated him to more than usual solemnity of manner; and with a most important aspect he protested that he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in a person of rank—such affability and condescension, as he had himself experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously pleased to approve of both the discourses which he had already had the honour of preaching before her. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings, and had sent for him only the Saturday before, to make up her pool of quadrille in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many people, he knew, but he had never seen anything but affability in her. She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the neighbourhood, nor to his leaving his parish occasionally{85} for a week or two to visit his relations. She had even condescended to advise him to marry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectly approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed to suggest some herself,—some shelves in the closets upstairs.
and elephants and things. I said, why couldn’t we see them, then? He
“You wouldn’t look like a servant-girl _then_, would you?”
Biarritz is built on a rock. Over trenches excavated by the ocean picturesque bridges are thrown. The top part of the town consists of splendid hotels and lovely villas which stretch towards Bayonne and the road to Spain. It is from Biarritz that Christopher Columbus sailed to discover America. This queen of southern strands is very gay and fashionable. There are three beaches: La Grande Plage has a splendid casino; Port-Vieux, incased between rocks and is well sheltered against the assault of the big billows, where children and invalids bathe in preference. Above Port-Vieux a tunnel is cut through the rock for pedestrians, and on the summit of the rock rises the statue of the Virgin, held in great veneration by the seamen; near it stands a big cross and a pole with an alarm-bell to signal shipwrecks. A bridge is thrown over the dyke under which the ocean roars furiously producing sounds like continual cannon-shots. It is on the third beach, La côte des Basques, that the waves are the strongest. On Sundays the villagers from round about assemble here, dressed in their half Spanish costumes, to dance sprightly mouchachas and the fandangos, with the accompaniment of castanets and tambourines. Having danced to their hearts’ content, they undress completely, and enter the water in a long file, holding each other by the hand, men and women pêle-mêle; after the waves have drenched them thoroughly, they come out and bake themselves on the sand for a while.
on a word about the new letter, but didn’t need to, because we knowed
CHAPTER XXXII.

spectacles on all the people, so that everything they saw was green.”
Is It Them?—Singing the “Doxologer.”—Awful Square—Funeral Orgies.—A Bad
If Ireland is called “Erin,” (Green Island), this name would suit Japan still better. After the bare coasts of Siberia and Corea, the eye rests with delight on the beautiful verdure of the Japanese Islands.
and there were two bags of haricot beans and some limp lettuces. This
Then I returned through the pine wood, neck-high with red weed here and
Mrs. G⸺ and Melle. Nadine came in hopelessly late to table, and sometimes didn’t appear until after eight, keeping dinner waiting. One day when I descended to the dining-room, a smart young man, in the barber’s block style, wearing very yellow gloves and yellow boots, walked in. He had a white gardenia in his buttonhole and an eyeglass, which made him squint. Frau Weidemann introduced him to me as Signor Gorgolli, the son of her close friend. He shook hands with me raising his elbow to his ear, and bowed his head as politely as the exigencies of his high collar would allow. Mrs G⸺, who lighted up when men were present, but languished if there were only ladies in the room, had taken extraordinary pains with her toilette for Signor Gorgolli, and came down to dinner having put on her most becoming gown. She was displaying her best graces to him, and laid herself out to be irresistible, and encouraged the young snob, which I regretted, because you could see at once that he wasn’t the kind who needs encouragement, being thoroughly pleased with himself and seeming to think that every woman must fall in love with him. Edging his chair closer to where Mrs. G⸺ was sitting, he picked out a rose from a bowl of flowers that stood on the dinner-table, and pinned it into her low bodice. That coxcomb talked of himself all through the course of the meal, and didn’t want to hear what you say, only to tell you about himself. The letter “I” was the backbone of his conversation. He said “I this” and “I that” every time he opened his mouth; a more conceited ass I never set eyes upon. His manner struck me as peculiarly odious. He was trying all the time to impress the company with the idea that he belongs to a circle in society in which he certainly never set foot, and confessed barefacedly that his finances, being at low ebb, he was on the look-out for a rich heiress to pay off his debts, but that in the meanwhile he was disposed to get all the fun he could out of life, feeling far too young to settle into a sober family man.
changing it around every which way as we went along, and heaving in new
CHAPTER XXXI

The tow-head was a rattling big distance off, away out there in the
them as incomprehensible as any death could be. To me also at that time
branches, where they had lemonade and gingerbread to sell, and piles of
bill’s de chile. Bofe un you claims it. What does I do? Does I shin
stay and wait for Sid; and he said there warn’t no use in it, and I
Army lassies came singing down Waterloo Road. On the bridge a number of
he want to res’.”
[Image unavailable.]
“Something very much to the purpose, of course. He begins with congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest daughter, of which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured, gossiping Lucases. I shall not sport with your impatience by reading what he says on that point. What relates to yourself is as follows:—‘Having thus offered you the sincere congratulations of Mrs. Collins and myself on this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another, of which we have been advertised by the same authority. Your daughter Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after her eldest sister has resigned it; and the chosen partner of her fate may be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages in this land.’ Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this? ‘This young gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with everything the heart of mortal can most desire,—splendid property, noble kindred, and extensive patronage. Yet, in spite of all these temptations, let me warn my cousin Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur by a precipitate closure with this gentleman’s proposals, which, of course, you will be inclined to take immediate advantage of.’ Have you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is? But now it comes out. ‘My motive for cautioning you is as follows:—We have reason to imagine that his aunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the match with a friendly eye.’ Mr. Darcy, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think{446} I have surprised you. Could he, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man, within the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie more effectually to what they related? Mr. Darcy, who never looks at any woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at you in his life! It is admirable!”
I, what does it mean? Down by the wood-pile I comes across my Jack, and
“Do you reckon that nigger would blow on us? We’d skin him if he done
So we put the sheet back on the line that night, and stole one out of

HONG-KONG
suggestions of the red weed.
“I remember, when we first knew her in Hertfordshire, how amazed we all were to find that she was a reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect your saying one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield, ‘She a beauty! I should as soon call her mother a wit.’ But afterwards she seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her rather pretty at one time.”

out for the Territory ahead of the rest, because Aunt Sally she’s going

smack to matchwood.

pick a beautiful flower; and after a time the Tin Woodman cried out:
says:
there, about the head of the island, a day or two before that, so I
over his own father and let on to be better’n what _he_ is. You lemme
The reader must be sensible, that there is no occasion to speak of the sums annually exported to India, it matters not by whom; they no longer exist for Europe; and I have proved nothing hitherto, if it be still doubted that Europe has lost nothing in that respect but the trifling advance in her prices, which 100 or 150 thousand pounds sterling, added annually to her general specie, would have given to all the productions, both of agriculture and industry. The return of those 150,000l. in India goods has produced yearly to Europe all the labour necessary to repay them; for it must be observed, that labour pays every thing, and that nothing is paid but by labour. The 150,000l. exported to India, are not lost therefore, as to their essential effect, as would be the case of sums laid up in the coffers of a Sovereign, who might be unacquainted, even at this day, with what was known to Queen Elizabeth above[304] 200 years ago, that the Prince’s treasures are well placed no where, but in the hands of his subjects, that is, of such amongst his subjects who do not lock them up in their own chests.
miles, and you’ll come to a town on the left-hand side of the river. It
sings out, “Take up a collection for him, take up a collection!” Well,


Quick—hurry! I’ll hunt the labboard side, you hunt the stabboard. You

dreadful than any of the forms they had seen Oz take.
We have already observed, that out of the three last millions of inhabitants, 600,000 capitalists only share among themselves the neat profits of the arts, and of cultivation. There remain therefore 2 millions 400,000 dependents, who look up, for their subsistence, to the caprice, the pride, or wants of those opulent men. Now out of that number of dependents under every denomination, servants, clerks, lawyers, physicians, &c. several thousands are to be[44] reckoned, who, tired of their situation, put by constantly, part of the wages of servitude, in order to secure to themselves and their posterity a more free and less equivocal existence.—Would the State be benefited, were this class of men, as essential as any other parts of society, to bury, as it were, the surplus of their layings-out, till they should have amassed the sum they might think sufficient for their intended purpose?—Would not the money, thus lying idle, occasion a chasm in circulation, which would turn to the prejudice of trade, thereby deprived of part of its resources?—Besides, if the want of a chest, safe from the attempt of robbers, and other inconveniences, a chest which is not only a security for them, but affords an interest for the money therein deposited, should necessitate them prematurely to embark in some scheme foreign to their occupation, which must be either abandoned or neglected: would not that knowledge, which they have derived from experience in all matters relating to their primitive avocation, be entirely lost to the public?—A reimbursement therefore which would deprive that part of society, much more wretched and dependent than either the mechanic or the cultivator, of a resource which, from its certainty, induces the former to fulfill with more zeal and[45] exactness, the duties they have imposed on themselves, would prove a measure as hostile to humanity, as it would be contrary to sound policy.

last Christmas your uncle Silas was coming up from Newrleans on the old
“There’s men who’d do it cheerful. What nonsense to pretend there
[340]
Arrives.—Hand Out Them Letters.

done it just as slick as nothing at all, too. Man the sweeps—man the
their seat and shivering.
Well, it _was_ pap, sure enough—and sober, too, by the way he laid his
With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity, Elizabeth opened the letter, and to her still increasing wonder, perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter paper, written quite through, in a very close hand. The envelope itself was likewise full. Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it. It was dated from Rosings, at eight o’clock in the morning, and was as follows:—
This one kept pointing the pistol at the man’s head on the floor, and





and the doctor sung out:
servants treated in England? Do they treat ’em better ’n we treat our
wave sucked back.
Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with indignation. After watching her a little, Fitzwilliam asked her why she was so thoughtful.
I.	How Christianity Came to India	1
pitifulness. Now the thing for _you_ to do is to droop your tails and
After a drive of less than an hour, we came to a village where we stopped to rest for the night at the house of the Commissary of Rural Police.
bending and soldering and polishing and pounding at the legs and body
“To the Emerald City,” said Dorothy, “to see the Great Oz.”




afraid, although he was much disappointed.
As soon as Tom was back we cut along the path, around the garden fence,
one another, with their necks stretched, trying to see, and people on
CHAPTER XXIV.


interest?”


common, and the Heat-Ray was ready to follow. Save for such, that big

that the drift of the current was towards the left-hand shore, which
It was a monstrous big river here, with the tallest and the thickest



“Well, you _do_ need skinning, there ain’t no mistake about it. And I

In another moment the huge wave, well-nigh at the boiling-point had
sent a boy to run about town with a blazing stick, which he called a
“G-e-o-r-g-e J-a-x-o-n—there now,” he says.
several tears of sorrow and regret. These tears ran slowly down his
fifteen of them packed together around me, with their necks and noses
But if the debt of 64 millions, contracted from 1754 to 1762, had increased, by 10 per cent. the nominal value of all merchandise exported from England since that period, how shall we prevent the 60 millions of the last debt, from increasing, from 8 to 10 per cent. the nominal value of all commodities to be exported after this later period?
Thirdly, Independent of this general and inevitable repartition of the 60 millions laid up heretofore, the 10, 15, and 20 millions, which England has found yearly, during the last war, in the purse of her subjects, were, beyond doubt, that portion of capitals, which the circumstances of such a war as the last was, would have rendered useless in the hands of the lenders, had government[35] found in the Exchequer those sums which were obtained by way of a loan. Can it be doubted but that this portion, useless in England, in the supposition of a prior accumulation of money, would equally have been sent into France, on the first prospect of placing it to advantage?—It would have been carried there, just as the Dutch had formerly sent into England the dormant part of their capitals, and would send it any where, at all times when sure of benefiting by it, were it even against the interest of the United Provinces, saying with Camilla, in Corneille’s Tragedy of the Horatii,
and says:

“The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their infancy, they have been intended for each other. It was the favourite wish of his mother, as well as of hers. While in their cradles we planned the union; and now, at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would be accomplished, is their marriage to be prevented by a young woman of inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to the family? Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends—to his tacit engagement with Miss de Bourgh? Are you lost to every feeling of propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say, that from his earliest hours he was destined for his cousin?”
[Image unavailable.]
our house and a stranger, and it wasn’t good of you to say it. If you



Heading to Chapter IV.	18


saved him by telling the men we had small-pox aboard, and he was so
I struck for the light, but as soon as he turned the corner I went back

“The obsequious civility.”
“Only this morning I officiated at early celebration——”

TO ILLUSTRATE
15th June.—We had unfavourable winds and stood anchored the whole night, beaten by a boisterous sea. My head rolled on the pillow, and I had to hold fast to the edge of my berth not to be thrown out. Of course sleep was out of the question.
lassitude too, hot and close, with, I am told, a rapidly fluctuating
battle and heroism came back. It hardly seemed a fair fight to me at


nice-looking younger one, with his right arm in a sling. And, my souls,
That pleased the old man till he couldn’t rest. He said he’d cowhide me

fire; but whenever one was talking and letting on to know all about
“And was Denny convinced that Wickham would not marry? Did he know of their intending to go off? Had Colonel Forster seen Denny himself?”
kitchen. It was still daylight, and I perceived him across the room,
king rips out and says:
Well, I see I was up a stump—and up it good. Providence had stood by me

head of the island they quit shooting and dropped over to the Missouri
    And prim as if
SUEZ
cow?”
astonishment.
falling off. When he got his head over the top of the wall the
they all went in a big parlor that had a new rag carpet on the floor,
of space, out of the stress and tragedy of it all. This feeling was
Mr. Bingley arrived. Mrs. Bennet, through the assistance of servants, contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the period of anxiety and fretfulness on her side be as long as it could. She counted the days that{409} must intervene before their invitation could be sent—hopeless of seeing him before. But on the third morning after his arrival in Hertfordshire, she saw him from her dressing-room window enter the paddock, and ride towards the house.



held Toto tightly lest he should run after her and frighten her.
the poor Scarecrow, they could have been very happy.
“One of them does.”
Chapter XVII
The armistice was announced at Kniss-Kala on the same day that the Turks were to attack the detachment commanded by my husband. What a terrible misfortune there might have been for me, had the announcement not come in time, and what a narrow escape Sergy had. I shudder when I think of it.

On the river front some of the houses was sticking out over the bank,
was a bottle that had had milk in it, and it had a rag stopper for a

the air, to vanish and reappear almost instantly as it seemed, with the
Time is going on and we are still in Erzeroum, and though the certitude that war won’t begin anew tranquillises me, still the ignorance in which we find ourselves about the time of our departure is very hard to bear.

He says:
business from the gasworks, and the electric lamps were all alight. I
Turning to the Tin Woodman, she asked, “What will become of you when







sperits—because, _you_ know our dogs, and ther’ ain’t no better; well,
sadly. “When I grew up I became a ventriloquist, and at that I was very

Byfleet and Chertsey stations, but that these had abruptly ceased. My
told the curate I was going to seek food, and felt my way towards the
in the extreme, but at the outside there could not be more than twenty


“If he is a Beast when I go to see him, I shall roar my loudest, and so

I am again on the hateful element. The sea is covered with foam, the wind blows impetuously, rising in enormous billows. We have to struggle both with the hurricane and the swift current which does not permit us to approach the[507] coasts of Derbent where we had to put in. I suffer a great deal from sea-sickness, although I have made three voyages round the world. All the passengers look green and miserable.
 How to Find Them

corner every little while. She said she had to have things handy to

handling-machine that was buried out of my sight in a corner of the pit


sometimes pleasant and sometimes dark and terrible. However, I will use

3dly.


These mumps is different. It’s a new kind, Miss Mary Jane said.”

If he don’t come back for a year he’ll be all right. You can’t prove


of black dots appeared to one of those concerned. Never before in the
all do; and _he’s_ got to, too. Huck, you don’t ever seem to want to do


October 6th.—The coasts of Annam are outlined on the horizon. Dark grey clouds, precursors of rain, sweep rapidly, driven by the wind which had risen suddenly, and one of these tempests of the equinox came to fall upon us. The squall lasted only a few minutes, but we couldn’t go on the deck, which was drenched by the deluge.
Weybridge?”
light out. I never see such a woman. And you could hear her whoop to
“How I gwyne to ketch her en I out in de woods? No; some er de niggers
hair-ball talked to Jim, and Jim told it to me. He says:

“Well, then, what’s the sense in wasting the plates?”


we could see the river below, a bubbly mass of red weed, and the low
he’ll help, and he done it, too, and done it very well. Of course I

At each stage the colonists welcomed us with “Bread and Salt.” My husband received a great number of petitions from the emigrants, for the greater part complaints from the new settlers against the colonists, who demanded one hundred roubles for the right of settling down with them, and oppressed them in every way.
“Funeral to-morrow, likely?”
Jim free in her will; and so, sure enough, Tom Sawyer had gone and took
that sheet they made the rag ladder out of, ther’ ain’t no telling how
They got him out and emptied him;
the evening she started over with her nigger woman in the horse-ferry
half-a-man’s coat-tail, and come raging up here, swearing what big
of arms, because he hain’t.”
“From this time we began to look out for India, and thought we had now left the worst behind. But on the 17th June, in the night, we had a most furious storm, in which all declared we were in great danger. Even the next day it was frightful to behold and it was much heightened by the heavy rain which accompanied the wind. Meanwhile, when the tempest was at the highest, we slept in peace and quiet, a gracious God had hidden the danger from us. On the 19th there was a pretty strong breeze. A rope, with which a sail was belayed, happened to break, which caused the ship to heel a little, and all at once we lay on our side. The captain called out to the man at the helm to put the ship about, but they could not accomplish it. The vessel had inclined altogether to one side, and was, moreover, quite wet from the rain, so that the people fell as they attempted to walk on the deck. However, the storm at length subsided and we sustained no material injury. In how many distresses hath not our gracious God covered us, as it were, with His wings! On the 30th of June we passed the tropic of Capricorn a second time. Now we came again into a pleasant climate, hitherto we had sometimes very cold weather. On the 4th July the rope of the helm broke, and as the wind happened to blow fresh, the ship fell into some disorder. On the 10th we again crossed the line. The 13th was a most agreeable day for we then came in sight of Ceylon. The chief mate discovered it about nine in the morning. The joy which this produced on board is hardly to be described, since the[Pg 45] greater number scarcely expected that we should make it so directly. We said, ‘This hath God done! O how great is His goodness and how graciously doth He hear our prayers! May the kindness which He hath showed us in this instance serve to strengthen us in filial confidence!’
“Yes; to the last. But if I go on I shall displease you by saying what I think of persons you esteem. Stop me, whilst you can.”
“Don’t you holler. Just set still and take it like a man. I got to tell

“Your list of the common extent of accomplishments,” said Darcy, “has too much truth. The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no otherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen; but I am very far{51} from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general. I cannot boast of knowing more than half-a-dozen in the whole range of my acquaintance that are really accomplished.”
“Is it possible?” cried Elizabeth, when she had finished. “Can it be possible that he will marry her?”

It was this, as much as anything, that gave people courage, and I
how it can be done.”
amid the wreckage. Never before in the history of warfare had
such another crowding and shouldering and shoving as there was, to
roun’ de place, en so dey wouldn’ miss me tell arter dark in de
and looked everywhere to see where she was. “After a time,” continued

down against the back fence, and some outbuildings down a piece the

young ones had on calico. Some of the young men was barefooted, and
“Never heard of it before—tell me about it.”

Miss Sophia standing in her door, which was next to ours, and she took
the sun, just clearing the pine trees towards Weybridge, was already
It was awful thoughts and awful words, but they was said. And I let
little dim glimpses of them on both sides of me—sometimes just a narrow
joints would not be rusted. At the same time her own tears fell thick
chile; en de man dat think he kin settle a ’spute ’bout a whole chile




“Oh, yes, pretty well off. He had houses and land, and it’s reckoned he
We were carried from the manufactory to the frontier of Macao and China. Our porters clambered up the stony ladder-staircases bearing the name of streets, which are all two yards broad, veritable corridors paved with sharp stones, with grass growing between them. We passed through the Chinese quarters of the town, where all the fronts of the houses have recesses containing grotesque-looking idols with twisted legs, the gods of prosperity, before which incenses are burnt.

them go by, and when the dogs come they warn’t interested in us, but
two or three days to consider the matter and I’ll try to find a way to



there, they will begin catching us systematic, picking the best and
man that left his family, it didn’t say why. I read considerable in it
It consists also, perhaps, in that revolution, which must have been effected in the mind of every intelligent Briton, by the demonstration grounded on experience, of the impossibility of doing beyond a few minutes, with a given number of men, more than that same number is capable of effecting habitually, and without fatigue.

Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with a note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waited for an answer. Mrs. Bennet’s eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was eagerly calling out, while her daughter read,—



Elizabeth said no more; but her mind could not acquiesce. The possibility of meeting Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place, instantly occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea; and thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt, than to run such a risk. But against this there were objections; and she finally resolved that it could be the last resource, if her private inquiries as to the absence of the family were unfavourably answered.
sand-pits.
I assented.
dressing gown and shawl; her husband followed, ejaculating.
it; so every now and then I’d borrow two or three dollars off of the
III.	My First Appearance in Society	33
Then my fears got the better of me again, and I resumed my paddling.
Don’t betray me, I wish to be your friend. There is a desprate gang of
money, and they’d slide right out and get away with it. If she was to

“From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two of the silliest girls in the country. I have suspected it some time, but I am now convinced.”
Mr. Bennet’s emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such as he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; for it gratified him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom he had been used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as his wife, and more foolish than his daughter!

great desert that surrounds this Land of Oz. I’m afraid, my dear, you
I was that uneasy ’t I crep’ up there and locked ’em in! I _did_. And
resolute.
“I do not think we were speaking at all. Sir William could not have interrupted any two people in the room who had less to say for themselves. We have tried two or three subjects already without success, and what we are to talk of next I cannot imagine.”

June 20th.—Last night we visited the village of Laouk, inhabited by Christians and Mussulmans. My husband asked a white-bearded “imam” if the Armenians and the Turks lived on good terms with each other, and that old Osmanlie for answer, in order to prove his affection, tenderly embraced an Armenian priest who stood by. I wonder if these individuals will kiss each other when the Turks have re-entered Erzeroum!


The day after Sergy’s departure there was a tremendous storm at sea, destroying innumerable fishing-boats. I passed an anxious night listening to the roar of the wind outside, threatening to overturn the house. The windows rattled in their frames, and doors were burst open. Mme. Beurgier came in the morning with terrible stories of damage done by the storm. Boats were torn from their moorings and blown on to the land, and a great number of Chinese junks were tossed on the shore. A score of soldiers, who were crossing the bay on a raft to bring hay from the opposite shore, were obliged to drop anchor not far from the coast, in order to await for the tempest to abate. They were caught by the storm and their raft was torn away and shattered to pieces against the rocks. At dawn,[367] eight soldiers only succeeded in landing, after having swum on the wrecks for many miles; all the rest had perished. And my husband was out at sea at that moment! I was beside myself with anxiety.
at his face—it’s too gashly.”
In June Sergy went to inspect the troops beyond the Baikal mountains. He will be away about two or three weeks. I dreaded to let him go so far away, and decided to rejoin him on his way back at Sretensk, a town situated at 2,500 miles from Khabarovsk.


We have very little breeze and sunshine in profusion until the stifling afternoon had passed. It is evening now; the sun has set and the freshness of the desert night is delightful. Our ship is steaming at half speed through the placid canal. An immense electric light shows us our way. A big vessel comes to meet us. Our sailors having taken the ship for a Russian cruiser, began to shout, “Vive la Russie!” but it appeared to be a Spanish mail-boat.

This question is not, whether it would be more advantageous to the State, not to have contracted a debt of 238 millions; but whether, since it is incurred, it would be profitable to discharge it. To doubt of the former, would be absurd: 238 millions thrown away almost entirely, within the space of 90 years, to forward destructive schemes, now no otherwise compensated than by a double devastation of the same kind, in a neighbouring kingdom, which by a treble population was able to support it, would certainly have been better bestowed, in both countries, either on the lands, whose revenues and number of cultivators would have increased, or in the improvement of the trade and arts, the stock and chef-d’œuvres of which[27] would thus have been multiplied. But the debt being once incurred, let us suppose that the 238 millions, which are vanished, should return into the Exchequer, would it be proper or not to pay it off? Thus stands the question.



through the silver a little, and it wouldn’t pass nohow, even if the

the street again, with his gray hair a-flying. Everybody that could get
[Image unavailable.]
The Terrorists are continuing their work. It’s getting positively dreadful, everyone’s nerves are set on edge. Many rumours are circulating in St. Petersburg. The story goes now that the late Tzar Alexander II., proceeds slowly every night from the Winter Palace to the Kazan Cathedral, where he appears to the people. One of the chief rioters profited by this report, and one evening, during vespers, the Emperor’s ghost made its usual appearance, pronouncing in a loud voice the following words: “Warn my son that I am waiting for him.” But hardly had the admirably disguised sham-Emperor finished his public address, when the police laid hands upon him.
the property divided up so George’s g’yirls would be all right—for
[11]It is a very good idea, according to the Navigation-Act, to restrain, as much as possible, the English sugar-colonies, which their strongest interests attach for ever to England,—to restrain, I say, those sugar-colonies, in order to enlarge the faculties of some relics of timber, tar, and wheat-colonies, which their strongest interests will detach from England as soon as they shall be strong enough to make the best of their timber, tar, and wheat. It is said in England, that the sugar-cane planters are so immensely rich, that they can well afford to pay 20 per cent. dearer to their dutiful brethren, for what they could purchase 20 per cent. cheaper from their revolted ones.—A sugar-cane planter, with a clear revenue of one or ten thousand pounds sterling in sugar, is neither more nor less rich than a freeholder in Great-Britain, with a clear revenue of one or ten thousand pounds sterling in wheat or grass; the one, as well as the other, is every day rich by the 2 or 4 pounds weight of food he can digest, and by the 6 or 10 or 15 lb. of cloaths he can wear; the one, as well as the other, picks out those 10 or 20 pounds from the materials that best suit his taste or fancy.—To the shame of thy power, ô Opulence, here thou must stop! huc usque venies.—Such is the truth, no greater is the truth, no less trivial is the truth, before which that great globe itself, that immense and baseless fabric of premiums, prohibitions, restrictions, and so many other financiering visions—shall dissolve, and leave not a wreck behind!



golden buckles on their shoes; and princes with jeweled crowns upon



dismal and lonesome out in a fog that way by yourself in the night, you
“Oh, if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live in Derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not much better. I am sick of them all. Thank heaven! I am going to-morrow where I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has neither manners nor sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones worth knowing, after all.”
July 26th.—To-day is our last Sunday on board. The missionary read prayers in the saloon. He gave out a hymn and all the passengers sang it together. He prayed for the President of the United States, for Queen Victoria and our Emperor, and preached a capital sermon. He said that the passengers, coming from different parts of the world, had gathered here to join together in fervent prayer. In a few days, probably, we shall all have to part for evermore, but in the sight of God we shall always be united.
horse; the shafts smashed noisily, and I was flung sideways and fell

Not stopping to look again, I wrenched the horse’s head hard round to

But when the Woodman entered the great Throne Room he saw neither the
wrong. But the Scarecrow seized the oil-can from Dorothy’s basket and
light upon the railway puzzled me at first; there were a black heap and
could go and stay three or four days?”
considerable many frills since I been away. I’ll take you down a peg

couple of sawlogs made fast together. Then I see another speck, and
“I k’n stan’ _dem_, Mars Tom, but blame’ ’f I couldn’ get along widout
with a double-barrel gun in his hand, and takes his stand, perfectly

wondering how this was going to help me out of my scrape; and at last,
It is not difficult to call up the scene, the cluster of twenty-four grave Brahmins, watching with keen eyes to see what Schwartz would or could say in answer to all this. Then the white-haired man, perfect in his mastery not only of their tongue but of their literature,[Pg 167] would in clear persuasive tones point out to them the truth as it is in Jesus. By a sudden consent of feeling they all draw nearer and when he has done speaking, they thank him for his words. “Of a truth,” they exclaim, “you are a holy man, and if all you Christians thought and spoke and lived as you do, we would without delay undergo the change and become Christians also.”
“My God, to thee this heart I bring,”
up at that place and didn’t quite touch ground. If you stood four or
punkin-headed nigger, and don’t send nobody to watch the nigger. Jim
“Yes, Miss Mary Jane she wanted you to do that. She says, ‘Tell them to

only just pretended. We used to hop out of the woods and go charging
indeed happened? I could not credit it.
he would be blind drunk in about an hour, and then I would steal the

Love Thee o’er earthly pride or pelf,

a vivid glare, and to the right of that a row of yellow oblongs. Then I
“Won’t you tell me a story, while we are resting?” asked the child.
raft like the dickens was after you!”
her companion from death. She had grown so fond of the big Lion she was
throwing a feeble glow upon the floor in the corner, the steady ticking

after us!”
“I don’t know,” I said. “I have been buried in the ruins of a house
along, and he made me a new head out of tin.
“Who is Glinda?” inquired the Scarecrow.

“Oh no—it is not for me to be driven away by Mr. Darcy. If he wishes to avoid seeing me he must go. We are not on friendly terms, and it always gives me pain to meet him, but I have no reason for avoiding him but what I might proclaim to all the world—a sense of very great ill-usage, and most painful regrets at his being what he is. His father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. Darcy, was one of the best men that ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never be in company with this Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a thousand tender recollections. His behaviour to myself has been scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive him anything and everything, rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing the memory of his father.{101}”
“How can you talk so?” said Jane, faintly smiling; “you must know, that, though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I could not hesitate.{153}”
“You old scoundrel, I didn’t, and you know I didn’t. There, now!”
into which the second cylinder had fallen was being shelled, in the
Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience generally is. Jane had been a week in town, without either seeing or hearing from Caroline. She accounted for it, however, by supposing that her last letter to her friend from Longbourn had by some accident been lost.
Such is nearly the result of Mr. Hume’s reasoning on this pretended mania of supplying the wants of the State, by mortgaging its revenue. Let me be permitted to urge a few words in answer, on behalf of the landed proprietor.

It seemed to me that the pit had been enlarged, and ever and again

Heading to List of Illustrations	xxv
“In that hut down by the ash-hopper. Why, looky here. When we was at
strikes you dead.”
right off. All my troubles was gone. I went to looking out sharp for a
cart.



“It ain’t no use, it can’t be done. What you reckon I better do? Can’t

“What is all settled?” repeated the other, as she ran into her room to prepare. “And are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the real truth? Oh, that I knew how it was!”
bushes as it hurried towards them through the twilight. Then, with a
He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be said.
smelling yellow flowers and slept soundly until morning—all but the

yes, it’s _mighty_ likely!” and shook me up again, and said he reckoned

[125]
the Scarecrow brains.”
in your breast, so I can put your heart in the right place. I hope it


CHAPTER LVIII
“_How’d_ you come?”
firing that enabled her to get so near the enemy as she did. They did




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRIDE AND PREJUDICE ***

“And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you, and admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did. But I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected.”

I had now passed my eighth year and the time for lessons had come. I was given over to the care of a French governess, Melle. Rose, who was very badly named, for she was a horrid lemon-coloured old creature, wearing a hideous curled wig, and always looking as though she had just swallowed a spoonful of vinegar. I hated plain people about me and could not bare the sight of Melle. Rose, disliking her from the first. What a life I led her! Plaguing her was a charmingly pretty sport for me. My governess was always scolding and faultfinding; she forced me to make her every morning and evening a low curtsey, which made me long to kick her. Melle. Rose held up as an example to me a little friend of mine, the Princess Mimi Troubetzkoy, who was a well-behaved child, doing credit to her governess’s bringing up, and never giving her any trouble. But I despised sheep-like docility and was weary of hearing of all the beautiful things Mimi did and said.

I’m sure it’s somewhere.”


CII.	Vladivostock	453
Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt’s ill-breeding, and made no answer.
mistake coming to our town, instead of letting well alone—and so on and


wondering at this strange, remote wailing. It was as if that mighty



Jesus my Redeemer lives,

They come in and shut the door; and the first thing the duke done was

resks, though I ain’t had no experience, and can’t say for certain; but
and when we went back to the raft about dark the canoe was gone!
but ef you en Huck fetches a rattlesnake in heah for me to tame, I’s
“Oh, he’s dead, he’s dead, I know he’s dead!”
forward an inch or so. Then the thing came upon him in a flash. The

“No, he hain’t,” Tom says; “it’s all there yet—six thousand dollars and
_see_ him. That _would_ be a pretty howdy-do. Come out from under that
“Never mind the patch,” exclaimed the happy Woodman. “I am very


dish yer ole shirt, en you knows I got to keep de journal on dat.”
as I came out of my front door, lugging my treasures, done up in a

He readily agreed to it.

in a book, and called it Domesday Book—which was a good name and stated
see, all kinds of things might happen. Well, I didn’t see no way for a
It was a mighty nice family, and a mighty nice house, too. I hadn’t


neither, nor do any gabbling by the way. Just keep a tight tongue in
CHAPTER I.
On his return he spent some months in arranging the work of the crowd of Jesuits who had followed him, but it cannot be said that he renewed his original plan of preaching Christianity in a simple and elementary manner to the[Pg 16] nations of India. But with all his limitations he stands on the horizon of history as one of the greatest missionaries his Church ever knew. He had the courage of a hero and the piety of a martyr, and his end, as he died of fever in a dirty hut on the Island of Sancian, amid unsympathetic strangers, without the rites of his Church, with his glowing eyes wistfully looking towards the China he hoped to win, forms a sad but not inappropriate close to his life.
Kansas, and live with Aunt Em and Uncle Henry.”
I shall suppose, for a moment, that, during the space of time I have just mentioned, the balance of trade did, in reality, produce to England[96] an importation of money, to the amount of 267,774,769l. (for the reports of the Custom-House, as stated by Sir Charles Whitworth, brought in as a proof of that pretended, uninterrupted balance, in favour of the nation, mean what I have said, or mean nothing at all, in regard to this matter; they do not prove one penny if they do not prove the whole sum). It is true that, according to the same reports, we must deduct for the money exported from England, during the course of those 75 years, about 105 millions, by which the nation at least got rid of a surplus which would have strangely disparaged the price of that which was preserved in the country: but is it very certain that the 162,774,969l. the precious nett of the pretended balance, was actually preserved? This appears to me impossible, for the following reasons, which may perhaps furnish us with the means of knowing, precisely enough, in what the true balance consists.
tell my whole fortune if I wanted it to. I says, go on. So the
use is a half a chile? I wouldn’ give a dern for a million un um.”
calls itself a govment, and lets on to be a govment, and thinks it is a

way here, I’ll—”

He made no answer; and they were again silent till they had gone down the dance, when he asked her if she{117} and her sisters did not very often walk to Meryton. She answered in the affirmative; and, unable to resist the temptation, added, “When you met us there the other day, we had just been forming a new acquaintance.”
He heard footsteps running to and fro in the rooms, and up and down



April 18th.—On waking this morning I saw the street covered with snow, which continued to fall in big flakes, and it is spring in Russia now! Country, people, climate, everything is so gloomy out here!
I said, “Don’t do nothing of the kind; it’s one of the most jackass
more. We must watch these Martians. Some of us must go as spies. When
13th July.—Early in the morning we passed Argon, a dirty Chinese town with big pools of water here and there; one would need stilts to walk across the unpaved streets full of children, pigs and evil smells. Towards noon, we arrived at Blagovestchensk, a large and populous town.
“Why, Jim, you wouldn’t be afraid of it after a little. You could tame
“Haven’t you heard of the men from Mars?” said I; “the creatures from
“This at first seemed a great misfortune, for I knew a one-legged man
CHAPTER LXXXII

They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and, while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of meeting its owner returned. She dreaded lest the chambermaid had been mistaken. On applying to see the place, they were admitted into the hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to wonder at her being where she was.
OUR WAY BACK TO RUSSIA
you—’thout _help! Thar’s_ wher ’tis. Don’t tell _me_, s’I; there
around us! We heard them sing out:
papers, talking excitedly, or staring at these unusual Sunday visitors.

which breaks on it and makes that streak look that way; and you see the
were languid, my plans of the vaguest. I had an idea of going to
“Gone to see a friend is all right, but I won’t have my love given to
“I mention it because it is the living which I ought to have had. A most delightful place! Excellent parsonage-house! It would have suited me in every respect.”
rest; I couldn’t stay still in one place. It hadn’t ever come home to
The opening of the Agricultural Exhibition took place whilst the deputies were at Tashkend. All the productions of Turkestan were gathered there: fruit, flowers, seeds, preserved vegetables, bonbons, domestic animals, etc. A great number of venomous insects, which abound in the Famished Steppe, were also exhibited; scorpions, phalanxes, and spiders of every kind. A mollusk, which is to be found in all the bathing establishments of Tashkend, is particularly disgusting; that little monster is scarcely perceptible in the water, being half transparent, like jelly. Ugh, the horror!
and I am only a little girl.”
and on either side of the railway the houses were blackened ruins. To
persuaded him, and once I tried to bribe him with the last bottle of

“I cannot imagine,” replied the Scarecrow; “but we can go and see.”

I go to London and see the busy multitudes in Fleet Street and the

a fraud that’s got to make signs, and ain’t learnt how. Lost their
of the water through the reeds, like little frogs hurrying through



“I will return to the Emerald City,” he replied, “for Oz has made me
roared, the currrent was tearing by them so swift.

For I’m afraid to be laughed at,
the activity of the clockwork that kept the planet in view.
them cheats so you can throw a dog through it anywheres; then the nice
just a piece of rock or something like that that’s always getting into
“No, sah, I hain’t said a word.”

stove-pipe. Look at it, says I—such a hat for me to wear—one of the
We took an apartment in the house of a coach-maker; his daughter waited on us. Insignificant in her work-a-day clothes, she looked quite a lady on Sundays, dressed in her smartest frock; but her work was badly done that day.
they’d jumped overboard and took a swim it chippered them up a good
road that appeared between the backs of the villas. Mrs. Elphinstone
Mrs. Reynolds’ respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this intimation of her knowing her master.
when a soldier came into my garden. I heard a slight scraping at the
try and shave us; but she didn’t seem to be sheering off a bit. She was


the ground, and in a moment he was hidden and my brother was borne
and Buck, and Hank, and Joe, and Andy, and talked lazy and drawly, and
“My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her spirits are greatly shaken. She is upstairs, and will have great satisfaction in seeing you all. She does not yet leave her dressing-room. Mary and Kitty, thank Heaven! are quite well.”
“I will make a ladder,” said the Tin Woodman, “for we certainly must


manner about the cylinder. The second handling-machine was now

“Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what is to befall her?”

Huck, thanks to goodness!”
August 7th.—I occupy with Mrs. Serebriakoff the commander’s cabin. Early in the morning the officer on service had to come in to consult the chronometer. After breakfast we took a look over the ship. The commander ordered the sailors to show us how they hung their hammocks, for the night. During that operation a big dog, belonging to the crew, who had an aversion to the officers of the ship, cunningly contrived to bite their legs. On the lower deck we saw a group of runaway convicts who were being transported back to Siberia to the Island of Saghalien. They belonged to the Asiatic tribe of “Kurds” (fire worshippers). They were chained together two and two, and guarded by two sentinels. The “Kurds” seemed to be taking their imprisonment[358] with amazing apathy. The presence on the boat of these evil-looking men, with dark, ferocious faces, will not give me a calm night.
35,000,000 of miles sunward of them, a morning star of hope, our own
a dead calm—lay a serpent of black smoke to mark the next ironclads of

de powerfullest dream I ever see. En I hain’t ever had no dream b’fo’

hog or two, for there warn’t any lock on the door, and hogs likes a
love. I pray you to give me a heart that I may be as other men are.”
_Of the London and Continental
kill everyone. And after they went away I got off towards Walton across
you should wish to leave this beautiful country and go back to the dry,
of course I’d of liked to run up to town and see them, but I dasn’t,
“Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you imagine that you are gratifying mine?”
Buck looked about as old as me—thirteen or fourteen or along there,
They were sparing of the Heat-Ray that night, either because they had

The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their parents, about a twelvemonth ago, was now brought forward again.

“No,” replied Jane, “I have not forgotten him; but I have nothing satisfactory to tell you. Mr. Bingley does not know the whole of his history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have principally offended Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct, the probity and honour, of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that Mr. Wickham has deserved much less attention from Mr. Darcy than he has received; and I am sorry to say that by his account, as well as his sister’s, Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man. I am afraid he has been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mr. Darcy’s regard.”
What is he but funk and precautions? They just used to skedaddle off to
plantation, which he built it himself at his own expense, for a church
“There is also one other person in the party,” he continued after a pause, “who more particularly wishes to be known to you. Will you allow me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance during your stay at Lambton?{315}”
CIV.	Back to Russia	458
We didn’t say a word for a good while. There warn’t anything to say. We
Will it be long before they feel that all the actual wealth of a State, its real wealth, is nothing more or less than the mass of its present industry; that all its possible wealth can arise only from the sum of all its possible labour; that the greatest riches are only the greatest sum of labour? that if this labour is a bitter pill, the gold and silver in which it is wrapped up, are only (like honours, titles, dignities, fame, esteem, &c.) different kinds of powders, which sweeten the taste of it to those who are ignorant of its value, to those who know not how necessary labour is to support every day, without being weary, and sometimes without regret, the wretched burthen[181] of our lives; and in fine, that paper, once got into credit, can, in this respect, be an ample substitute for gold and silver ... but how many circumstances, where gold and silver cannot supply the want of credit?

accident prevented trains from reaching Woking that night. The nature
pleased, and they talked right along awhile, and then got to one side
“Fais toi des ennemis que je puisse haïr.”
powers to make a cyclone; but I’ve been thinking the matter over, and I
CHAPTER XXIX.

LONDON
showing their blue shirts, dark trousers, and boots coming to the calf.

almost all the earlier reports. None of the telegrams could have been
of my voice wherever I wish, so that you thought it was coming out of
uncooked steak, and the half of a ham. I give this catalogue so
these houses, and all those damn little clerks that used to live down
tropical exuberance of the red weed. Directly this extraordinary growth
“As often as I can. But you know married women have never much time for writing. My sisters may write to me. They will have nothing else to do.”
and the bushes so thick. We tramped and clumb around all over it, and
person’s fist, was where I had left it, so I took up the slab of

indisputably did much to counterbalance the increased weight of their
bare leg, wrapped about with bloody rags. He was a lucky man to have
There were half a dozen flys or more from the Woking station standing

prisoner not scrabbling his inscription to leave behind, and his coat
hope of destroying that object before it opened. It was only about
“Yes,” she answered, “I melted her with a bucket of water.”
“De man ain’t asleep—he’s dead. You hold still—I’ll go en see.”
another one, and go ahead. She warn’t particular; she could write about


The carts and carriages crowded close upon one another, making little

CHAPTER LIX
had to wipe every tear carefully from his face with her apron, so his
shoulder every now and then, but I didn’t see nobody. I was at Judge

“A Lion!” cried the little Queen. “Why, he would eat us all up.”
was after sun-up, and I had been sound asleep. Pap was standing over me
dollars apiece. Jim said we could take deck passage on a steamboat now,

most ruined for a servant, because he got stuck up on account of having
studying it out. I says to myself, I reckon a body that ups and tells
Most of the people were hard at it squealing and exciting themselves.
and moisture of the air, and sank to the earth in the form of dust.
“She did indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. Very nonsensical to come at all! Why must she be scampering about the country, because her sister had a cold? Her hair so untidy, so blowzy!{47}”
the things; but that was a lie: he got every blessed one of them out of

straight ahead, and so stepped into the holes and fell at full length
She was at least free from the offence of Mr. Darcy’s further notice: though often standing within a very short distance of her, quite disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be the probable consequence of her allusions to Mr. Wickham, and rejoiced in it.
“There’s some champagne in the cellar,” he said.

Kansas—but not before.”
their way into the torrent of people, my brother plunged into the
gone. Save for the big mound of greyish-blue powder in one corner,

XC.	Monte Carlo	432
Effects of a merciless Tax upon all the Articles of the most general Consumption.
Every year, say the prejudices of both nations, more than seven millions sterling are required for their two terrible balances;—but not above six millions are brought over from America:—if Spain and Portugal be allowed to come in for one sixth (indeed it would be but just), the other parts of Europe must settle it amongst themselves to find the two millions sterling, which without that assessment would be deficient in the balances necessary to France and England.—Whence does Europe take those two millions? Whence have they been taken hitherto? I know not: but it is a stubborn fact: you may consult the work of Mr. Necker for the balance of France, and for that of England the statements of Sir Charles Whitworth; the former amounts annually to 70 millions of livres, about 3 millions sterling; and the latter to 83,678,818l. in the space of 20 years, from 1754 to 1773; it is, one year[297] with another, more than 4,180,000l. per annum. But above all, let it not escape your observation, what is said in France, that the decline of that Empire will begin, when this balance of 70 millions of livres shall begin to decline, and that it is the opinion in England, that, were the favourable balance to be below 2 or 3 millions sterling, a national bankruptcy must indispensably follow. What is most miraculous (and indeed consolatory for those who are obliged to think of their elevation, before they dream of a bankruptcy, or even of their decline) is, that whilst France and England have received annually, the one 4, the other 3 millions sterling, that is to say, one sixth more than America has to share amongst all the European nations, the other countries in Europe have nevertheless increased their mass of money, by all that was necessary to keep up their luxury, and the circulation of a revenue which has almost doubled in the course of a century. These are prodigies which will cease to be so, even if we admit the facts on which they are founded, if we take the trouble of adding thereto a few other facts rather less questionable; and if it be acknowledged at last, that there are yet others, concerning which the most expert calculator cannot flatter himself that he shall even come near the truth, and which give[298] to those who will be at the trouble of reflecting, all the latitude they may want, to conclude that the two supposed balances are as inadmissible when subjected to the discussion of reason alone, as they are afterwards demonstrated to be false, by facts which cannot be controverted.
mother in disguise, and be ready to _ba_ like a sheep and shove soon
I came upon the wrecked handling-machine halfway to St. John’s Wood
We sat in the adjacent kitchen in the dark—for we dared not strike a
[182]
described the Heat-Ray to them, and they began to argue among
The preaching was going on under the same kinds of sheds, only they was
“That will be easy,” replied the man, “for when she knows you are in
usual for the prisoner’s mother to change clothes with him, and she
what made them; but Toto knew, and he walked close to Dorothy’s side,
Well, one thing was dead sure, and that was that Tom Sawyer was in

my cottage and took care to oil myself whenever I needed it. However,



weary faces smeared with tears. With many of these came men, sometimes
Nearly a month had passed since our engagement, and our visit was near drawing to a close; it was time to start on our homeward journey. I left Tiflis with heart-breaking regret; I hated to leave Sergy behind, he had grown into my heart and I could not bear the idea of being separated from him. I didn’t know how I was going to get along till April without a sight of him; deprived of his company my life would be lonely beyond words. Five months were such an awfully long time to wait! We promised to write to each other every day, but that was a poor consolation.
his cousin Joe (that was the other young chap) would make up for this
to talk. He says:
here too soon; and so I come down the back way.”

[Image unavailable.]
the duke he quit tending door and went around the back way and come on
of men and women on foot, and by the wheels of vehicles of every
head looking about. Behind the main body was a huge mass of white metal
bottom of a tin plate with a fork and throw it out of the window. The

all the time, and told her every blame thing, from where we first
fer to wait, so I slid overboard en struck out fer de islan’. Well, I
between us, I taking the northern side and he the southern, we played

while he locked me in and went down to the store, three miles, to the

before, and the judge said he believed it. The old man said that what a
By-and-by, when we got up, we turned over the truck the gang had stole
raft went by so close we could hear them talking and cussing and

I awoke to find that dismal howling still in my ears, “Ulla, ulla,
scarcely know how to speak of it—was the single tight tympanic surface,
said to her. “There is no hope for me,” she said sadly, “for Oz will


Our wedding was to take place at Dolgik in the beginning of April. Serge Michailovitch, Sergy as I called him now, spent a good deal of his time with me; we used to pass all our evenings together in the library, where we contrived a sort of recess, furnished with a sofa, in which we could talk in peace. Nothing will ever make me forget the hours we passed together, hours which were all but too brief for us; we forgot that clocks existed. Dear days! so long ago, yet so vivid to me! We sat on the sofa with our heads very close together, pretending to read out of a book that lay on my lap face downwards. One evening as I sat thus, side by side with Sergy, my hand imprisoned in his, developing our plans for our future happiness, the footsteps of my uncle Staritzki recalled us to reality. Seeing that I held my book upside down, uncle went to fetch a venerable calf-bound volume containing the code of laws, and gave it to me saying laughingly that, perhaps we should be more interested with that sort of literature.
SOCIETIES.

We were dreadfully struck and grieved to hear of my brother’s death, and soon after came a telegram from St. Petersburg announcing that our Emperor had departed this life. His Majesty fell dangerously ill during his stay in the Crimea, and died in October. The oath of loyalty to Nicholas II., who succeeded to the throne, was given in the cathedral by all the military and civil functionaries serving in Khabarovsk. The town is in mourning; there is not a yard of crape left in the shops. In November the betrothal of Nicolas II. with Princess Alice of Hessen, the granddaughter of Queen Victoria, took place.
trees grew so big and close together that their branches met over the
up a crick amongst the cypress woods, to see if I couldn’t get some


“I never grant favors without some return,” said Oz; “but this much I
She explained that they had as much as thirty pounds in gold, besides a
brownie, or in any other form that pleases him. But who the real Oz is,
The Countess Keller, one of the lady patronesses of Moscow, was getting up a charity affair in the hall of the Assembly, an amateur play and “Tableaux.” She called upon me to beg me to take part in these Tableaux, and would hear of no refusal. I asked for a day’s consideration, for Sergy rather disapproved of the whole thing, but the Countess sent me a note that same evening, imploring me to say “Yes” directly, and Sergy, who was always willing to accede to any wish I expressed, and had not the heart to refuse me anything, gave in.

not to leave a knife or anything in the cabin when he was away; I
let them go by; and as they went by I see they had the king and the
On the following day the “Goldes” were celebrating their “Feast of the Bear.” They bring up all the year round a young bear and devour it on that day. After lunch a “Golde” brought his two wives to be presented to me. They offered me a model of their national costume, richly embroidered.
tow-head to tie to, for it wouldn’t do to try to run in a fog; but when
“But if instead of trusting in Jesus and His consummate atonement, we trust and rely on our own virtue and consequently stand upon our own foundation, we shall never enjoy a moment’s peace and unshaken delight. Our virtue and holiness are and must remain imperfect.[Pg 168] We shall therefore always have reason to confess before God: ‘If Thou wilt mark in my thoughts, designs, intentions, what is amiss, who shall stand before Thee?’ Let us therefore seek for pardon, peace, and joy in Jesus; and having found that let us be grateful and obedient. But though we should be as holy as any of the apostles, let us beware lest we put our confidence in anything but the sufferings and atoning death of Jesus Christ.”
My mind was occupied by anxiety for my wife. I figured her at

approached, one of them said to her:

cannot kill her yourself, how do you expect me to do it?”
Next day we went to call on the Hollands, our Cairo friends, who live at Windsor Hotel. We started down Fifth Avenue, a street lined with solemn stately buildings with pillared porticoes, all of the self-same pattern. The height of the houses amazed me, some of them being from twenty to twenty-five stories high. The streets are mostly numbered and run in rows. The life in the streets is tremendous. There was an appalling thunder of trains rushing every minute above our heads.
“I am Dorothy,” answered the girl, “and these are my friends, the Tin
“Welcome, O King of Beasts! You have come in good time to fight our
“Walked back with them”	148

pass the hat around!” Then everybody said it, the preacher too.
ordinary “Pike County” dialect; and four modified varieties of this
Street, I saw far away over the trees in the clearness of the sunset
thief had been disturbed, and a number of gold chains and a watch lay


the grindstone; the bed-leg was sawed in two, and we had et up the
village they yawled us ashore. About two dozen men flocked down when
lawyer, says:

talk all kinds of languages, and knowed everything. And that ain’t the
some handbills, and stuck them up all over the village. The bills said:

When he saw Dorothy and her companions the man asked, “What do you wish
“Didn’t you know water would be the end of me?” asked the Witch, in a

In man, in all the higher terrestrial animals, such a method of
Wey, and the red glare was hidden from me. As I ascended the little
When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr. Collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so much struck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared he might almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfast parlour at Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey much gratification; but when Mrs. Philips understood from him what Rosings was, and who was its proprietor, when she had listened to the description of only one of Lady Catherine’s drawing-rooms, and found that the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt all the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison with the housekeeper’s room.
Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances of attachment. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing further to wish.{460}
In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother’s words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible whisper; for to her inexpressible vexation she could perceive that the chief of it was overheard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposite to them. Her mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.
sawed off that a way, s’e? _think_ of it, s’I? I lay it never sawed

Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I would thou couldst;
green girl, who showed each of them to their old rooms at once, so they

“No,” I cried, “that’s impossible! No human being——”

Oz gave a low growl at this, but said, gruffly: “If you indeed desire a


impenetrably dark. I stopped short in the doorway.
At first I regarded little but the road before me, and then abruptly my

“I _didn’t_ nuther.”
by their overthrow through any human effort. But on the fourth or fifth

the first lightning of the gathering storm, and the thunder burst like
Mamma, having enough of hotel life, began to look for a private villa, and I triumphed inwardly each time she did not come to a right understanding with the proprietors, for it did not suit me a bit to be separated from Walter Heape. But mamma made her choice at last, and before long we were installed in a pretty cottage called “Maison Monheau.” Happily the day of our removal coincided with the day of the departure of my English friends. Mr. Delbruck gave us a pressing invitation to come and have a grape-cure on his property, situated in the neighbourhood of Bordeaux. This suggestion was seized upon by the boys with enthusiasm; they promised me a warm reception and said they would do anything they could to make my visit a pleasant one, and painted me entrancing pictures of the good times they would give me; they could offer me fishing, a pony for me to ride, and[41] other enticing things. For my part I thought it would be splendid fun, and the invitation was so tempting that I was ready to embrace Mr. Delbruck, but mamma declined it to my intense disappointment.
I was a little depressed at first with the contagion of my wife’s


which he stretched, but mainly he told the truth. That is nothing. I
three times, and missed fire and fell every time, and the last time
him up. I told him me and my brother was over on Spanish Island hunting



left three or four thousand in cash hid up som’ers.”
replied the Princess.
“Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehension of its containing any repetition of those sentiments, or renewal of those offers, which were last night so disgusting to you. I write without any intention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wishes, which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and the effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should have been spared, had not my character required it to be written{245} and read. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand your attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I demand it of your justice.
“How you gwyne to git ’m? You can’t slip up on um en grab um; en how’s
destroyed Lisbon a century ago.
Wizard.”
“Mercy sakes!”
“It’s a lie! You done it, and you got to _say_ you done it, or—”
The sun scorched my bare back. At last, as the bridge at Walton was
is kings, and you got to make allowances. Take them all around, they’re



“What’s it all about?”
And we done it elegant, too.” He’d got a start, and she never checked
It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could be added to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject by its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long, during the whole of the journey. From Elizabeth’s thoughts it was never absent. Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish,{350} self-reproach, she could find no interval of ease or forgetfulness.
elegant little piles. Everybody looked hungry at it, and licked their
October 26th.—We spent the whole afternoon on the veranda bargaining with natives who carried trays of precious stones. One has to be very careful with these vendors, who frequently sell worthless stones for precious ones. Sergy bought me a beautiful moonstone necklace.
locked, and we wanted to see the fun, so we went down the
heads. So he glided along, and the powwow and racket getting more and
at that. I went straight out in the country as much as a mile before I

But it warn’t no use; he stormed right along, and said any man that

I was very glad to do as he asked, and so become one of the privileged
from the village, not from below. So I just took a look, and shoved
“You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of my journey hither. Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why I come.”
summerhouse talking vigorously about the battle that was lowering upon

Another day Danys entered into a loud detail of grievances of which her brother was the cause. She had to keep strict watch on him; but he did everything that he was told not to do, and gave her a world of trouble. When he got ideas into his head, there was never peace till he had what he wanted. He was mamma’s own pet, and could get almost anything he liked out of her, and led her by the nose. Whatever Hermann did, whatever Hermann said, was always right, and Danys was always in the wrong, and had undeserved punishment even when she was behaving in the most exemplary manner. She was Hermann’s scapegoat and accustomed to hear herself roughly spoken to by her mother, and always roared at. “I wish I were as small as a needle and Hermann as big as an elephant, perhaps I wouldn’t have always to bear the blame then!” said poor Danys, her eyes filling with tears.
“But it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of any consideration in the world,” replied Darcy.
water you could see a spark or two—on a raft or a scow, you know; and

Still, all this does not explain her charm, which, taking beauty as a common form of all heroines, may perhaps consist in the addition to her playfulness, her wit, her affectionate and natural disposition, of a certain fearlessness very uncommon in heroines of her type and age. Nearly all of them would have been in speechless awe of the magnificent Darcy; nearly all of them would have palpitated and fluttered at the idea of proposals, even naughty ones, from the fascinating Wickham. Elizabeth, with nothing offensive, nothing viraginous, nothing of the “New Woman” about her, has by nature what the best modern (not “new”) women have by education and experience, a perfect freedom from the idea that all men may bully her if they choose, and that most will{xxiii} away with her if they can. Though not in the least “impudent and mannish grown,” she has no mere sensibility, no nasty niceness about her. The form of passion common and likely to seem natural in Miss Austen’s day was so invariably connected with the display of one or the other, or both of these qualities, that she has not made Elizabeth outwardly passionate. But I, at least, have not the slightest doubt that she would have married Darcy just as willingly without Pemberley as with it, and anybody who can read between lines will not find the lovers’ conversations in the final chapters so frigid as they might have looked to the Della Cruscans of their own day, and perhaps do look to the Della Cruscans of this.
loafers get up and watch the thing out of sight, and laugh at the fun

fambly foun’ it out ’bout half an hour ago—maybe a little mo’—en’ I
“When I contemplate the ways of God by which He led me I am full of admiration and praise. I was once a heathen, who did not know Him and He called me by His faithful servant Mr. Schwartz. This, my venerable father, received and instructed me. His exertions by day and night tended to bring me to repentance towards God and faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ, to produce in me fruits meet for repentance, to induce me to lead a Godly and holy life and to grow in knowledge and in every grace[Pg 137] and virtue. He did not destine me to worldly concerns but appointed me to bring my nation to the knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ whom He sent to redeem the world.”
circle of deep blue and the little round planet swimming in the field.
The Serebriakoffs could not accompany us. The Colonel was promoted to the grade of general, and had[437] received a new appointment at Moscow. I was awfully sorry to part with Mrs. Serebriakoff with whom I had gone through many hardships during our first tour around the world.
passion of emotion, while I, with a curious forgetfulness of my own
Mr. Young rates the clear profits of the Manufactories and Trade of England alone at 37 millions; but as these two objects have apparently been trebled in regard to the exports, they cannot be supposed to have exceeded 12 millions in[6] the reign of William and Mary. To this let us add, in a proportion rather exaggerated, 5 millions for the landed and commercial revenues of Scotland; and it will appear, that, including the 32 millions of landed produce, as computed by Mr. King, the total amount of the revenue, land and trade of both countries included, could hardly be equal to 49 millions in the beginning of the present century. Now, from the same author, both kingdoms contained at that period 7,200,000 inhabitants, who, if admitted to a brotherly share, would have claimed only 4½d. each per day. I do not confine myself to a nicer exactness in the fractions: the object is not to calculate the precise instant of an eclipse; or at least, that of English prosperity appearing to me no ways probable, I think myself justified in neglecting every thing that might impede my operations, without influencing, in the least, my arguments.
 I. THE EVE OF THE WAR.

We drove in rikshas to the Oriental Hotel through dark and empty streets.
will have to live with us.”
pulpit.”

On his way back Sergy was overtaken by a terrible storm in the Sea of Okhotsk. His steamer arrived at Vladivostock covered with ice.
want to go no deeper—didn’t want to rob a lot of orphans of


CHAPTER LXXII
CHAPTER LI
Elizabeth privately added, “And how much I shall have to conceal!”

to do our _duty_, and not worry about whether anybody _sees_ us do it
DE L’ÉDITEUR.
and silent, eloquent lips. He wanted the slit, which permitted only one
mournful inscriptions, and we can kill two birds with that same rock.

we had fifteen of the bulliest kind of ones; and then we took it and
her umbrella and the brave little dog flew at her and bit her leg in
silver whistle.
put his’n on, and he told me to put mine on. I done it, of course. The
London

“Nor I, I am sure,” said Miss Bingley.
LXVI.	Tokio	352
enough to forget to remember to not deny about hiding the money-bag
case at Pinner, and heard at some railway station on his way of the
“No, no. You forced me into visiting him last year, and promised, if I went to see him, he should marry one of my daughters. But it ended in nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool’s errand again.”
“I know how to fix it. We got to have a rock for the coat of arms and
the corporal who would leave them behind. I stopped and gripped his
he presses us too hard. No!—point it at his horse.”
people—whereas you’re just _as_ brave, and no braver. Why don’t your
long as I could. The water was in a tumult about me, and rapidly
the Winkies, and gave them sharp spears, telling them to go to the
along, and both of them going it at once, like a cat convention; and
Shepperton guns spoke this time unavailingly.
young Harney and Miss Sophia. He said they’d got across the river and
[Image unavailable.]

The streets are full of life and movement. Chinese women, enveloped in long blue shirts, plod on their deformed feet. Fat, grotesque-looking Chinese maggots sprawl in splendid victorias. Curious one-wheeled vehicles are pushed by a vigorous coolie, bearing one passenger only, sitting at one end of a plank put on the top of the enormous wheel, making balance to his goods and chattels placed on the other end of the plank. As “time is not money” in the Orient, the fare of a run which lasts sometimes half-a-day, with many halts, is only one farthing! We met a “towkee,” or mandarin, arrayed in a marvellous costume embroidered with silk and gold, who was conveyed in a rich palanquin, surrounded by many attendants who beat the drum all the way. Further on our carriers stopped to make way for a funeral procession, preceded by Chinamen sounding the horn and beating the drum. The deceased is carried in a large box ornamented with a metal dragon. Behind came the hired women mourners, with their plaintive wail. The whole procession is arrayed in white, the mourning colour in China. On our way back we passed along the Bund, in the English section, a pleasant little park to which no Chinaman, be he a coolie or a mandarin, was admitted, and traversed the broad, grassy Maidan, the European rendezvous, where Englishmen and Americans, in spotless flannels, played cricket or football. On the pier we saw a flag signalling a tempest coming on. How annoying! We shall have to wait here until the typhoon passes away. In different places placards announced the arrival of Antoine Kontski, the celebrated pianist, Beethoven’s last disciple.
shoved on by; but the front door was locked, and the key wasn’t there.

The happy Issue of a desperate Combat between Monopoly and some private Interests.	265
“What I have seen,” says he, “and experienced in the majority of places during my stay I truthfully declare. On the Island of Taprobane (i.e. Ceylon), in Inner India, where the Indian Ocean is, there is to be found a community of Christians, consisting of both clergy and the faithful, but I do not know whether there are any Christians to be found beyond this. Similarly in Male (Malabar, perhaps more particularly Quilon, which was later known by the Arabs as Kullam-male) where pepper grows and in the place called Caliana (Kalyan near Bombay) there is also a Bishop, who receives imposition of hands from Persia, as well as in the isle called the Isle of Discoris in the same Indian Sea. The inhabitants of that island speak Greek, having been originally settled there by the Ptolemies who ruled after Alexander of Macedon. There are clergy there also, ordained and sent from Persia to minister among the people of the island, and a multitude of Christians.... In a very great number of places one found churches of Christians with Bishops, martyrs, monks and recluses, wherever in fact the Gospel of Christ had been proclaimed.”
fetched away a three-gallon jug of whisky, too, that he found under a
We became silent, and stood watching for a time side by side, deriving,
I resolved to leave him—would that I had! Wiser now for the

Release date: July 1, 2024 [eBook #73958]


“I hain’t been doing a single thing, Aunt Sally, I hope to gracious if

“A piece of a raft,” I says.
Here we are at Boulogne, comfortably settled at the Hôtel du Pavilion Impérial. From the window I can see the broad Atlantic and the sea-shore which is so extensive that in 1855 Napoleon III. made the review of an army of 40,000 men on it. The tides are very strong at Boulogne, the sea is very high in the afternoon, the water rising rapidly with a great splashing of waves, and towards evening it is quite low again. Bathing is allowed only after the arrival of the life-boats at their station. In bad weather, when the signals of stormy weather are hung out, bathing is forbidden. We spent most of our time out of doors, taking long walks by the sea-shore or wandering up and down the winding, sleepy, streets of old “Haute-Ville,” and climbing up the ramparts with their pleasant outlook on fields and ocean.
and no further, I most dropped in my tracks I was so scared. Well, I

clear, high-pitched voice. He was standing on the cylinder, which was
afraid to try to work up to it. But at supper, at night, one of the
Let the dead bodies be wrapped up in woollen instead of linen cloth; linen coming from abroad, wool being a staple commodity, and the dead caring little whether their winding-sheet be made of woollen or linen: it is a point of economy which it would be rather too severe to condemn, although it is probable enough that in the North they would exchange with pleasure,[322] for your buried woollen, linen cloth in sufficient quantity to wrap up your dead; a circumstance which might prove very beneficial to some of the living, both in England and Silesia. But will you attempt to persuade, that it is advantageous to the State, under any aspect, to compel a man who calls himself free, to wear manufactured buttons, when his inclination would lead him to have them made of remnants of stuff? Will you attempt to persuade, that it is advantageous to the State, to make him pay a penalty of 3 or 4 pounds, besides cost, if he is surprised flagrante delicto? Will you attempt to persuade, that it is advantageous to the State, to encourage the infamous trade of informing, by a reward in favour of an informer, against a man guilty of such a crime? Will you attempt to persuade, that it is advantageous to the State, to withdraw from their useful occupations a swarm of fellows, become capable of any dirty work, by having turned informers on account of the stipulated recompense, and who, waiting for an opportunity of doing worse, leave their work-shops as soon as such a law is passed, in search of a prey the seisure of which will enable them to live in riot and intoxication for a whole week together, without being obliged to return to their work? This is not all; for, in fine, if all the branches of industry[323] have the same right to the protection of Government, does not a law, the immediate effect of which is to enhance the price of buttons by occasioning a greater demand for that article, destroy all idea of that protection equally due to the other branches of industry, by infallibly depriving some of them, both of the amount of the cash they might have received from those who will now be forced, against their inclination, to purchase manufactured buttons, and of the amount of cash which the advanced price of manufactured buttons, will unjustly wrest from those who, by the effect of the law, are obliged to pay dearer for what they might have procured at a cheaper rate? Would not the least facility granted for the importation of some foreign merchandise, have occasioned abroad a greater consumption, either of buttons, or of some other English goods, than such a law can procure at home in the manufactory unjustly favoured? But, above all, will you attempt to persuade, that it is advantageous for the State, to acquire a thousand more button-makers, when that acquisition is obtained by the loss of a thousand artificers employed in manufacturing some other articles, the consumption of which would have been free, that is, analogous to the situation of those who boast of their being so?


Why, Huck, it wouldn’t make no more talk than breaking into a soap

proud of me for helping these rapscallions, because rapscallions and
I was beside myself with joy, it was simply glorious to have Sergy here, but his flying visit only sharpened my desire to have him always near me. The days that followed his departure were long and dismal; I was literally pining for him and counted the weeks and days like a schoolgirl.
But that the undiscovered country from whose bourne no traveler
But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage it was more difficult to understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak, it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice—a sacrifice to propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He{227} seldom appeared really animated. Mrs. Collins knew not what to make of him. Colonel Fitzwilliam’s occasionally laughing at his stupidity proved that he was generally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have told her; and as she would have liked to believe this change the effect of love, and the object of that love her friend Eliza, she set herself seriously to work to find it out: she watched him whenever they were at Rosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford; but without much success. He certainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that look was disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it seemed nothing but absence of mind.
sparkled with gems, as did everything else. In the center of the chair

“Really,” said the Scarecrow, “you ought to be ashamed of yourself for
and left them a sober gray; they had taken the red from her cheeks and
Let us suppose, that population is doubled as well as the revenue; no alteration can certainly take place in the real value of things;—that value will remain for each article, the same as it was before; that is, the sum of the labour requisite for the production of that article:[5] neither will the relative value undergo any change; the quantity of labour known, or supposed, in two different objects of a certain consumption, will remain, as at first, the sole criterion for fixing the difference of value in the one and the other. The essential relation of general correspondence between the wants, and the real resources, remaining also the same, there can likewise be no real difference in the situation of any individual whatever; if there are every where two consumers to one, the same increase will be found in the number of productors. The only palpable, and unavoidable alteration, always grievous when it is sudden, is that which,[139] in the present hypothesis, must have taken place in the nominal value, that is to say, in the money-price of every thing; for the quantity of coin which was in circulation, being always the same in that country, standing by itself as we have supposed, and without mines, whilst the objects representing the said quantity, had successively doubled, it had been indispensable, successively, either by degrees, or by starts, to come to the point of giving for 2 in money, that which could not be given before for less than 4, or rather of denominating 4, that same quantity of money which hitherto had been denominated 2.—If you look for a precedent of the first effects of a disproportion too considerable or too rapid, between the wants and the demands, or between the mass of coin in circulation, and the number of articles to be circulated, it will be found, in the revolutions which took place in England, during the space of two years only, 1288, 1289, the quarter of wheat rose from 1s. to 2s. then to 3s. 9s. 12s. came down again to 2s. was then raised all at once to 20s. and fell at last to 16s. where it seemed to support itself for some years (see the excellent Inquiry of Mr. Smith, into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations); this is the man truly[140] capable of dissecting, as it were, that subject, of which I can, at best, but mangle the epidermis.

I was sorry to say good-bye to Mrs. Holland. We parted with mutual regret and promises of letters. Kissing me fondly she said: “I love you awfully, darling; I have never met a more lovely little thing than you!” A few more kisses and we separated to follow our diverse destinies. Mrs. Holland stood on the doorway to see us off and waved her hand in friendly farewell, whilst the omnibus slowly carried us away.

for Judge Thatcher in the courts to make him give up that money, and he
them dogs never even got on the _track_ of ’m once! You explain _that_
“Stern oars, there! heave her head to stabboard!” I heard that just as
Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from observing how much the beauty of her sister rekindled the admiration of her former lover. When first he came in, he had spoken to her but little, but every five minutes seemed to be giving her more of his attention. He found her as handsome as she had{414} been last year; as good-natured, and as unaffected, though not quite so chatty. Jane was anxious that no difference should be perceived in her at all, and was really persuaded that she talked as much as ever; but her mind was so busily engaged, that she did not always know when she was silent.

these beats jailed.”
scooting along the bluff bank in the easy water. Pretty soon we come to
Miss Watson, your runaway nigger Jim is down here two mile below



steamboat landing; but they couldn’t come it. Every time one of them
out for some sign of these monsters. I slept little. As I lay in bed I
nothing else. I slunk along another piece further, then listened again;
11thly,
“I am sure she did not listen”	393


Not these impaired the sacred name

“If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better for the neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then we might possibly get a settled family there. But, perhaps, Mr. Bingley did not take the{223} house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as for his own, and we must expect him to keep or quit it on the same principle.”
“Git aboard,” says the king. “Hold on a minute, my servant ’ll he’p you
 XI. AT THE WINDOW.

First, If that tax lessens the consumption of the article taxed, provision must be made, by a fresh tax, for the deficit in the first, which nevertheless has already deprived of sustenance, those who derived it only from that article of consumption annihilated by the tax.
don’t ever think of that. No, you _feel_ like you are laying dead still
railway station to get an evening paper, for the morning papers had
In the night we crossed the Marble Sea, and early the next morning we perceived the Dardanelles, and heard the beat of the drum on the opposite shore. Towards evening we entered the Archipelago, strewn with rocky islands, and passed before Lesbos, with shores scorched by the sun, without a tree or a blade of grass.
on the raft with Jim, hiding daytimes and running nights, the way me
like it.”
the case. You don’t know kings, Jim, but I know them; and this old rip
He relapsed into silence, with his chin now sunken almost to his knees.
the sound of a cawing overhead I looked up at the huge fighting-machine

three telescopic stars infinitely remote, and all around it was the
may thereafter be free for evermore.”
on the shoulder and says:




I had heard about some of these things before, but not all of them. Jim
of the coal cellar, and stood there in the darkness staring at the
Gunn’s Family Medicine, which told you all about what to do if a body
her go out of that door; no, I hain’t ever seen her since, but I reckon
“After a short survey”

“Well,” says I, a-blubbering, “I’ve told everybody before, and they
together—and hadn’t ever seen his brother William at all—that’s the
understand the reasons for it, and how it’s the custom in Europe; so

“Gentlemen,” says the young man, very solemn, “I will reveal it to you,

be in time for dinner; keeping indoors after dinner for fear of the
It appears to me that matters thus settled, might remain so for ever, without inconvenience, without any alteration of prices, in either of the two nations, had not Nature, either from mere caprice, or to make men, in spite of themselves, dependent on each other, and oblige them to look on one another as brethren, established certain unknown rules, in consequence of which, that very same wheat, which would cost only 26 or 27s. at Rome, we have supposed, and 40s. in London, this same wheat I say, the staff of life all over Europe, every where accounted the standard of labour, and every where cultivated in proportion to its common necessity, is at times nevertheless at one place in great plenty, and very scarce at another. Now it seems to be a matter of perfect indifference, that in regard to any other article a merchant should ransom his wealthy fellow citizen, a landed proprietor, by charging him, for instance, 30 crowns for an English trinket, originally purchased for no more than 10, as an equitable measure between labour and labour: it is the younger son who robs the elder brother, to provide against the right of primogeniture; or, in other words, it is no more than the transferring of a few crowns, from a very valuable hand, that of the consumer, to another equally precious, that of an agent of the production:[163] but it is of the utmost consequence for the Sovereign, that, in a time of scarcity, insatiable men, were they even his subjects, do not presume to ask 4000 grains of silver for a quarter of wheat, upon pretence that in England, from whence it was imported, they have paid for it 3440 grains, (for it is always upon such victorious arguments that the national monopolist endeavours to defend his extortions, in times of distress); the difference is so great between 4000 grains of silver, and only 2200 or 2300, the common price by which that of labour is regulated in my hypothesis, that all the treasure shut up in the castle of St. Angelo could not prevent half the inhabitants from starving for want of food in a time of dearth. Luckily, however, this misfortune may be obviated by one of the grandest operations in finance, that can possibly be conceived; for the object is no less than to oblige the people to pay in good earnest for their wheat in a moment of scarcity, at the rate of 4000 grains of silver per quarter, a price so far above the means of that very people, to whom the intention is to shew some favour. This financiering operation is founded on the following remark, obvious to the meanest capacity, and perhaps not unworthy of being deeply searched into by a judicious observer.

Our boat has brought a parcel bearing my address at St. Petersburg, postmarked Sydney. The message over the seas was a book written by O’Ryan, an Australian doctor who had served in the Turkish army during the Russian-Turkish war, whom I had met many years ago at Erzeroum. The book is entitled, “Under the Red Crescent.” It is mentioned in it that the author had fallen in love with me at first sight, and could not forget me till now. It was a strange coincidence that the book travelled in the same mail-bag, going to the same country, and it was very queer this unexpected discovery of an Australian adorer of long vanished times.

Heading to Chapter V.	22
on Sundays he wore a blue tail-coat with brass buttons on it. He

smoke driving across the stars, and thought that nothing more serious
[316]

Tin Woodman told her all. She thanked him for saving them and sat down
After the review the Emperor invited the chief-commanders to a lunch at Petrovski Palace. Some of the officers of the Emperor’s suite came to pay us a visit in the afternoon, General Skobeleff, a brilliant celebrity, amongst them. Though he was supposed to be a woman-hater, he gallantly kissed my hand, at which an enthusiastic lady-visitor, who happened to be present, began to examine my hand to see if a star had not incrusted itself on it after the kiss of such a man, every inch a hero.
gets here.”
“Can’t you get down?” asked Dorothy.

This made Dorothy so very angry that she picked up the bucket of water
turning and pushing at those behind, in order to clear their way to


other side you couldn’t tell nothing about her only whether she was a
gorgeous frocks of silver and gold and purple; and shepherds dressed in

Miss Watson she kept pecking at me, and it got tiresome and lonesome.
was watching the corpse all sound asleep on their chairs. The door was
[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]

_everything_ they had.


nights, it’s us; we’re going to set you free.”

Wimbledon, Richmond Park, Kew, and so forth—at unnaturally early hours;
and then put their hand on their head, and looked up towards the sky,
KISSINGEN

“I don’t want to blow on nobody; and I ain’t got no time to blow,
The carriage road that leads from Vladicaucasus to Tiflis is equally dangerous in winter as in summer, for instead of snow avalanches there are falls of stones. I shuddered when I passed under these treacherous rocks, dreading every time we passed them to be smashed to pieces. I was startlingly impressed by the scenery; it was a wild, primeval landscape, great old mountains all around. Sharp turns were to be made and we had often to stop the carriage to let omnibuses and camels pass, a process for which there was scarcely enough room.
of tin nor straw, and could not live unless she was fed.
and bothered both. But Tom says:
headline, you won’t have to come a-near the raft—please do.”
My windows look out on the lake and bit of garden belonging to our boarding-house. Just before dinner I looked out of the window and discovered our hostess sitting in the garden, holding a bit of crotchet in her fingers. I found that she had altered in a most surprising way, and was utterly metamorphosed and unrecognisable, transformed into a portly lady, wearing a black silk dress, with hair beautifully dressed.
“No, my boy,” says the old gentleman, “I’m sorry to say ’t your driver
The Council with the Munchkins
between us; we could a touched him, nearly. Well, likely it was minutes

The minute I was far enough above the town to see I could make the
shake and clear out and leave them behind. Well, early one morning we

May 15th.—Yesterday on our way home from the cloister of Abdurakman-Kazi, we saw on our way some bomb shells. This morning, a little shepherd turned over one of these shells, which exploded and tore the poor lad to pieces.
“Write to me very often, my dear.”
“Well, then,” I says, “if we don’t want the picks and shovels, what do

July 19th.—We are passing the whole day before the stations named “The Seven Capital Sins.” Towards night we stopped before the “Fourth Sin.” These stations have been fitly named: their aspect takes away every desire to sin. I never saw such God-forsaken places!
went out into the street again.

both of them cried, “Oh, my!” as soon as they looked over the wall.
Another night we went to the theatre to see “Serge Panine,” the comedy in vogue. I liked the play, but the spectators did not seem to understand it, and giggled in the most pathetic places. We were very much amused when a dog, who was promenading between the chairs, mounted on the stage and stretched himself comfortably before the prompter’s box.
eyes on it.”

Myers, St. Paul.
works himself up and slobbers out a speech, all full of tears and
jabbed his fork into it in three or four places first.
“Oh,” he says. And after a minute, he says:
MOSCOW




the convulsive movements of the outer skin.
the Pool became a scene of mad confusion, fighting, and collision, and
kitchen; and there was things enough on that table for seven


If it were acknowledged, that in regard to the money proprietor, whether dependant or capitalist, nothing can result from it but the certainty of procuring henceforth and for ever, at the most equitable price, that which he had paid for hitherto according to the rate set on it by monopoly, and often by a scarcity cunningly prepared and managed:
Scarecrow to rule over us.”
“That is proof that he is sharp,” remarked the Lion.
One or two had been disturbed by dogs.
you been _doing_ down there.”
blue and white tiles, and a couple of coloured supplements fluttering




Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the trouble of finding a subject to him.
mile wide.
as much about it as anybody did, and as soon as we was half up stairs
An Italian yacht, the “Christopher Columbus,” bearing the Prince of the Abruzzes, the nephew of King Humbert,[392] has arrived at Vladivostock, but the Prince didn’t proceed further on to Khabarovsk.
’kase it’s down in de bills dat you’s gwyne to git hung.”
writhing with the gusts of the dying storm, and throwing a red
thing—that is, there’s something in it when a body like the widow or
Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to supper; but their carriage was, unluckily, ordered before any of the others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them.

October 27th.—At 8 o’clock in the evening we took our passage on the Océanien, a steamer bound to Marseilles. If the temperature permitted, I would jump for joy at the thought that it was our boat to Europe.
quick blow that cut the beast’s head clean off from its body, and it
“It’s all right; I’ve got it. Take my trunk in your wagon, and let on
weed. And over all—silence. It filled me with indescribable terror to

yaller girl’s frock.”




give me no credit; it all belongs to them dear people in Pokeville
The following principles are such as, I think, can never mislead.

short, with a little cry of surprise.

CHAPTER VIII
again; pap said he’d been a man that had always been misunderstood
She first loved a Greek, of colour dark and sallow,
“Mrs. Long and her nieces”	420
Trouble now broke out afresh in Madras, for the French were again investing the town, and the missionaries at Vepery gathered together in prayer for the safety and success of the British arms. During an assault on the town the native horsemen who were assisting the French troops swept down on to the mission buildings and robbed the Christian men, women, and children who were in the church for security. It is surprising that there was no bloodshed, but, as one of the missionaries said, “Our gracious God, however, without whose permission not a hair falls from our heads, mercifully preserved his servants, so that their persons were not touched and, with the exception of being plundered, no one sustained the slightest injury.” After getting some protection from the French officers, Mr. Fabricius went back to his dismantled station at Vepery, where everything was in confusion and only a few manuscripts and books were left[Pg 65] by the fierce Mohammedan troops. For some time it seemed as if the English in the fort would not be able to hold out, but at the critical moment their fleet appeared before Madras and not only was the siege abandoned but in several subsequent battles the French power was, as regards India, broken for ever.
The next day being Sunday, we went to hear mass at the Russian church. The singing was beautiful, but our priest, with his hair cut short, did not at all harmonise with the rest of the Orthodox surroundings. After lunch, we had a nice trip by boat to St. Cloud. We had lunch there at a small inn over the entrance door of which we read with eager eyes, “Lait Frais,” (Fresh Milk). A simpering red-armed and rosy-cheeked servant girl in a pink print dress, appeared wiping her hands with her blue apron; she spread a brown cloth upon a table standing in a green harbour under a big walnut tree, and served us a frugal repast, consisting of milk and eggs. A few steps from us stood a pair of scales with a placard saying, “Come and see how much you weigh before and after dinner,” serving, surely, as a catchword to this inn, as over the door there was a painted hand pointing to the scales. After our cosy meal, we walked gaily through the grounds of St. Cloud, enjoying our walk as two big school children out for a holiday.
acted. I never see such an old ostrich for wanting to gobble
_Maggiore fretta, minore atto._ Got it out of a book—means the more

been destroyed completely; by a chance the kitchen and scullery had
The secret of that charm many men and not a few women, from Miss Austen herself downwards, have felt, and like most charms it is a thing rather to be felt than to be explained. Elizabeth of course belongs to the allegro or allegra division of the army of Venus. Miss Austen was always provokingly chary of description in regard to her beauties; and except the fine eyes, and a hint or two that she had at any rate sometimes a bright complexion, and was not very tall, we hear nothing about her looks. But her chief difference from other heroines of the lively type seems to lie first in her being distinctly clever—almost strong-minded, in the better sense of that objectionable word—and secondly in her being entirely destitute of ill-nature for all her propensity to tease and the sharpness of her tongue. Elizabeth can give at least as good as she gets when she is attacked; but she never “scratches,” and she never attacks first. Some of the merest obsoletenesses of phrase and{xxii} manner give one or two of her early speeches a slight pertness, but that is nothing, and when she comes to serious business, as in the great proposal scene with Darcy (which is, as it should be, the climax of the interest of the book), and in the final ladies’ battle with Lady Catherine, she is unexceptionable. Then too she is a perfectly natural girl. She does not disguise from herself or anybody that she resents Darcy’s first ill-mannered personality with as personal a feeling. (By the way, the reproach that the ill-manners of this speech are overdone is certainly unjust; for things of the same kind, expressed no doubt less stiltedly but more coarsely, might have been heard in more than one ball-room during this very year from persons who ought to have been no worse bred than Darcy.) And she lets the injury done to Jane and the contempt shown to the rest of her family aggravate this resentment in the healthiest way in the world.

of an army of hawkers following these pioneers. Men came scrambling off
was most all the time at it, because it was about the only way to put

It was nuts for the crowd, though maybe not for the king’s friends; so
My brother stopped.
Still indefatigable, we went to visit Westminster Abbey, and saw the hall in the Temple where Shakespeare played before Queen Elizabeth. After that we had a stand up sixpenny lunch in a small and rather shabby establishment, which consisted of one room only, where a white-aproned cook fried mutton-chops served to us on a marble table on which table-cloth and serviettes were conspicuous by their absence.
“I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has no defect. He owns it himself without disguise.”
“All right, I’ll do it, seeing it’s you, and you’ve been good to us and
together. There was a place on my ankle that got to itching, but I


hands; so I took up a needle off of the table and went to threading it.
tragedy happened, and a number of people, shop people and so forth,
XXV.	Lucerne	172

up’ards, and jams him into an old trap of a cabin like this, and lets
The monsoon rages at this season in these parts. When we came into the open sea the long swell began to lift and toss the steamer like a cork. The passengers became immediately sea-sick and sought their berths. One of the cows on board broke her leg during the horrid rocking and had to be killed. I rolled my deck-chair into the corridor under a ventilator broken through the ceiling, which allowed me to overhear all the conversation which took place on the upper deck; the rolling was less here. Maria Michaelovna brought me some tea and a lot of nice things with it. Over my head, through the pipe of the ventilator, I heard the recruits conversing. Two men began to pick a quarrel, and nearly came to blows. Both of them were put under arrest. Whilst they were being led away, one of the quarrellers complained to the officer on duty that his antagonist, in an access of fury, had pricked him with a pin, and the other one defended himself, advancing that he had been pricked the first with a crust of bread!
Three millions of mechanics do not live more soberly, nor are they worse clothed, than the husbandmen: it may therefore be inferred, that out of the 20 millions, which they likewise receive for their labour, they lay out in the produce of industry, 12 millions, which, added to the 44 millions I have just mentioned, make, all together, 56 millions.

across her breast, and two arms stretched out in front, and two more



I ’uz mos’ to de foot er de islan’ b’fo’ I found’ a good place. I went
But there was a tremendous amount of work to be done before they could be ready for the great offensive to be carried across space. The great ships were rapidly being equipped with the electron projectors and assembled in long rows outside the great transmitting stations, awaiting the final start.
and three thousand dollars, gold, to the girls; and it give the tanyard
overwhelmed in its overthrow. It seemed to me then that this might have
irritable with the curate’s perpetual ejaculations; I tired of the

the Martians were evidently, in spite of their repulsive forms,
anything in them but jimpson weeds, and sunflowers, and ash-piles, and
“The man that bought him is named Abram Foster—Abram G. Foster—and he
Of course the two were quite unable to do anything. They shouted
We get from his letters at this period references to the political trouble which was making his efforts as a missionary very difficult, the people resenting oppression, the policy of the English represented by the Company changing continually with the fluctuation of their alliance with the native rulers, agriculture at a standstill, and the sepoys in a state of mutiny because they can get no pay. “It is truly melancholy,” he writes, “that nothing but fear will incline us to do justice to them. By these means[Pg 128] all discipline is relaxed, the officers lose that respect which is due to their rank and station, and the Sepoys become insolent. This has been the case not only in time of war, but now in the time of peace. May God help us to consider the things which belong to our peace in all respects.” But amidst these difficulties he works hard to consolidate the little gatherings of Christians which look to him as a spiritual father and is busy with the schools, the interest of the children always lying so near his heart. Schwartz is full of faith, and his sunny presence brings confidence and hope wherever he goes; of such a man one might well say that he was a happy saint with an optimistic view under the most depressing circumstances. In so many respects he was ahead of his age, seeing possibilities which had not yet been revealed to the few Missionary Societies existing, at any rate in England, and drawing confidence and encouragement from the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, which had so well supported him in all his aims.

help to you, I am such a fool.”
The man that had a-holt of me was very good to me, and kept saying he
corner turning up towards the post office a little cart, filled with
handling-machine, with a faint and musical clinking, extended,
of the pit. And then, amid the clangour of the machinery, came a

“No; he never saw him till the other morning at Meryton.”
may converse with me.” Indeed, the Voice seemed just then to come
the mud at the bottom of the river. Then, before he could pull it out
thunderstorm. Here, moved by curiosity, I turned aside to find, among a

The next morning we rode to Chillon where we visited the mediæval castle, historically old and famous. The Château de Chillon stands on a small island which is reached by a bridge. An old guardian produced a large bunch of keys and took us all over the castle, down a labyrinth of mysterious echoing passages with many hidden nooks. It is a place full of thrilling historical associations; to hear the guide talk of the massacres that took place here, made my blood run cold. Down steep, winding steps we followed our guide into the secret chambers where the victims were kept. He brought us into a dungeon where Bonnivard, the famous “Prisoner of Chillon,” endured his weary captivity, chained up to a post three hundred years ago. It has tall columns carved apparently from the rock, inscribed all over with a thousand names beginning with Byron and Victor Hugo. The torture-chamber was also shown to us, where the prisoners, after hideous martyrdom on the bed of tortures, were sentenced to death. We saw the huge stone upon which the victims condemned to death spent their last night. After long tortures to some of them it was announced that they were free, and believing that they were going into liberty, they joyfully descended the three steps which led into a deep pit and fell down upon sharp-pointed daggers. A shiver ran through me when I passed the open square where the gibbet stood, and saw the windows from which the corpses of the executed were thrown right down into the lake. Now we were entering the apartments of the duchesses which opened on the lake, whereat those of their husbands looked into the courtyard. As it appears in olden times also the first place was given to the ladies. Then pushing open a heavy oak door we entered a great vaulted hall paved with stone[183] quarries and adorned with figures of knights in armour, with a monumental granite fire-place at one end. We went out of the gloomy castle as fast as we could, and were glad to be back at peaceful and modern Montreux.

his pocket. Then we went to the nigger cabins, and while I got Nat’s
“Gimme a chaw ’v tobacker, Hank.”
“I warn’t prowling around, sir, I fell overboard off of the steamboat.”
crowd the same way. When me and the king and the duke got home to the
[443]
our duty to see that they don’t get away from here till we’ve looked
“The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured father always gave me much uneasiness; and, since I have had the misfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the breach: but, for some time, I was kept back by my own doubts, fearing lest it might seem disrespectful to his memory for me to be on good terms with anyone with whom it had always pleased him to be at variance.”—‘There, Mrs. Bennet.’—“My mind, however, is now made up on the subject; for, having received ordination at Easter, I have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me to the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her Ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which are instituted by the Church of England. As a clergyman, moreover, I feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in all families within the reach of my influence; and on these grounds I flatter myself that my present overtures of good-will are highly commendable, and that the circumstance of my being next in the entail of Longbourn estate will be kindly overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject the offered olive branch. I cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the means of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to apologize for it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make them every possible amends; but of this hereafter. If you should have no objection to receive me into{81} your house, I propose myself the satisfaction of waiting on you and your family, Monday, November 18th, by four o’clock, and shall probably trespass on your hospitality till the Saturday se’nnight following, which I can do without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine is far from objecting to my occasional absence on a Sunday, provided that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day. I remain, dear sir, with respectful compliments to your lady and daughters, your well-wisher and friend,
in a line, each perhaps a mile and a half from his nearest fellow. They
“I am sure there is not on his. I will answer for it, he never cared three straws about her. Who could about such a nasty little freckled thing?”
difference whether you do right or wrong, a person’s conscience ain’t
any more that day. In the afternoon he made a feeble effort to get at
thread still and fetch the needle up to it; hold the needle still and
before—blacker, mostly, than is common. One was a woman in a slim black

for countless years—as though no planet Mars existed in the sky. Even
were careful not to hurt her.
“All right, then, I’ll do it; but I could carry it just as handy in my
Our long journey is nearing its end. In another two days we shall be back in Russia.

    You’re quite as stiff
“It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey the claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. You are determined to ruin him in the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world.”
I was pretty tired, and the first thing I knowed I was asleep. When I
to dig by, and a lantern makes too much, and might get us into trouble;


I stared, astonished, and stirred profoundly by the man’s resolution.


Going on along the Strand to Trafalgar Square, the paper in his hand,
the houses grew pink with the early dawn. The flying people on foot and
He bounced up and stared at me wild. Then he drops down on his knees,
Before my departure I had a long conversation with Ofrossimoff; that silly boy actually proposed to me. In an amazingly sudden way he blurted out, with a voice which was eloquent of many things, how madly he loved me, and asked me if I’d marry him. I tried to turn all he said into a joke, and told him to put that ridiculous idea out of his head, for I couldn’t quite take him seriously, like a regular grown-up man. He was so disastrously young in fact, just turned nineteen. “Ah, that will remedy itself soon enough!” exclaimed my suitor, adding that he would wait for ten years if he were sure of getting me at last; and when I told him that love did not grow with waiting, he said that, as far as he was concerned, he promised me the devotion of a lifetime and a lot of other nonsense. Upon this we decided that we should wait for three or four years, and concluded a compact of eternal friendship. We parted with a lingering hand-shake and tender glances. There was a tear in the corner of my eye, for I did care for him in a way. But “out of sight, out of mind!” His face haunted me for some days, and in a week’s time I had forgotten the poor boy’s existence.
“Well, mamma,” said she, when they were all returned to the breakfast-room, “and what do you think of my husband? Is not he a charming man? I am sure my sisters must all envy me. I only hope they may have half my good luck. They must all go to Brighton. That is the place to get husbands. What a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go!”
anything else; so we said we would, if he would tell us how. He said we


“I saw it happen.” I proceeded to tell him. “We have chanced to come in
I could hear her.
town; and pap he always said it, too, though he warn’t no more quality



“So much love and eloquence”	156

September 7th.—Sergy went to the camp to inspect the troops, together with the representatives of the civil, military and naval forces. Before they left the camp, reciprocal hurrahs cheered our Emperor, the army and the navy.
two of the Monkeys caught Dorothy in their arms and flew away with her.
Tom rose square up in bed, with his eye hot, and his nostrils opening
paper.
“but the kind Stork saved me, and if I ever get any brains I shall find
quietly into the scullery. In the darkness I heard the curate drinking.
things; and you never see a cabin as blithesome as Jim’s was when




lovely Lady I shall beg hard for a heart, for all ladies are themselves
[311]
they had retreated he realised how urgent and unavoidable it was to
brain, sending enormous nerves to the eyes, ear, and tactile tentacles.


For some minutes I lay there in the rain and darkness watching, by the

“Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise.”
him up to the sick-room, and had a high talk; and Tom give Jim forty
“There is only one thing in the world I am afraid of.”
northeast; several smacks were sailing between the ironclads and the
In the critical moment of a discredit, which will always be imputable to the Minister, when the King and the People are fully acquainted with their real interest, if administration, not knowing what to do, does not hesitate to apply to the land proprietor, whose ways and means are always visible, and whose purse lies, as it were, ever open against his own inclination, the Minister, no doubt, finds his excuse in the necessity; but after the crisis is over, why should the proprietor be further aggrieved?
The succeeding days were the most trying I had ever known; I was so miserable, so wretched, and needed comfort so badly, and here I was left alone to wither away! It was altogether too cruel! I was so young, and my trouble was so great! For twenty years I had lived and had never been acquainted with adverse circumstances, and the troubles which had been averted were now beginning to come thickly upon me, and I could not possibly endure it patiently, my heart overflowed with self-pity. I will not deny that I displayed a pitiful lack of moral courage, but I was neither a philosopher nor a stoic, alas! It is a fact that I had always lived on the sunny side of life, and was born to be petted and made much of. Fairies had brought their offerings at my birth, and I took the rose-leaf pathway as my due; and now my eyes began to open to the realities of life!
There are delightful walks and drives in all directions of the Isle of Wight. We undertook to make excursions through the neighbouring country in a huge pleasant-tour coach named “Old Times.” This coach can hold twenty people inside and is driven by four powerful horses gaily decorated with ribbons. We began our tour by Bembridge, and scrambled into the back seat of the immense car by a ladder of ten steps. The postilion frantically blew his horn, the coachman cracked his whip over the head of his horses, and the coach rattled full speed along beautifully kept roads. The drive proved long and interesting. We made three halts without changing horses. Our fellow-passengers were not very elegant-looking. I took Sergy’s neighbour, a tall, bearded man, who was chewing a stinking cigar, for a German colonist, and he proved to be a German Royal Prince. Towards noon we drew up before the veranda of Bembridge Hotel standing on the beach, and had lunch on the spacious terrace, enjoying the sea-breeze. At the same time a pleasure-boat had brought a crowd of tourists to the hotel. We were back to Shanklin for dinner, having taken another road through the woods and corn-fields. Before us there was a lovely stretch of country with the gold of ripening grain and the scarlet glint of poppies smelling like honey; full blown blossoms of clover white and pink, scented the air. The Isle of Wight, so green and fresh, is well named “The Garden of England,” really it is quite the nicest bit of England. Trees and grass are of a wonderful vivid green peculiar to this island. The climate is so mild that figs, laurel, and myrtle trees grow in the open air. Intense heat is quite unknown here.
behind. “Way! Way!”
“Two offences of a very different nature, and by no means of equal magnitude, you last night laid to my charge. The first mentioned was, that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I had detached Mr. Bingley from your sister,—and the other, that I had, in defiance of various claims, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruined the immediate prosperity and blasted the prospects of Mr. Wickham. Wilfully and wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged favourite of my father, a young man who had scarcely any other dependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect its exertion, would be a depravity, to which the separation of two young persons whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks, could bear no comparison. But from the severity of that blame which was last night so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hope to be in future secured, when the following account of my actions and their motives has been read. If, in the explanation of them which is due to myself, I am under the necessity of relating feelings which may be offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. The necessity must be obeyed, and further apology would be absurd. I had not been long in Hertfordshire before I saw, in common with others, that Bingley preferred your elder sister to any other young woman in the country. But it was not till the evening of the dance at Netherfield that I had any apprehension of his feeling a serious attachment. I had often seen him in love before. At that ball, while I had{246} the honour of dancing with you, I was first made acquainted, by Sir William Lucas’s accidental information, that Bingley’s attentions to your sister had given rise to a general expectation of their marriage. He spoke of it as a certain event, of which the time alone could be undecided. From that moment I observed my friend’s behaviour attentively; and I could then perceive that his partiality for Miss Bennet was beyond what I had ever witnessed in him. Your sister I also watched. Her look and manners were open, cheerful, and engaging as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar regard; and I remained convinced, from the evening’s scrutiny, that though she received his attentions with pleasure, she did not invite them by any participation of sentiment. If you have not been mistaken here, I must have been in an error. Your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter probable. If it be so, if I have been misled by such error to inflict pain on her, your resentment has not been unreasonable. But I shall not scruple to assert, that the serenity of your sister’s countenance and air was such as might have given the most acute observer a conviction that, however amiable her temper, her heart was not likely to be easily touched. That I was desirous of believing her indifferent is certain; but I will venture to say that my investigations and decisions are not usually influenced by my hopes or fears. I did not believe her to be indifferent because I wished it; I believed it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason. My objections to the marriage were not merely those which I last night acknowledged to have required the utmost force of passion to put aside in my own case; the want of connection could not be so great an evil to my friend as to me. But there were{247} other causes of repugnance; causes which, though still existing, and existing to an equal degree in both instances, I had myself endeavoured to forget, because they were not immediately before me. These causes must be stated, though briefly. The situation of your mother’s family, though objectionable, was nothing in comparison of that total want of propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly betrayed by herself, by your three younger sisters, and occasionally even by your father:—pardon me,—it pains me to offend you. But amidst your concern for the defects of your nearest relations, and your displeasure at this representation of them, let it give you consolation to consider that to have conducted yourselves so as to avoid any share of the like censure is praise no less generally bestowed on you and your eldest sister than it is honourable to the sense and disposition of both. I will only say, farther, that from what passed that evening my opinion of all parties was confirmed, and every inducement heightened, which could have led me before to preserve my friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy connection. He left Netherfield for London on the day following, as you, I am certain, remember, with the design of soon returning. The part which I acted is now to be explained. His sisters’ uneasiness had been equally excited with my own: our coincidence of feeling was soon discovered; and, alike sensible that no time was to be lost in detaching their brother, we shortly resolved on joining him directly in London. We accordingly went—and there I readily engaged in the office of pointing out to my friend the certain evils of such a choice. I described and enforced them earnestly. But however this remonstrance might have staggered or delayed his determination, I do not{248} suppose that it would ultimately have prevented the marriage, had it not been seconded by the assurance, which I hesitated not in giving, of your sister’s indifference. He had before believed her to return his affection with sincere, if not with equal, regard. But Bingley has great natural modesty, with a stronger dependence on my judgment than on his own. To convince him, therefore, that he had deceived himself was no very difficult point. To persuade him against returning into Hertfordshire, when that conviction had been given, was scarcely the work of a moment. I cannot blame myself for having done thus much. There is but one part of my conduct, in the whole affair, on which I do not reflect with satisfaction; it is that I condescended to adopt the measures of art so far as to conceal from him your sister’s being in town. I knew it myself, as it was known to Miss Bingley; but her brother is even yet ignorant of it. That they might have met without ill consequence is, perhaps, probable; but his regard did not appear to me enough extinguished for him to see her without some danger. Perhaps this concealment, this disguise, was beneath me. It is done, however, and it was done for the best. On this subject I have nothing more to say, no other apology to offer. If I have wounded your sister’s feelings, it was unknowingly done; and though the motives which governed me may to you very naturally appear insufficient, I have not yet learnt to condemn them.—With respect to that other, more weighty accusation, of having injured Mr. Wickham, I can only refute it by laying before you the whole of his connection with my family. Of what he has particularly accused me I am ignorant; but of the truth of what I shall relate I can summon more than one witness of undoubted veracity.{249} Mr. Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who had for many years the management of all the Pemberley estates, and whose good conduct in the discharge of his trust naturally inclined my father to be of service to him; and on George Wickham, who was his godson, his kindness was therefore liberally bestowed. My father supported him at school, and afterwards at Cambridge; most important assistance, as his own father, always poor from the extravagance of his wife, would have been unable to give him a gentleman’s education. My father was not only fond of this young man’s society, whose manners were always engaging, he had also the highest opinion of him, and hoping the church would be his profession, intended to provide for him in it. As for myself, it is many, many years since I first began to think of him in a very different manner. The vicious propensities, the want of principle, which he was careful to guard from the knowledge of his best friend, could not escape the observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself, and who had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments, which Mr. Darcy could not have. Here again I shall give you pain—to what degree you only can tell. But whatever may be the sentiments which Mr. Wickham has created, a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from unfolding his real character. It adds even another motive. My excellent father died about five years ago; and his attachment to Mr. Wickham was to the last so steady, that in his will he particularly recommended it to me to promote his advancement in the best manner that his profession might allow, and if he took orders, desired that a valuable family living might be his as soon as it became vacant. There was also a legacy of one{250} thousand pounds. His own father did not long survive mine; and within half a year from these events Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me that, having finally resolved against taking orders, he hoped I should not think it unreasonable for him to expect some more immediate pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which he could not be benefited. He had some intention, he added, of studying the law, and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would be a very insufficient support therein. I rather wished than believed him to be sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly ready to accede to his proposal. I knew that Mr. Wickham ought not to be a clergyman. The business was therefore soon settled. He resigned all claim to assistance in the church, were it possible that he could ever be in a situation to receive it, and accepted in return three thousand pounds. All connection between us seemed now dissolved. I thought too ill of him to invite him to Pemberley, or admit his society in town. In town, I believe, he chiefly lived, but his studying the law was a mere pretence; and being now free from all restraint, his life was a life of idleness and dissipation. For about three years I heard little of him; but on the decease of the incumbent of the living which had been designed for him, he applied to me again by letter for the presentation. His circumstances, he assured me, and I had no difficulty in believing it, were exceedingly bad. He had found the law a most unprofitable study, and was now absolutely resolved on being ordained, if I would present him to the living in question—of which he trusted there could be little doubt, as he was well assured that I had no other person to provide for, and I could not have forgotten my revered father’s intentions. You will hardly blame me{251} for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for resisting every repetition of it. His resentment was in proportion to the distress of his circumstances—and he was doubtless as violent in his abuse of me to others as in his reproaches to myself. After this period, every appearance of acquaintance was dropped. How he lived, I know not. But last summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice. I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget myself, and which no obligation less than the present should induce me to unfold to any human being. Having said thus much, I feel no doubt of your secrecy. My sister, who is more than ten years my junior, was left to the guardianship of my mother’s nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and myself. About a year ago, she was taken from school, and an establishment formed for her in London; and last summer she went with the lady who presided over it to Ramsgate; and thither also went Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly by design; for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance between him and Mrs. Younge, in whose character we were most unhappily deceived; and by her connivance and aid he so far recommended himself to Georgiana, whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of his kindness to her as a child, that she was persuaded to believe herself in love and to consent to an elopement. She was then but fifteen, which must be her excuse; and after stating her imprudence, I am happy to add, that I owed the knowledge of it to herself. I joined them unexpectedly a day or two before the intended elopement; and then Georgiana, unable to support the idea of grieving and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as a father, acknowledged the whole to me. You may imagine what{252} I felt and how I acted. Regard for my sister’s credit and feelings prevented any public exposure; but I wrote to Mr. Wickham, who left the place immediately, and Mrs. Younge was of course removed from her charge. Mr. Wickham’s chief object was unquestionably my sister’s fortune, which is thirty thousand pounds; but I cannot help supposing that the hope of revenging himself on me was a strong inducement. His revenge would have been complete indeed. This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which we have been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject it as false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty towards Mr. Wickham. I know not in what manner, under what form of falsehood, he has imposed on you; but his success is not perhaps to be wondered at, ignorant as you previously were of everything concerning either. Detection could not be in your power, and suspicion certainly not in your inclination. You may possibly wonder why all this was not told you last night. But I was not then master enough of myself to know what could or ought to be revealed. For the truth of everything here related, I can appeal more particularly to the testimony of Colonel Fitzwilliam, who, from our near relationship and constant intimacy, and still more as one of the executors of my father’s will, has been unavoidably acquainted with every particular of these transactions. If your abhorrence of me should make my assertions valueless, you cannot be prevented by the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and that there may be the possibility of consulting him, I shall endeavour to find some opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course of the morning. I will only add, God bless you.


“Very much.”


CHAPTER VI
as tall as Dorothy, who was a well-grown child for her age, although
(I must premise, that in all I have now to say, not only on the present hypothesis, but on all those that follow, I build on this principle; that, from the moment every individual pays the tax, nobody pays it; that nevertheless its produce reverts to the creditors of the State, and that therefore every body is interested in carrying matters to that issue as soon as possible.—If there never existed in the average of prices any revolution so sudden, so great, and constant in its effect, as the one which I am about to suppose; it is because it never was necessary to lay all at once 10 millions of taxes. The effect produced by one million on a revenue like that which England enjoys, is so trifling, so gradual, that it never can be felt.—But to my hypothesis).
Rumours of strained relations between China and Japan spread about. A colonel of the general staff, sent by my husband to Tokio, gave us alarming news. Complications burst out between the two countries and soon war broke out. At the first combat of the outposts the Japs put to defeat the sons of the Celestial Empire. It was a headlong flight; twenty thousand Chinese soldiers went over to the enemy, abandoning their rifles. The Japs have sunk several Chinese cruisers, and have invaded Manchuria, where everything is put to fire and sword. There was an armistice of three weeks between China and Japan, during which Likhoundjan, the viceroy of China, was sent to Japan as Ambassador for negotiations of peace. He was wounded by a pistol-shot by a Jap. Fearing to be poisoned by the enemies of his country, he refused to be treated by Japanese doctors, and a German physician had to be sent to him from Berlin. For some time uncertain news arrived from the seat of war. At last we were informed that peace had been signed, when a second despatch was received, telling us that the Emperor of Japan had refused to ratify peace. Russia, together with France and Germany, insisted that the Japanese troops quit Manchuria, but the Japs insist on remaining and become more and more arrogant.


gates that didn’t generly have but one hinge—a leather one. Some of the
would hive the next one. She went and got the lump of lead and fetched

I got on admirably with my cousin, Kate Swetchine, the most good-natured girl in the world; her sister, Sophy was much too serious for me. I had all my days free to do what I desired. Music became an actual passion to me; I practised the piano a good deal; Liszt being one of my favourite composers, I played his rhapsodies stormingly. I began also to study singing, and in spare moments wrote stupid verses, which all my admirers thought beautiful. That winter I raved about officers belonging to the horse-guard regiment, and dedicated to them an atrocious poem that I sang on the motive of L’Amour, the fashionable chansonette of the season.
arched roof, and the walls and ceiling and floor were covered with
But I reckon it was more than a cat-nap, for when I waked up the stars
No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. “My dear, dear aunt,” she rapturously cried, “what delight! what felicity! You give me fresh life and vigour. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. What are men to rocks and mountains? Oh, what hours of transport we shall spend! And when we do return, it shall not be like other travellers, without being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We will know where we have gone—we will recollect what we have seen. Lakes, mountains, and rivers, shall not be jumbled together in our imaginations; nor, when we attempt to describe any particular scene, will we begin quarrelling about its relative situation. Let our first effusions be less insupportable than those of the generality of travellers.{194}”

I took the watch, and Jim he laid down and snored away; and by-and-by

 Thinking



wore broad Panama hats.
to be _sorry_ they was going out of this region! And I believed they
“Well, then,” I says, “how’ll it do to saw him out, the way I done
But they too had been discovered. In some strange way the creature had sensed them, and sent a call to his friends, for across all the system they could see the strange creatures racing at a velocity that could not be much short of that of light, for while the men were material, and as such could not travel at that speed, the force beings, by their very natures akin to light, could very probably attain to that motion.




I goes off wid de cattle ’bout daylight, so dey wouldn’ ’spec to see me

near the top of the great dome, and it said:
to the door and knocked.
CHAPTER XXVII.
guarding giants. Had I been alone, I think I should have taken my
“Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say in behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the business? Do clear them, too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of somebody.”

He overtakes a young Brahmin carrying the idol Ramen on a bench of wood and as he walks with him for some distance the opportunity is given of opening up the Scriptures and pointing out that idolatry can never help and only Christ can redeem us from our sin. Sometimes inquirers come to him, drawn by curiosity as to what this Christian religion really means.
been a crowd of three hundred people or more at this place, besides
that hid these new-comers to our earth. Once a leash of thin black

gloomy. After the Lion had rested they started along the road of yellow


don’t _give_ them notice there won’t be nobody nor nothing to interfere
 “I am the Late Dauphin”
SAN FRANCISCO
getting ready. Mind you, it isn’t all of us that are made for wild
took me for Tom Sawyer I had to stand it—there warn’t no other way, and

CHAPTER LV
what in the world to make of it. I’m at my wit’s end, and I don’t mind
“Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deep in mud, I am absolutely certain, and the gown which had been let down to hide it not doing its office.”
plain but nice. She said she’d have her frocks and a lot of other traps
my breath I asked her what the paper was about, and she asked me if I
“Yes, you did—’bout six chaws. You borry’d store tobacker and paid back

I am selected for President of the Benevolent Society of the city of Tashkend. The meetings of the committee are held in our house. I presided at a long table covered with green cloth. At the first assembly I felt timid and embarrassed for many eyes were on me, and for the moment I almost forgot how to get on with the formal little speech I had learned so carefully. I was grateful when Sergy, who sat opposite to me, came to my relief and did all the talking for me. All at once my courage returned to me, and I took an animated part in the project to found an asylum for old men and women. It was decided to organise for that purpose a great charity feast with theatricals, bazaar, tombola, and what not! I issued about 700 invitations, with an indirect allusion to the subject of offerings which I claimed for the forthcoming lottery.
“I think I have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney in Meryton?{48}”
guns being laid for them unseen, a fresh canister of the black vapour




and rabbits and the skull of a sheep. But though I gnawed parts of
became quite friendly with the little girl.



The dinner at table-d’hôte was announced for seven o’clock. We entered the large dining-room full of grand gentlemen and smart ladies in evening dress. Dinner was served at small separate tables; it consisted of oyster soup, followed by a dish of frogs, strongly spiced cari, served with hot rice, and tropical fruit for dessert, unknown in Europe: the jack-fruit, of the size and appearance of a water-melon, and a sort of great orange four times its natural size, named grape-fruit; you have it on your plate cut in two halves with ice on each, and you scoop the inside out of a lot of tiny pockets with a tea-spoon. I was glad of the coolness of the big hall; a punkah-boy on the verandah pulled drowsily at the cords that moved the great fan. The usual language spoken here between Europeans and natives is called “pigeon-English”—a mixture of English, French, and German. It was difficult to make ourselves understood by the boys. We had to explain ourselves mostly by signs.
“We have come to claim our promise, O Oz.”
and so forth. In addition, Ogilvy’s wire to the Astronomical Exchange

the snake’s mate was there, and bit him.
The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a most convenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually tempted thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt, and to a milliner’s shop just over the way. The two youngest of the family, Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions: their minds were more vacant than their sisters’, and when nothing better offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morning hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and, however bare of news the country in general might be, they always contrived to learn some from their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both with news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in the neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was the head-quarters.
“In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode to express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, however unequally they may be returned. It is natural that obligation should be felt, and if I could feel gratitude, I would now thank you. But I cannot—I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainly bestowed it most unwillingly. I am sorry to have occasioned pain to anyone. It has been most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will be of short duration. The feelings which you tell me have long prevented the acknowledgment of your regard can have little difficulty in overcoming it after this explanation.”

somewhere for me. The world may go on just as it’s always done, and
was a power of style about her. It _amounted_ to something being a
CHAPTER XVI.
October 28th.—The children of a native couple bound to the Isles de la Réunion, romp in the corridor making a terrible row. They are awfully ill-bred and boil over with perversity, and pass their time in fighting and playing tricks and putting their tongues out to their “ayah” (nurse), an old negress wearing a yellow kerchief on her head, the ends of[422] which passed through her large straw hat. She endeavoured to teach the naughty brats better manners, but it was all in vain; they continued to behave shockingly. I was sorely tempted to give them a sound shaking when they shrieked when taken to bed at night.

imprisonment endurable he would not observe. Slowly I began to realise
shore. Everything was dead quiet, and it looked late, and _smelt_ late.
you to the gates of the Emerald City,” said Glinda, “for it would be a
“I suspected as much,” replied Elizabeth. “But how did he account for it?”

Then suddenly we saw a rush of smoke far away up the river, a puff of
May 17th.—Striving to invent all sorts of distractions in order to raise the drooping spirits of our Russian colony, horribly depressed by the epidemic of typhus-fever, we have organised races on a track of three miles. To-day a large crowd of inhabitants surrounded the racing-place. There were seven concurrent events—five Cossack and two native. When they started I followed them attentively, fearing to see our Cossacks outridden by the Turks. To my great joy a young Cossack gained the first prize, the sum of four hundred francs. He mounted a tiny insignificant-looking horse that he had bought at Khiva for forty francs. The Cossack was accompanied up to town in triumph by a big crowd, and two military bands.
Bingley she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed. He was received by Mrs. Bennet with a degree of civility which made her two daughters ashamed, especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of her courtesy and address of his friend.

would see it. Up-stream boats didn’t generly come close to us; they go
After dinner Sergy went to Mew’s post-office to hire a dog-cart for a drive to Sandown, a neighbouring watering-place. We have run the risk of breaking our necks during the promenade. I drove a restless horse who pranced and kicked all the time, taking fright at a passing train he jerked to one side, bolted and sprang into a furious gallop nearly dragging my hands off. I frantically tugged at the reins and managed to pull up the frightened animal some way down the road, driving him into a heap of stones. The season had not yet begun at Sandown, and the houses with their locked doors and closed shutters looked as if in sleep. Everywhere placards were to be seen bearing the inscription, “Apartments to Let,” and announcements that pieces of ground were to be let. There was land to be sold for 999 years.
The tumult of Elizabeth’s mind was allayed by this{282} conversation. She had got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her for a fortnight, and was certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she might wish to talk again of either. But there was still something lurking behind, of which prudence forbade the disclosure. She dared not relate the other half of Mr. Darcy’s letter, nor explain to her sister how sincerely she had been valued by his friend. Here was knowledge in which no one could partake; and she was sensible that nothing less than a perfect understanding between the parties could justify her in throwing off this last encumbrance of mystery. “And then,” said she, “if that very improbable event should ever take place, I shall merely be able to tell what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner himself. The liberty of communication cannot be mine till it has lost all its value!”
PARIS
So Jim went to work and told me the whole thing right through, just as

“Certainly,” he replied, biting his lips. Elizabeth hoped she had silenced him; but he soon afterwards said,{402}—
since the devising of gunpowder was the beginning of a battle so still.
“I hope not.”
sides of the room, he disappears down cellar. Then in about two seconds
then more paleness spreading around; then the river softened up away


give him up, I’d hang him.” And whilst the nigger stepped to the door




and not borrow some of it?”
REMINISCENCES OF
information concerning them. Now no surviving human being saw so much
“You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meeting yesterday. Are you much acquainted with Mr. Darcy?”
heat of my long walk. With infinite trouble I managed to break into a
then we fetched him over, and I started down for the raft. When I got
the nigger was crazy. I says to Sister Damrell—didn’t I, Sister
Thinks I, it won’t do to paddle; first I know I’ll run into the bank or

all those books through. Especially we must keep up our science—learn
camp-meeting, natural brothers and benefactors of the race, and that

turned the whole thing into an infant Sunday-school, just out of spite.

amongst the Grangerfords either. Why, that old man kep’ up his end in a
Oz, left to himself, smiled to think of his success in giving the
The storm burst upon us six years ago now. As Mars approached
kit and biling of ye; and don’t come nigh me again till I’ve got back
“She is a most charming young lady, indeed. Lady Catherine herself says that, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the handsomest of her sex; because there is that in her features which marks the young woman of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sickly constitution, which has prevented her making that progress in many accomplishments which she could not otherwise have failed of, as I am informed by the lady who superintended her education, and who still resides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends to drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies.{86}”
up, one after the other, straight into the still air.
history of the world had such a mass of human beings moved and suffered
“Be careful!” cried the green girl. “The tears will fall on your green
By-and-by the men stopped cavorting around and yelling. They started

“At once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted.{436}”
Query. Why do you solicit a prohibitory law against the exporting of such an article of national product?
brung her nose to shore; then I got my gun and slipped out and into the


means of a little pipette into the recipient canal. . . .

behind the bed, and says:
“I am,” said he, with a firm voice.
pounds altogether—into his pockets, and went out again into the
“Yes,” replied Wickham; “his estate there is a noble one. A clear ten thousand per annum. You could not have met with a person more capable of giving you certain information on that head than myself—for I have been connected with his family, in a particular manner, from my infancy.”

A bat flickered by and vanished. A distant tumult of shouting began and

before I get done with you. You’re educated, too, they say—can read and
We walked down to the ramparts this afternoon with the Gilberts, and rambled over the old fort, surrounded by high massive walls through the embrasures of which cannons are to be seen. During all these eight years of their sojourn in Erzeroum the Gilberts are entering this citadel for the first time, it had been terra prohibita to all strangers up till now. Pushing forward we climbed up a high tower by a narrow winding staircase; my long habit was dreadfully in the way and I stumbled over it continually. The citadel is now occupied by the Russian regiment of Bakou and three or four scores of Turkish soldiers entrusted to watch over the warehouse, who presented arms to my husband. There is a great bond of sympathy between these Osmanlies and our soldiers; though not one of them can speak a word of Turkish, they explained themselves quite easily in a highly fantastic language of their own. Maksoud Effendi, the chief of this small Turkish detachment bewitched us by his amiability and led us to admire the edifice of Chifket-Minaret, a beautiful Arabian building of the ninth century, with two formidable pillars of the Byzantine style at the entrance. According to what the Armenians say a saint of their nationality reposes in that minaret, but the Mussulmans pretend that it is the burial place of one of their most celebrated “imams.” For the moment this mausoleum, as well as the innermost recesses of that edifice, are encumbered with guns, bombs, shells and other objects of but little religious character.
Out of Bondage.—Paying the Captive.—Yours Truly, Huck Finn.
and slink around and pick up things I want. Jackson’s Island’s the
“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible,” said the little man, in a trembling
“What news from the common?” said I.
trouble he would let him ride if he thought he could stay on the horse.
dreadful lonesome. I judged he had got drownded, and I wasn’t ever

host of them quickening their pace; even a man so scared and broken
Woking.

After supper pap took the jug, and said he had enough whisky there for

 A Tough Job
ditch by the side of the road. He looked back, saw what I was doing,
but they saw that no harm was intended, so they rode through the air
CHAPTER CXXIV
I said I had got it on the boat. So then she started for the house,
Exclusive of those 8 millions sterling, the interest paid by England to acquire, preserve, and protect that part of European exports that concerns her, amounts to about 6,500,000l. including that of the last war; the interest paid by France, comes nearly to the same sum; the interest paid by Spain could not be computed, were the depopulation of that country to be taken into the account; but estimate them at 4 millions, including those which other European nations have sacrificed to the same Idol: let us say nothing about Holland, who for many years (except the few last) has made some figure Europe, only by her good luck in alleviating the distresses of others, her sole motive for which was her own advantage: and we shall sum up, at last, an annual expenditure of 25 millions sterling, in interest and naval expences, incurred by Europe, in order to preserve the exclusive privilege, 1st, of exporting every year 15 millions sterling in European goods to her colonies, both in India and America; and, 2dly, of establishing in those colonies the system of government best calculated to prevent that exportation from becoming more considerable.
It was all she could do to hold in; and her eyes snapped, and her

“I am never hungry,” he said, “and it is a lucky thing I am not, for my


“Yes,” says the duke, kinder slow and deliberate and sarcastic, “_We_
The loss of her daughter made Mrs. Bennet very dull for several days.
“Hamlet’s soliloquy, you know; the most celebrated thing in


clients of the underground railway, and that the Sunday excursionists
integument to that of the other sprawling bodies beyond, and the true
the ground. I roused him out and says:
him pretty keen. But he never meddled at all; just slid the lid along
shirt with his blood, and all that. He told him everything. Jim he



will be the wisest man in all the Land of Oz.”
sale warn’t no account and the niggers would be back home in a week or

green-grey of the field, and in a moment it was evident this Martian
it can take a hold of a prowling, thieving, infernal, white-shirted
mechanical intelligence as the Martian possessed was quite able to
gable of the house nearest the corner.
and George were the only ones that come out here; George was the
he can hide it, it ain’t no disgrace. That was my fix exactly. The more
convinced—as firmly as I am convinced of anything—that the Martians
worded telegrams in the Sunday papers conveyed. The majority of people
September 8th.—A tent is a poor place to spend the night in, nevertheless I slept soundly in my narrow camp-bed. At daybreak I was roused by the sound of trumpets and the beating of drums; the soldiers began to stir, in great excitement, and less than a quarter of an hour later the whole camp[130] was broken up. Our soldiers having burned all their useless rags by the fire, hundreds of the indigent inhabitants of Erzeroum hurried down like birds of prey upon the place recently occupied by our camp and searched for the remains in the dense smoke. Meanwhile our troops drew up in a line while their commanders took a survey of their ranks and congratulated the men on the occasion of their return to their homes. After that public prayers were sung; during the Te Deum the sounds of the trumpet resounded to signal our departure.
and let people guess what is the matter. Now we’re trying to do you a


“Very well,” answered the little man; “I will get it for you.”

the ghostly, terrible Heat-Ray I had already seen on Friday night smote
cool way of that nigger—why, he wouldn’t a give me the road if I hadn’t
“To Hyder’s palace high and low came, inquiring of me the nature of the Christian doctrine, so that I could speak as long as my strength allowed. Hyder’s younger son (not Tippoo), seeing me in the Durbar or hall of audience, saluted me in a friendly manner and invited me to pay him a visit in his own apartments. I told him I would come most cheerfully, provided his father would give permission, since to do so, without his consent, might prove injurious both to himself and to me. Of this he was perfectly aware. Even the most intimate friends do not venture to speak their mind freely. Hyder has everywhere his spies, but I knew very well that on the subject of religion I might discourse day and night without fear of giving him the least offence.
Walking one day on the Boulevards our eyes fell upon an inscription in large gilded letters “Korestchenko Magasin Russe.” In one of its windows we saw a manifesto of the recent Coronation of our Tzar, and were told that a Russian traveller had left that paper to be sold for 40fr. The address of a Russian restaurant was given to us in that shop, to which we immediately proceeded, wanting to enjoy the different dishes of our national cookery, the foretaste of which was delicious to me. But a great deception awaited us. We didn’t perceive any Russian element round about; the proprietor and the waiters were all French. Noticing our disappointment we were told that the cook was a Russian, and that was some comfort. We sat down at a table with a cloth that was not too clean, took up the menu-card and studied it through. It appeared very copious and made my mouth water. But alas! all the dishes that were served to us, beginning by the famous stchi, our national cabbage-soup, with scanty bits of over mature mutton, were horrid, and so was all the rest. We only lunched on a herring and a glass of milk. Hungry and cross we directed our steps to a neighbouring French restaurant, where this time the tasty menu did not deceive us.
“I felt sad at this, for it showed I was not such a good Scarecrow
of unknown composition, much as the parabolic mirror of a lighthouse
shirt, and he was very frowzy-headed. He came in gaping and digging one
had made a trade and got forty dollars, and when we found him in the

and he got so he wouldn’t hardly notice the other niggers. Niggers
ever. So they started upon their journey once more.
Aunt Em dropped her work and came to the door. One glance told her of





seemed as if it had driven blindly straight at the house, and had been
Revival.—The Duke of Bridgewater.—The Troubles of Royalty.
understand them but himself. When the Tin Woodman walked about he felt
_k’chunk!_—it had took all that time to come over the water. So we
She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horses were engaged; Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and her mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a bad day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long before it rained hard. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother was delighted. The rain continued the whole evening without intermission; Jane certainly could not come back.
Jericho. You couldn’t get her to take a-holt of one of them with the
that I couldn’t come down again. It went way up above the clouds, so
July 16th.—We stopped at midday before a Cossack settlement. The steps leading to the quay were covered with red cloth and strewn with flowers; a triumphal arch was erected, bearing at the top my monogram. Under the arch stood two “atamans.” A group of young girls, dressed in their best, came to offer me flowers.
NOTICE.
you ever saw, and he lit into that horse with his whip and made him
answering him, appeared over the trees to the south. It would seem that

islan’?”
Long since they had decided where they would go. Now that they could travel with almost infinite speed, they chose a goal that would be safe to life for aeons to come. BETELGUESE! It was their goal now.
close darkness, buried among coals and firewood, not daring even to
“You are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be! Engaged to Mr. Darcy! No, no, you shall not deceive me: I know it to be impossible.”
At sight of these strange, swift, and terrible creatures the crowd near
in shirt, trousers, and slippers, his braces loose about his waist, his
Orphanage near the crest of the hill, the green tops of the pine trees,
man—like Buck Harkness, there—shouts ‘Lynch him! lynch him!’ you’re
in the palace at Sheffield they’ve got furnaces, and he wants his water

“Lady Catherine, said she, you have given me a treasure.”
PER G. G., CHIEF OF ORDNANCE.

build us a raft, so we can float to the other side.”


“—they bein’ partickler friends o’ the diseased. That’s why they’re
and Tom was on the lookout all the time; but it warn’t no use, they
During the rest of that day there was no other adventure to mar the

We are surrounded by fishing-smacks, with bronzed fishermen, who wore nothing above the waist-line and not much below it, their whole costume consisting only of a narrow belt. We passed two formidable-looking British cruisers before entering the port of Yokohama, which is rather a difficult undertaking among all this multitude of vessels encumbering the harbour of Yokohama. Sampans, in which stood policemen in snow-white uniform and Japanese quarantine officers scurried towards us. They came to see if we had any ailing passengers on board.
close upon the first, made my heart jump. The monster was already



dog crying about somebody that was going to die; and the wind was
tall trees along the lane were free from the red creeper. I hunted for
The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were standing on the steps of the house, as they entered the paddock; and when the carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted up their faces and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome.



April 1st.—Mr. Kamsarakan, our Prefect of the Police, is a very jolly fellow, fond of playing jokes on his friends. To-day, for instance, he has invited to dinner all his acquaintances belonging to the Russian colony whom he met in the street, promising them a splendid Russian cabbage-pie. His guests rejoiced beforehand at the thought of partaking of that famous national dish, but as they began to arrive, there was no sign whatever of any preparations for dinner, and Kamsarakan’s servant announced that his master was out and would probably not dine at home to-day. The guests’ countenances expressed the blankest dismay; being far from their fatherland no one had remembered that the first of April was the day of traditional mystifications. As for[106] Kamsarakan, he went at the same time to Mr. Eritzeff’s, one of his invited guests, and asked the servant to give him something to eat. He devoured all the supper, and when poor Eritzeff returned home dismissed from Kamsarakan’s house, he found himself deprived both of his dinner and his supper.
was all pretty much fagged out, too, but mainly Jim. The old man had

hundred pounds. We couldn’t handle him, of course; he would a flung us
to human machines, to ask myself for the first time in my life how an
been heah; he say he reck’n you’s ben shot, kase you didn’ come home no
Mr. Collins’s return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of pleasure to Mrs. Bennet. On the contrary, she was as much disposed to complain of it as her husband. It was very strange that he should come to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome. She hated having visitors in the house while her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people the most disagreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, and they gave way{165} only to the greater distress of Mr. Bingley’s continued absence.



January 2nd.—We took our passage on the Salasie, one of the swiftest boats of the Méssageries Maritimes, bound for Hong-Kong. We leave Shanghai in splendid weather; the sea is beautiful, the sky of an azure blue.
We returned to the hotel in a cab. When we asked our driver if his horse was also doomed for the bull-fight, he answered that for some years yet his animal would escape the bull’s horns.
“And that,” said Mrs. Reynolds, pointing to another of the miniatures, “is my master—and very like him. It was drawn at the same time as the other—about eight years ago.”
squeal of a horse that was as suddenly stilled. Then it was as if an
“Bridgewater,” which, he said, was a title anyway, and not a name; and
dead beats is the kind the widow and good people takes the most
would go rumbling and grumbling away, and quit—and then _rip_ comes

Strange those men would seem to us. They were under four feet in height, with great barrel chests, long arms and short legs. The dying planets had scant atmosphere, and economy advised a low pressure of the precious gases, lest too much diffusion take place; and Mercury, the smallest planet, put a distinct limit to the pressure. They journeyed from one planet to the other so frequently that an equal pressure on each was almost a requisite. The long arms ended in slender, delicate fingers that were the most perfect tools ever developed. And the toes, too, had become highly prehensile. The many machines that man had built had required all his directing powers. The feet had at first been used only to push pedals, but gradually there came other purposes. Those members could be so useful!
Well, I’ve noticed that thing plenty times since. If you are with the
The judgement of the Public, on the ideas thrown out in this Essay, will determine the fate of some others, which are nothing else but the consequences or developement of these.
cooked a supper, and I had about made up my mind I would stay there all

Navarre, or wherever it is. It’s gaudy, Huck. I wish there was a moat
[349]
In France, from the beginning of the present century down to the time when Mons. Turgot was intrusted with the department of the finances, the sum of what I can collect from the French mode of taxation, is, that without any determined system, without any other rule than the immediate want of money, and the facility of procuring that money by means of a loan, at any interest whatever, they had successively taxed[225] whatever came first to hand, or occurred to the imagination of the comptroller general for the time being; nothing was spared, in order that no one should complain; landed estates, employments, money, individuals, the one because he was industrious, the other because he had no industry and that he might acquire some; this man, because he had a title; that other, because he had none; a third, on account of what he consumed; a fourth, for that consumption to which he was doomed,—(an expedient which, together with the galleys, was devised by the farmers general, as an admirable stroke upon smuggling). No sin more venial, than to take some liberties with a compound of such motley pieces; nothing more severe than the reflexions thrown out against it on the other side of the channel; and nothing can more forcibly prove that France was planning some reform on the subject, than the orders given most minutely to enquire into the principles and effects of the various modes of taxation adopted in other parts of Europe. I think, in regard to all those parts of French taxation, which I have alluded to, as every intelligent man does in France and England: nevertheless, if one cannot positively affirm, that the result of such a chaos of strange regulations, has been, that every[226] one perceiving the burden to be general, nobody ever thought of easing himself at the expence of others who appeared to have been loaded in the same manner, yet it cannot be contradicted, that, notwithstanding the want of true principles on the part of the taxator in France, the price of every thing might have continued to this day, without material alteration, had it not been for an event, of which I shall speak in the sequel; and if it were true, as some very deep politicians will have it, that the more depreciated commodities are in a country, the quicker that nation advances towards opulence, because, in such a case, the national manufacturer has it in his power to favour the foreigner by underselling all other countries in the world; if this principle were not at least questionable, as I hope to prove it by and by, every one would admit that the compound-taxation, even compounded, as I have just described it, does not appear totally destitute of some advantages.
cordwood floating down, and pieces of log rafts—sometimes a dozen logs

man said, come along, let Sid foot it home, or canoe it, when he got
than awake, he gave a great spring and landed directly upon the

better. Tom said so himself. Jim he never let on but what it was only
Well, when the river rose pa had a streak of luck one day; he ketched
things, with boxes of valuables and all that,” he said. “They come from
I found Jim had been trying to get him to talk French, so he could hear
a look’n’-glass; and a piece of carpet on the floor—and your own father
“Now,” says Ben Rogers, “what’s the line of business of this Gang?”
the man laughed harshly as he said, “It isn’t as easy as you think!”
“Perfectly so, I thank you.”
The Océanien is going to stop here twenty-four hours to discharge coal. I saw Singhalese porters, with sacks on their heads, mounting on deck and plunging down into the hold to come out again bent in two under their loads. We walked to the Great Oriental Hotel, which stands on the quay, quite near to the port, a large building surrounded on all sides by the broad veranda. There are colonnades underneath the hotel with shops.
Jim; and then you kept Tom here so long with the butter in his hat that

And farther on, from a lull near East Barnet, they saw two trains
The grain stores having been destroyed by the enemy, no seed was sown, no harvest could be reaped, and famine, gaunt and deadly, stalked through the land. No strong men were left, only wandering skeletons were met within the miserable and devastated villages. Hyder carried off the healthy children and the flower of the people, the rest were left to die, as Schwartz says: “When passing through[Pg 119] the streets early in the morning, the dead were lying in heaps on the dunghills.” And here in this extremity we see the forethought and practical wisdom of Schwartz. With the anticipation of such a famine he had purchased twelve thousand bushels of rice, and when it seemed as if the soldiers would die for want of food, he went to the natives, who had lost all confidence in the word of a European, and got them to bring in their animals and stores, making himself personally responsible that they should be duly paid. “I afterwards settled with the natives and they went home quite satisfied. The Lord also enabled me to consider the poor, so that I had it in my power to feed a large number for the space of seventeen months.”

That England must have allowed her foreign connexions to call 14 millions 300 thousand pounds the same quantity and quality of their manufactures, which, before the effect of English taxation, they called only 13 millions, and which, till then, had made the balance of what they imported from England.
The invitation was accepted, of course, and at a proper hour they joined the party in Lady Catherine’s drawing-room. Her Ladyship received them civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact, almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy, much more than to any other person in the room.

king’s hands, and says, “Take this six thousand dollars, and invest for

squealing most horrible, with a dog or two swinging to each ear, and
“How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains? I felt a little uneasy—a little fearful of my sister’s happiness with him in marriage, because I knew that his conduct had not been always quite right. My father and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt how imprudent a match it must be. Kitty then owned, with a very natural triumph on knowing more than the rest of us, that in Lydia’s last letter she had prepared her for such a step. She had known, it seems, of their being in love with each other many weeks.”
“Why, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. I am afraid you will be angry.”
world. She _was_ the best girl I ever see, and had the most sand.
Jim says, kind of solemn:
“Mrs. Annesley is with her. The others have been gone on to Scarborough these three weeks.”

looked around and see the coffin, over in the corner on two chairs; so
ain’t any Shepherdson about him.” Then the old man said he hoped I

“Hurry! _hurry!_” I says. “Where’s Jim?”
around as we please. But whenever any of us are taken away our joints
_see_ that _they’d_ go and tell? Ther’ ain’t no way but just to not


“I have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books of a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit. It amazes me, I confess; for certainly there can be nothing so advantageous to them as instruction. But I will no longer importune my young cousin.”
Making them pens was a distressid tough job, and so was the saw; and

it come out, too, because crabapples ain’t ever good, and the p’simmons
those of the Munchkins.
“I like her appearance,” said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas. “She looks sickly and cross. Yes, she will do for him very well. She will make him a very proper wife.”
mos’ly I wisht dey’d lemme ’lone, I does.”
the rest of the town get roped in; and I knew they’d lay for us the
houses on the common side of the three villages, and the people there
complete specimen in spirits at the Natural History Museum, and the

“We must go and search for water,” she said to him.
“REMARKABLE STORY FROM WOKING,”

axe, he marched up to the first tree that had handled the Scarecrow so
So the soldier was summoned and entered the Throne Room timidly, for
little island of survivors on Castle Hill, alive, but unable to escape.
All the European exports, carried by England in the year 1773, either to India, Africa, or America, including the exports for which she held an exclusive privilege in the part of America now independent, amounted to 4,975,192l. we shall say 5 millions:—if you value at 10 millions of the same currency, the exports of all the other nations of Europe to those parts of the world, we shall find a capital of 15 millions sterling in goods annually exported from Europe:—but the yearly expence of a navy, which cannot be dispensed with for the protection of those exports,[383] is valued at 8 millions sterling, 4 of which fall to the share of England and France.
we’ll let it go. But there’s one thing—he can have a rope ladder; we
possible cover for guns, chanced to be in front of him. Some fired only
“I bet you can’t spell my name,” says I.





screen and pulled a thread, to make the eyes move and the mouth open.”
messenger to me, and I came at once. I am the Witch of the North.”
want, child, and why is that great Lion with you?”
lightning-rod to spy around; and the nigger at the back door was


to, and the whole street packed with people listening and laughing and
FOR 3 NIGHTS ONLY!


“I am afraid you have been long desiring my absence, nor have I anything to plead in excuse of my stay, but real, though unavailing concern. Would to Heaven that anything could be either said or done on my part, that might offer consolation to such distress! But I will not torment you with vain wishes, which may seem purposely to ask for your thanks. This unfortunate affair will, I fear, prevent my sister’s having the pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley to-day.”
brook, and soon after they all started toward the Emerald City.
sociable time; then we crawled out through the hole, and so home to
On the Influences of the national Prices on the Sales in foreign Markets.	151
“You, my dear friend, are younger in years and may still live for some time. I entreat you to give your whole heart to Him, who can fill it with eternal joy. All worldly goods are deficient in that respect. They may please us but they cannot make us truly happy. Let us therefore take our refuge in Him who has loved us and given Himself for us. Live to His glory, and forget not that the true disciples of Jesus crucify the flesh and the lusts of it. Be guided by the blessed Spirit of God—trust not in your own strength—watch and pray and the God of peace be with you.
are who we say we are; and in a day or two, when I get the baggage, I
first new experiences of mine. After a long time I ventured back to the
CHAPTER XXX.
Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise concerning that gentleman, and required information; and Elizabeth had such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to herself. His apparent partiality had subsided, his attentions were over, he was the admirer of some one else. Elizabeth was{188} watchful enough to see it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain. Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied with believing that she would have been his only choice, had fortune permitted it. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering himself agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than in Charlotte’s, did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence. Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and, while able to suppose that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish her, she was ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and could very sincerely wish him happy.
CHAPTER XV.

We had Jim out of the chains in no time, and when Aunt Polly and Uncle




was letting _on_ to give up sin, but away inside of me I was holding on
It’s a possible thing? But saving the race is nothing in itself. As I
behind a little woodpile, and kep’ his horse before him to stop the
a slave no more.”

“Well, they’ve got that; and it makes me feel pretty silly to think
seemed to be all about us. In one place we blundered upon a scorched



people when she was alive, and it didn’t seem right that there warn’t
Martians at Epping, and news of the destruction of Waltham Abbey Powder
channel between, and some that I couldn’t see I knowed was there
“No you ain’t. You ain’t the only person that’s ben snaked down
coming and _telling_ him I see the niggers come out of his room acting

“She is my aunt who lives in Kansas, where I came from.”

fitted her as well as if they had been made for her.
Gates lived. This officer unlocked their spectacles to put them back in
count, and they ain’t going to _get_ no money. It’s just like the way




and begun to cry.
In the second case, the prices of commodities would not be perceptibly increased any where else but in England; the prices of her correspondents would have been, ten years after the peace, almost as they were in 1754.
But he never heard me. He had forgot me and everything else. He had his
Cairo.
slamming of a door. But I do not know who these people were, nor what
silver-headed cane—the awfulest old gray-headed nabob in the State. And
oiled the Woodman’s jaws, so that after a few moments he could talk as
right and give Jim up, would you felt better than what you do now? No,
cut bank with smoky ghosts of big trees on it, and the current throwed
The life of our Emperor is in constant danger. An attempt to murder him was made whilst he was taking his usual afternoon walk. Luckily the malefactor’s bullet missed the Tzar. Petersburg is all in a flutter through that attempt. Te Deums are sung in all the churches and the town is decorated all over with flags. The day of the attempt, during the performance of the opera “Life for the Tzar,” a large audience packed the house from floor to ceiling. When the Emperor appeared in his box, the hymn “God save the Tzar,” resounded through the hall; the whole audience rose to their feet, and deafening cheers were heard. Our monarch bowed graciously in response.
in, and there I was, up a stump again! She motioned me to be still, and

Bustled near you with a great deal of grace.
“Why, _ourn_—your Uncle Harvey’s.”
advantage about it—except for the other people; so at last I reckoned I
“My dear friends,” said Oz, “I pray you not to speak of these little

trying to get a shot at it. I clipped along, and all of a sudden I
and chatted together. Dorothy was once more filled with the hope of
And then he busted into tears, and so did everybody. Then somebody
The service of the post leaves very much to be desired. We have received a letter from Russia dated six months ago; the missive had arrived first at Khabarovsk, but as at that time there was no communication between these two towns, on account of the bad state of the roads, this letter had returned to Russia to be sent back again to Vladivostock via Japan.
“Probably not; but Mr. Darcy can please where he chooses. He does not want abilities. He can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worth his while. Among those who are at all his equals in consequence, he is a very different man from what he is to the less prosperous. His pride never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just, sincere, rational, honourable, and, perhaps, agreeable,—allowing something for fortune and figure.”


said he was used to being Romeo, so the king could be Juliet.
“In order to give you, reverend Sir, a somewhat detailed account of this gracious guidance of our God, that you may magnify His name with us, I shall briefly relate the most important particulars from our diary, not having yet found time to copy the diary itself, which your Reverence will kindly excuse.
doctor’s house, but they told me he’d gone away in the night some time

the following story:
there were none.

cylinders—the second in Addlestone Golf Links and the third at



It was while he was working on the development of his apparatus that the fatal accident occurred and killed him. Luckily he had kept a careful record of all his experiments, and men were able to duplicate them with the aid of the remnants of his apparatus. He had been working on the actual making of the images; he wanted to be able to keep them real without the machine; in other words, he wanted to give them actual existence; he wanted to reconstruct, atom for atom, the object under his fourth dimensional scanner.
questions, and then he answered perplexingly and brokenly. He was a

I awoke in the middle of the night with a heavy heart; feeling myself expatriated and shut up in a golden cage: I cried bitterly. What would I have not given to be back at St. Petersburg again!
Out to that minor sun they flashed, and around it they formed a great sphere of ships. Then each of the mighty projectors, nose pointing to the blazing sun below, turned loose its powers. Through special filters they could watch the field forming. First it was a thin shell that surrounded the entire planet as the projectors threw it into position. Ten thousand small ships were occupied in maintaining the field of electrons in place with their projectors. Already the shell of force was thick and strong. Unless the Force Creatures made a concerted effort at some one point, they would soon be doomed.
the battery. The ammunition blew up, the pine trees all about the guns
24th July.—We travelled to-day from sunrise to sunset without stopping.
 The Wreck

At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and the others returned into the house. Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two girls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune, which Charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked to dine at Rosings the next day.{200}
the king and crying; and all of a sudden the doctor ups and turns on
Home Again
amid the long grass. I suppose the time was then about four or five
SINGAPORE

It was the leaves and rubbish on the raft and the smashed oar. You
We slept most all day, and started out at night, a little ways behind a
Each person had their own nigger to wait on them—Buck too. My nigger
before I was murdered that time?”

Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The fishing scheme had been renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of his meeting some of the gentlemen at Pemberley by noon.{327}
years—and you always think they’re talking about _you_. As a general

Land of the South. They were all in the best of spirits, and laughed
o’clock. I laid there in the grass and the cool shade thinking about

to care much to live. He most desperately wanted to see Harvey—and


We passed another town before daylight, and I was going out again; but
Once more the air was filled with battle-cries, and Hyder Ali, the despot of Mysore, began to threaten the great provinces of Southern India whose rulers had made an alliance with the English for the common safety. A large army prepared to march against the invader and in one of the heathen temples at Trichinopoly, converted into a hospital, Schwartz preached to the troops, standing for a pulpit upon a heap of black polished stones. He then went on a missionary journey to see the brethren at Tranquebar. On the way he found plenty of opportunity for giving his Gospel message to processions and wayside pilgrims and especially at one place, Ammal-Savadi, where, attached to a palace, was a row of houses nearly a mile long built for the Brahmins. Here he gathered a large crowd unto whom he preached the Word of Life, expounding the parable of the Prodigal Son. One of the Brahmins, much impressed, applied to himself the character of the wandering son which caused Schwartz to exclaim: “O that they would arise and go to their Father!” After ten[Pg 80] days with his old friends at Tranquebar, he returned, passing on his way a magnificent banyan tree, in the shade of which the merchants were busy in their booths. To them he spoke of the Supreme Being, the Fall, how Christ came to redeem us, and that now there is a way of salvation and a highway of holiness. They could not do otherwise than agree with his earnest reasoning. “It is so written,” they said, “but who can live thus? Who is able thus to eradicate his desires? We have it also on the palm leaves but it is impossible to keep it.” There appeared no active opposition to his declaration of the truth. He records as regards the way of salvation that he invariably and most justly represented it “by true repentance, faith in the Divine Saviour Jesus Christ and godliness springing from a true faith. Not a single heathen made the least disturbance, they listened in silence. Afterwards I addressed them separately and exhorted them to receive the saving doctrines of the Gospel.”
didn’t.”
all about that scandalous show, and Burton said he would tell the
“Now,” says the duke, “after to-night we can run in the daytime if we
ever see; and Tom said the same.

He was wont to bewail his own imperfections, and those of his letters which portray the inner reflections of his mind, show his humility, and how little he thought of[Pg 190] himself. But we may take with confidence the judgment of his contemporaries, who had not only a personal knowledge of him, but saw with their own eyes the reality of the work he had done in India.
rule the Winkies wisely and well.”
before, but I reckoned I’d go now to spite pap. That law trial was a


greensward all about, with stately trees bearing rich and luscious


discouragements; but before them was a lovely, sunny country that
it was a good many miles wide, but on the Missouri side it was the same
the dog is asleep already.”
very afternoon.”
“What shall we do?” asked Dorothy despairingly.
“Oh, she’ll do. That’s all right. Huck can come in.”
flicker of the lightning, and sent a man to the nearest house, a half a

somebody has hogged that bag on the sly?—now how do _I_ know whether to
said of course him and William would take the girls home with them; and

CHAPTER II.
the Scarecrow brought Dorothy some fruit from a tree near by, which she
“You bet it is. But how you goin’ to manage it this time?”

upon me. Then I heard midnight pealing out from Pyrford Church behind
the war, and it was found attached to its parent, partially _budded_
service was over, I was walking through the roads to clear my brain for

extermination or appalling degradation, with no clear prospect before
The sharp sound of the syren from the Océanien warned us that it was time to return to the boat. Towards two o’clock in the afternoon our ship finished loading coal, and we left Port Saïd on our way to Marseilles.
Reflexions on the foregoing System.	203
LXXX.	Saigon	410
“De goodness gracious alive, Mars Tom! Why, if dey was a rattlesnake to
was in Clumbus’s time, like enough. There was generly hogs in the
in the middle, where there was a village on each side of the river, and
house I begin to go slow. I ’uz off too fur to hear what dey say to
trouble in yo’ life, en considable joy. Sometimes you gwyne to git
The colour now rushed into Elizabeth’s cheeks in the instantaneous conviction of its being a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt; and she was undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explained himself at all, or offended that his letter was not rather addressed to herself, when her father continued,{445}—



returned. From there we could see the searchlights on Richmond Hill and
fox-fire, and just makes a soft kind of a glow when you lay them in a


furiously hot that he turned tail and rushed from the room. He was glad

can’t stay so, you soon get over it.
“You may readily comprehend,” she added, “what my curiosity must be to know how a person unconnected with any of us, and, comparatively speaking, a stranger to our family, should have been amongst you at such a time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it—unless it is, for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems to think necessary; and then I must endeavour to be satisfied with ignorance.”
Everybody was surprised; and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment, turned silently away. Mrs. Bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete victory over him, continued her triumph,—
The duke was thinking _he’d_ been doing pretty well till the king come


how I figure it out. It isn’t quite according to what a man wants for
blamed if he’d ever do it again. So they went off a-jawing; and I felt
suited—this kind of thing was right in his line.
bear a powerful charm. There is now but one Wicked Witch left in all
“Oh, deary me!” says Aunt Sally; “_is_ he changed so? Why, that ain’t


Of course each one of them expected to see the Wizard in the shape he
“I see a little cottage at the right of us,” he said, “built of logs
mile and a half wide; we run nights, and laid up and hid daytimes; soon

CHAPTER XC
Martians, and Londonward, where those hills rise about Richmond and

with fear, for she knew what a powerful charm belonged to them. At
[460]
Beyond were the pillars of fire about Chobham. They became pillars of

her arms. When the Cowardly Lion stepped upon the raft it tipped badly,

entered the back room and took up a measure of bran, which he mixed
There were four or five boys sitting on the edge of the Pit, with their
rescue their friends, and the Winkies said that they would be delighted
shot with threads of red fire were driving up into the still air, and
On the next day the delegates were present at a children’s feast arranged on the square opposite our house. The entertainment[521] was given especially to attract the little natives; we wanted to tame these little savages and show them that the Russians were not so terrible as they are made to believe. The whole population, except a small part of civilised natives bring up their children inculcating in them the fear of the Russians. The entertainment began about three o’clock and went on till quite late in the evening. There were about two thousand children. It amused me to watch their enjoyment and see the expression of mistrust, stamped on their small faces, change suddenly into one of keen delight when sweets and toys were being distributed to them. It is to be hoped that the little Sartes returned to their homes carrying sentiments of friendship to the Russians in their small hearts.

fetched it down, and unstopped the best rat-hole, and in about an hour





I willingly acquiesce, taking it for granted, with the author, that Great Britain contains 9,350,000 inhabitants: but, at the same time, I apprise the reader, that I do not mean to take any advantage of a population more or less numerous; nor of a larger or smaller amount of the revenue. Data I require; but such I will prefer as most nearly border on reality. There is not a State to which, with a difference in the numbers, one may not apply what I have to say concerning England, in those which I have adopted.


Everything around seemed so strange to me. There were no chamber-maids in the hotel, and barefooted Nubians, wearing a flowing white cotton gown from neck straight to heel, served us.
with forebodings of evil. I talked to her reassuringly, pointing out
February 7th.—I was awakened this morning by a voice, proceeding from the corridor, wildly vociferating, “My money! I want my money!” It was an American traveller who had been robbed at the hotel of the sum of eleven thousand dollars. He had gone down for breakfast, and when he returned some minutes later, he found the drawer forced and his money gone. The police was summoned, and his apartment turned upside down. The portfolio was found out under the mattress, and one of the boys, serving at the hotel, confessed to the robbery, and was marched off to gaol. I saw a constable dragging the culprit by his long tail, whilst the whole household regaled him with blows and kicks.
THE DIARY OF A
Tom waited to think it over, and see if there wasn’t nothing else; and


“They acknowledged that it could not. I next demanded of a Brahmin whether he did not perceive that the world was full of sin and that we should all be found guilty and how he might obtain forgiveness? He answered, ‘Through the mercy of God.’ ‘You say right,’ I resumed, ‘but you know that God is righteous and punishes the wicked, how then can a just God be gracious to such sinful creatures so as fully to pardon us and to make us blessed?’ Upon this I explained to them the doctrine of redemption through Jesus Christ and earnestly exhorted them to embrace it.
authorised the movements of the troops; their idea was that a dispute
woods and turned it over in my mind a long time, but I couldn’t see no

 
_itself_ off, s’I—somebody _sawed_ it, s’I; that’s my opinion, take it

But that crowd of people had a far narrower escape than mine. Only the

“Listen!” he said.
behind, and with it the many dangers they had met in its gloomy shades.
aroun’ mongs’ de neighbors en fine out which un you de bill _do_ b’long

LXVIII.	Across the Inland Sea	357
May 30th.—We arrived at Petrovsk at eight o’clock in the morning, and took passage on the Alexis a boat bound to Krasnovodsk, the chief port of the Transcaspian provinces. We weighed anchor at 10 o’clock. Our voyage began under favourable auspices; the weather is very mild, not the slightest breeze ruffles the smooth surface of the water, but unfortunately, in even the most splendid weather, the rolling is felt in the Caspian Sea.
“Bless yo’ heart for them words, Jake Packard! I’ll never forgit you
“Didn’t I _say_ I was going to help steal the nigger?”
“During my stay, about thirty persons, who had previously been instructed, were baptized. He always performs the service with such solemnity that all present are moved to tears. He has certainly received from God a most peculiar gift of teaching the truths of religion. Heathens of the highest rank, who never intend to become worshippers of the true God and disciples of Jesus Christ, hear his instructions with pleasure. During an abode of[Pg 139] more than forty years in this country, he has acquired a profound knowledge of the customs, manners and character of the people. He expresses himself in the Tamil language as correctly as a native. He can immediately reply to any question and refutes objections so well that the people acknowledge ‘We can lay nothing to the charge of this priest.’”
 Shooting the Pig
sight of the house he looked back and around a second, and then comes

suddenly a mounted policeman came galloping through the confusion with
dey is; dey’s reglar rapscallions.”
“What you been doing down there?”
Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour of her hand, but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Sir William at all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion.
Then he went to work on the nigger, coaxing him and petting him, and



creature could prevent them from climbing the hill. So he said, “I’m
a “divining-rod,” “dissipating witch spells,” and so on. By-and-by he
Both children had got bad manners at table; they fidgeted on their chairs, kicked their legs right and left, and were eating noisily, rattling vigorously their knives and forks. They spilt their soup all over their napkin and spattered jam all over themselves. They also made a point of overeating themselves, transferring the largest and best pieces to their plates; they had several helps of pudding and wanted to have all the cake.
trees to offer them shade; so that before night Dorothy and Toto and
phrenology when there’s a chance; teach singing-geography school for a
The Thomas tradition is perpetuated by a cathedral of simple dimensions in the neighbourhood of Madras which is dedicated to his memory, while another church three miles from St. George’s offers the faithful the privilege of entering the floor and taking a handful of earth as a cure for diseases, because the ashes of the saint were found there. The bones, however, were religiously taken by John III of Portugal to a church at Goa, where they[Pg 5] are still an object of worship. At St. Thomas’ Mount near Madras there is a granite stone upon which is carved a cross and dove with outspread wings, probably the work of the seventh century. The inscription, which is in Pelhavi or ancient Persian, says: “In punishment by the Cross was the suffering of this One who is the true Christ God above and Guide ever pure,” according to Dr. Burnell. But another expert, Dr. Haug of Munich, rather expands the literal meaning as “He that believes in the Messiah and in God in the height and also in the Holy Ghost is in the grace of Him who suffered the pain of the cross.” Two other crosses are preserved in the ancient Church of Cottayam in Travancore; upon one of these a portion of the old Pelhavi inscription has been replaced by a quotation from Galatians vi. 14, “Let us not glory except in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.” These crosses are full of antiquarian interest and seem to indicate Persian influence on the Christian Churches of South India and also go to prove the existence of Christianity on the Coromandal coast in these early centuries.
know anything, somehow—perfect saphead.”
house was small, for the lumber to build it had to be carried by wagon
comes by in the night. When we got to the cabin we took a look at the

“There were some very strong objections against the lady,” were Colonel Fitzwilliam’s words; and these strong objections probably were, her having one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was in business in London.
“Come with me; and see that you mind everything I tell you, for if you
June 26th.—At dawn the African coast, scorched by the sun, came into view. We enter the port and stop opposite the Russian Consulate. Our boat will enter the Suez Canal only at night, and we shall have time to make a short trip to Cairo. When we arrived at the railway station we saw the tail end of the Cairo express passing before our noses. As the next train left only at six o’clock, we had to put off Egypt, and were glad to find shelter in a cool little bar surrounded by a tiny garden, where we sat in the shade and sipped iced drinks, after which we returned on board. Our boat was loading coal, and all the portholes had to be closed in order not to get black. I ventured on deck and was instantly transformed into a negress.
She put her hand to her throat—swayed. I made a step forward, and
quite satisfied with my lot.”



couple of weeks or two; and I says, all right, that suits me, but I
lot. They generly had on yellow straw hats most as wide as an umbrella,
My curiosity concerning harem life was not entirely satisfied. I wanted to visit a harem containing several wives. The interpreter of our hotel, a Circassian named Michael, who spoke twelve languages, proposed to show us a harem whose Pasha kept a dozen wives. Sergy did not approve of the expedition, but I had my own way and started off with Zoe and her lady-companion in an open carriage. We drove through narrow, winding streets. While we were slowly mounting a steep slope, we saw two women, wrapped in blue veils, descending almost perpendicular flights of street-steps cut in the rock, making signs to our driver to stop. After a hurried colloquy with Michael, who sat on the box, he had the carriage stopped to take them up, and explained to us that these women were going to serve as interpreters for us in the harem, where he could not be admitted. One of them was a Servian and could jabber a little Russian, and her companion spoke English.
fresh competitor. As the yelping died away down the silent road, the
CHAPTER XIII
became of them. We saw nothing of them next day. The Black Smoke
Chapter IV

long ways from home. We begun to come to trees with Spanish moss on
“Don’t you know, Mars Jawge?”
horizon—“they’re starving in heaps, bolting, treading on each other. .


The Hollands are living all the year round at the “Windsor,” where they keep a splendid apartment, like a great number of Americans, who live in hotels to avoid the bother of servants and housekeeping. The Hollands had us to dinner at the “Windsor,” and Mrs. Holland wanted me to look my best in order to make the conquest of the paper-reporters, who take their meals at the “Windsor.” She insisted that I should wear my prettiest dress, but I didn’t take any pains to impress the journalists, and put on my walking costume. I wish the Hollands wouldn’t put me forward always!

man that warn’t buried was more likely to go a-ha’nting around than one
stole now.

he swore he’d make the law force him.
“Walk fast now till you get away from the houses, and then shin for the

ventured upon after that night was the preparation of mines and

away from Shepperton station.

hunt up her uncle, and he’d fix the thing. I made the land about a mile
me at them, for about a quarter of a minute: Three big men with guns
extraordinary effect in unmanning me it had that I ran weeping silently



As yet, of course, few people in Woking even knew that the cylinder had



stood beside her.
haggled him open with my saw, and towards sundown I started my camp
“Four days!” she says; “I’ll stay a year!”
Hampton, and so we came to Twickenham. These were the first people we
“How about my heart?” asked the Tin Woodman.
band—able-bodied, clean-minded men. We’re not going to pick up any
And when at last is come my end,
yet; she warn’t near over it; when she was setting thinking about

three-quarters of a mile above it, in the mouth of a crick which was

Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech. They ran through the vestibule into the breakfast-room; from thence to the library;—their father was in neither; and they were on the point of seeking him upstairs with their mother, when they were met by the butler, who said,—
ground, and I seen somebody’s tracks. They had come up from the quarry
What then appears to me to be the result of this fatal interest of two millions due annually to Holland?—That the latter is essentially interested, not in an increase of the power of England,[123] who might make a bad use of it; not in an increase of specie in England, which, by lowering its value, must compel her to return that of the Dutch, already so much disparaged in their country; but to a further extension of the English trade, or rather of the general commerce, which can alone, by advancing constantly, and every where, the quantity and price of the objects that are to circulate, increase in the same proportion the necessity of the instruments indispensable to every kind of circulation and undertaking, and keep up in every part, for the interest of Spain and Portugal, as well as for that of Holland, the value of the sign intended for a general representation, which Holland in her proportion will ever have in greater plenty than all other nations, thanks to the narrow limits of her territories, and to the manners of her inhabitants, which, in all probability, are the consequence of that limitation.

In as short a time as Mr. Collins’s long speeches would allow, everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as they entered the house, he earnestly entreated her to name the day that was to make him the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation must be waived for the present, the lady felt no inclination to trifle with his happiness. The stupidity with which he was favoured by nature must guard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure and disinterested desire of an establishment, cared not how soon that establishment were gained.
“Indeed!”
The man who escaped at the former place tells a wonderful story of the

“I hope so,” said Dorothy earnestly, “since you seem anxious to have

fidgeted up and down the raft, abusing myself to myself, and Jim was

they can; for my niece has been exposed to the dreadful pluribus-unum
that killed me and took the things. They won’t ever hunt the river for
and so was his family. He was well born, as the saying is, and that’s

But very early in the morning poor Ogilvy, who had seen the shooting
The Dainty China Country
Twenty people sings out:
engines, a powwow of cussing, and whistling of steam—and as Jim went
“Our occupations here have been of singular use and a great refreshment to us. In every difficulty we could have recourse to the Rev. Mr. Ziegenhagen, the venerable chaplain of His Majesty, who has behaved to us with paternal kindness and has given us such plain directions as we, like inexperienced children, stood in need of. This was our daily occupation, to take lessons and receive instructions. Then we had also to preach a few sermons;[Pg 36] I twice, namely, once in the Royal Chapel on the first day of Nativity and afterwards for the Rev. Mr. Pittins at the Savoy; Mr. Poltzenhagen four times and Mr. Hüttemann three. May God bless what has been spoken in great weakness.”

chanst.”

That each of the three parts taxed singly, at 3,333,333l. 6s. 8d. and enabled to pay the impost by an advance of price, both in the productions[200] and in the wages of labour, be reduced to its primitive 20 millions, after the payment of the tax.
Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the servants remained. But when they had withdrawn, he said to her, “Mrs. Bennet, before you take any, or all of these houses, for your son and daughter, let us come to a right understanding. Into one house in this neighbourhood they shall never have admittance. I will not encourage the imprudence of either, by receiving them at Longbourn.”
What then is that other cause, so active, so cogent, not of that extravagant price which monopoly alone can occasion, but of that price rather above the necessary one, which gives to every thing an increase of vigour? It is credit. It is that prodigious talisman which realises all that it conceives, since all that it conceives has the same advantage as reality. How many capitals would never have existed, had not credit supposed them several years before they did really exist? How fill up the real chasm of capitals, which may, in an instant, suspend a hundred manufactories in a kingdom, and, by that suspension, ruin, starve, the trader, the merchant, the manufacturer, the mechanic, all, except the farmer, whether proprietor or tenant, who, by the counter-blow, could not die of hunger, but in real misery on his stacks of wheat, which he would no longer attempt to reproduce.




brother William, which can’t hear nor speak—and can’t even make signs

“Well, I don’t care if I _did_, I didn’t _do_ it, anyway. But you not
“And I think I shall need their service just those three times,”
into his boot-tops, and home-knit galluses—no, he only had one. He had
So he done it; and it satisfied him; and he was that glad to see me


The first is, that it is impossible in the nature of things, to keep up foreign consumption, upon[345] which depends the continuation of our exports, without giving foreigners leave to increase the price of theirs, by so much as the commodities carried to them must be increased by our taxes;—in the same manner as it is impossible in the nature of things, to keep up interior consumption, national consumption, upon which depends the payment of taxes, without a general interior increase in the price of labour, as well as in the price of its products, when the wants of the State require new contributions.
“To be sure they could,” cried the Scarecrow. “Why didn’t we think of
reckon that the people that made the books knows what’s the correct

perfectly obvious so soon as he spoke. I had still held a vague hope;
[353]
Nebokoodneezer, s’I.”

morning, or else the bees would all weaken down and quit work and die.

James’s Gazette_, in an extra-special edition, announced the bare fact
him he wanted done.
but we had no glimpse of the Martians until we were some way towards
was in such a fidget now that some was wanting to start right _now_ and


“You don’t need them. You are learning something every day. A baby has
Third Hypothesis.
I set down again, a-shaking all over, and got out my pipe for a smoke;
looked up to him as an unfailing friend and advocate.
up out of their chairs and give them good-day, and didn’t set down


stumbling along in the darkness. Dorothy could not see at all, but Toto

I laid there, and had a good rest and a smoke out of my pipe, looking
I touched the curate’s leg, and he started so violently that a mass of

multitude. Their skins were dry, their lips black and cracked. They
Emerald City belong to us, and we can do just as we please. When I
of Illinois, where the Ohio River comes in, and that was what we was
When Dorothy awoke the sun was shining through the trees and Toto had
couldn’t prop it up right, and she would always cave in. But of course

“Nay, if you are so serious about it, I shall consider the matter as absolutely settled. You will have a charming mother-in-law, indeed, and of course she will be always at Pemberley with you.”

Dorothy wept bitterly at the passing of her hope to get home to Kansas
The king began to gurgle, and then he gasps out:

[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]



seeing all these mice around him he gave one bark of delight and jumped
air until they were over a country thickly covered with sharp rocks.
Lady Catherine seemed pleased.
a flask, which he filled with whisky; and we lined every available
King of the Forest?” inquired the Lion.
With assumed tranquillity he then replied, “I have no wish of denying that I did everything in my power to separate my friend from your sister, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards him I have been kinder than towards myself.”
[Image unavailable.]

CHAPTER CIII
After luncheon, I drove with my husband in a smart landau with a pair of fine bays, put at our disposal by the Government, to the Hôtel Continental where all the members of the foreign missions had put up. Sergy wore his full uniform, on which shone many decorations, and created a great sensation; people stopped and turned their heads when we passed through the street. In the long gallery of the hotel we saw groups of foreign representatives walking about. Sergy proceeded to introduce all the officers to me. Captain Sawyer, the aide-de-camp of General Freemantle, the English representative, was the best looking of them all. A Spanish colonel, Señor Achcaragua, came up by himself[212] and begged for an introduction. His ardent eyes fixed on mine rather frightened me. One of his brother officers told Sergy that the colonel’s brains were slightly touched, thanks to his somewhat stormy youth, during which he had spent himself too much physically, being not insensible to the Southern temperament of the Spanish ladies. During this edifying colloquy, General Fabre, the French representative, came up to Sergy and told him that he had just been appointed by King Humbert “Cavaliere” of the Order of the Corona d’Italia.
The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round the other table, and Mr. Collins took his station between his cousin Elizabeth and Mrs. Philips. The usual inquiries as to his success were made by the latter. It had not been very great; he had lost every point; but when Mrs. Philips began to express her concern thereupon, he assured her, with much earnest gravity, that it was not of the least importance; that he{106} considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged she would not make herself uneasy.


his head to one side, and chawed his tongue, and scrawled off
summit. These hill-like forms grew lower and broader even as we stared.







over the table upon which we had been sitting and lay about our feet.

Wicked Witch and too afraid of her not to do as she told them.
neither do men live nor die in vain.




“No, Lizzy, that is what I do not choose. I should be sorry, you know, to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in Derbyshire.”
“They listened with great attention to all that I told them of the supreme excellence of the true God and of the redemption of mankind from their fallen state by His Son Jesus Christ. The next day I assembled a number of natives under a tree and explained to them the Christian doctrine. They felt how vain and irrational it was to worship their numerous deities and fully approved of the doctrine of one God, Creator of Heaven and Earth. I also visited a Brahmin, who was considered the richest inhabitant of the place; he allowed me without interruption to expose the folly of idolatry and then said, ‘I also worship God.’ We were interrupted by the arrival of a Hindu who fell on his face before him. The Brahmin took some ashes, which he spread over the poor man. I told him how wrong he acted in accepting honours which were due to God alone. Enraged at this reproach he exclaimed, ‘Prove that there is only one God.’ This I did[Pg 71] by directing his attention to the great works of Creation. He dismissed me by saying, ‘In the same way that we bow before the body of a man and yet mean to pay respect to his soul, we bow before images and intend to worship God,’ a plausible excuse which has been argued in favour of idolatry in all ages, but which is at once derogatory to the majesty of the Supreme Being and destructive of all true and acceptable worship.”
dinner Friday we was laying around in the grass at the upper end of the
come on humanity, deepened his persuasion of the immediate necessity
they all followed him. He pointed to one corner, in which lay the great
PRIDE.

house a good ransacking: I knowed that very well. Then I turned in,

Elizabeth smiled.
come tearing in, with the thunder and lightning a-ripping around and
“But suppose we cannot?” said the girl.
faint, and at last indistinguishable amid the low banks of clouds that
The victim of sensuality, he yet kept his head clear for business, and though he could not read a word he dictated several letters at the same time and his marvellous memory kept him always in touch with the financial and political affairs of his kingdom. Schwartz has given us a picture of his court, and his interview represents Hyder in one of his best moods. He seemed a very Gallio in his religious views and used the Brahmin because it suited his purpose to be guided by the ablest and only educated men. There is no doubt he misled the pious Schwartz in letting him imagine that those boys were the objects of his charity and tender care. As a matter of fact, they simply represented his practice of carrying captive the young natives of any country which came into his hands. He was cruelly severe in his discipline and did not spare his own son when it was needed; his ferocity of revenge and his lust of plunder made him an unsparing enemy and an avaricious thief. And yet, as we have seen in his talk with Schwartz, there was a better side of him and he had a desire at least after truth and justice. It is quite a natural question, when reviewing such a character, to ask oneself what Hyder Ali might have been had he embraced the Christian faith.
The door of the cavern was big enough to roll a hogshead in, and on one
concentration of military material.
a log ahead o’ me en swum more’n half way acrost de river, en got in

churches, silent and abandoned; as I thought of the multitudinous hopes

want to. I’ll think the thing over—I’ll invent a plan that’ll fix it.
“Well, then, what can be done?” inquired the Woodman.
the light, it glistened like wet leather.
Done by him 300 consecutive nights in Paris!
mice and little mice and middle-sized mice; and each one brought a
“This is a wretched beginning, indeed! My sole dependence was on you; and I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not. Yet, indeed, I am in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves me, and we are engaged.”

“Please take it,” says I, “and don’t ask me nothing—then I won’t have
“No governess! How was that possible? Five daughters brought up at home without a governess! I never heard of such a thing. Your mother must have been quite a slave to your education.”
foot long; but its head was joined to the pudgy body by a neck as
[Image unavailable.]
the lovely Lady. And the Tin Woodman saw that his terrible Beast was


felt that she could help him if she would.
immediately the self of every day again—a decent, ordinary citizen. The

as possible. As the sun crept up the sky the day became excessively
and went just about wild.
[504]
August 13th.—The heat is not so intense to-day. The sky is grey and big drops of rain begin to fall. At 8 o’clock in the morning we arrived at Krasnovodsk, where I was received by the agent of the steamboat company, an old admiral retired from the service. The Tropic, a boat built in England, was reserved for my crossing. I have the best cabin; a placard placed over the door bears the following inscription in English: “To accommodate four seamen,” but one could easily place a dozen of men in it. It proves to what an extent the English consider the comfort of their sailors.
that is necessary for the support of animated existence.

article in the _Referee_ compared the affair to a menagerie suddenly
very strong upon me that night. Here was another side to my dream.
morning. Those who did took some time to realise all that the hastily
Elizabeth was forced to give in to a little falsehood here; for to acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.{442}

August 15th.—The weather has changed for the worse; heavy black clouds hang over the billowy sea. The wind is getting stronger; we are awfully tossed about. I have really no chance on the sea; as soon as I step on board, Neptune never fails to be very disagreeable.
I went off down to the river, studying over this thing, and pretty soon
observed, crouched in a spasm of terror. He came sliding down the
Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth again, having still a great deal to say to her, and many inquiries to make after all their Hertfordshire friends. Elizabeth, construing all this into a wish{324} of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased; and on this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their visitors left them, capable of considering the last half hour with some satisfaction, though while it was passing the enjoyment of it had been little. Eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries or hints from her uncle and aunt, she stayed with them only long enough to hear their favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.
from the walls above the kitchen range.
Twelfthly, Had France been indebted to the disparagement in the prices of her commodities, for the advantage of procuring the money wanted for the five articles before mentioned, she would have found herself in the impossibility of answering that want, as soon as, by the new regulation, those commodities were restored to their natural value, as soon as the liberty of exporting wheat had raised its price almost to the level of that which it bore in England.—Now will it be said, that ever since the landed revenue[281] in France has risen from 40 to 50 per cent. by an advance in the price of commodities, less bullion has been spent by the French in plate, in gilding, and other articles of luxury?—Will it be said that France stood in need of the money necessary to settle in cash with her foreign correspondents, when this resource from circumstances became preferable to the mode of paying in bills of exchange?—Will it be said that she fell short of it for all those Jewish and miserable operations, or for that reciprocally beneficial smuggling with her neighbours?—Will it be said, that her circulation, which, beyond any doubt, required a more considerable mass of money, as soon as her revenue had tertiated, has suffered by that necessity of a higher balance, become impossible (according to the maxim) as soon as it grew indispensable?—Will it be said, that her industry has lingered away as soon as her agriculture has been more able to enliven it?—Yet all these absurdities must be admitted, or it must be acknowledged that the price of commodities may be tertiated, or doubled in a nation, not only without injuring industry, whose business it is to keep within the kingdom all the money wanted for circulation, but even with securing to the nation a more considerable balance in money, since it must become so whenever the price of[282] every thing is raised one third, and perhaps more than one half.—The sacred maxim therefore has not even common sense, when applied to the internal trade of the State.
“That is very true,” replied Elizabeth, “and I could easily forgive his pride, if he had not mortified mine.”
river road for to try to ketch dat young man en kill him ’fo’ he kin
you and obey your slightest wish. There is only one thing I ask in
Fifthly, They have the true notion of an equitable trade, founded on the continuation of former relations between goods and goods; a principle from which I only draw inferences relative to the national debt, and which suffices to destroy all the hideousness of that phantom.
 “Gimme a Chaw”
horror on the faces of the people about me. I heard inarticulate
mighty sorry for you, Miss Mary Jane.”
XXIV.	On our way to Lucerne	171
farther lip, flat and vast and strange, lay the great flying-machine
bit. Lord! They haven’t begun on us yet. Don’t you see that?”
Two or three days and nights went by; I reckon I might say they swum

The Woodman set to work at once, and so sharp was his axe that the tree


clock, a slipper, a silver spoon, and the like poor valuables. At the
 We turned in and Slept
believed that the destruction of Sennacherib had been repeated, that
gate. “What’s it all abart?”
four long sweeps at each end, so we judged she carried as many as
He readily assured her of his secrecy, again expressed{342} his sorrow for her distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present reason to hope, and, leaving his compliments for her relations, with only one serious parting look, went away.
sense of doubt and insecurity in my mind. I sit in my study writing by
of mechanical appliances must ultimately supersede limbs; the
pison, and fall down the well, and break his neck, and bust his brains
A singing mistress was sought for me, who rejoiced in the poetical name of “Fräulein Rosa.” When I was presented to her I gave way to a fit of most indecent laughter, for this Rose looked such a guy—a veritable old caricature. Outraged she left the room and never after returned. I was very glad to be rid of that fright, and clapped my hands in naughty glee.

We reached Tiflis in the evening and established ourselves very comfortable in Sergy’s spacious apartments. It was the prettiest home that could be imagined; my pink boudoir was lovely, a real bonbon box. I had all the world before me and everything to make me happy. Wearing rose-coloured glasses through which one looks at the outside world, I felt in particular good-humour with life in general and with my husband above all. But all joys have an end. These two delicious months passed over only too swiftly; storm-clouds rose quite unexpectedly upon our horizon and a shadow of trouble hung over us. A few years before, an insurrection broke out in Herzegovine; later on the Bulgarians made an attempt to throw off the Turkish yoke, but the Osmanlies made short and terrible work of the unfortunate Bulgarians, and Serbia and Montenegro maddened by the spectacle of horror, declared war. We were expecting with dread lest Russia should meddle in that sad affair, when all of a sudden rumours of war spread abroad. Whatever I thought will now become of me, should I have to part with Sergy, who had crept into my life as a necessity? It did not seem possible; sooner might I lie down and die!
all about, and gloomy in there amongst them. There was freckled places
all day to get the hang of the things, and by-and-by I could do pretty
Regent’s Canal, a spongy mass of dark-red vegetation.
gars and such, and they do get pretty rank; and next you’ve got the
in the sky, and after a time their talk died out and gave place to an

Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments.
[302]
“Let us make a chair with our hands and carry her,” said the Scarecrow.
“I am far from attributing any part of Mr. Bingley’s conduct to design,” said Elizabeth; “but, without scheming to do wrong, or to make others unhappy, there may be error and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness, want of attention to other people’s feelings, and want of resolution, will do the business.”
was strange to see the place quite tranquil, quite desolate under the
gwyne to _leave_, dat’s _shore_.”
the lightning showed me one that wasn’t chained I snatched it and
done. But what _I_ say is this: it ain’t good sense to go court’n
July 19th.—We are half-way over the ocean to-day, and had champagne at dinner for this occasion.
Then I jumped in the canoe and dug out for our place, a mile and a half
it was just as safe to not to. So I never said nothing.
I hunched Tom, and whispers:
people seemed to have here was that the Martians were simply formidable
that had precipitated the action. As the limber gunners went to the
Few stopped and came aside from that flood. The lane opened slantingly
WRECKAGE.
There ain’t no harm in a hound, nohow.

what had been happening to the world, had not anticipated this
luck, and this time he made the trip.
whole place, the way you’re always going to stop their holes and don’t

George’s family, or to Peter. And he always let on that Peter wrote him

and across the pretty bridges until they saw before them a very


CHAPTER LXVI
When it was daylight, the girl bathed her face in a little rippling
half a mile along this road.”

curate, the whereabouts of the Martians, and the possible fate of my
“That’s why he nearly blunted my claws,” said the Lion. “When they
greatly excited me. My imagination became belligerent, and defeated the


it tapped against the wall, or started on its movements with a faint
and better the more he got used to it. He said that in that way it
CHAPTER XXI
kin stan’.”

half tie the sack, and they worked out somehow, and left. But it didn’t




into the great metallic carrier which projected behind him, much as a
they set the coffin in the middle of the room on a couple of chairs,
That England must have been complaisant enough to call 13 millions, in a foreign market, the amount of her exports, which the effects of her new taxes obliged her to call 14 millions 300 thousand pounds at home:
Thirteenth Hypothesis.
“From the very beginning, from the first moment, I may almost say, of my acquaintance with you, your manners impressing me with the fullest belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of the feelings of others, were such as to form that groundwork of disapprobation, on which succeeding events have built so immovable a dislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the last man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry.{242}”
nature of this substance.


The king sassed back as much as was safe for him, and then swapped

and, promising faithfully to return to them, and parting, as I will
“The road is straight to the South,” he answered, “but it is said to be
adorer to a candle made of tallow.)
After the second bull we pushed resolutely through the crowd, we had to fight our way as best we could by a series of manœuvres, and managed this time to decamp. I had my first, and I am sure of it, my last experience of a bull-fight, the one thing that makes Spain hateful to me. Outside the bull-ring we saw the carcasses of the martyred bulls, whose meat was sold at low prices to the lower classes.
as we could, to bake the pie in, and took it down cellar and stole it
Title: Pride and Prejudice
little girl would who had been suddenly whisked away from her own
said. I had forgot it. We laid up for the day on a tow-head tolerable

Say, lemme hear you read.”
before I could think more than about a half a thought, and he never
finished, for his cowl was then seen above the trees again.
“You bet it is.”

blessing over it, but it was worth it; and it didn’t cool it a bit,
As a matter of fact, although there was a growing appreciation of the value of utilising native converts as catechists and helpers in the days following Schwartz, there appears to have been a corresponding reluctance to ordain them, save in exceptional cases, to the work of the ministry. The day of a native clergy dawned slowly. We have it on record that, so far nearer our present time as 1851, “although there were over 493 catechists and preachers there were under all the societies at work in India only twenty-one ordained native pastors.”
have to worry along the best he could with an onion. He promised he


silence. It was a crescent with twelve miles between its horns. Never


tin pan with bread and meat and things; and whilst the others was


the fields. But—— It’s not sixteen days altogether—and your hair is
PREFACE.
just as I and the artilleryman had left them. My home was desolate. I
So whilst me and Jim filed away at the pens on a brickbat apiece, Jim
Thirdly, That the case between nation and nation trading together, is similar to that which subsists between citizen and citizen; as there is but one way for a man to prevent the last penny of his wealth from being useful to some other member of his community; and that way is, to bury under ground (as soon as he has received it) that last penny, the utility of which he grudges to share with other men: in like manner, a nation can no otherwise prevent the surplus of her money being carried into another country when this latter is in want of it, than by burying her balance as soon as she has received it:
off. But mostly they hang round the harem.”
just in time to save them.
of people drinking at the stream, some fighting to come at the water.
same way when young birds done it. I was going to catch some of them,
“How’m I going to guess,” says I, “when I never heard tell of it
invisible jet impinged upon them and flashed into white flame. It was
_Phelps!_”

On the following day we drove to Castellamare; a succession of villages lined the way. The tramway took up half the breath of the road, encumbered with huge waggons drawn by great powerful horses; I felt rather frightened. On approaching Sorrento we ran against a car drawn by a horse, a cow and a donkey as well! There was a local feast of Saint-somebody, I didn’t know who, at Sorrento, and flags were suspended from house to house across the narrow streets. We passed before the house which had been inhabited by Torquato Tasso transformed now into an hotel. Just in front of it stands the statue of the great poet. The distant sound of low chanting attracted our attention; it grew louder, and presently, far up the street, we saw a religious procession come in sight. At the head came a pilgrim holding a high crucifix. Behind followed a group of curates in white surplices, bearing a large grotto in which stood the statue of a saint dressed as a Franciscan monk, surrounded by a number of statuettes representing worshippers kneeling to him. A number of little girls, arrayed in white, with crowns of roses on their heads, carried an altar decorated with vases full of paper-flowers, in the middle of which stood the statue of the Virgin, clad in a rich brocade dress and a long blue mantle embroidered[227] with silver stars; the Madonna’s long hair fell in ringlets on her shoulders. A large crowd of pilgrims came behind. We begged a constable to clear a passage for us through the throng and gained the high road by a back street. From afar we saw the lava running down Vesuvius. Our vetturino, turning round, said, “That’s my home,” pointing with his whip to a little village sheltered beneath the treacherous mountain.

around the gills, and it all amounted to a considerable state of things
Her father lifted up his eyes, Jane was distressed, Elizabeth looked expressively at Lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw anything of which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued,—
“I’m very sorry, indeed,” said Dorothy, who was truly frightened to see
tarred, and I saw a contorted shape lying across the pathway. I could

they’d a got the corpse they was after. Well, I see I warn’t hurt,
Ef I could git de ten _cents_ back, I’d call it squah, en be glad er de
“Oh, single, my dear, to be sure! A single man of large fortune; four or five thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!”
first body of Martians.
She shook her head. “I do not get on at all. I hear such different accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.”

“Kill the Wicked Witch of the West,” answered Oz.
going to happen. But nothing did.

[394]
wishing I knowed who shot the man, and what they done it for.

The soldier then left them and the Scarecrow said:
it did not matter now if my axe slipped, for it could not cut me. There
“He is as fine a fellow,” said Mr. Bennet, as soon as they were out of the house, “as ever I saw. He simpers, and smirks, and makes love to us all. I am prodigiously proud of him. I defy even Sir William Lucas himself to produce a more valuable son-in-law.”
your kind—as long as it’s daytime and you’re not behind him.


April 31st.—I called to-day on Signora Lavini, a curious specimen of a Turkified European woman. She is the wife of an Italian druggist, who has lived here for many years. Their daughter was born and educated in Erzeroum, of which one is easily aware by her moral development. Nevertheless her parents seem very proud of their offspring; they called her up to exhibit her musical accomplishments before us. The young virtuose betook herself to the piano, and first played some scales on the elderly instrument shockingly out of tune, toiling up and down the piano, and giving her wrist and arm a tremendous jerk every time it was her thumbs turn to go under. She ended her musical performance by the traditional Cloches du Monastère.
“What has happened?” I asked.
 Honest Injun
plans, and how we could alter them in a minute any time there was an

April 2nd.—The Catholics celebrate to-day their Palm-Sunday. We went to their cathedral where Capuchin monks, in brown garments, wearing a cord instead of a girdle, officiated. After mass we visited the school directed by the French Sisters of Mercy. The Turks had shown themselves very uncivil to these Sisters when they arrived at Erzeroum, but they got accustomed to them afterwards, and begin now to esteem the good sisters for their attendance on the sick and wounded.
When a man has shewn himself capable of looking upon a war as the readiest means that could conduce to a general union of interests, no one will be surprised if that very man should allow to luxury the principal honour in the accomplishment of such a prophecy. Nor would any one be surprised[355] if he were to add, that the rage for luxury, in a discerning despot, would soon lead him to establish within his dominions the greatest freedom, from which alone he can expect the greatest display of all kinds of luxury, the choice and first fruits of which would be always at his command. Nor again would any one be surprised were the prophet to add, that wherever luxury should be at its summit, none but the idle would be at a loss for a livelihood, and that not a mean one; that even the idiot, as well as the worn-out labourer, would find there, under the designation of a hospital, an asylum equal to the habitation of a King:—The habitation of the Kings of Great Britain is not comparable to some of her hospitals.
She was alive still; the steering gear, it seems, was intact and her
“Yes; but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.”

unknown lane with these two women.
I ransacked it, but couldn’t find anything else. I couldn’t make
right, and out through the hole, swift but soft—Jim first, me next, and

was only Huck; but he laughed _such_ a screechy laugh, and roared and
you see, I don’t know nothing about play-actin’, and hain’t ever seen
“His being so sure of succeeding was wrong,” said she, “and certainly ought not to have appeared; but consider how much it must increase his disappointment.{279}”
October 25th.—I found a telegram from Sergy waiting for me at Kermineh, telling me by what train he would meet me at the station of Kata-Kourgan. I am happy, happy, happy!
stiffly.

good. Your uncle Harvey’s a preacher, ain’t he? Very well, then; is a

their lives, have wars, revolutions, until the men want them out of the
aware of a fighting-machine standing near by the Langham and looking
fastened to them that passed around the back of her head, where they
friends were at first dazzled by the brilliancy of the wonderful City.
The Resident invited Sergy for a drive in his carriage. They crossed large fields allotted to the culture of tobacco, cacao, pepper, indigo and coffee. A long street of small huts, with roofs that may be opened, all of the same shape and size, spreads in the coffee plantations, serving for the drying of the grains. As soon as the sun appears, the roofs are opened and the coffee grains are spread on the floor to be dried. From thence Sergy was driven to the Piradenia Gardens, containing a rich collection of queer tropical plants, trees of the rarest species, and beautiful flower-beds. To see the gardens took hours. Sergy was dazzled by the beauty of all he saw. On his way back to the hotel, a storm broke out; it was one of those formidable equatorial rains of such violence, that it seemed as if the sky was emptying itself upon the earth.
CXXIV.	Kissingen	532
[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]
FOOTNOTES:
The artilleryman began to tell me of the sort of people who still

never hunted for no back streets, but humped it straight through the
but just follow the lines. Then pretty soon he says:
“Well, when it come dark I tuck out up de river road, en went ’bout two
got there they bent over and looked in the coffin, and took one sight,
“La!” replied Kitty, “it looks just like that man that used to be with him before. Mr. what’s his name—that tall, proud man.”
“Everything’s all right now except tools; and that’s easy fixed.”





“It ought to be good,” he replied: “it has been the work of many generations.”
wust. They said he could _vote_ when he was at home. Well, that let me



And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect unconcern, “Oh, but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and when I have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim it with fresh, I think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much signify what one wears this summer, after the ——shire have left Meryton, and they are going in a fortnight.”
Even as I beheld this a lurid green glare lit the road about me and
When the meal was over I went speedily to put on my travelling dress, for it was nearly daylight and we had to drive a long way to Mertchik, a fine estate belonging to Sergy’s elder brother, situated at about fifty miles from Dolgik, where we were to spend our honeymoon.
cross-hall of the texas. Then in there I see a man stretched on the
worth fifteen of mine for style, and would make Jim just as free a man
wash-pan—afraid the solder would melt; but Uncle Silas he had a noble
In the afternoon I ventured upon deck. Heavy black clouds hung over us; a fresh air blew into my face. We are to-day at the extreme point of our voyage, quite near to the Aleutian Islands and Kamtchatka. A lark settled on our mast, and Baron Korff came to congratulate me with this first winged messenger from the distant country which was to be our new home. From San Francisco a pair of big albatrosses followed our ship, resting during night on the masts.
Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness. She had spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with Charlotte, and the kind attention she had received, must make her feel the obliged. Mr. Collins was gratified; and with a more smiling solemnity replied,—
“I have been most highly gratified, indeed, my dear sir; such very superior dancing is not often seen. It is evident that you belong to the first circles. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not disgrace you: and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated, especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Miss Eliza (glancing at her sister and Bingley), shall take place. What congratulations will then flow in! I appeal to Mr. Darcy;—but let me not interrupt you, sir. You will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that young lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.{118}”
the hatchet, and covered up the raft with them so she looked like there

“I cannot pretend to be sorry,” said Wickham, after a short interruption, “that he or that any man should not be estimated beyond their deserts; but with him I believe it does not often happen. The world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his high and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chooses to be seen.”

their poison cloud over this patch of country and then over that,
September 4th.—I did not leave my room until dinner-time, reading a heap of newspapers which had been forwarded from Khabarovsk; but the news was two months old. One is obliged to live behind date in this far-away country.
only one way left to destroy Dorothy and her friends.
“Nearly three weeks.”
warn’t afraid of anybody running across us. We laid there all day, and
Finn helped a nigger to get his freedom; and if I was ever to see

he’s little ain’t got no show—when the pinch comes there ain’t nothing
[271]
scared; and the place getting hotter and hotter, and the butter
“It is evident by this,” added Jane, “that he comes back no more this winter.”
encountered water it straightway became gigantic and of unparalleled
brains, and a heart also; so, having tried them both, I should much
struggle occurred for places in the special trains that were put on at
How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned! His attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to grasp at anything. His behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive: he had either been deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been gratifying his vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had most incautiously shown. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter and fainter; and in further justification of Mr. Darcy, she could not but allow that Mr. Bingley, when questioned by Jane, had long ago asserted his blamelessness in the affair;—that, proud and repulsive as were his manners, she had never, in the whole course of their acquaintance—an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways—seen anything that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust—anything that spoke him of irreligious or immoral habits;—that among his own connections he was esteemed and valued;—that even Wickham had allowed him merit as a brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his sister as to prove him capable of some amiable feeling;—that had his actions been what Wickham represented them, so gross a violation of everything right could hardly have been concealed from the world; and that friendship between a person capable of it and such an amiable man as Mr. Bingley was incomprehensible.

will, but this is a St. Louis one.”
“Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what is strong already. But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away.”

could use his right hand, you would see that he wrote his own letters
this, it seemed to kind of take the tuck all out of me. I went along
[5]

writ’n done with blood! Must a ben a raft uv ’m at it right along, all
198,	l. 10, for 46s. read 46s. 8d.
The system of taxation, which may be called general, is composed of the four different kinds of taxes which I have just mentioned:—First, some kind of poll-tax, under that or any other name;—secondly, a land-tax;—thirdly, an impost on the consumption of the rich, or luxury;—and fourthly, in fine, the freedom taken with the consumption of the poor, or general consumption;[224] for the sun of reason forces its way through the darkness of prejudices; these only serve to retard the progress of nature wherever light first began to shine. It would be easier to stifle truth at first, than entirely to escape its effects.

a speech of small variety and considerable intermittence. I took a
1st, Whether an accession of wealth, an addition of gold and money to the circulation, would not increase the prices of every thing, as necessarily as taxes must do it;—2dly, If that increase in prices, procured by wealth, would not be accompanied with the same inconveniences in regard to the supporting of a competition abroad;—and, 3dly, If the stranger to whom we should[157] declare ourselves compelled to sell him our goods dearer, because we are grown richer than the rival nation, would not have the same answer to give us, as if he were told, that the cause of the advance in the price is, our being loaded more heavily with taxes.
for he was big and heavy; but the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman stood
heavily into a shallow pool of water.
“If we only had the Scarecrow with us again,” said the Tin Woodman,
A new complication arose: the poor subjects, jealous of the peaceful character of the Christians and their steadfast refusal to join in plundering expeditions, encamped themselves with the avowed purpose of extirpating Christianity, root and branch. Many of the Christians, therefore, armed themselves in self-defence. Once more, as peacemaker, Schwartz hurried to the scene of action and by the spell of his personality persuaded the malcontents to disarm and go back to their ploughing and sowing on the fields. His grateful comment is “My heart rejoiced at the kind over-ruling providence—surely He is a God that heareth prayer.”
This was invitation enough.
Kars has changed considerably since my departure to Erzeroum; sign-boards written in Russian are to be seen everywhere, and our language chiefly is heard in the streets.
the night and the silence, until long after midnight, in a cabmen’s
death of the Martians is so probable as to be regarded almost as a

[118]
attempt to shut him into the taproom. That sobered him a little; and
chapters I and the curate have been lurking in the empty house at
A. We shall send it abroad.
“I never heard that it was.”
violently—was lifted high against the sky, a black, vague enigma

The Bingleys and the Gardiners and the Lucases, Miss Darcy and Miss de Bourgh, Jane, Wickham, and the rest, must pass without special comment, further than the remark that Charlotte Lucas (her egregious papa, though delightful, is just a little on the thither side of the line between comedy and farce) is a wonderfully clever study in drab of one kind, and that Wickham (though something of Miss Austen’s hesitation of touch in dealing with young men appears) is a not much less notable sketch in drab of another. Only genius could have made Charlotte what she is, yet not disagreeable; Wickham what he is, without investing him either with a cheap Don Juanish attractiveness or a disgusting rascality. But the hero and the heroine are not tints to be dismissed.
ain’t far from here. I’m one of them—but I hain’t talked it around. A
The French officers were present at a night retreat on the Khodinka Field, after which a great supper was given in their honour at the Military Club, illuminated a giorno. I[289] stood amongst the crowd of lookers-on when the mariners were proceeding to the dining-room. There arose on their passage a mighty shout: “Long live France!” and the French officers shouted: “Long live Russia!” Innumerable toasts were drunk to the prosperity of France and Russia during the repast. My husband pronounced a long discourse in French, after which Admiral Gervais addressed himself to General Malahof, the oldest Russian military commander present, and said that as he hadn’t the opportunity to shake hands with all the Russian officers sitting at table, he asked permission to kiss the old General for them all. The champagne had loosened the tongues of the guests, and one of them, having suggested the wish that France and Russia should fight together against Prussia some day, a voice cried: “We’ll enter Berlin together!” after which the subject of conversation was diplomatically changed. Next day the French mariners returned to St. Petersburg on their way to Portsmouth, where Queen Victoria was to meet them.

“It seems, in spite of dangers, that the best thing Dorothy can do is
hurt once or twice.”
a-going to find out who it is that’s here on the island with me; I’ll
as many as he put in the basket. But the Scarecrow did not mind how
to be hers and get out her poor old scrap-book and read in it when her
It was true; Toto had fallen down beside his little mistress. But the
mouthful of ashes more than what they was before. I didn’t believe we
hopeless, seeing the fury of the Londoners to crowd upon the trains,

Thou who was crowned on high
borrowed three dollars from Judge Thatcher, and pap took it and got

“Oh, your father, of course, may spare you, if your mother can. Daughters are never of so much consequence to a father. And if you will stay another month complete, it will be in my power to take one of you as far as London, for I am going there early in June,{264} for a week; and as Dawson does not object to the barouche-box, there will be very good room for one of you—and, indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, I should not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you large.”
“How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! But I knew I should persuade you at last. I was sure you loved your girls too well to neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! And it is such a good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning, and never said a word about it till now.”

given. But everyone is familiar with the magnificent and almost
The air was full of sound, a deafening and confusing conflict of

LXXXI.	Singapore	413
brilliant group of three lines in the green, and it is possible that it
knowledge of comparative physiology is confined to a book or two, but

Mere child as I was, I already indulged in a decided taste for adventures, and experienced one on the road. During the night, we were pushed into a railway carriage full of passengers; one of them, a very good-looking young man, made room for us and went to find for himself another place. The next morning, whilst we were breakfasting at the Station of Marseilles, a waiter brought me a beautiful bouquet, followed by our amiable fellow-passenger of the previous night, who[25] proved to be a Mexican fresh from South America. He opened the conversation by telling us that his name was Gallardo Alvarez, and hinted that he was an unmarried millionaire, making his first pleasure tour in Europe. Studying him stealthily I decided that he would do.
all that he knew of these Martians and their ways. The sun crept higher
this way and that in the woods, whooping and screeching; but it warn’t


place, and I kept answering, till by-and-by it was in front of me
useless to fight people with shooting heads; no one can withstand
right; so the best way would be for us to pick out two or three things
 Tom Sawyer’s Band of Robbers
As soon as we entered Holland, the landscape changed at once. We rolled across flat expanses: all was level land. Vast fields of red and white tulips spread before us. Black and white cows, with huge bells on their necks, dozed in the high grass. The verdant prairies are variegated with bad-smelling canals filled with water, on a level with the ground. Quaint little houses with green and white shutters, that have sat themselves close to the water edge, border the road. In the distance windmills were turning slowly in the evening breeze, pointing their wings in all directions and filling the air with a ceaseless whir.
asleep, but she was dead.
“As to outward circumstances, a gracious God hath paternally preserved me and amidst bodily weakness mightily supported me. Let my God only give me that which Paul was enabled cheerfully to say, 2 Cor. v. 1: ‘We know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved we have a building not made with hands, eternal in the heavens!’”
black veil, and white slim ankles crossed about with black tape, and
suburban roadway. Vast, indeed, was the change that we beheld.

sounds we heard represented a noisy tumult in the interior.
seen the devil and been rode by witches.

away. For a day and a night I traveled through the air, and on the
advancing along the muddy coast from the direction of Foulness. At that
rob her of her money!
“Why, that’s just what I was going to ask your grace.”
Fifthly, that the liberty of exporting corn, even under its present restrictions, makes, as it were, of all Europe, at this day, only one family; that, on the whole, there is constantly as much of that indispensable commodity as is necessary for all the family; but that a man whose folly would be to trace out, describe, and acknowledge, throughout every thing that concerns society in any essential point, the stamp of an universal benevolence, determined to unite all men together by their wants and interests if it is impossible to[168] do it by more disinterested motives, would not prove too inconsistent in a fit of that folly which might induce him to suspect some marks of that stamp, even in the bad seasons, in the storms which successively visit all the parts of the world, make them all sensible of the necessity of such union, and soon bring nearly upon a level, all the different prices of that indispensable commodity, the cultivation of which requires, almost every where, the same labour, or which, by its quantity, always answers, upon an average, to the labour bestowed upon it:
not see even my subjects, and so they believe I am something terrible.”

My, but there was a crowd there! Fifteen farmers, and every one of them

says, “O Lord, don’t shoot!” Bang! goes the first shot, and he staggers



a day. But I believed in him sufficiently to work with him all that
Tom Sawyer Wounded.—The Doctor’s Story.—Tom Confesses.—Aunt Polly
The wonder cannot but increase, if we consider with what eagerness those two countries are intent upon improving their trade.
the imperfect descriptions of such eye-witnesses as myself to go upon,

couldn’t make out how he was willing to go into this thing; so I just
haven’t got it in the book—I’ve only got one volume—but I reckon I can
got by myself I went to thinking the thing over. I says to myself,
my brother touched her she became quite still, as if frightened.
Serfogee Rajah’s Monument to Schwartz	”	”	184

sunken, so that at first I did not recognise him. There was a red cut
gave rise in all cases to red-coloured growths. Only that known

certain further details which, although they were not all evident to us
“Why?” asked Dorothy.
the aluminium-making. The whole picture was a flickering scheme of
I says:

luck not to have a heart.”
lot of signs to the duke with his hands, and the duke he looks at him
upon them to repent—repent! . . . Oppressors of the poor and needy . .
the same thing. It’s energy in a gale of funk, and turned clean inside

either of ’em Wilkses”—and he wagged his head towards the king and the
Ocean right off and go to work on the pirates.
the crowd, tallies very closely with my own impressions: the three

Jim and me got uneasy. We didn’t like the look of it. We judged they
“Oz keeps a great pot of courage in his Throne Room,” said the man,

The loss of Schwartz was felt all the more because he was such a remarkable personality, one of those men of whom it is fairly admitted that it is extremely difficult for another to take their place. Many men can do mighty works, but only the few can beget love and inspire, not only amongst their friends and converts, but in the hearts of worldly wise civilians, and the priests of pagan religions, a sincere and respectful confidence. It may be said in truth of Schwartz that in both these directions he had no equal in his day.
reckon they said? Why, they said he couldn’t be sold till he’d been in



their possession. It was stated that the people of Walton and
joke about it, and I judged it would strain the duke and the king some
“‘This fellow will scare the crows fast enough,’ said the farmer. ‘He
But it warn’t surprising; because he warn’t only just a farmer, he was
the scarlet fields. The Scarecrow began to grumble a bit.

28th July.—I woke up in the middle of the night with a suppressed scream and jumped up in my bed. I had been dreaming I was at sea, and the engines of the Peru had come to a sudden stand-still. “Why are the engines not working?” I asked Sergy in an alarmed tone. After he had comforted me and I had pinched myself to be sure I was not dreaming, I fell fast asleep again.

“Oh yes—I understand you perfectly.”
hands of the Wicked Witch of the West, who made us enslave the Winkies,

CHAPTER XXXI.

I seized the opportunity of slightly shifting my position, which had

make for a sort of do-nothing religion, very pious and superior, and
Scarecrow. Its head was a small sack stuffed with straw, with eyes,
bread, and laid down behind a log on the bank in a little open place.


such a hurry I hadn’t untied her. I got up and tried to untie her, but
or didn’t go to bed early enough in the evening. Take it all round, we
plums from the trees beside the river. Behind them was the dark forest
of the world. The Martians, I thought, had gone on and left the country

marked with transverse stripes, and slightly flattened from the perfect
“Well, I’ll try it,” said the Lion. “Who will go first?”
“And you promised to give me a heart,” said the Tin Woodman.
(by special request,)

and up the ridge and into the cavern. There Jim laid, sound asleep on

June 19th.—Towards noon we arrived at Odessa where I was happy to find my mother, who had come from Moscow to see us off. We put up together at the Hôtel de Londres.
life. So hereafter you must all serve him, and obey his slightest
would do it all just as Tom said.

position. We saw one shrivelled old fellow with a huge box and a score
One can easily imagine what an anxious time I passed through, living in a constant state of alarm. Sergy’s telegrams brought me the assurance that he was still alive and unwounded, but what might be in an hour—to-morrow? The minute just past might have made me a widow!
Now, would the abolishing of such a resource turn to the profit of the State, even supposing[26] it to be effected by the justifiable means of a general reimbursement, were the case possible? I have too often reflected on the subject, too often revolved it over and over, I have viewed it under too many points, not to be sensible how far above my strength it is to discuss the matter in all its parts; I shall nevertheless venture to throw out some thoughts, which to me seem likely to render somewhat problematical a question which, at first sight, does not appear anyways difficult to resolve.
now so nobody won’t think of following me.
and Dorothy would lie beside him and put her head on his soft, shaggy
[Image unavailable.]

Once more the veil of obscurity, like a shifting mist, settles on that Indian Church; no word breaks the silence, no streak of light enables us to see the growing powers of this faithful few, hedged in by Judaism on the one hand and the native religions on the other.

considerable a-doing it. I fetched the pig in, and took him back nearly



it up. Some men crowded around him and tried to get him to shut up, but

on hand with her “tribute” before he was cold. She called them

I set it down, private, because somebody might want _me_ to spell it
“I beg you will not put it into Lizzy’s head to be{24} vexed by his ill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man that it would be quite a misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that he sat close to her for half an hour without once opening his lips.”

wheel had broken his back, and his lower limbs lay limp and dead. My
Here is a striking statement made by another to the missionary one day—it is the unbelief of a later day in its old setting. We can imagine Schwartz, with his keen intellect, watching this caviller as he tries to throw the net of a fine spun objection upon the teaching of the missionary.

“Shucks, it ain’t no use to talk to you, Huck Finn. You don’t seem to
crowding multitude of ships and boats that was driving out to sea.


rotten, but the former not only stayed my hunger, but filled my
{253}
not doing these little people more harm than breaking a cow’s leg and a
the river, because pretty soon I would be passing the ferry landing,
Another one was a young lady with her hair all combed up straight to
sweetness of the air!
Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of these transports, by leading her thoughts to the obligations which Mr. Gardiner’s behaviour laid them all under.
de crick, so’s to be all ready for to shove out en leave soon as Jack
about supper, nor ever seemed to think about it—and so they kept it up,
“A little sea-bathing would set me up for ever.”

she says, and I see her nostrils spread and her eyes snap when she said
time to reach the Emerald City, I shall never get my brains.”

NAGASAKI
With proper civilities, the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally surprised to find that he meditated a quick return. Mrs. Bennet wished to understand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of her younger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept him. She rated his abilities much higher than any of the others: there was a solidity in his reflections which often struck her; and though by no means so clever as herself, she thought that, if encouraged to read and improve himself by such an example as hers, he might become a very agreeable companion. But on the following morning every hope of this kind was done away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in a private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before.
“Blame you! Oh, no.”
remain until it sank of its own accord into the ground. As a rule the
wrong as well as any, but not what is possible to tortured men. But
saying, she died before she got her mind made up, and now they kept
out to protect.
made up his mind to run down that night to me, in order, as he says, to


ELIZABETH, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it to contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of its contents. But such as they were, it may be well supposed how eagerly she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited. Her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined. With amazement did she first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power; and steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanation to give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. With a strong prejudice{254} against everything he might say, she began his account of what had happened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness which hardly left her power of comprehension; and from impatience of knowing what the next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the sense of the one before her eyes. His belief of her sister’s insensibility she instantly resolved to be false; and his account of the real, the worst objections to the match, made her too angry to have any wish of doing him justice. He expressed no regret for what he had done which satisfied her; his style was not penitent, but haughty. It was all pride and insolence.
said they rode him all over the world, and tired him most to death, and
“Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do not wait on him. But, however, that shan’t prevent my asking him to dine here, I am determined. We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon. That will make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at table for him.”
The Armenian-Catholic Archbishop, Melchisedec, called before dinner. Though he is suavity itself, there is something about him which gives me a feeling of distrust. He pretends to be very happy that the Russians still occupy Erzeroum,[103] and dreads our departure, fearing cruel treatment from the Turks towards the Christian population.
On the day of our arrival we sat up late on the terrace of our hotel, looking out on the Esbekieh Gardens, where the Arab band is playing every night. I was astonished to hear Russian popular airs among their repertoire. Smart British officers, quartered in Cairo, in tight-fitting uniforms, strolled leisurely about the streets. Dignified Arabs, mysterious long-robed figures, appeared to float rather than walk, their white bournouses blowing behind them, native nurses wheeled perambulators, the negresses wrapped up in white veils and the Arab nurses in blue covers. A band of tourists, riding spirited little donkeys, passed along. Egyptian donkeys are fine little animals, holding their heads high like[301] thoroughbreds; they are white for the greater part and shaved in designs. The best donkeys are brought out from Mecca, and valued higher than horses.


 Misto Bradish’s Nigger
the windows: white, with pictures painted on them of castles with vines

completed, and was busied in serving one of the novel contrivances the
we shall be carried into the country of the Wicked Witch of the West,
it was with the niggers—it warn’t no sale, and the niggers will be back
me _dat!_”
human reef, and of the swift and ruthless destruction that had hung

Chapter IX
CVIII.	Hong Kong	463
tied, and hopped in and pulled for dear life towards the middle of the
But those marooned ships were lost—destroyed soon by the vengeful giants. And the forces of man on the far-off planets of a far-off sun were worried anew. Their weapon was a failure after all. Some new thing must be developed. But how did it happen that the first attempts were successful? The scientists believed it was due to the fact that the first attempts were utter surprises to the creatures—they were taken before they could prevent the loss of their energy. In some way they were able to build a barrier about themselves that prevented the loss of energy, even as it prevented the penetration of the energy of the disintegration ray.
them’s sick.”
[282]
“It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Anything beyond the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far.”
helplessly in the air, and then sucking her deck down almost to the
door, I after him; but the minute we turned the corner and was in the
portmanteau in the other. Then round the corner of the lane, from
“Both,” replied Elizabeth archly; “for I have always seen a great similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial, taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to posterity with all the éclat of a proverb.”

that stood in the middle of the room. It was shaped like a chair and

We have arranged to have our meals served in our apartment. At five o’clock a waiter brought in a neatly arrayed tray with nice tea, delicious cream and fresh-baked rolls.
start a bank mysef. Well, o’ course dat nigger want’ to keep me out er

watermelons and green corn and such-like truck.
They did not know. They only knew that the enraged creatures were closing in on them, closer and closer—and now the ships were being sent back to the system as rapidly as possible—one—two—three—four—but more could not get through—the others were cornered, marooned in infinity by the destruction of the sender. The Force Creatures, utterly immune to the Minus Force shells, attacked unchecked, gripped it with strange forces, limbs, hands or gripping force, that tore through the foot-thick alloy like so much tissue paper, metal, which was fifty times as strong as our frail steel, a metal whose molecules had been designed by the scientists of the race millions of years ago, and in all those ages no stronger, more inert metal had ever been found. But now that tough envelope was torn open, for the forces of atoms were greater than the forces of molecules, and the creatures used those forces.
to stir, and I might get catched—catched with six thousand dollars in

shift their quarters. I have an impression that many of the houses here
One night (the first missile then could scarcely have been 10,000,000

searched around, and fetched back the iron thing they lift the lid
hall.
the level of an animal. But as the saying goes, I gripped myself with
where quick hiding was possible, and so went on up the Exhibition Road.
instinct; and my instinct said she would be coming up—from down towards
So they got out and went in.
ain’t got noth’n’ to complain of.”
tell them of the terrible Beast he had seen. They all wondered greatly
she made up her mind to wear it and carry her sunbonnet in the basket.
We made a short halt at Munich, just in time to make a round of the museums and to climb a dark staircase, lighted by a few oil-lamps, up to the gigantic statue of Bavaria, in the head of which two big iron sofas find place, and whose eyes serve as windows. We had a splendid bird’s-eye view of the whole town out of them.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The diary of a Russian lady
“Very well,” answered the little man. “But I shall have to cut a hole
again; and about the first thing we done was to bait one of the big
Scene: The Mississippi Valley Time: Forty to fifty years ago
“I feel wise indeed,” he answered earnestly. “When I get used to my
rose a thin smoke against the sky. Against the sky line an eager dog
by H. G. Wells



FROM COLLEGE TO MISSION FIELD.
room, and twisting and turning, with queer sudden movements, this way
“Willingly!” exclaimed Dorothy; “indeed, it is of no use to me now, and

She says:
his surprise, that before the throne was a Ball of Fire, so fierce and
There was black dust along the roadway from the bridge onwards, and it


NAGASAKI

Their visits to Mrs. Philips were now productive of the most interesting intelligence. Every day added something to their knowledge of the officers’ names and connections. Their lodgings were not long a secret, and at length they began to know the officers themselves. Mr. Philips visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a source of felicity unknown before. They could talk of nothing but officers; and Mr. Bingley’s large fortune, the mention of which gave animation to their mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the regimentals of an ensign.{38}
“Yes,” I says, “but I reckon it ain’t regular. Come up the stairs, and

 Traveling By Rail
One morning about daybreak I found a canoe and crossed over a chute to
three days before, he must have been walking the world, a man of
“The great wish of our heart is, that those who have been instructed in our religion may lead a life conformable to its holy precepts. Some indeed bring forth the fruits of faith, as for others we labour with patience, in hope of seeing them turn to the Lord.”
paddling around hunting the runaway nigger.
In July great festivals were arranged to celebrate the twenty-third anniversary of the taking of Tashkend. There was a parade of troops on the square before the palace, after which my husband proceeded to the tomb of our soldiers killed during the siege of the town and laid a wreath on their grave.
suddenly complained of faintness and thirst, and we decided to try one

Head nor the Lady, for Oz had taken the shape of a most terrible Beast.

I see it warn’t no use wasting words—you can’t learn a nigger to argue.
about a thing that ain’t none of her business?”
none. One may picture the orderly expectation, the officers alert and
“And do you impute it to either of those?”
The high road from Tiflis to Vladicaucasus is called the “Military Georgian Road.” The scenery is magnificent but dreadfully wild, and I was awfully frightened to see that we were within a yard of the brinks of horrible precipices. As we got higher up in the mountains the air became so rarified[68] that it was difficult to breathe. Our sledge, drawn by two horses, one in front of the other, dragged on slowly, rising. The blocks of snow that bordered our way formed a prison wall between the road and the world outside. Everything was a sort of wild, white sleepy stillness; no sound arose but the clink of the harness. A large wooden cross rose on the highest point of the road; a flock of black crows flew across the leaden sky, and wheeled about it, croaking piercingly. Everything looked so grey and cold; we found ourselves as in a bewitched icy kingdom in a fairy tale. There was something very awe-inspiring about it all.
down if they have all they want, and think we’re just harmless vermin.”
dragged me right along, he was so excited, and I had to run to keep up.
sight o’ trouble.”


“Offended two or three young ladies”	177
you think of no way?”
“Great guns, _this_ is a go!” says the king; and both of them looked

object to sending for that money and letting us keep it till they prove

“Do you not see us?” answered the Scarecrow.
Secondly, It is the highest interest of the capitalist of industry, that there be the greatest plenty and variety of the best productions of the earth, and the greatest consumption of the products of industry.

“What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?” cried he. “Do you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you there. What say you, Mary? For you are a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and read great books, and make extracts.”

wouldn’t a been in that ring-master’s place, not for a thousand dollars.

he contracted to do a thing, and you paid him, and didn’t set down

I just give up then. I knowed what the matter was. That cut bank was an
“Greenhorns, flatheads! _I_ knew the first house would keep mum and let
hang about the railway station. There was very little talking. Few of
cart. The Wey has a treble mouth, and at this point boats are to be
He became preceptor in the Latin School of the Orphan House and it was his duty in that capacity to gather the scholars and the servants of the establishment together every morning for family prayers and at the same time to give them an exposition of some portion of Holy Scripture. This was also a preparation for his future sphere of work. The principal of the Orphan House, G. P. Weiss, took a lively interest in him, and he also received much benefit from the Divinity lectures delivered by Dr. Francke, the son of the founder of the work. Here then, under excellent auspices, he was able to practise habits of self-denial and thrift and to live that simple life which was so much impressed upon him by his father.
snake, about the thickness of a walking stick, coiled up out of the
sometimes not that way, because they’ve left dead fish laying around,


resolution. Save for the expression of the faces, London seemed a city

reckon that’ll do?”



Ten years later Bishop Middleton was also on a visit to Tanjore, and he also records the fact that “his highness dwelt with evident delight on the blessings which the heavenly lessons and virtues of Schwartz had shed upon him and his people,” and a similar expression of grateful regard occurred on the attendance of Bishop Heber at a durbar when the Rajah talked warmly about Schwartz, “his dear father.”

On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and the two who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their punctuality as sportsmen, were in very good time. When they repaired to the dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take the place which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by her sister. Her prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore to invite him to sit by herself. On entering the room, he{417} seemed to hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was decided. He placed himself by her.

 Jim

“Doan’ you ’member de house dat was float’n down de river, en dey wuz a
We were in a dense crowd of Hindoos, Negroes and half-castes, when we stepped on shore. Enterprising natives attacked us, each of them seeming determined to carry some portion of us away with them. They were not ruffians demanding our money or our lives, as they seemed doing, but were simply peaceable porters and guides, hoping to earn an honest penny. An elegant victoria drawn by a pair of fine horses, with a native coachman—wearing a red fez—on the box, was placed at our disposal by a rich rajah, but I preferred to drive to the Hôtel d’Europe in a carriage belonging to our Consul,—Mr. Kleimenoff,—drawn by a pacific pony. The Consul’s “Kawass,” a negro of the blackest black, wearing on his shoulder a belt with the Russian arms—the double eagle—embroidered on it, was sitting on the box. We are again on British territory. The names of the streets and all the sign-boards are written in English. Every nationality seemed to be represented in the streets: all shades of black, brown and yellow—Chinese,[414] Malays, Hindoos and Europeans from all countries. The Hindoos are slender and handsome men, with firm polished bodies like bronze statuettes. The negroes are also splendid specimens of manhood, robust and square-built; they wear round their necks, arms and legs silver bands ornamented with coral beads. Both sexes walk about in the streets in the primitive simplicity of nature, naked and unashamed. The women with silver rings in their nostrils and clinking bangles round their arms and ankles, wear nothing above the waist and not much below. They grow old very early, and at the age of twenty look forty at least. Little black children, resembling each other as two drops of ink, are playing in the tropical sunlight in the dust. Good-looking English soldiers promenade, stick in hand, and English officials drive importantly in victorias.

wanted the _adventure_ of it; and I’d a waded neck-deep in blood

Official visits have been exchanged between my husband and the admirals. Sergy went over to the cruisers in a steam-launch carrying his standard. He called first on Admiral Tirtoff, the chief of the Russian fleet, on his man-of-war Pamiat Azova, on which our Emperor made his voyage around the world when he was heir to the throne. According to naval etiquette, every time my husband left a vessel cannons were fired.

AT five o’clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half-past six Elizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil inquiries which then poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the much superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley, she could not make a very favourable answer.{46} Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearing this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their indifference towards Jane, when not immediately before them, restored Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her original dislike.

“No, no; stay where you are”	67


On the following day we started for Cernobbio to spend a week at the Villa d’Este. Our apartment was large and airy; the marble floor and white-washed walls looked agreeably cool, with windows and balcony looking out on the lake, and the hotel terrace with flights of white marble steps descending to the water’s edge. A boat belonging to the hotel was anchored near it.
Then he showed us another little job he’d printed and hadn’t charged
 Yours Truly

strawbries.”

Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more seriously, assured her of its truth.

Dolls took no leading part in my childhood, and I had often wished I had been a boy. I climbed trees and tore my frocks and engaged in all sorts of wild pranks.
Sixthly, That the nominal price of the essential article, to which that of the others must finally revert and conform, fixed at first by its proportion in the quantity of articles to be represented, and by the divisions and subdivisions of the mass of money then existing for that use, this nominal common price will certainly rise or fall, constantly, and without the least inconvenience, just as that first quantity of coin shall cease to answer, by more or by less, to the quantity of the objects of which it was calculated to transfer the property.
“Yes—indeedy.”

Those who have never seen a living Martian can scarcely imagine the

Well, I couldn’t see no advantage in going where she was going, so I
away, _sure_. So Jim he said it was all right, and we set there and
Last winter a French Colonel, Baron Rothvillers, passing through Moscow, paid us a visit, and invited us to come and see him in Paris and make the acquaintance of his wife, which we now did with pleasure. Baroness Rothvillers is a fine horsewoman and her stables are renowned in Paris. She invited me to drive with her in the Bois de Boulogne. I sat on the high driving-seat and trotted her handsome pair of browns round the Park. The horses were pulling and became somewhat restive, but I kept them well in hand, surveyed by the groom, immovable as a wooden image, with rigidly folded arms, seated on the back seat.
“When did you say he died?”


throughout the inanimate vastness of sidereal space. But that is a
To-day my husband has ordered Shefket Bey, one of the oldest members of the Ottoman officers left in Erzeroum, to fire a cannon from the citadel at twelve o’clock precisely, employing for that purpose a Turkish gun and Turkish powder. Ten of our soldiers have been appointed for that special service by Sergy. Shefket Bey was obliged to submit, swallowing his wrath. He took it with outward meekness, whilst his eyes gave a flash, and answered humbly, “Pek-ei.” (I’ll obey you.)
From England let us pass over to France, and always taking for granted that a Minister of[237] finance is not a conjurer, and that he can take from the pockets of the people no more money than they possess; I wish it could be examined:
“Well, one day I went up in a balloon and the ropes got twisted, so
With such kind of histories of their parties and good jokes did Lydia, assisted by Kitty’s hints and additions, endeavour to amuse her companions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened as little as she could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham’s name.

She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying{123} to each, and on which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened with delight to the happy though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Bingley’s regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence in it. On their being joined by Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew to Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last partner she had scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to them, and told her with great exultation, that he had just been so fortunate as to make a most important discovery.
 “It ain’t Good Morals”
turning his head (which worked beautifully on hinges) he saw a strange
Directly opposite the “Palais des Machines” is the “Vieux Paris.” To visit it is to step back into the past. In the street La Huchette, the houses, the shops, the citizens, everything, transports you to the seventeenth century; the anachronism was ourselves in our modern clothes, which did not harmonise with the picture. Soldiers with their bands at the head, wearing white wigs, marched in the streets. On a raised platform the Mandolinists of the Duc de Guise played pretty gavottes and minuets. A few steps further the so-called “Sans-Chagrins” (street singers), standing on a table, sang popular airs. Through an open window we saw a dainty “Marquise” singing old-time love-ditties, to the accompaniment of a smart “Marquis” wearing a white wig and buckled shoes, who played a harpsichord. The illusion was complete, we had gone back a hundred years to Louis XVI. time. In the Rue Sainte Antoine we saw the exact copy of the church Sainte Marie, with a museum inside,[278] where you could see the atrocities of the French Revolution, represented with horrid realism, and calculated to give even a strong man the creeps. Soldiers wearing pig-tailed wigs bellowed: “Come and see the execution of the Royal Family!” In dark alcoves different scenes of the French Revolution were represented. We saw the wax figure of Robespierre presiding at the Jacobin Club; of Charlotte Corday in the act of murdering Marat, etc., etc.
Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with her two elder sisters. In society so superior to what she had generally known, her improvement was great. She was not of so ungovernable a temper as Lydia; and, removed from the influence of Lydia’s example, she became, by proper attention and management, less irritable, less ignorant, and less insipid. From the further disadvantage of Lydia’s society she was of course carefully kept; and though Mrs. Wickham frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with the promise of balls and young men, her father would never consent to her going.
Albert Hall, the Imperial Institute, and the giant mansions of the

and them niggers would break their hearts for grief; they cried around
“I laid dah under de shavin’s all day. I ’uz hungry, but I warn’t
woods talking, and me reading the books, and having a general good
spend it for something to eat, and give me some, because it was all the
bell was jangling out above the excitement.


him. It takes up more room than all the rest of a person’s insides, and
telescopic fashion, a tentacle that had been a moment before a mere
“_Dah_, now, Huck, what I tell you?—what I tell you up dah on Jackson
“Let us therefore ask you seriously before that God who knows your hearts and ways, do you love your neighbours sincerely? Is it the bent of your lives not only to honour your God but likewise to make your fellow creatures happy? Have you showed a tender regard to their eternal welfare? You see thousands before your eyes sitting in darkness and the shadow of death. Have you endeavoured at least by your example to convince them of the purity and excellence of your religion? Have you discouraged vice and wickedness or have you promoted it and so laid a stumbling block before your ignorant and careless fellow-creatures? Have you assisted the poor and needy in their distressful circumstances or have you been regardless of their misery?
me my lovely heart. I should like to cry a little because Oz is gone,
soon, when one of them says, “_I’m_ for going and getting in the cabin
At the entrance hall of the “National” we found negroes with brushes who made dusting attacks at our clothes.
Getting up at break of day I hurried to our rendezvous and saw the Grand Duke in the distance standing upon a hillock amongst a group of generals and officers surveying the sham-fight with a field glass at his eye. On perceiving me the Grand Duke nodded and waved his hand, and when I approached His Highness, he inquired after the state of my health, fearing I had taken a cold in remaining out in the club-garden so long the night before.
public-house and get food and drink. I was weary after eating, and went
bloodshot smoke at the first touch of day.
slain; slain, after all man’s devices had failed, by the humblest

Then Dorothy and the Lion got up, and the girl helped the Tin Woodman
it presented a sort of metallic spider with five jointed, agile legs,

one. I wanted to be getting away before the old man got back, but of

along, straight for town. Well, the very first man I see when I got
is alive with their lights. It’s like a great city, and in the glare
Church—it has been replaced by a spire—rose above the trees.
“Dear ma’am, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must excuse me. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. I am going away myself.”

“My dear Mr. Bennet,” replied his wife, “how can you be so tiresome? You must know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them.”
Laws knows I _wanted_ to go bad enough to see about Tom, and was all

widow would take me one side and talk about Providence in a way to make
We could see saw-logs go by in the daylight sometimes, but we let them
paradoxical, but I am inclined to think that the weakness and insanity
I says, “Don’t you ask me no questions about it, please. You’ll take

“_Well_, then.”
me. When I got to the three log doorsteps I heard them unlocking and
you inquire around for _him_ when you got loose? _I_ don’t remember
thought to fetch a lantern. But they sailed into digging anyway by the

whitewashed on the outside.

_was_ sorry, and so did you, and so did everybody. Don’t ever tell _me_
the women? No; nobody ever saw anything in the books like that. You
They were of course all intending to be surprised: but their astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs. Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even inferior to what Elizabeth felt.
“So you lost the ten dollars.”

know how to make it. I hain’t ever hearn er sich a thing b’fo’.”
Elizabeth was pleased to find that he had not betrayed the interference of his friend; for, though Jane had the most generous and forgiving heart in the world, she knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice her against him.

Ominous Plans.—News from Jim.—Old Recollections.—A Sheep
But the pretty milkmaid was much too vexed to make any answer. She
February 25th.—The chances were that we should remain at Cairo for some days to come. We had just been informed that we must wait a whole week to catch the Laos at Port Saïd. Directly after breakfast we set to work to find lodgings, which was not an easy thing to do. At last we got apartments, consisting of a bedroom and a sitting-room, in the second floor of a private house, where we were made as comfortable as circumstances would allow. We’ll pay five shillings a day for our board and lodging. Our travelling companions have found rooms in the same house.
it up if it don’t work.”

“She was so old,” explained the Witch of the North, “that she dried up
friends of his lived, that at last induced my brother to strike into a

off, just as young lilybulbs bud off, or like the young animals in the
wrote a couple of times to the plantation below Orleans to come and get

The Tin Woodman was about to reply when he heard a low growl, and


now if they read on and see what more it done for us.
After my installation in the house of an Armenian, an old dismissed officer, I had the horrible pain of seeing my husband depart to the campaign. We had again to endure separation which might end in death.

of a cyclone, and in a few score yards I would come upon perfectly
sleep and get strong, and then he would see who was who.

one so cowardly. But let us go on.”

as long as she had one of the shoes she owned half the power of their
On our way home we visited a Turkish Coffee house. We entered a paved courtyard with a fountain basin in the middle, surrounded by big yellow flowers. The customers were sitting around the basin on low cushions; some of them were sipping their coffee and others smoked their narghile, passing it by turns from neighbour to neighbour. Thus occupied, the Turkish smokers pondered meditatively, whilst the Greeks and the Armenians argued about their commercial affairs. This coffee-house consists of several lofty rooms. In one of them the proprietor was sitting proudly behind his bar; a quantity of narghiles of all dimensions, richly adorned with gold and silver ornaments, lay in rows on the shelves fixed all around the wall. In the next room a barber worked, shaving a greater number of skulls than beards.

Towards five o’clock we have got over the 64 kilometres of the maritime canal, and are in the stifling heat of the Red Sea.

brung these gray hairs and this premature balditude. Yes, gentlemen,
covered up the raft that way for, and laid by in the daytime instead of
Leatherhead, though I knew that there I had the poorest chance of

duke astraddle of a rail—that is, I knowed it _was_ the king and the

of the bend. Is your man white or black?”
flickering that danced over the sky. The sky was what is called a
Lady Catherine seemed resigned. “Mrs. Collins, you must send a servant with them. You know I always speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea of two young women travelling post by themselves. It is highly improper. You must contrive to send somebody. I have the greatest dislike in the world to that sort of thing. Young women should always be properly guarded and attended, according to their situation in life. When my niece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer, I made a point of her having two men-servants go with her. Miss Darcy, the daughter of Mr. Darcy of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with propriety in a different manner. I am excessively attentive to all those things. You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs. Collins. I am glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would really be discreditable to you to let them go alone.”
be still.
“What d’ye mean—a gun?”
“We must cross this strange place in order to get to the other side,”

celebrated Dr. Armand de Montalban, of Paris,” would “lecture on the
October 16th.—To-day we are upon the equator and enter the south hemisphere. We cross the great meridian—the 180th degree of longitude, and are close to the centre of the globe. We drop out a day of our lives; yesterday it was October 15th (Sunday), to-day it is October 17th (Tuesday). We did not celebrate the passage of the line, and had no foolish ceremonies, no fantastics, no ducking at sea, which consisted in sprinkling with salt-water the neophyte who crossed the equator for the first time. All that sort of thing has gone out. One of the passengers exclaimed for fun that he saw the equator and a naive lady-passenger took up her opera-glasses and began to stare round about, which made everybody laugh. We remained long on deck, enjoying the beautiful tropical night. The sky was sown with stars. Good-by the “Old Bear,” and welcome the “Southern Cross.” It is not particularly large nor strikingly bright, but it does, after a fashion, suggest a cross not carefully shaped, consisting of four large stars and a little one. We saw also the black patch of the sky which the sailors call the “soot-bag.” We had music on deck, where the piano was carried out. I played duets together with Mr. Shaniavski, and the commissaire scraped on the mandoline. I have remarked that it is always the commissaires who constitute the musical element on French steamers.
away and left me alone.
were expected. Then—a familiar, reassuring note—I heard a train running
it, when the flashes come.
Chapter XLVI.
I had considerable money, so I give him ten cents, but begged him to
place for our show.
ribbed channel towards some receiver that was hidden from me by the
I.	Early Recollections	13


one night, drifting along down the river, trying to make up our minds

been borne down under the horse’s hoofs.
hole in which the cylinder lay. I have already described the appearance



plans against us. And early in the twentieth century came the great
“The door ain’t going to be locked, Tom, and there’s the window and the

beating tin pans so the steamboats wouldn’t run over them. A scow or a







“I shall go on,” he said.


Really, duckie, ’tis not without a sigh!
I _was_, with both of ’m on my hands, and there I had to stick till
“I am grieved, indeed,” cried Darcy: “grieved—shocked. But is it certain, absolutely certain?”


thirst. I drank a great deal of it and, moved by an impulse, gnawed

de woods on de Illinois side.
Coming out, he bought a _Referee_. He became alarmed at the news in
And mind, you puggie, be discreet,
on the water a long ways up—about abreast the ferry. And there was the
That’s all he said. He was the innocentest, best old soul I ever see.

THE CRIMEA
Among these were a couple of cyclists, a jobbing gardener I employed

kept Emmeline’s room trim and nice, and all the things fixed in it just



on, and kill the people and take their watches and money.”
caterpillars, and one thing or another; and we like to got a hornet’s
“Is this a hint to me, Lizzy,” said her father, “to send for the horses?”
condition. His prophecy, I remember, appeared in November or December,

Here our Author, beginning to feel himself on ground sufficiently firm, confesses that he sees nothing in the present situation of England, tending to justify the idea of a national bankruptcy, although the public news-papers often hint at the convenience of such a measure. The author even so far forgets himself, as to examine seriously, whether it would be profitable or unprofitable to effect the so much recommended reimbursement,[vi] even on the supposition that the 238 millions which have been borrowed, and have disappeared, could find their way back to the Exchequer.
that his knees bent under him was galvanised for a moment into renewed

He sprung to the window at the head of the bed, and that give Mrs.

“She seems a very pleasant young woman,” said Bingley.


the sheet all in little strings and twisted them together, and long

dog—and he’ll go in the river and bring out chips that you throw in. Do
and Highgate.
come into being there, hiding our view of the farther country; and
“It is only a stuffed man. I will peck his eyes out.”
head’—and they chop it off. ‘Ring up Fair Rosamun.’ Fair Rosamun
people, and she was never known to hurt anyone who was good. Her name
monster had risen to its feet and had begun to walk leisurely to and


weather. He asked the king where he was going, and the king told him
thousand people in St. Louis, but I never believed it till I see that

“Praised be Thy name, O Lord, in profound humility, for all the grace, protection, and blessing during the[Pg 57] whole of our journey Thou hast graciously bestowed upon us of Thine undeserved mercy for the sake of Christ, our Mediator! May the seed of Thy word, which we Thy poor servants have sowed on our journey, spring up and produce abundant fruits that we and those who have received the word in their hearts, may praise and adore Thy goodness to all eternity! May the mission with our brethren at Cuddalore, which has been renewed afresh in Thy sacred presence, be productive of abundant blessing! Our supplications, which we have jointly brought before Thy footstool, with regard to ourselves and the flock entrusted to us, vouchsafe graciously to hear and let us perceive it for the strengthening of our faith. And thus begin anew to bless us and to prosper the work of our hands. Yes, prosper thou our handiwork, O Lord, for the sake of Christ and of His bitter sufferings and death! Amen.”
then, remoter across the river, over Walton, we saw another such
“I must bear my witness! I go! It has already been too long delayed.”
hitch yourself up a tiptoe and fetch your hand up over your head as
shower upon the planet, or that a huge volcanic explosion was in
baldhead, pretty pert and uppish.
became rougher and hillier, for there were no farms nor houses in this
Only three days before his own sudden death, Bishop Heber wrote an estimation of Schwartz, which is all the more valuable because it contains a frank admission of a mistaken impression he had previously formed concerning one side of his character.
We visited that day the Algerian village in the Trocadero Gardens. Superb natives, arrayed in rich costumes, sat on the threshold of their open booths, shrieking out the virtues of their wares. Close to the village stands the Dahomey pavilion, with its straw-thatched roof. Black natives stood on watch, perched on the top of a high tower. In the Singhalese village I patted the small brown babies, calling to mind my sojourn in Colombo. We entered a barrack close by, from which resounded the frantic strains of weird native music. Inside, women clad in Oriental costumes, gleaming with golden coins on their waists and wrists, performed the Danse du Ventre to the accompaniment of clapping hands. One of the beautiful “odalisques” stepped down from the estrade and passed round with a plate into which people dropped money. One glance was enough to show that this would-be Daughter of the Desert was a typical “Parisienne” from the “quartier des Batignolles.”
them, but I could tell where they was by the whisky they’d been having.
lay still.

When we arrived at Wirballen, the sight of our frontier, the Russian voices, the Russian train, the Russian porters were a joy to me. How nice it is to be home again! We found Moscow in full winter: all the streets were white.
“Yes, it _is_ good enough for me; it’s as good as I deserve; for who
place in the early morning, and ran from door to door warning us to
Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was gone, he turned to his daughter and said,—


formidable than the huge iron bulk in whose wake the steamer was

January 20th.—It begins to get hot. The double doors of the dining-room are taken off, and the piano is brought out on the deck. The passengers have put on their white clothes for dinner. We are approaching the equator zone, and pass the Strait of Tonkin by moonlight.
“Very true; and if I had my will we should. But, my dear Lydia, I don’t at all like your going such a way off. Must it be so?”
In the church of “Santa Croce” we saw the staircase (Scala Pia) brought forward from Jerusalem, reputed to have belonged to Pilate’s Palace, where they were trodden by Christ at the time of his trial. Pilgrims are permitted to ascend the steps on their knees only. Two smart ladies were toiling slowly up the long ladder, stopping at every step to arrange the folds of their skirts. Some peasant women, who had begun their ascent much later, soon overtook them. I am sure that they have more chance of getting to the Kingdom of Heaven.
a hair’s breadth. He released his grip on the fallen man and jumped
more than on Mars, albeit his muscular strength would be the same. His
across the ditch again.
“Certainly not.”
they’ll follow the track of that sackful of rocks to the shore and then
streak of dawn we got another letter ready, and was wondering what we

William’s the only ones that’s left now; and, as I was saying, they

I was going to hide behind that; but maybe it was luckier I didn’t.
Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman.
of most of them were hoarse and weak. Through it all ran a refrain:

ended. He presented them as tilted, stiff tripods, without either
_Beware. Trouble is brewing. Keep a sharp lookout._ UNKNOWN FRIEND.
January 3rd.—The Salasie is like a splendid hotel on treacherous waters. After lunch we went over the steamer and admired it greatly. The crew is composed of 180 sailors—Chinamen all of them. At six o’clock in the morning they begin to clean the boat, polishing brass things so beautifully that they can easily be used as mirrors.


boss of it; it all belonged to me, so to say, and I wanted to know all
Shoes which the girl always wore. Her bees and her crows and her wolves
cracking his whip and shouting “Hi!—hi!” and the clown cracking jokes
their first surprise. Possibly they see it in the same light.
[Image unavailable.]

illustrated paper he edited in those days. People in these latter times

February 21st.—The air is cool and fresh, and the Japanese passengers begin to freeze. In Australia it is summer in November, December, January and February, and thus our Australian passengers, going out to Europe for twelve months will enjoy summer the whole year round.

stillness. But it was not so much the stillness of death—it was the
“The best plan will be to walk along the riverbank until we come to the
retreated to their triangle of cylinders again, in the circle about
“It’s all right,” I says.
BY ORDER OF THE AUTHOR

“And till Colonel Forster came himself, not one of you entertained a doubt, I suppose, of their being really married?”

would have seemed stippled black with the streaming fugitives, each dot
throwing dark shadows upon the green treetops eastward. The smoke



Dorothy carried the shoes into the house and placed them on the table.

the body had a strong case for survival, and that was the hand,
done that. When I waked up just at daybreak, he was sitting there with

She was awakened by a shock, so sudden and severe that if Dorothy had


Strand, and it comes across my mind that they are but the ghosts of the
imagination to carry Dorothy back to Kansas, and I’m sure I don’t know
“This will serve me a lesson,” said he, “to look where I step. For if I
says:

We must now look at the part played by Denmark in the evangelization of India. This was largely due in the first instance to that enlightened Christian King Frederick IV, who having concluded a long and disastrous war with Charles XII of Sweden was able to turn his attention to the work of evangelizing the East. In this he was prompted by Dr. Lütkens, his chaplain, who was also interested in the development of a strip of territory purchased from the Rajah of Tanjore. Here then was the moment of providential opportunity and soon the man appeared who was ready and willing to embrace it.
“Yes, or I will never see her again.”
missing my brother. The less courageous of the robbers made off, and

say—so it was all right now, and I told Tom I was a-going for a doctor.

Through a long and stormy passage he worked hard to acquire a knowledge of Portuguese, and at last, reaching his destination, stepped ashore without a friend to meet or welcome him and his companion to this strange land. They were evidently not wanted in India. On every hand they looked round only to find a fresh trial of their faith.
at the time, will enable the reader who is unacquainted with them to
found myself thinking consecutively—a thing I do not remember to have
After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm by a lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards Mr. Darcy, drawing near Elizabeth, said to her,—



“To whom I have related the affair”

got to remember what they are, and make allowances. Sometimes I wish we
burning was in the air.


The train rattled out of New York and crossed the Harlem. We skirted that pretty little river and ran over the prairies. We travel in a splendid “Wagner Express,” a rival to “Pullman’s Express.” All the cars are first-class; it is only the so-named “Colonist trains” which are second-class. Our saloon-car had no compartments in it, there was just one wide corridor with velvet armchairs dotted about. In front of our engine a kind of giant spade is fastened to clear the line from droves of cattle and other encumbrances. A huge bell keeps ringing all the time for the same purpose.

mixed-up whiskers. There warn’t no color in his face, where his face
Yet so vain is man, and so blinded by his vanity, that no writer, up to


City; and the Winkies gave them three cheers and many good wishes to
I would, in the next place, propose, for examination, whether those two nations are not indebted to these prejudices, for the greatest part of their mistakes, and of the obstacles which they[296] have found, which they still find, and which they will ever find, in the measures that other nations think themselves obliged to adopt, in order to guard against the effects of those prejudices, till their fallacy is universally acknowledged, as well as their insufficiency to produce their boasted effect, even in favour of those who would obstinately refuse to give them up.
I lit a pipe and had a good long smoke, and went on watching. The
“I say orgies, not because it’s the common term, because it
I have said it more than once, and beg leave to repeat it here: Let any essential object be denoted by one number or another; it is a matter of perfect indifference, provided the numbers intended to denote the mass of objects corresponding thereto, do not present any ideas[249] contrary to the proportion of labour which exists between the essential object, and the mass which is to form its balance. Thus then, be the value of wheat, which serves as the general standard, because it is useful to all, at all times, and which ought to be so, from another consideration almost equally powerful, namely, that it constitutes about one third of the landed revenue in Europe—be its value, I say, denominated 30, 50, or 25, nothing more indifferent, provided the numbers denoting the value of the other products of land and industry, keep exactly, either by more or by less, within the same proportion; it is clear that, in such a case, neither the land proprietor nor the capitalist of industry, can undergo from the alteration in the numbers, any real alteration in their circumstances. But to think of nothing but the manufactures, and imagine it possible to maintain, and endeavour seriously to maintain, wheat at the same price, whilst the taxes advance by 10 per cent. that of the products of industry,—is to aim at the ruin of agriculture, and to oblige all the proprietors of land and money, whose employments in the State would not indemnify them for such an injustice, to go in search of another country, where the manufacturer, better acquainted with his real interest, would know, or act as if he knew, that the solidity of his[250] wealth is inseparable from that of the land proprietor, and from the ease of the proprietor of money, and of the labouring man.
goose-quill if they had it. It ain’t regular.”
Dorothy was puzzled at this, for it sounded queer to hear a stuffed man
vital, intense, inhuman, crippled and monstrous. There was something
And just outside the terminus the train jolted over temporary rails,
the duke and the king begun to lay out a plan for working them towns.
a body sick, a white to make a body’s flesh crawl—a tree-toad white, a
sometimes comes into the stillness and the darkness, I stood my trial,
pens out of, you muggins. They _always_ make their pens out of the

Opposite our windows spreads a spacious lawn and pleasure grounds, where Englishmen, who carry their habits with them in all parts of the world, give themselves up to[476] every kind of outdoor sport: golf, cricket, tennis, etc. The players look very nice in their white flannels and blue caps.
beautiful, so that the travelers rejoiced in leaving the forest far
“But it’s something more than a meteorite. It’s a cylinder—an
your folks are all down with chills and fever. Don’t be a fool again,
“Then,” observed Elizabeth, “you must comprehend a great deal in your idea of an accomplished woman.”


I was about I was sound asleep, and the candle burning.
eleven, and _then_ if I don’t turn up it means I’m gone, and out of the
I thought all this over for two or three days, and then I reckoned I
was all busy listening. The king was saying—in the middle of something

the dead man’s face a minute, and some dropped in a tear, and it was

drawers, he took out a pretty heart, made entirely of silk and stuffed


himself free and easy, and if anybody ever come meddling around, he

[3]Venn, Life of Xavier, p. 28.
En I warn’t gwyne to show mysef on de bank in de daytime.”

THE EARTH UNDER THE MARTIANS.
She said it was wicked to say what I said; said she wouldn’t say it for

 “We Would Sell the Raft”
Horsemanship was my ruling passion. I easily found partners to accompany me in my rides, and careered through the streets of Tiflis, followed by my cavaliers, enjoying to overtake them like a cyclone. I cantered home in high spirits, with a heated face and my hair coming down, most of it outside my cap, not in it. I frequently brought my cavaliers home to tea, and if they didn’t happen to be particularly interesting, I proceeded straight to bed, and the Staritzkis had to sit with my guests and entertain them as best they could, whilst I slept the sleep of the just.
Then the king begins to work his jaw again, and says how him and his

fairly hum—and finally skipped off, and made his bow and danced off to

“I know, but—”
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
hill would be moving. I found him in his bar, quite unaware of what was

“Did not you? I did for you. But that is one great difference between us. Compliments always take you by surprise, and me never. What could be more natural than his asking you again? He could not help seeing that you{19} were about five times as pretty as every other woman in the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly is very agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many a stupider person.”
XI.
“That was a good ride,” said the little girl.

matter of detail, it is remarkable that the long leverages of their
watch-guard for a watch, and is always seeing what time it is, and so
of gables that was called Oriental Terrace. It was all so real and so
blew upon a silver whistle that hung around her neck.
Our programme was as follows: we rose at six, swallowed hastily a glass of mineral water and went to take a walk on the broad avenue named Allée de sept heures. In the afternoon we listened to the band playing in the principal square bearing the name of Pierre le Grand. (Spa’s iron waters had saved the life of our Tzar, Peter the Great, nearly two hundred years before).
king’s duds was all black, and he did look real swell and starchy. I
her the noise and shooting waked up me and “Sid,” and the door was


On our way back to the hotel, we entered a farm bearing a placard with the alluring inscription: “New Milk.” The hostess, a fat negress with an orange kerchief tied round her head, ran up to us, smiling and shewing two rows of very white teeth in a very black face. She offered tea with excellent cream and bread and butter.
dismally. Haggard special constables with white badges stood at the

looked around slow, like he wished he could run across a friendly eye
“Oh, nothing much. Loll around, pass the plate—and one thing or
bright, the sky a glowing blue. A gentle breeze kept the red weed that
but only just to be doing something; I knowed very well where the right
me before, what this thing was that I was doing. But now it did; and it
thing. S’pose he opened his mouth—what then? If he didn’t shut it up
One afternoon we saw a carriage stop at our entrance door, it held King Oscar of Sweden and his suite, who had come to take lunch at our hotel. After their meal the whole company withdrew to the lawn in front of our window. The Swedes threw themselves down on the grass, and the eldest member of the party, who was lying on his back in idle contentment, began to sing at the top of his voice a Swedish song with the burden of O Matilde, coming over and over again. Another Swede, forgetting his dignity, pirouetted and executed somersaults like a veritable clown, his legs making frequent excursions towards the sky, to the great indignation of one of the hotel tenants, a prudish maiden-lady of some fifty years, who was knitting in the garden. She rose suddenly, gathered up her work in dignified displeasure, and walked back to the hotel with an air of offended maidenhood, like a startled virgin whose virtue was being put to the test. King Oscar was travelling in strictly incognito under the name of Count Haga. When my husband asked our waiter, who had just brought in our tea, if the gentleman who sang O Matilde, was the King, he responded stoutly that it was not at all the King, but his first minister. Some time afterwards, during our stay in Paris, we saw the portrait of the Swedish King exposed in the window of a picture shop, and the fact appeared undeniable—that the singer was precisely King Oscar.

“But it is not merely this affair,” she continued, “on which my dislike is founded. Long before it had taken{240} place, my opinion of you was decided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I received many months ago from Mr. Wickham. On this subject, what can you have to say? In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself? or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?”
There ain’t no sense in it; go for the steam ferry.’ Now if you’ll go

“What is it, duke?”
The housekeeper came; a respectable looking elderly woman, much less fine, and more civil, than she had any notion of finding her. They followed her into the dining-parlour. It was a large, well-proportioned room, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went to a window to enjoy its prospect. The hill, crowned with wood, from which they had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the distance, was a beautiful object. Every disposition of the ground was good; and she looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered on its banks, and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it, with delight. As they passed into other rooms, these objects were taking different positions; but{303} from every window there were beauties to be seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable to the fortune of their proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with admiration of his taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine,—with less of splendour, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.
“Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. Do you often dance at St. James’s?”
Si le monstre d’une concurrence en fait de commerce, prétendue invincible graces à la[406] légèreté des prix dont elle seroit armée, n’est pas aussi fantastique que celui d’une balance toujours favorable.
Sold.—Royal Comparisons.—Jim Gets Home-sick.
would be curious to know how they live on another planet; we might
with them, you must up and say I told you the whole thing beforehand,

my legs together on it and she went on talking. But only about a
CHAPTER XCVII
“If you will thank me,” he replied, “let it be for yourself alone. That the wish of giving happiness to you might add force to the other inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to deny. But your family owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I believe I thought only of you.”
and all the modern conveniences in his wardrobe to dig himself out
dispersed. There was scarcely an intimation of movement from the pit.
Title: Thoughts on the mechanism of societies
more, and what a stir there was when Jim run away; and I told Tom all



undertaker’s back and shoulders gliding along the wall again; and so he
This time our sleeping berths were still more uncomfortable, arranged behind the partition for two persons on one bunk. This is all very well for married couples but is it not particularly cosy for strangers of different sexes to lie down all night side by side. This lot befell Mme. Beurgier; her berth-mate turned out to be Mr. Koulomsine, who after long parleys succeeded in finding a sleeping berth in the next car.
“Have you any water?” I asked abruptly.
“But does Lydia know nothing of this? can she be ignorant of what you and Jane seem so well to understand?”
these invaders arrived, directly they drank and fed, our microscopic
Seen nearer, the Thing was incredibly strange, for it was no mere

It is all cheery, home-like and delightful out here after my lonely life in Alexandropol and Kars. I began to take an interest in all my surroundings once more. When I waked up next morning my first thought was, “Can it be true, or is it only a dream that I have my husband to myself?” and I almost cried for joy when I was quite sure it was true.
Then, turning to Mr. Bennet, he offered himself as his antagonist at backgammon. Mr. Bennet accepted the challenge, observing that he acted very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements. Mrs. Bennet and her daughters apologized most civilly for Lydia’s interruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he would resume his book; but Mr. Collins, after assuring them that he bore his young cousin no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as any affront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and prepared for backgammon.{89}

mighty nice old man. And always is.
street there were a dozen echoes to the noise of his window sash, and

There, among some young pine trees and furze bushes, I stopped,

“Well, I’ll count ’m _again_.”
When we went back to the hotel, dinner was served in our apartment. We went to bed directly after our meal. The room was like ice. We had to cover ourselves with all the shawls and rugs that we had brought with us, and still we couldn’t get warm; in spite of the cold, voracious mosquitoes ill-treated us the whole night. We got up very early, swallowed hastily a cup of nasty coffee and left for Naples. At the stations our train stopped as long as the guards wanted it. “Partenza!” they cried out, but the train did not move. A lady, who travelled in our compartment, said that there were smugglers on the line, and told us some horrors which fairly made my hair stand on end. While she was going on with stories of smugglers, our train, which was going full speed, stopped suddenly the moment we entered a tunnel; we were for long minutes in complete darkness and heard voices calling noisily and the sound of smashed glass. Good Heavens! what could be the matter? My imagination being awfully excited, I nearly died of fright. It appeared that our guards had forgotten to provide us with candles for the tunnel, and were doing so now, in the dark, breaking to pieces the lantern. I heaved a sigh of relief when we came out of the tunnel into the light again.

[495]
I crawled out almost immediately, and crouched, my feet still in the
food since midday, he told me early in his narrative, and I found some
perfectly dead and still, like Sunday. We found a sick nigger sunning
We got on very well for Melle. Allamand bore with my caprices, which were many, I must confess. But though she was always in a good temper we had little quarrels sometimes, which we soon made up. I studied my piano with Melle. Allamand and learned English, which soon became a second mother-tongue to me. When we went out walking, my governess’s soft heart was full of pity for the poor starving homeless dogs which she picked up in the streets and brought home to be fed; the ugliest and shabbiest had her tenderest care. Melle. Allamand was called back to England and my parents had to get another governess. An English young lady was engaged, named Miss Emily Puddan. My brothers made her rage awfully in calling her Miss Pudding. She had no authority over me whatever, being in fact rather silly, but she was a very pleasant companion—so well up in all games. We were enthusiastic croquet-players and had sometimes desperate quarrels, being very near scratching each other’s eyes out. “I tell you I hit your ball!”—“You didn’t!”—“I did!” etc., our arguments becoming very hot and uncivil; soon we dropped our mallets and ran and complained to mamma, both governess and pupil.
If the colonies, now independent, will henceforth call in all the other nations of Europe to a share in the advantage of crediting them in the same manner, can it be supposed that England will not find in Europe, some other nation willing to receive that part of the English credit, which the independent colonies shall no longer think proper to make use of? In this case, can any thing more be required, on the part of England, than to manufacture in less quantity such goods as suit only the inhabitants of America, and somewhat more of those that may suit the different nations of Europe; and to this first operation to add the complaisance of receiving a greater quantity of their goods than she has imported hitherto?—In this case likewise, what ruinous consequences could England experience[378] by exporting her goods to her neighbours, instead of sending them to America?
“It’s all over,” he said. “They’ve lost _one_—just _one_. And they’ve
Grace’ll take the shuck bed yourself.”
and the house shook so hard that she lost her footing and sat down
At length, however, she sat up and looked about her.
Wicked Witch dies you will not see your uncle and aunt again. Remember



“Oh, dear! Oh, dear!” cried Dorothy, clasping her hands together in




himself. As to his real character, had information been in her power, she had never felt a wish of inquiring. His countenance, voice, and manner, had established him at once in the possession of every virtue. She tried to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait of integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the attacks of Mr. Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone for those casual errors, under which she would endeavour to class what Mr. Darcy had described as the idleness and vice of many years’ continuance. But no such recollection befriended her. She could see him instantly before her, in every charm of air and address, but she could remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and the regard which his social powers had{257} gained him in the mess. After pausing on this point a considerable while, she once more continued to read. But, alas! the story which followed, of his designs on Miss Darcy, received some confirmation from what had passed between Colonel Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last she was referred for the truth of every particular to Colonel Fitzwilliam himself—from whom she had previously received the information of his near concern in all his cousin’s affairs and whose character she had no reason to question. At one time she had almost resolved on applying to him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the application, and at length wholly banished by the conviction that Mr. Darcy would never have hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been well assured of his cousin’s corroboration.
it wouldn’t be no harm to borrow the others. So we talked it over all
stomped on the floor like a perfect storm, whilst the king held up his
ACROSS THE PACIFIC

your party, I will also go to the Emerald City and ask Oz to help me.”
alone, and saw the people on the other side of the pit running off,


“Come in,” called Oz, and the Woodman entered and said, “I have come



“I’m the tallest{10}”
thing, that’s the thing I’m a-going to dig that nigger or that
After eating we crept back to the scullery, and there I must have dozed
candle in both rooms. I passed along, and the parlor door was open; but
in the palace, but now, to her surprise, she found it was no longer
with Toto and pulled his tail and crowed and laughed in a way that

woods eastward, and to Woking on the west. The road was dotted with
leading me by the hand, and the children tagging after. When we got
is. I’s seed ’m befo’; I don’t k’yer to see ’em no mo’.”
[339]
and when Jim told him Uncle Silas come in every day or two to pray with
they told you to tell me; and every last thing you can think of.”
were quite as long as the tiger had said, and its body covered with

they’d tar and feather me and ride me on a rail, sure. I didn’t wait
anything to increase in number as time wore on. Presently a measured


the margin came those who were on foot threatened by the wheels,

And now before them the great screens glowed mistily. Then slowly they cleared to show in gray outline the interior of the far-off ships. Each ship was represented by a great screen. And now, as the ship gained solidity, the screens cleared, the images became sharp and strong, color filled them out with greater detail. Then slowly the men stirred. They moved with returning consciousness, and took over the control of the ships from the automatic controls. One by one they reported back to headquarters. There was only forty-seven seconds' delay in the time of transmission of signals now, so they maintained two-way communication.
and found she was crying herself at this sorrowful parting from her
“We are all threatened,” answered the tiger, “by a fierce enemy which
The whole night I shivered with cold in my bed under two quilts scented with lavender. Notwithstanding the chilly atmosphere, persecuting mosquitoes strove to cover us with their stings.
Emerald City. So my good luck is all due to her, and I shall never
but, nothing daunted, I had them replaced with tin ones. The Wicked
Heading to Chapter XLIV.	318
It has been observed, that a national debt contracted, no matter for what, occasioning in every thing an indispensable increase of price, the Colonies pay their quota of such a debt (notwithstanding the drawbacks) when they purchase goods at the rate to which the said debt has advanced them: it must also have been noticed, even how necessary it was that the price of commodities[373] from the Colonies should increase in proportion to the price of those of the Mother-country, in order that the former might be able to answer that advance of prices, without hurting the two essential points, consumption and re-production; whence it follows, that if new taxes are introduced, either directly or indirectly, to defray their pretended proportion in the interest of the national debt, neither harm nor good will result, if the price of their commodities be increased in the same proportion; but that if they be taxed, without that increase in the price of their commodities, they will consume by so much less of national goods or of foreign ones paid for in national merchandise, that is, to the amount of the sum which the tax shall have taken from them: this point is evident. Thus it is, that after the war in 1755, all Europe was obliged, as has been shewn, to increase her prices, so as to put them on a level with those in England; and had not Great Britain submitted to that reciprocal advance, and all the rest of Europe condescended to receive only, for the 13 effective millions of their own goods, the 13 nominal millions of that quantity of English commodities which was worth 14, on account of the taxes only, the nominal million which would have remained in the hands of England, would have been without value, and[374] no longer reproduced for want of consumption, for want of means to pay for it, and to encourage such a reproduction.

because they might see the smoke. So I set there and watched the

still stood intact, awaiting their fate, shadowy, faint and pallid in
wade securely, although the red weed impeded my feet a little; but the
slave, and so I’d better write a letter to Tom Sawyer and tell him to

piece, and found the two bodies laying in the edge of the water, and
a dog was stretched out on the grass in the sun sound asleep. I went up
[379]
If it should result, not from arguments, which very seldom contain what they ought to contain, in order to become uncontrovertible, but from the experience of a whole century, sufficient to estimate the effect of the passion the most ardent, and the most attached to its object, that contrary to the common ideas, and in spite of the general rage for money, the whole of commerce has, to this day, been ultimately confined to its true balance, i. e. to bartering goods for goods, except the little money which is wanted every where, and which has constantly penetrated every where, to answer either to the new productions when they had actually increased in their quantity, or to the advance of prices when the taxes had at last produced every where, and on the generality of prices, their effect, as equitable as it is necessary and harmless:
If the men went to the island I just expect they found the camp fire I

“I understood that there were some very strong objections against the lady.”
backward, while even the fierce beasts stopped short and looked at him
sinister?”
opened another one and spread it on his breast; but they tore open his
and the figure of a workman carrying a basket appeared. Beside him ran

 X. THE EPILOGUE.

hurry, and warn’t fixed so as to carry off most of their stuff.


good look at me, and all said, “Why, _he_ ain’t a Shepherdson—no, there
“If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have no idea of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine.”
Scarecrow waked Dorothy and the Lion and Toto, and told them that the
and said:
At the corner of the lane that runs to Putney Bridge station I found a

But Dorothy they did not harm at all. She stood, with Toto in her arms,
it, to resort to threats, and at last to blows. That brought him to
One day we visited the fish-market. The fisherwomen with their short skirts and large white flapping caps, holding their arms akimbo, reminded me of the traditional “Madame Angot.” We crossed over in a canoe to a small beach where the fishermen anchor their boats at spring-tide. We returned to Boulogne with a grey-haired boatman wearing a silver ear-ring in one ear. He was a desperate Royalist, as it appears, and fumed all the time during our crossing against the French Republic, thanks to which, to his belief, morals had visibly decayed at Boulogne. He said that we had no idea of the extent of corruption in this unhappy country, and how disloyal the population was to their household traditions which they had cherished for centuries. Wanting to prove to us that he had remained a good Christian, he began to search in the pockets of his jersey for a small silver cross, forgetting to row in the meanwhile; and just at that moment whilst I was going hot and cold all over, a steamer came towards us full speed and we narrowly escaped being upset.

with Aunt Sally, just as sure as you’re born. Now, the way I look at
us all to stay hid whilst he went up to town and smelt around to see if
words out, I was so anxious; but I told Tom as quick as I could we must
It is difficult to understand me at times. I am not quite like other people, being a thing of nerves and moods. One evening, when my sister-in-law had driven away to a Court ball, I felt myself somewhat like Cinderella, and as I couldn’t stand being left altogether out in the cold, I seized the opportunity for a few frantic tears in private. I daresay it was silly of me, but I couldn’t help it. Only fancy, my sister-in-law is going to enjoy herself whilst I must pine away at home! But the odd thing was that even if I had been persuaded ever so much to go to that ball, I should not have gone.
smoking ground. It was the strangest spectacle, that black expanse set
and by-and-by fetched up on the steep top of the hill the other side of

“Do you suppose Oz could give me a heart?”
The contents of the political telegrams received to-day are rather alarming; England decidedly plots a war afresh, and a rumour of the approaching breaking of peace has spread in the town. We must be prepared that the Turks will assail us at any moment.

“And this is your real opinion! This is your final resolve! Very well. I shall now know how to act. Do not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I hoped to find you reasonable; but depend upon it I will carry my point.”
CHAPTER CI

[238]
looked down and saw him dimly, clambering over the palings. At the
“It’s bows and arrows against the lightning, anyhow,” said the
Close to Interlaken we took the train for about ten minutes. Interlaken is situated in a narrow pass encircled by a range of sparkling white mountains, behind which rises the majestic Jungfrau. This coquettish little town seems to be specially built for tourists, there are almost nothing but hotels in the place. The room which we occupied at the Hôtel des Alpes was furnished Swiss style, with a cuckoo-clock and cupboards in the walls; there were antimacassars everywhere, and two blue vases on the mantlepiece with everlasting flowers; on a small table lay a bible and a hymn-book.
the property for auction straight off—sale two days after the funeral;

says:
pistol raised in his right hand—not aiming it, but holding it out with

“Good gracious! Lord bless me! only think! dear me! Mr. Darcy! Who would have thought it? And is it really true? Oh, my sweetest Lizzy! how rich and how great you will be! What pin-money, what jewels, what carriages you will have! Jane’s is nothing to it—nothing at all. I am so pleased—so happy. Such a charming man! so handsome! so tall! Oh, my dear{465} Lizzy! pray apologize for my having disliked him so much before. I hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in town! Everything that is charming! Three daughters married! Ten thousand a year! Oh, Lord! what will become of me? I shall go distracted.”


and, moving about under an armour of metallic shields, have completely
Haggerston and Hoxton, and, indeed, through all the vastness of London
the lonesomeness of the river, and kind of lazy along, and by-and-by
waiting, and the ammunition waggons were at a business-like distance.
people walking in their best clothes seemed scarcely affected by the


with the selenite paper weight upon it, the sheet of work I had left on

The next stopping-place was Krasnoyarsk, a big Cossack settlement. The inhabitants presented us wine in bottles entwined with branches of grapes. I remained on deck till midnight, admiring the large river on which the full moon reflected its opal glimmer.
not terrified. I came upon him as if it were a matter of course. I



now. When Dorothy, who was an orphan, first came to her, Aunt Em had

“How long will it be,” the child asked of the Tin Woodman, “before we

 Trouble is Brewing
 Sawdust Diet


all over every time there was a sound. The duke told him to make

“I don’t want to, Jake Packard. I’m for killin’ him—and didn’t he kill


CHAPTER VI.

en give de ten cents to de po’, en laid low to see what wuz gwyne to
the job was done. We crept in under Jim’s bed and into the cabin, and
“But here we’re a-running on this way, and you hain’t told me a word

come of it.”


the mountains and the rocks to fall upon them and hide them—hide them
in ahead o’ me.”

“Why, de gracious sakes! do he know you genlmen?”
“When I am in the country,” he replied, “I never wish to leave it; and when I am in town, it is pretty much the same. They have each their advantages, and I can be equally happy in either.”
human being, all the complex apparatus of digestion, which makes up the
with her out of the country forthwith. For I already perceived clearly
“Why, Mars Tom, I doan’ _want_ no sich glory. Snake take ’n bite Jim’s
this picture over the head of the bed in her room, and every time her

our Lilienthal soaring-machines, our guns and sticks and so forth, are
sweetly, and Dorothy did not feel nearly so bad as you might think a


“Your house did, anyway,” replied the little old woman, with a laugh,
Feeling too tired to appear at table-d’hôte, I went immediately to bed, whilst Sergy made gastronomic purchases at the nearest grocery-shop. He came home laden with parcels, having converted himself into a temporary hanging-stand; from every part of him suspended a loose parcel containing butter, cheese, sausages, etc., and under his arm he brought bravely a bottle of Malaga wine, which he added to his stock in order not to be taken by the shopman for a famished wretch.

“They’re in an awful peck of trouble, and—”
These were then some of the darkest days of Indian history, the time of the tragedy of the Black Hole of Calcutta, of wanton treachery, of pitiless hate and[Pg 59] massacre, and all the miseries of a bloody war. In the midst of these stormy conflicts, Schwartz was much concerned with the indifference which existed in the minds of the natives towards the claims of the Christian religion. Thankful as he felt for the marks of success on many hands, he realized increasingly, as all thoughtful workers must do, the darkness of the heathen mind and how little after all was accomplished. Schwartz was no pessimist; indeed, a careful study of his character gives the refreshing idea of a man of vivacity and hopefulness, strong of faith in God and ultimate victory, comforting himself with the promise of Holy Scripture whenever the difficulties were more than usually severe. With it all, there is the revelation of the sense of self-abasement, the condemnation of the slightest risings of pride and satisfaction which we find in the lowliness of spirit of Thomas à Kempis and other mystics. The mind of the man, too, is manifested so clearly in his letters, which are like little windows enabling us to look into this brave heart. He is writing under date 17th October, 1755, to his old friend and guide, Professor Francke at Halle, and breaks forth into a strain of praise and thanksgiving: “Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the God of all true consolation, salvation, and life, who mercifully and gloriously helpeth us in all trouble! He is a God that delighteth in our life, a God that humbleth that he may exalt us, that maketh us to feel our wretchedness that he may thoroughly save us from it. My soul doth magnify the Lord!

with just one stout board nailed across it. I says:

“One gets to know that birds have shadows these days. This is a bit
[401]
Declining the honours the authorities of Blagovestchensk wished to bestow on me, I telegraphed to General Arsenieff, the governor of the town, that I could receive no one on board, having decided to play the invalid, and was disagreeably surprised to see that a great crowd awaited me on the quay. Mrs. Arsenieff forced my cabin door open and transmitted to me three big bouquets tied with broad ribbons, sent by her husband, the chief of the Cossack regiment quartered at Blagovestchensk, and the Prefect of the Police.
They were obliged to camp out that night under a large tree in the
started to get him. Aunt Em, badly frightened, threw open the trap door

paddled over here to hear the news, and Sid’s at the post-office to see
right before that, but it was all comfortable now. I was glad the way

“Or give me a heart,” said the Tin Woodman.
the High Street across the bridge to Fulham. The red weed was

warmed her and made her feel less lonely. She and Toto ate the last of
Then the beasts bowed down to the Lion as their King, and he promised
trees. I stopped to look at them, drawing a lesson from their stout
and utter destruction our own species has wrought, not only upon
Profiting by our stay in Florence, Sergy wanted me to be immortalised by brushes and chisels, on canvas and on marble. He ordered my portrait to be taken by Parrini, a well-known painter, and my bust by Romanelli, the famous sculptor, who took us to his “studio,” full of nymphs and cupids and limbs; a moving platform for the model occupied the middle of the room. I had to sit from nine o’clock in the morning until six in the evening, which was rather fatiguing. Whilst Parrini painted my portrait, his wife, Signora Adelgunda, a buxom, pleasant-faced lady, stood behind and generally approved, nodded her head and murmured, caressing her husband’s cheek, “Bene, bene, caro, Beppé.” Signora Adelgunda was also a painter, and had exhibited several times. She has watched for eight years the right to obtain the first place to copy Rafaele’s Madonna at the Pitti Galleries. Her picture had found its way into the Museum[219] and was sold for the sum of two thousand francs. Parrini, during the sittings, told me little humorous things he could think of, trying to keep me amused. I laughed very much when he related to me that he had just received from America the photographs of a gentleman and his wife who wanted to have their portraits painted conformably to these photos, only the gentleman wished to be reproduced with less hair on his head and ten years more on his shoulders, whilst his spouse, on the contrary, wanted him to drop ten years of her age. Parrini related to me that when Mme. Lebrun, the celebrated lady-painter, in her old age, visited the Pitti Galleries and saw an oil painting of her, reproducing her young and beautiful, the poor woman had a fit of hysterics and nearly fainted away. Yes, certainly, it must not be pleasant to grow old, especially when one has been gifted by good looks. I felt very flattered when Parrini told me in his artistic language, that like Mme. Lebrun my face had warm and cold touches. Shall I ever fall into a swoon, if I ever reach old age, when looking at my portrait painted by Parrini, I wonder? The Parrinis have got a little son named Mario, a premature painter, who puts paint on the doors, walls and statues which adorn his father’s “studio.” He is a very lively and noisy little boy, who gives trouble and puts things out of place. His last exploit was to daub with red paint the statue of the daughter of Niobe, and to adorn her beautiful face with long black moustaches. Romanelli is over seventy years old but carries them lightly on his shoulders. He wears a red scarf round his throat, carpet slippers, and a black velvet “calotte” pushed off on the back of his bald head. At my first sitting I felt rather shy when the sculptor placed me in a seat standing on the turning pedestal, but at the second sitting it went off all right, I mounted bravely on my elevated throne. The bust of a young woman, made in clay, stood on my right hand and Romanelli modelled it here and there, according to my features, diminishing or adding small bits of clay. Sitting for my bust made me sleepy, and I waited impatiently when Romanelli, who was careful not to overtire me, would tell me to have a rest. Then I rose and went out into the garden, stiff with long sitting. I yawned and stretched my arms wearily and five minutes after I resumed my place on the “dais.” When the turn came for my neck to be modelled, Romanelli told me to unbutton the upper part of my bodice, which made me burn with shame. The old sculptor laughed and said that he had lost the number of all the necks, a great deal more low-bodied than mine, which had served for models to him during his long artistic life. My bust advanced rapidly and the likeness was perfect, but Sergy, who had only too flattering an opinion of me in every way,[220] and was very hard to please according to what concerned my precious person, found that the head was not well put on, and the back not sufficiently straight, and when Romanelli agreeably to his demands, began to take off layers of clay from my bust’s back, Sergy turned away shuddering: it seemed to him as if I was being carved alive. Romanelli declared finally that the head had to be separated from the bust in order to place it more backwards; my husband would not consent to be present at this bloodless operation and carried me away promptly, when we returned an hour later, we found the head in its proper place again. My bust in clay was now completed and Romanelli promised to send to Moscow for Christmas my bust made in marble. The lump of clay representing the bust of a young woman, which Romanelli manipulated according to my features, is transformed now, for another sitting, into a bust of a wrinkled old man. My portrait will be ready for Christmas also.
“If our friends, the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman, were only with us,”
The barometer stood high all the time, nevertheless the ocean tosses us pitilessly. Our steamer was rising and falling upon the long Atlantic waves, and now came my first real experience of ocean travelling. I was obliged to leave the table during dinner.
That dark expanse was lit in patches by yellow gorse and broom; there
planks. It was twelve foot wide and about fifteen or sixteen foot long,
to fetch a sheep, and so I went along; but when we was dragging him to

had come, I, who had talked with God, crept out of the house like a rat
I stood staring, not as yet realising that this was death leaping from
do the right thing and the clean thing, and go and write to that
I came to this country it was in a balloon. You also came through the
CHAPTER XII.
We removed at last to the Villa Maria, where we felt the cold very much. The rooms were badly heated, and the draughts in the corridor were strong enough to work a windmill, and they gave me a horrid cold. In the night the noise of the passing trains and the roar of the sea hindered our sleep. We hastened our departure and started for Paris, where we intended to spend a few days before returning to Russia. Towards night three young Corsicans entered our compartment, and we were doomed to pass a sleepless night, for we couldn’t stretch our legs, and felt very uncomfortable. Our fellow-travellers were the very image of Napoleon Bonaparte, and resembled each other like three peas.
not very different from ours except that, according to Philips, blue
CHAPTER XLV.
to think one of the great fighting-machines had stumbled against the
the world—plague _take_ the things, I’ll count ’m again.”
“Yours sincerely,” etc.
“Lizzy,” cried her mother, “remember where you are, and do not run on in the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home.”
November 30th.—Our stay in Tiflis, alas, did not last long. The Grand Duke Michael, setting out to St. Petersburg, has charged Sergy to work out projects in case of a new war with Turkey, (Oh! horror!) and has ordered him to bring them personally to St. Petersburg. We are leaving Tiflis in the beginning of December.
she had promised the old woman I should not marry the pretty Munchkin
“Is there anything we can do,” it asked, “to repay you for saving the
but I shoved right into the timber where my old camp used to be, and
wouldn’t a cared. Now cler out to bed, and don’t lemme see no more of

Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to know what they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began playing again. Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said to Darcy,—

MRS. GARDINER’S caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone: after honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on:—
with them. That was all they asked me. Then the doctor whirls on me and
tugged at them till I got them ashore; then I covered up their faces,
for me; I didn’t want to see him no more. He used to always whale me
That cheered me up. I’d begun to think I warn’t going to get a hint of
“It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter with ease cannot write ill.”
“Oh! Your uncle! He keeps a man-servant, does he? I am very glad you have somebody who thinks of those things. Where shall you change horses? Oh, Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at the Bell, you will be attended to.”
they spilt it out on the floor, and it was a lovely sight, all them


It results, First, that every system of balance, founded on the supposition which served as a basis to the two balances I have spoken of, is as chimerical, as it would be pernicious to the nation who should regulate herself by it, and to such other nations as might be unfortunate enough to correspond with her:
come lazying along the street and whollop herself right down in the
desert?”
bridle, a-reeling this way and that; and the next minute he sprung up




truth.”
creeps upon them.
shiniest hat; and there ain’t a man in that town that’s got as fine

saw, and pretty soon pap come in.

The Salasie has arrived this morning, and to-morrow we sail on that ship for Saigon.
to carry him to the store; and that minute the two boys started on the

told him of, was much astonished; but he answered her bravely.

said “Ouch!” it hurt her arm so. Then she told me to try for the next

round them, scared and wretched, and fled at my brother’s threat.

“I is, is I? Well, you answer me dis: Didn’t you tote out de line in de
yaller janders, and brain-fever, and I don’t know what all.”


a power of thunder and lightning, and the rain poured down in a solid

impetus of its pace, had struck him and crumpled him up like a thing of
At Christmas we got up a concert for the benefit of Professor Albrecht, an old violincellist, whose pecuniary circumstances were not very flourishing just then. My husband’s aide-de-camps took the arrangement upon themselves. A raised platform had been put at the end of our hall, and chairs were placed in rows. We invited artists and dilettanti to take part in our concert. I had a duet and solo to go through and showed much courage at the rehearsal of the concert. It was poor Sergy who seemed much more[287] excited and nervous, looking forward to that concert with excitement. At last the day of the great event arrived. I hardly knew how to get through it and spent that day like a professional prima-donna, reclining in a long chair and waiting for my triumphs. People began to arrive towards eight o’clock. There were a great many pupils of the Music Academy and the Philharmonic School among the audience. Every seat in the hall was rapidly filled up. We artists gathered behind a screen hidden from view by big plants. The agitation I felt over my début, before a select audience of musical critics, may easily be imagined. I had never sung in a concert before and was going to enjoy an entirely novel and exciting experience. Just before the beginning of the performance, whilst I sucked vigorously a pastille to clear my throat, a waiter brought us a bottle of champagne to keep up our courage, to the great alarm of Sergy, who thought that I had been taken by a sudden access of timidity and needed the help of that stimulating drink to hearten me. Before making my appearance on the platform I had an attack of stage-fright, but I soon recovered my self-possession, and after the first note I lost my fear entirely. Taking care not to look at the audience I directed my glances above their heads, trying to persuade myself that all the audience was merely furniture. My first aria was Gounod’s “Ave Maria,” to the accompaniment of Professor Albrecht on the cello. A storm of applause arose, and I was recalled several times. “Bis, bis,” ran round the room and I had to sing again and again. I don’t wish to boast, but my triumph was complete. Mr. Schostakowsky, the director of the Philharmonic Society, who was critical to the extreme, approved, nodding his head, and when the first part of the concert was over, he came up to me and complimented me upon my singing. There was a quarter-of-an-hour interval for gossip and refreshment, during which Count Kergaradec, the French Consul, thanked me for the pleasure my singing had given him, telling me that I was equally pleasing to the ear and to the eye. I was very flattered, very excited, very happy, and realised that the stage was my proper sphere. There! I am on the point of failing in modesty, and stop! When the performance was at an end, and the audience filed out, we invited some friends to supper. I was too excited to go to bed until dawn. Every one agreed that our concert was a wonderful success. Our desire to raise as much money as we could was fulfilled, the collection mounted to over eighty pounds, which we handed over triumphantly to Professor Albrecht. We did not expect so large a profit.

anyone.
knew the most, and they all started away. They traveled that day and

on them.”
and twice I seen Harney cover Buck with his gun; and then he rode away
was gone.



life is simply unbearable without a bit of courage.”
that would fight no more for ever, at the tattered red shreds of flesh
was plenty of niggers, and she sewed there a good deal and read her


on either side were sweet and gay with multitudes of dog-roses. The
“To be sure, Lizzy,” said her aunt, “he is not so handsome as Wickham; or rather he has not Wickham’s countenance, for his features are perfectly good. But how came you to tell us that he was so disagreeable?”


happy in the hedge. He told them of his own escape out of London, and

would have took too long to _make_ so many. Jim said the moon could a



“You are not going to introduce yourself to Mr. Darcy?”
everybody crowded up with the tears in their eyes, and most shook the
[Image unavailable.]

Woodman and the Lion, and even on little Toto; and all were locked fast
“I know it,” returned Dorothy, “but we have lost the Scarecrow, and are
hundred such questions struggled together in my mind as I watched that
“It must have been his sisters’ doing. They were certainly no friends to his acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at, since he might have chosen so much more advantageously in many respects. But when they see, as I trust they will, that their brother is happy with me, they will learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms again: though we can never be what we once were to each other.”


And there warn’t a blessed snake up there when we went back—we didn’t
After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Mr. Bennet coolly observed,—

bed, for a clew, after he’s gone? and don’t you reckon they’ll want


Had it gone?
fruit.
sending us, the Thing that was to bring so much struggle and calamity
Then perhaps those national manufacturers, so proud and so jealous of their exportations, so greedy of premiums, prohibitions, restrictions, encouragements of all kinds, would sue more ardently to have those nuisances suppressed, than they ever did for their establishment.

We went to Dauville on a raft to see the races, although I do not particularly like that sport, and take the view of the late Shah of Persia, who explained why he would not go to[283] the Derby, during his stay in London, by saying that he had always known that one horse could run faster than another, but that it was a matter of perfect indifference to him which that one horse might be. The hippodrome was filled with a gay and fashionable crowd, who followed the races eagerly. The prize of 10,000 francs was won by the famous “Volcano,” whose lucky proprietor was loudly applauded. Rain began to fall and we got wet through because the people behind us wouldn’t let us open our umbrellas: my pretty dress was quite spoilt. Whilst we lingered at Dauville the tide had run away, so we had to take an oddly-shaped carriage, with a white awning on it, and drive back to Trouville, being obliged to cross a pontoon bridge, as with low water the little river La Touque becomes almost dry, and the tide retreats so far that fishing-boats were lying upon the banks of sand.

fattened and bred like a thundering ox. Ugh! Fancy those brown
three flights of stairs until they came to a room at the front of the

hunted and killed. Perhaps they also prayed confidently to God. Surely,
morning.”


The annual returns from the American islands was computed, 90 years ago, at about 330,000, (Sir Charles Whitworth’s State of Trade). Half of this produce was, in all likelihood, mortgaged to commerce; but it only supposed a stock of 3,000,000 at most lent, it matters not at what interest. The yearly produce of those colonies, added to that of the ceded islands, amounts, at present, to more than 2,900,000; more than one-third of which belongs to the trader, either as purchaser or mortgagee, and exhibits a sum of about 20,000,000, from which we shall substract the former 3,000,000; and considering (for a moment) those colonies as being foreign to the State, we shall find a sixth clear saving of—17,000,000, (the petition of the merchants in 1775, supposes it to be 30,000,000.)
other’s necks and crying; and I reckon I couldn’t a stood it all, but
The mighty Pyramids seem to stand quite near to Cairo, and still it takes an hour and a half to drive to them by a long avenue of great trees with meeting branches, stately leafy veterans, whose thick tops, forming a cool vault, prevented the sun from scorching us when we drove on the Ismail Road that leads from Cairo to the Pyramids. We crossed an iron bridge over the Nile, which, though at its fullest now, is not very deep; a drove of buffaloes were crossing it easily. We passed through the mud-built village of Sakhara, a small encampment with a cluster of nomad tents, and saw a circle of Arab-Bedouins, cloaked and white hooded forms, belonging to a nomad tribe, crouching over a fire and[303] cooking their dinner in the plain, under the scanty shade of palm-trees. Their Sheikh, a very tall and dignified Arab, offered us a camel and a donkey to go and see the Sphinx. Sergy mounted the camel and I had to condescend to the donkey. We were followed by a band of Bedouins who offered us their services as guides to the Pyramids. Our escort increased as we went on; half-naked children ran after us begging baksheesh. Directly after leaving the village we were in the Sahara, with no tree or habitation, only the naked desert with rippling sandbanks. The landscape fatigued the eye by its sand uniformly yellow and its sky uniformly blue. The Pyramids, the greatest of all human monuments, bewildered us by their size when we drove up to them, especially the Pyramid of Cheops, which took a hundred thousand masons twenty-five years to build. The Pyramids are of extreme antiquity, a thousand years before the Christian era. At the time when Abraham undertook his journey to Egypt, the Pyramids had already existed for several centuries back. As soon as a Pharaoh began to reign, in the first place he had his mausoleum built in the form of a Pyramid. Inside, rooms with alabaster walls are shown, and long high galleries containing the huge granite sarcophaguses. We made the tour of the great Pyramid of Cheops. Its blocks consist of a series of steep stone steps. To go up these steps is like walking up a wall. The hard African sun was shining fiercely and it was too hot to undertake the ascent of the Pyramid; we were contented to contemplate its wonders from the base. A young Bedouin proposed to show us a wonderful feat—his ascent and descent of the Pyramid in nineteen minutes, but we refused to witness that acrobatic performance and rode over the hot yellow sand of the desert to the Sphinx. All around us the great plain extended to the horizon. I was oppressed by the immense solitude. In the desert, in the midst of the sand-ocean, the monstrous Sphinx, the colossus of the past ages, keeps watch on the sands from nearly four thousand years before the birth of Christ, sleeping his eternal and enigmatic sleep. How many centuries have past, and this giant continues contemplating, with a mysterious and condescending smile, the nothingness and instability of the world. Hundreds of years after I am dead the Sphinx would be probably as it is now—silent, grave, crouching there under the scorching sun, its eyes of stone gazing beyond the world of men, and seeming for ever to be smiling ironically on the folly of human vanities and aspirations. I looked at the wonderful beast that lay gazing westward, with mocking, calm and fathomless eyes of everlasting mystery, and was conscious of a sudden sense of smallness. If it hadn’t been so hot I should have meditated on the fragility of human greatness. A[304] legend says that Mary, Joseph, and the Holy Child halted here on their long journey, when they fled to the land of Egypt to escape the fury of King Herod, and that the Virgin laid the tired Christ between the paws of the Sphinx to sleep. We had brought a small kodak with us, and Mahmoud immortalised me installed on the back of my peaceable courser, and my husband perched on his high quadruped, both of us surrounded by a multitude of dusky sons of the Sahara. When we got to our carriage we amply recompensed the services of our Bedouin followers, who continued to run after our carriage demanding more tips and shouting “Baksheesh, Sahib, baksheesh!” Mahmoud put out of himself by their effrontery, rose in his seat looking remarkably ferocious, and began to throw stones at them, at which the whole crowd took to their heels. We had to return full speed to Cairo, before the drawbridge was raised for the ships to pass; we tore through the bridge which is a mile long, scattering the foot-passengers who happened to be in our way to right and left.

staring placards. “Dreadful catastrophe!” they bawled one to the other
down on his blankets by-and-by; but luck didn’t run my way. He didn’t

A-rabs and the elephants, but as for me I think different. It had all
said it. So then she looked a little better satisfied, and says:

edge of the gulf and crouched down.




The eyes winked three times, and then they turned up to the ceiling and
About eight o’clock a noise of heavy firing was distinctly audible all
The next day we visited the mosque of “Amrou.” Before entering it, we were told to tie on straw slippers upon our shoes. In the shadow of the mosque it was nice and cool. A palm had grown in the second court near a cistern where pilgrims performed their ablutions. The mosque is a large square building containing a whole forest of miraculous columns—“Proof Columns,” as they are called—standing very near each other, and giving passage to the “Just” and keeping back the “Perverted.” The proof can’t be precisely right, for according to it, it is only slim individuals who are ascertained to be the “Just,” while those inclined to be fat, always appear to be “Perverse.” A “muezzin” was chanting the Koran, in the middle of the mosque, to a throng of pilgrims prostrating themselves in prayer before the tomb of Caliph Amrou, who was buried on the spot where he had been killed during a great slaughter, which took place in the altar during the fight of the Arabs and the Mamelukes.
and when he wants to send any little common ordinary mysterious message
“Yes; but when questioned by him, Denny denied knowing anything of their plan, and would not give his real opinion about it. He did not repeat his persuasion of their not marrying, and from that I am inclined to hope he might have been misunderstood before.”
Collins and a boy.”
[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]
Mr. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted by the Gardiners and Jane; but, as he took up his abode with the Lucases, his arrival was no great inconvenience to Mrs. Bennet. His marriage was now fast approaching; and she was at length so far resigned as to think it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured tone, that she “wished they might be happy.” Thursday was to be the wedding-day, and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and when she rose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother’s ungracious and reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accompanied her out of the room. As they went down stairs together, Charlotte said,—
The newspapers were full of us. Our hotel was besieged by reporters waiting in the ante-room for hours to have a word from us. The Harper’s Magazine asks for our photographs, and a type-writing machine office proposes to issue 250 correspondences concerning my husband. We received a lot of letters from autograph-hunters. Mrs. Vanderbilt, one of the richest women in America, wrote to Sergy requesting his autograph in order that she might add it to her collection of celebrities.
Tom, Dick and Harry as what he is, and slam around money the way he

“We informed the Rev. Mr. Kiernander of our arrival and he sent in the afternoon a country boat to fetch us. There we took our leave of the officers and passengers who had shown us every kindness. They were much moved at parting and wished us every blessing in our future ministry. May the Lord do good abundantly to[Pg 46] them all! In the evening dear Mr. Kiernander received us and praised the name of the Lord for all the mercy He had shown us....
The Country of the Quadlings
March 25th.—On account of ill-health, General Loris-Melikoff, by his own request, was released from the command of the main army, which was given over to General Heimann.
made her powerful pretty. I was a good deal astonished, but when I got
Many renowned artistes visited our old capital this winter, among them Tamagno, the celebrated tenor, whose fame was just then ringing all the world over. After a concert-tour in America he came to Moscow to collect a new harvest of laurels. But I didn’t admire particularly his thundering voice, a veritable Jericho trumpet! Ferni-Germano, the ideal “Carmen,” for whom Bizet had composed his opera, made a clamorous appearance after Tamagno. She came to see us with a letter of recommendation given to her by one of our friends living in St. Petersburg, but didn’t find us at home. I wanted to see her close and went to the hotel where she had put up to pay her a visit. The “diva” didn’t gain on close acquaintance; she couldn’t stand the ordeal of pitiless sunshine, and sat with her back to the light in discreet semi-obscurity. I saw, nevertheless, that she hadn’t had time to rub off the powder which lay an inch thick on her nose. Eleonora Duse, the great Italian tragédienne, had come to Moscow to give a few performances. I saw her in “La Dame aux Camelias,” and was immensely pleased with her acting. In all my life I had never seen anything so perfectly beautiful. She seemed to have absolutely converted herself into “Violetta,” whom she represented, and put all her soul in her part; most of the women in the audience were in tears. I was also in rapture with Marcella Sembrich, who sang at the Imperial Opera; her beautiful well-trained voice was something marvellous. I had also the opportunity of seeing the famous ballet-dancer, Virginia Zucchi, in “Esmeralda,” and Nikita, a rising young star, recently out of her teens, with whom Europe and America had been enraptured, and who looked like a delicate piece of Dresden china, and was entirely bewitching with her long locks hanging loosely over her shoulders. I enjoyed her singing very much, her voice went straight to the heart of her listeners, and her high notes were as clear as a bird’s. Nikita had a brilliant future before her. She was born in America, and sang in public for the first time at the age of six.
made out of carpet-stuff, that had just come off of the steamboat and
CHAPTER CXII
bust out a-crying. If they warn’t the beatenest lot, them two frauds,
The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information was as sincere as her brother’s in sending it. Four sides of paper were insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of being loved by her sister.
The result of this favourable interview was the urgent request of the King that he should remain in Tanjore, and therefore, after consulting the brethren at Tranquebar, Cuddalore and Madras, he returned and was soon again in the presence of the King. “I explained to him,” he writes, “the command of God relative to the consecration of the Sabbath and His merciful intention in giving it, namely, to make us holy and happy, by devoting it to the concerns of our souls. He then inquired why we Christians did not anoint ourselves as they did. I replied that the heathen thought they were thereby purified from sin, but we knew that sin could not be thus removed—that God had provided a more effectual remedy, by sending a mighty Saviour who had taken away our sins by the sacrifice of Himself, and that we must seek forgiveness through faith in this Redeemer.
In the immensity of commercial operations, how many capitals to a considerable amount, unemployed during two, three, four, and six months, are indispensably wanted at the precise period! Would it turn out to the advantage of the State, if a considerable capital, useless for six months to the holders, and for the like space of time essentially wanted by those who possess none, should lie dormant in the proprietor’s chest, till time should give it life, and make it useful?
“You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?”
Sawyer—’”
to them all. Then he stood about five minutes, picking tallow-drip off
Every day I grew more and more home-sick. I often was in tears, not taking interest in anything. The awful climate was injurious to my health. I have no appetite, no sleep. The pink has gone out of my cheeks. Someone had cast an evil eye upon me to be sure. I’ve got so thin and pale that I am afraid to look at myself in the glass. Sergy, who reads my face, which is a mirror of all passive emotions, like a familiar book, grew alarmed and called in a doctor, but no doctor’s prescriptions were any good for my complaint. Mephistopheles whispered into my ear that instead of making me swallow horrid mixtures, the best remedy for me would be to fly back to Petersburg, but I have decided not to let myself be tempted by the enemy of mankind. At the end of a month I began to feel myself at home.
much.
“But it is,” returned she; “for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she told me all about it.”
But, would the inland trade, without which agriculture cannot subsist, flourish, if foreign commerce should not be encouraged in a particular manner? And were any circumstances whatever, combined together so as to occasion such an alteration in the price of necessaries, as would deprive industry of the proper means to support abroad a competition which cannot possibly subsist but by an equality of means; would it not then become necessary for government, to shew a special favour to commerce, intrusted with the care of that competition? The manufacturers, in all countries,[137] insist so forcibly on such a necessity! The ruling powers in every nation are so convinced of the truth of the above maxim!


altogether immune. But there are no bacteria in Mars, and directly

by jings, _he_ begins to cry.
brother, very luckily for him as it chanced, preferred to push on at
Well, there was a big outlandish parrot on each side of the clock, made

the outskirts of Horsell lock up and leave their houses.
people did before there were Martians to take care of them. And the bar
Silver Shoes gave her. So the Wicked Witch laughed to herself, and

and _they_ bowed the least bit in the world and said thank you, and so

In what manner the Interest of the National Debt will be probably paid off.

front, and the country people hitched their horses to the awning-posts.

He looked kind of weary and discouraged-like, and says:

[Image unavailable.]

“Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane’s disposition as you do.”

Two days later a telegram announced my husband’s definite arrival. On the eve of that happy day I went to bed very early and awakened the next morning with the pleasant sense of anticipation of the coming journey.

and underneath the picture it said “Shall I Never See Thee More Alas.”
up the hill. I went close up to the fence on the left and worked my way
doorway, they paused and whispered among themselves, as if afraid to

“God has dealt kindly, very kindly, with me. He has led me as a father, forgiven me ten thousand talents which I owed Him, has given me a knowledge of His love and the love of my Redeemer, has made me, unworthy creature, an instrument of His grace to convey some knowledge of the Redeemer to others; so that I have a lively hope of finding some with whom I shall sing the praises due to the blessed Jesus for ever and ever.
crimson trees towards Kew—it was like walking through an avenue of
dead body, I stooped and turned him over to feel for his heart. He was
It tells all about him, to a dot—paints him like a picture, and tells
secret, and trust me. I’ll keep it; and, what’s more, I’ll help you.
CHAPTER LXXIX

have been absolutely useless against their armour; the field guns have
work and bother of raising the mullen, and jews-harping the rats, and
dogs a-coming. They wanted to jump right in, but I says:
The Martians seem to have calculated their descent with amazing


briskly toward the Emerald City, her silver shoes tinkling merrily on
arrivals. At all the street corners groups of people were reading

to Kansas, and if he did she was willing to forgive him everything.


from Horsell to Maybury was deserted and brightly ablaze.
another died the next day. No, sir; if a body’s out hunting for cowards

Younger, of Drury Lane, London.” In other bills he had a lot of other




chaw tobacker, won’t ye?”

labours of the day, and making this novelty, as they would make any
Sept. 8th.—We started at 8 o’clock in the morning. Our boat glided down the swift river advancing very slowly. Our way wound in cork-screw curves, and the raftsman had to do some clever piloting to make the turns. On the left side of the “Soungatcha” was China. Here and there appeared to[373] sight Chinese thatched huts. Natives, with long tresses, floated in junks on the river. On our side there is no vestige of habitation; all around the silence was profound; we seemed to have the world to ourselves. Now we steam on along lovely green banks fringed with tall trees bending their branches low over the water and reflected in it as in a mirror. Wild ducks swept over us, and long-legged herons came quite near to the edge of the water.
Another steely tentacle directed the powder from the basin along a


Buck he loaded up his gun en ’lowed he’s gwyne to fetch home a
Endure such shame and scorn!
anything in her lap she throws her knees apart; she don’t clap them
One of the difficulties which exercised his mind especially at this time was the question of caste and here again his far sighted policy endeavoured to bring the people together, especially in divine worship. One day while waiting to see the Rajah a Brahmin challenged him, “Mr. Schwartz, do you not think it a very bad thing to touch a Pariah?” “O yes,” he replied, “a very bad thing.” The Brahmin saw that something more was meant by his answer, so he said, “But, Mr. Schwartz, what do you mean by a Pariah?” “I mean,” was the rejoinder, “a thief, a liar, a slanderer, a drunkard, an adulterer, a[Pg 135] proud man.” “O then,” said the Brahmin hastily, “we are all Pariahs!”

make of my voice coming out of the tree at first. He was awful
“Blamed if _I_ know—that is, what’s become of the raft. That old fool
3rd July.—The railway line is uninteresting and monotonous and the heat something dreadful. At five o’clock dinner was served in the restaurant-car, consisting of broth and roast beef surrounded by slices of oranges.
where he gave her a room with a pretty bed in it. The sheets were made


ever-thickening multitude away from the stations and along the

trees by the riverside and make a truck that will carry the Lion.”
Heat-Ray.
For some time I kept up a correspondence with Ettie Ryde, and inspired her with the following poem, in well turned rhymes:—
of—”

 He gave him Ten Cents
It was one of these long, slanting, two-mile crossings; so I was a good
“Mumps your granny! They don’t set up with people that’s got the

It is not a treatise that the Author announces; it is nothing more than Thoughts on the Mechanism of Societies. Such a title does not confine a Writer to a regular plan; it saves him even the risk of preparing his Readers for a chain of ideas which cannot escape their sagacity if it exist, and on which they cannot be deceived if it do not. But in a picture consecrated to the world at large as well as to his own Country, to the People as well as to their Rulers, it was necessary that the most striking object, the object to which their first attention was called, should be of so general an interest, as to entice them progressively to an investigation of all those details which deserve most to be scrutinised, and of which the different relations are either little known, or greatly mistaken.
“What, none of you?”
think it really is an Emerald City, and it certainly is a beautiful
“How long will it take, Tom?”

around and looking at her timidly. But the Scarecrow told her about

when they are going to jump on to a horse; some sickly grass-patches in
pack er k’yards. How much do a king git?”


 “It made Her look Spidery”


If the complaints set up by England against the United States, are grounded only on their incapacity of making returns proportionate to the value of the goods exported there since the peace, are the United States to blame if European cupidity has exported to America, in the space of six months, as much as its inhabitants could consume and pay for in two years? Does such an event, almost infallibly the result of a long interruption of correspondence, prove any thing more than the necessity of a balance between production and consumption, the advantage of knowing as soon as possible the difference from the one to the other, the inconvenience of a trade, in which we lose sight of our capital for whole years together, and the advantage of a trade which would 5 or 6 months after return to the hands of the capitalist the stock he had laid out?

all he wanted to eat, and a good time, and nothing to do. And we had
ground.
from behind, and they got along better. Soon they rolled the Lion out

Scarecrow, “What will you do when Dorothy has left us?”
saving my life,” added the Queen.
July 17th.—Oh, what a night that was! I wonder my hair didn’t turn white. We all thought we were going to the bottom. The ship was rolling and pitching violently, every board cracked and quivered, and enormous waves dashed over the deck; vases in the saloon went down with a fearful crash, and all my things were scattered about my cabin. The captain kept watch on the bridge the whole night. I heard him shouting orders to the crew to take down the sails.

my sight of the Martians on the previous evening. None of them had seen
Everyone connected with the terminus seemed ill-tempered.
sometimes, a girl carrying a baby, Gregg the butcher and his little

“But I thought all witches were wicked,” said the girl, who was half

then the bed hid him. Mrs. Phelps she jumps for him, and says:
and grand, but as good as she could be when she warn’t stirred up; but
In regard therefore to the effects of the tax on the prices of provisions, there is not the least difference between the system of taxing luxury, and that of a land-tax; 50s. in the supposition of an impost of ten millions, would prove in either system the necessary price of wheat; for if ever a price can be termed necessary, it is when it cannot be lower without effecting the ruin of the land proprietor, and even without missing the sole and indispensable end of taxation, unless recourse be had to one of the following resources:
water, incontinently that explodes into steam.
and of these my brother gathered such news as he could. Every broken
In his case, at any rate, he could not excuse his neglect of salvation on the plea of lack of knowledge.


“I have no reason, I assure you,” said he, “to be dissatisfied with my reception. Mr. Darcy seemed much pleased with the attention. He answered me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying, that he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine’s discernment as to be certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. It was really a very handsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him.”
“I bet they didn’t! Why, great goodness, there ain’t no chance for ’em
It was a very tall tree, and the trunk was so smooth that no one could
Following the command of our guides we fell flat on our faces, at once. All this happened in the space of a second. A smell of burning wool spread around us. It was my dress which had caught fire. Next moment we got up hurriedly and fled in terror to the other end of the cone, as the direction these rivulets of liquid fire take, depends entirely on the wind. By some miracle nobody was hurt. We have had evidently a very narrow escape of our lives. We were now on our way back to the Funicular Railway. Oh! that descent! We slid down as on skates and reached the Funicular Station in shoes almost entirely without soles.

workman’s basket hangs over his shoulder.
“Why, _the_ whole thing. There ain’t but one; how we set the runaway
fell while Miss Elphinstone was watching, for she took that duty
another corner. There was no garret at all, and no cellar—except a
We went out with the skiff and towed it ashore. Then we had dinner.

biggest and kindest and most loving heart in all the Land of Oz.”
them down a little, because the people that’s always the most anxious
any rag ladder you can start; and as for Jim, he ain’t had no
uncle Peter used to think so much of?—I mean the one that—”
it was all right enough anyway, and about what a body might expect of




down and get it out of there, but I dasn’t try it. Every minute it was
your leasure. Don’t do anything but just the way I am telling you, if
him, a trampling of feet, and a cheer that seemed to be answered

won’t, honest.”
limp, as soon and as far as my strength permitted, out of this accursed

“I do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage to Meryton. And so, my dear sister, I find, from our uncle and aunt, that you have actually seen Pemberley.”
“My dear madam,” he replied, “this invitation is particularly gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and you may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon as possible.”
[265]
by Sid being here.”
[362]
uncomfortable feeling to know one is a fool.”
My brother could not tell him.


Anxiety on Jane’s behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mr. Darcy’s explanation, by restoring Bingley to all her former good opinion, heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His affection was proved to have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless any could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend. How grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had been deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family!

“Why, my boy, you are all out of breath. Did you come for your

“Are you a Munchkin?” asked Dorothy.
you reckon you can learn me?”
on this wreck we are in a fix, sure. So on we prowled again. We struck
Wherever he went he entered into conversation with the people on the subject of religion and was bold in declaring that their idols were naught. It was also his custom to gather at Negatapatam the learned Brahmins for a discussion sometimes lasting for five hours, and on one occasion one of these declared that the Supreme Being had revealed Himself to Europeans in one way and to Hindus in another; they might believe in Jesus Christ, but the Hindus were equally right in worshipping idols; a virtuous life was the one thing needful. “My friend,” said Ziegenbalg, “no man can lead such a life but by the help of Christ, but it is not in my power to make you perceive this; go home and bow down humbly before the supreme Lord of All and ask Him to show you how it is necessary to believe in Jesus Christ and own Him for your Redeemer.”
Not one of the monuments erected since that period would now exist, nor would a single trace be left of the stocks to which the nation owes its present wealth: each portion of the national stock, every monument posterior to that era, prove as many persons reduced in the origin from 4d. to 2d. and then from 8d. to 4d. as either of the above two sums are oftener told[8] in the value of such monument, or such stock as might be made the subject of inquiry. No country in the world can boast of a more respectable source of its opulence.⸺This opulence must either be given up, or the inconveniences that attend it be submitted to. In all parts of the world the labourer earns a livelihood, and very little above that: yet this very trifle is sufficient to make him happy, wherever he cannot be compelled to work without pay. He feels little, never takes the trouble of thinking, and leaves off work only to eat, make merry, or go to rest.—Is our lot better, with that fatal degree of reflection by which our whole life so often centers within a single point?
The church bells were ringing for evensong, and a squad of Salvation
made the four wheels out of short pieces of a big tree trunk. So fast

In the first period of Societies, when they knew of no other want in the State but personal service[190] when it was necessary and possible, the common price of the articles then in circulation, was determined by the quantity of coin then existing in the nation: this is what may be justly termed the natural price. At this present time, when money is substituted to personal service, and supplies so advantageously its place; when each representation of an extra service leaves on every article, the stamp of a seal, which, without adding to the real or relative value of any thing, increases nevertheless the nominal value of every thing;—at this present time, when every nation has all the industry necessary to procure the coin wanted for this over-charge, it is the price, which this very over-charge sets upon the different objects, that regulates and attracts the quantity of silver to correspond therewith; and this price, which may be called necessary, is often evidently forced: I say, evidently, because, in the state of general correspondence, or, if you will, of that happy dependence wherein all the States of Europe stand reciprocally towards each other at this hour, when we see in one country the same objects, of the same quality, wrought with equal skill, 15 per cent. dearer than any where else, who can doubt but a part of that difference, of that extraordinary price, proceeds from taxes, and the other from monopoly?[191] But what part belongs to this, what part to the other? This is not so easily found out; 1st, because the part which is the work of monopoly, solely depends on the moderation of the monopolist, who never fails pleading the taxes for excuse; and, 2dly, because that part, which proceeds from the taxes, depends not only on the tax itself, but also on the manner of laying it, and on the effect which it is likely to produce in the minds of the people who are to support it. Such a tax as will make a slow, and only a trifling sensation in the prices of the French markets, will occasion all at once a considerable one in those of England: I shall hereafter state my reasons for this conjecture.
The reflections which I have hitherto laid before the reader, suppose that the refunded 238 millions would irrevocably be transferred from the Exchequer into the hands of those unfortunate individuals who might have been forced to receive their reimbursement. But one must live. Government could not carry injustice so far as to compel them to bury, or cast into the deep, that precious metal, ripped up at so great an expence from the bowels of the earth. What consequence would then ensue, if that immense sum put into circulation, not in England alone, where such an addition of specie would, in less than six months, occasion a six-fold rise of prices, but over all Europe, where probably treble that stock never was in circulation?—The price of every commodity would treble, or at best double, perhaps universally.—What advantage[32] could the State, or individuals, derive from such unavoidable, general, and proportionable rise?—Were the reimbursement practicable, instead of effecting it, I should vote for laying out the 238 millions in erecting a colossus of gold and silver, to be a standing monument of public gratitude towards those whose œconomy and confidence have served the State in its needful circumstances.

A false report has been spread at St. Petersburg, that Sergy had ordered all the Japs to leave the Provinces of the Amour. He hastened to inform the Minister of War that, on the contrary, six hundred Japanese workmen had just arrived to construct the Manchur railway-line.
It is very calm to-day. We are going full speed, making about 16 knots an hour. At eight o’clock in the morning we perceived a vague shadow without outlines—it is land! We soon enter the port of Nagasaki and pass before an American cruiser in gala attire on the occasion of Christmas. Pine branches, holly and mistletoe hung in festoons about the masts. We stopped alongside a Russian man-of-war, which welcomed us by the sound of a march. A steam-launch belonging to the Russian marine squadron, stationed for the moment at Nagasaki under the command of Admiral Doubassoff, was sent to bring us on shore.

Jim pitied him ever so much, and so did I. We tried to comfort him, but

to look into the child’s eyes and saw how simple the soul behind them
tigers,” replied the Lion, “and with claws so long and sharp that they

were tigers and elephants and bears and wolves and foxes and all the

“And my aunt Philips is sure it would do me a great deal of good,” added Kitty.
“Well, I tell you what _I_ think. What makes them come here just at
midnight; then they jailed him, and next day they had him before court,
MONTREUX
Nothing contributes so much to render a question undeterminable, as to perplex it with a multitude of accessaries, each of which would require a separate dissertation; consequently, nothing can render the solution easier than to reduce it to the smallest compass. Some other person will, no doubt, do much better,[83] what I can do only according to the extent of my abilities; nor did ever an author peruse his own work with more pleasure than I shall read the production of any one who shall throw the light of evidence where I can only form surmises. But if it be true, that after a short space of time, without any other assistance than the natural clashing of one interest with another, taxes, judiciously laid, are hurtful neither to individuals nor to the State,—would it not be better to labour with care to lay them judiciously, than to think of a reimbursement, the only effect of which will be to diminish, for a short time, amongst some individuals, the power of paying those very taxes?
one er dem witches jis’ wunst—on’y jis’ wunst—it’s all _I_’d ast. But
anything they had, just for a sight of that five-center piece; but they
smell, but it had a pair of very large dark-coloured eyes, and just
LXVII.	Kobe	356

up; hence in_ter._ So, you see, funeral orgies is an open er public

The climate of Vladivostock is extremely damp; the perpetual fogs act perniciously upon the nerves; the percentage of suicide is high and cases of madness are very frequent here. I am very happy that my desire to help the afflicted poor is beginning to be fulfilled. At my request the mayor of the town has collected five thousand roubles in the space of a few days to build an asylum for lunatics. One bed has already been established bearing my name.
river; but he got back to-day, and I told him as soon as he got here
It was always in the mind of Schwartz that this young man would one day sit on the throne of Tanjore and that in that position he must exercise the gifts of a ruler and show discretion and courage in dealing with others. Serfogee had no doubt some excellent qualities and his training while at Madras in the care of Mr. Jaenické was a good preparation for his future responsibilities.
it no longer I lit out. I got into my old rags and my sugar-hogshead
dented on the rocks below. But if I am on your back it will not matter
NICE

She looked out of all patience, but of course she come to count—anybody

yaller-boys. My, the way the king’s eyes did shine! He slaps the duke
flexibility or subtlety, and with an altogether misleading monotony of
Toto did not like it. He ran about the room, now here, now there,

fences had been whitewashed, some time or another, but the duke said it

At this time the work in India was passing through[Pg 33] anxious times; the French had captured Madras, and Fabricius was compelled to fly with his little flock, leaving behind the devastated mission buildings. But afterwards, when the British troops had turned the tide of war, the Lutheran missionary was invited to take charge of the church buildings at Vepery, from which the Romanists had been ejected for their treason. The call for fresh helpers was urgent and Fabricius pleaded for reinforcements. In response Professor Francke was asked to select some fit men in the University to go out and take up this work, and it is not surprising that Schwartz should have been selected and recommended. He was evidently prepared for this and readily consented, but stipulated that his father’s permission must be obtained. After much prayer, for he felt the turning point in his life had come, Schwartz hastened homeward to his native Sonnenburg. At first his reception was by no means favourable. He was the eldest son, and the whole family were looking forward to his advancement as a Lutheran clergyman at home, and even his father quite naturally hoped that, as he was getting into years, this worthy son of his would take his proper place as head of the family. It was a crisis, one which has occurred in the life of many a young missionary on the threshold of his career of divine service. At such a time we often extend to the young son a deep sympathy, which, however, in justice ought to be shared with his parent. In the case of Schwartz’s father, the decision involved so much that he took three days to consider his duty, and when this time of waiting had expired the family expected that their own views on the subject would be promptly confirmed. But the old man had taken counsel of God, and he was ready, like Abraham, to make any sacrifice in obedience thereto. He came downstairs and laid his hand upon the shoulder of his expectant son, bidding him God-speed and granting him his blessing and approval,[Pg 34] asking him never to forget his own country and his father’s house, but to go in God’s name to win many souls for Christ. The brave old man little thought how much he was giving for the welfare of the world.

“I ain’ got nuffn but a coase comb en a piece o’ paper, en a
“Well, what _did_ you say, then?”
in color and fell in flowing ringlets over her shoulders. Her dress was
ladder was ready. The Scarecrow climbed up the ladder first, but he was



you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
and crossed me off. She says, “Take your hands away, Huckleberry; what

One day when I was shamelessly flirting with Ofrossimoff, absorbed in each other we had forgotten the presence of Stenger, who came to us in a storming rage, his face a thunder cloud, and told Ofrossimoff he wouldn’t play second fiddle, nor submit any longer to a cat-and-mouse game, and also would not permit any other man to usurp his place, especially to such a baby not yet out of the school-room. (Ofrossimoff at that time was a moustachless youth and Stenger had already a slight shadow on his upper lip, of which he was immensely proud.) My aunt was right: there was a frantic personal affair between these two boys, and Ofrossimoff flaming angrily at Stenger’s insult, challenged him to a duel. That was a nice piece of work indeed! The two rivals were going to fight and all through me; they had already invited seconds. Happily the duel did not come off, Stenger was forced to apologise, but nevertheless I was now feeling myself to be a heroine, as for Ofrossimoff, he seemed to me to be as bold as a young lion, and went up twenty-five per cent in my estimation. I had a good scolding, nevertheless, from my aunt, who said I was a fearful little flirt, playing merry games with the affections of men. She accused me also of having given Stenger every encouragement, and said that I must do everything now to cure him of his infatuation and stop all this nonsense. Following her advice, I tried to be as frigid as a whole iceberg to poor Stenger, and told him he was a fool to break his heart for me, and that he must try and find another object for his affections. I hope now I had been unfriendly enough and had brought him to his senses; but it came to nothing, and his parents decided that the[46] best thing was to get him out of my way and send him away from St. Petersburg; so they accompanied their “Benjamine” to the train, and after having installed him in the railway carriage, they returned home peacefully, far from the thought that in spite of his appearance of filial obedience, Stenger had conceived, beforehand, the audacious project of running away, and great was the amazement of the old couple, when their son reappeared that same day, declaring that decidedly he would not be separated from me.
own body would be a cope of lead to him, therefore. That, indeed, was
was sick or dead. There was a hymn book, and a lot of other books. And
“Filial love requires us to make use of this opportunity of informing you of our circumstances. When we last wrote to you we were off the Isle of Wight and had a most favourable wind but we were obliged to lay to for more than half a day, before the things which the ship brought us from Deal were taken on board. Towards evening we sailed and by Monday came already close to the Bay of Biscay. In the morning the wind veered about and the captain found himself compelled to return to some harbour. Here the motion of the ship was so violent that I experienced something of sea sickness but only for a few minutes. That day about four we arrived off Falmouth. We were met by two pilots and the captain engaged him who came first to the ship, but the other, on coming up, expressed his great dissatisfaction, not so much because he had not been engaged, as because the other had not conducted us aright. He disputed so long that the first was obliged to go away. This morning we found that the man had just grounds for his displeasure.[Pg 39] For when it was ebb tide our ship had not sufficient water but struck frequently against the ground with such a crash as if a gun was fired. At the same time there was a great storm so that we might have sustained much injury if God had not preserved us. Now we praise Him that we were forced to return, for in this storm we should have been in the greatest danger off the Spanish coast. Thus we daily perceive that His goodness preserves us. O that we might always look only to Him, rest in His will and filially resign ourselves to it! Our captain shows us great kindness. For the rest I pray God daily that He would purify my heart more and more from all dross and by His Spirit fit me for the important office for which, unworthy as I am, He has out of mere grace ordained me.”


The English physician is leaning over him and catches his whisper, “Doctor, in heaven there will be no more pain.” In a quiet tone he replies, “Very true, but we must keep you here as long as we can.” There is a pause, and then the earnest voice speaks again, “O, dear doctor, let us take care that we may not be missing there!”
“There’s food all about here. Canned things in shops; wines, spirits,
But in this scheme the expence is more considerable.

area of common was silent and desolate, and the charred bodies lay
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
All the railway lines north of the Thames and the South-Eastern people

Sea-sickness is a very good remedy for cooling down love. My fat doctor has become indifferent and mute. He lay stretched in his deck-chair, looking dreadfully green in the face.
“Yes.”


HAD Elizabeth’s opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could not have formed a very pleasing picture of conjugal felicity or domestic comfort. Her father, captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance of good-humour which youth and beauty generally give, had married a woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in their marriage put an end to all real affection for her.{295} Respect, esteem, and confidence had vanished for ever; and all his views of domestic happiness were overthrown. But Mr. Bennet was not of a disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which his own imprudence had brought on in any of those pleasures which too often console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice. He was fond of the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal enjoyments. To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted than as her ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement. This is not the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his wife; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.
approaching the cylinder. There was some booing from those more

fact, there was nothing to justify that very extravagant phrase. Plenty
half suffocated, I raised my head above water, the Martian’s hood
“But, Huck, dese kings o’ ourn is reglar rapscallions; dat’s jist what
says:
how good it was all this happened so, and how near I come to being lost
roared and clapped and stormed and haw-hawed till he come back and done

    . . . Are we or they Lords of the World? . . . And

to a big building, exactly in the middle of the City, which was the
One day, just as we were sitting down to table, Hermann brought me a radish, fresh from its bed of mould, and the hand that held it out was evidently the spade that had dug it therefrom, and in sore need of soap. Frau Weidemann told him that he must always be washed and brushed before he went down to the dining-room, and ordered him to go and wash his hands immediately, but Hermann, who had no acquaintance with the word must, set his mouth in a hard curve and didn’t move; he looked so obstinate that I was strongly tempted to shake him. A more wilful boy I never saw: he’d try the temper of a saint. But this time Frau Weidemann had her own way, and ordered him out of the room. Hermann reluctantly obeyed, with rage in his little heart, and dashed from the room, banging the door with a shock that made the room rattle. Hermann ran straight to his mother, who didn’t come down to dinner that day, to complain of Frau Weidemann, and instead of giving him a good scolding, Mrs. G. rewarded him with chocolates and kisses.

Would not the question about luxury, reduced to its elements, like those other questions which I have touched upon hitherto, present consequences diametrically opposite to those ideas which perhaps are yet too common, only because they have not been thoroughly examined? Methinks I have advanced one step towards the solution of the problem, by proving (if I have proved it) that the tax laid on that pretended monster, Luxury, is in fact the most oppressive for the people, on account of the following[356] effects, from which the impost cannot be freed.
germs do we succumb without a struggle, and to many—those that cause
I startled my wife at the doorway, so haggard was I. I went into the
and decent the widow was in all her ways; and so when I couldn’t stand
stumbling in the ditches, blundering into one another.
about nothing else. It got darker and darker, and it was a beautiful

that I did that day until the time that I stood weeping and praising
bread, you know; but after that he never bit into nothing but what he

also:
swaying vast mechanical bodies; and that they could move swiftly and
William, too, for that matter—because he was one of them kind that
“No, I should have turned in a moment.”
 Huck Creeps into his Window

The pleasure-train which brought us back to London was taken by assault. We ran from end to end of the long train in search of seats nowhere to be found, until at last we were literally hurled into a crowded compartment in which I squeezed myself between two fat ladies, taking up as little room as I could. Though we were returning from a temperance festival, there was a tipsy woman drunk with beer in the next car, who was leaning out of the window shouting bacchanal songs in a voice thick with drink.

Author: Barbara Doukhovskoy
barked at them in a tiny voice, afterwards running away again.


My appearance nearly deprived Stenger of speech, then he took my hand and devoured it with kisses, much to the indignation of my aunt who was of the opinion that a married woman shares the dignity of her husband and, like Cæsar’s wife, should be above suspicion of even the slightest flirtation. Whilst we paced up and down the platform, a pretty flood of eloquence rose to Stenger’s lips, and I was aware that the constancy of his heart was as great as ever, and that he was still my devoted servant. He said with a quiver in his voice, looking me full in the face and nervously tormenting his very slight moustache, that after my marriage he had been moved to the desperate resolution to marry also; but it did not help him to forget me, and that all these years he did his best to tear the thought of me out of his heart and could not. But I didn’t love him, all the difference was there. I only shrugged indifferent shoulders and responded to his passionate eloquence with six degrees of frost. “Fiddle-de-dee! old times are better left alone,” I replied, looking upon his dismayed countenance with a cheerfulness which rather hurt his feelings.
stack o’ water-moccasins.”
Sunday-school book, I ain’t no ways particular how it’s done so it’s
organic fluctuations of mood and emotion.
in there to get your breath. By jings, we forgot to fasten that lean-to

“The one I got yesterday out of the post-office.”




Jim.—Jim’s Escape.—Signs.—Balum.
When I struck the town I see there warn’t nobody out in the storm, so I
I says yes; and him and some others laughed, and said, “Stuff!”
remote dream. It may be, on the other hand, that the destruction of the
beautiful trip to England was most about spoiled for her; she didn’t

communicated with one another by means of sirenlike howls, running up

_doctor!_” and Abner Shackleford says:
“Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. Will you hear it?”

They heard his voice, and, looking back at him, saw one hand clutched


Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy’s marriage; but as she thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley, she dropped all her resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility to Elizabeth.
to be moving along. I’ll fetch Goshen before daylight.”


frauds, and they may have complices that we don’t know nothing about.
able to read it. Why, half the time you can’t read anything a prisoner
me to see him whirl around so. Is the other one stuffed also?”


get us as long as they didn’t.
“I do not blame Jane,” she continued, “for Jane would have got Mr. Bingley if she could. But, Lizzy! Oh, sister! it is very hard to think that she might have been Mr. Collins’s wife by this time, had not it been for her own perverseness. He made her an offer in this very room, and she refused him. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will have a daughter married before I have, and that Longbourn estate is just as much entailed as ever. The Lucases are very artful people, indeed, sister. They are all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it of them, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves before anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is the greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us of long sleeves.”

He listened some more; then he come tiptoeing down and stood right
[368]

The old man was uptown again before breakfast, but couldn’t get no
CHAPTER IV.
hear no sign of a whoop nowheres. I reckoned Jim had fetched up on a
darkness, among the firewood and coal therein. Every now and then I
Then, nearer, I perceived a strange light, a pale, violet-purple
It swept across the river to Shepperton, and the water in its track
stupid and leather-headed a while; then all of a sudden he seems to
fact that a hummock of heathery sand intercepted the lower part of the
Henry, who was a farmer, and Aunt Em, who was the farmer’s wife. Their
CHAPTER V.
when he is in his own form, no living person can tell.”
hey?”

I see there warn’t nobody in there but the remainders of Peter; so I
ever see. He knowed how to do everything.
CHAPTER LXXI
LXXI.	Siberia—Vladivostock	362
Then he began to look out for a chance of edging to the right across
The torment was over. Even that day the healing would begin. The
Yet, it may be urged, that this increase in price is to be ascribed to the greater quantity of specie in circulation. Granted. In this case, a falling-off in the prices, accruing, as it is supposed, from a decrease in the taxes, which is represented as the effect of a reimbursement, cannot then take place:—besides, as the sequel will show, the taxes unavoidably bring in, one way or the other, even in the first year, the whole money required to pay the same. I shall argue on both suppositions. Is the increase in the prices owing to the taxation? It appears, evidently, that the taxes bring in the sums necessary to pay them, since they are actually and annually paid:—This money, then, must be withdrawn from the circulation, in order to lower the prices. Is this increase the effect of an augmentation of the specie? Then it will be necessary, in order[30] to ascertain the primitive price, to recall from the circulation all the money which has been introduced since, and in spite of the taxes. Now if, in spite of the taxes, a country abounds with money, how should it not be so, supposing no duties had been laid?—How can the abolition of the taxes prevent the introduction of cash?—How will it come to pass, that the mass of specie being increased, the prices shall not be raised?—And if all of them augment, in a fair proportion, who will gain by it, who will suffer?
“’Nough!—_I own up!_”


small pieces.”
there and see that he done it—what did he do? He always done the other
hundred yards the way they had come, until the fighting crowd was
the Thames after the destruction of Shepperton was examined at the
I looked over there to see who said it, and it was that Colonel
voice. “But don’t strike me—please don’t—and I’ll do anything you want
with a lot of empty names and facts which he picked up somewheres, and

{iv}Reading Jane’s Letters.      Chap 34.
ever happened to him, because he was a changed man now, and happy for
“Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is there, whatever might be their former conduct, that she would believe capable of such an attempt, till it were proved against them? But Jane knows, as well as I do, what Wickham really is. We both know that he has been profligate in every sense of the word; that he has neither integrity nor honour; that he is as false and deceitful as he is insinuating.”
“Quelala being the first owner of the Golden Cap,” replied the Monkey,
“So much love and eloquence”
behine you towards de las’; when you landed I reck’ned I could ketch up
the brains you so greatly desire.”
him as he sat behind his screen and gave him your message. He said he
right again—it was the sudden surprise of it that knocked us so kind of
you feel crawly; it was like spirits carrying on that way in the air.

“Well, all right. Don’t stand there palavering all day, but out with

July 24th.—A grey dawn is rising; white vapours surround us. Our boat, pushed by a favourable wind, makes twelve knots an hour, in spite of the fog. If our captain does not arrive in time at Yokohama, he will have to pay the sum of 500 dollars as penalty.
She was steaming at such a pace that in a minute she seemed halfway
enough time seeing them hunt for my remainders if I only had a bite to
“I come down on the Susan Powell from Cincinnati.”
distributed. No doubt, ran the report, the situation was of the
“Is he made of tin, or stuffed?” asked the Lion.
If she warn’t standing right there, just inside the door, looking as
one. If he does, I will go back to the Munchkin maiden and marry her.”
On reaching the spacious lobby above, they were shown into a very pretty sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than the apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done to give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to the room, when last at Pemberley.
Thatcher’s as quick as I could get there. He said:
missiles the Martians had fired at us drew earthward, rushing now at a

was come. The king he spread his arms, and Mary Jane she jumped for

very nation, round and round the ring, with that sot laying down on him
the dogs went for it, and in two seconds he was out himself and back


and help to keep the people back. He told me that a faint stirring was
and long before this earth ceased to be molten, life upon its surface
skin us. So we had the odd spoon, and dropped it in her apron-pocket
to come any nearer. But the King Crow said:
[439]

and turned everybody’s wits clean inside out and scared us all most to
“Well, if you knowed where he was, what did you ask me for?”
“Why, indeed, he does seem to have had some filial scruples on that head, as you will hear.{80}”
fireplace that was bricked on the bottom, and the bricks was kept clean



power and terror of these monsters. He learned that they were not
a room with. The king said it was all the more homely and more


January 17th.—The weather is very bad, the rain is falling in torrents. This morning a boy brought me, instead of tea, a tepid undrinkable potion as black as ink. When I told him to add some water to my tea, he found nothing better but to mix it with water that he had taken from the top of our bath, and then, wanting to convince himself that my tea was not too hot, he put his dirty finger into my cup.

on one side, and then t’other one on t’other side, and the people just

Then beyond the bend my brother stopped again. Miss Elphinstone was
away the old one. Uncle Henry was milking the cows in the barnyard, and
Chapter XIII

“After the second temple was destroyed (which may God speedily rebuild!) our fathers dreading the conquerors’ wrath departed from Jerusalem, a numerous body of men, women, priests and Levites, and came unto this land.”
We went drifting down into a big bend, and the night clouded up and got

peering at me from under the pink lamp shade, the white cloth with its
kept awake till dawn.
up into the hedge and stare towards Sunbury. As I did so a second

It was worth while to overcome all these difficulties to attain the “Mer de Glace” a fairy-like icy-kingdom. I was amazed by the vast and lonely beauty of these interminable uplands of ice; we were well repaid for our climb by this scenery of wildest beauty. On our way back we left the road and descended by the rough track to the lower route leading to the Hotel Eiger by a short cut, where we expected to find our saddle-horses, but when we had gained the road they were nowhere to be seen and we had to walk the entire remaining distance to the Hotel Eiger with the sun right over our heads. We got to the hotel red-faced, breathless and foot-sore. Our tempers suffered as well as our legs and we were so displeased with the manager for having given us such careless guides, that we wouldn’t take any refreshment at the hotel and hastened back to Interlaken. On arriving there we had dinner brought into our room and then went straight to bed. It was an unspeakable comfort to stretch my weary limbs between the cool sheets.

But the Tin Woodman would not let her do this.
know a body don’t love water-moccasins enough to go around hunting for
“I do not believe that he will ever live at Netherfield any more.”


word.”

Hotchkiss, s’e? Think o’ what, Brer Phelps, s’I? Think o’ that bed-leg
She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening with an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse. He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity.
CHAPTER XXXV.
advisable to kill him, lest his actions attracted the attention of the
being filled. People were fighting savagely for standing-room in the
some big sheets of wrapping paper and some black paint, and drawed off
town than what that undertaker was.
“So he is,” said the green man, “and he rules the Emerald City wisely
April 17th.—It is the birthday of our Emperor to-day. After a Te Deum in the Greek cathedral, there was a great review of our troops on the square; four military bands executed our national hymn, whilst our soldiers acclaimed their sovereign enthusiastically. The square was crowded with lookers-on. Egueshi caught the drift of a dialogue between an Armenian and a Turk; the Turk announced, pointing to the citadel from whence discharges were heard: “The Russians are unable,” said he, “to frighten us with their cannon-shots, one sees directly that these cannons are not Turkish ones for they make too little noise.”
king and told him to get his part by heart.
Harvey and—”
“I hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy.”
they drank, all three, and Bob and Tom poured a spoonful of water on
strengthened the walls of the cylinder. These, as it extracted them,
We started on our tour through Switzerland and went full speed in an express train to Lucerne. The scenery around us was lovely. Passing through the province “La Champagne,” so rich in vineyards, we perceived small white cottages with the vines in front. On the mountain slopes bunches of newly-mown herbs were scattered; men and women were helping to heap the grass into heavily laden carts. I was in ecstasies over the marvellous landscape that met our eyes immediately after leaving Liège. The delightful panorama reminded me of the Caucasus, only it was more pacific and thickly populated. Our train ran through countless tunnels and went twining in and out through patches of pasturage, so green, smooth and rich; big fat cows grazed lazily thereon. The road zigzags all the time, the sun appearing alternatively on our right or our left. The steep hills are covered with dense forests through which cascades are pouring down. We were winding higher and higher with every mile. The cars are very comfortable, with a long corridor along the side, where one can walk up and down. Feeling cramped with sitting, I went out there to stretch my legs, and saw a young man undeniably good-looking, whose appearance spoke the last word of fashion and who resembled a tailor’s model from a Paris shop-window. He twisted his moustache and stared so hard at me that I hurried back to my place, but this hunter of petticoats followed me and sat down on the vacant seat opposite to me. I settled myself far back into my corner and tried to hide myself behind my book, but every time I raised my eyes I met his stare. A draught of air blew in from the corridor “Shall I shut the door?” suddenly ejaculated the passenger by way of opening conversation. I said “no,” the “no” of a woman who was not to be drawn into a talk. Disregarding my cold tone, he insisted on lending me his rug, tucking it round my knees and under my feet, but I disencumbered myself hastily from his coverlet, which was very efficacious in lowering his enterprising spirits, and put that brazen-faced swell quickly into his place. It was a good blow to his self-conceit, he evidently took offence and left me alone.
trouble to be a prisoner.”
free nigger, and—”
old Hatfield jist the same way—and don’t he deserve it?”



for down-stairs; but as I come to the girls’ room the door was open,
good fry.
lived there, and all about the English Wilkses, and so on; but I didn’t

“Why do you want water?” he asked.
It is, thirdly, all that importation which is required to make good the deficit occasioned[101] by petty stock-jobbing, and the melting down of guineas, which no workman will ever scruple, when there will be a few more pence to be got that way, than by the purchase of bullion, or as often as, having no bullion at hand, he shall find himself in the immediate necessity of working.

up into the sky out of the greyness—rushed slantingly upward and very
“Well, what is it? And cut it middlin’ short, because it’s better for
The great art does not consist in finding, at pleasure, one million sterling more in France as well as in England, or vice versâ. Heavens![89] what kind of minister would that man be, whose genius could not discover, in either kingdom, in the multitude of objects truly susceptible of taxation, a number of articles capable of furnishing that million annually, without injuring the general consumption, beyond the first year at the worst? The only difference which, in this respect, I might point out between the two nations, is, that in France the impost would be registered, and paid after the usual remonstrances; and that in England, were the tax to have been devised, even by Supreme Wisdom, on the actual system, all those who might think themselves directly or indirectly interested in the operation of the tax, would not fail to clamour as loud as possible, and not without reason; for, after all, if the objects taxed, are equitably taxed, and in a due proportion with all the rest, why, out of 160 objects and upwards, already charged with equity, should ten be picked out to be overloaded with a new burden?—Has at least a rotation been established for the future?—On what principles? Or does it evidently appear that there can be no fixed one adopted on so important a matter?—If a tax is offered to be laid on such articles as have paid none hitherto, then Opposition stands on firmer ground; for, are not those objects, by their nature, evidently as sacred as the ark of the Lord? Did ever the least scrupulous,[90] the boldest Minister of the finances, dare, to this day, to lay his hand upon it?—Would he have respected it, if he had not trembled for his head; that is, in plain English, for his place? For, thank Heaven, there is no necessity, now, for the English to be more hot-headed than any other nation in Europe. It is generally acknowledged among themselves, with true English sang-froid, that, on the part of those champions of patriotism, who, according to the interest of the day, charge each other by turns with selling the people, and betraying the sacred constitution, all terminates now in the most exact change of admirable sarcasms, and exquisite railleries. The pleasure of being a Minister because the minister alone can do what is good, and the concern at not being a Minister, because the minister alone can do what is good, are now productive of nothing more in England; and the People, as well as the King, are not worse served for it, nor are they worse informed: witness the speeches on both sides.

The blood is trickling from Thy brow,
a couple of big carpet-bags by him.
New Jerusalem Church, Tranquebar	”	”	24
would just make a clean breast and tell her everything, but she musn’t

“You people with hearts,” he said, “have something to guide you, and


“Well, in a few minutes I shall be all melted, and you will have the
Language: English
couldn’t go if there was; because the runaway nigger told Burton and me

course I didn’t let on. I got the thing, and the first rat that showed

Tom says:
Expectation.—A White Lie.—Floating Currency.—Running by Cairo.—Swimming
Barbara Doukhovskoy
needn’t done it; I didn’t want to see him. There was heaps of old
desolated, seeking food elsewhere. Perhaps even now they were
develop.
sorts that it is possible to imagine.
Lion said:

the officers’ lunch, and give me all I wanted.”
Suddenly the monster vanished. It had toppled over the brim of the



Eastward, over the blackened ruins of the Albert Terrace and the
the Scarecrow.


got the letter at all, you know.”
I sat contemplating these things. I could find nothing to bring against

says:
it all, I had forgot what my name was. So I laid there about an hour
and _Sid_ had come all right and safe, she says to herself:
sky. It seemed so safe and tranquil.

street, and Dorothy saw that everything in them was green. Green candy
I did but a day before writing this last chapter, to see the great

come into my eyes. But I dasn’t scratch. Then it begun to itch on the
they’re worth, so I’ll find a chance time enough. I’ll steal it and
It would be most an hour yet till breakfast, so we left and struck down
Soon, soon to faithful warriors cometh rest;
November 2nd.—I was glad to return to the Océanien early in the morning. I stood on deck until we unmoored, watching a band of bronzed natives, in a state of almost Adamic nudity, beautifully shaped men unconscious of immodesty, their wardrobe reduced to a rag replacing the traditional fig-leaf swinging to and fro in a canoe and singing “Tarra-Boumbia” at the top of their voices, with a great supply of gesticulations and grimaces, slapping themselves energetically on the hips at the same time.
I took a walk between two and three every afternoon up the “Nevski Prospect,” a place of rendezvous with a number of my admirers. I came back one day from my walk with a terrible headache and throwing myself on my bed, I burst into a loud fit of hysterical laughter and weeping which terrified my cousins who stood beside me wringing their hands, and wanted to send the maid after the doctor, but my aunt, who came home at that moment, did something more practical: she stamped her foot and ordered me to stop instantly all that nonsense, otherwise she would countermand the dancing-party that was to take place that evening. My hysterical fit passed as if by magic; I recovered my self-control, and bounding to my feet in the liveliest manner, I began to prepare the dessert for our soirée.

before. It was hurting him considerable, and bleeding; so we laid him

“Because it ain’t in the books so—that’s why. Now, Ben Rogers, do you

her, and I said I did; and she asked me if I would do something for her
that people that acts as I’d been acting about that nigger goes to

“I saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present report; and I know I appeared{407} distressed; but don’t imagine it was from any silly cause. I was only confused for the moment, because I felt that I should be looked at. I do assure you that the news does not affect me either with pleasure or pain. I am glad of one thing, that he comes alone; because we shall see the less of him. Not that I am afraid of myself, but I dread other people’s remarks.”
would it be that ’d rob—yes, _rob_—sech poor sweet lambs as these ’at
“We can get along _with_ it, too,” he says; “just you slide down cellar
runs down to mark the angle of the Wey and Thames. I expected nothing
shall be glad to serve you in any way in our power, but we cannot cross
island, and Jim had gone down t’other side of it. It warn’t no tow-head
tells them to build a palace forty miles long out of di’monds, and fill
“Oh, well, that’s all interpreted well enough as far as it goes, Jim,”
the lawn, I saw the tops of the trees about the Oriental College burst
and was hunting around for some birds when I see a wild pig; hogs soon
So the Woodman took his axe and began to chop down small trees to make

A fancy took me to drive with Mme. Gilbert to the monastery of Abdurakman-Kazi in an araba, a cart drawn by a pair of oxen, for thousands of years the unchanged mode of conveyance in Turkey, a mode of locomotion more comfortable than dignified, to be sure. The araba was furnished with carpets and cushions, and the oxen adorned with flowers and ribbons. I undertook to perform the part of driver, and succeeded to put my phlegmatic bullocks into a sharp trot.
pulverised, and dispersed by the blow. The cylinder lay now far beneath
Ain’t that so?”

without any notice, because how was _he_ going to know what was
and your dress, and spoons, and tin plates, and case-knives, and the
lived pretty high.
XXXVI.	Peissenberg	232
“Yes, Mars Sid, _a_ dog. Cur’us dog, too. Does you want to go en look


spinneys, crawled the devoted scouts with the heliographs that were
just kept a-smiling and bobbing their heads like a passel of sapheads
clay, and gravel, over which spread a multitude of red cactus-shaped

saying I was brung up wicked, and so I warn’t so much to blame; but
The Monkeys had set them down near a farmhouse, and the four travelers
“Black Smoke!” the voices cried. “Fire!”
That was a good notion, too. So we shortened up one of the calico
“Well, he did act like he was drunk, but it ain’t no matter now. I got
PEISSENBERG

Mrs Bennet and her two youngest girls.
breakfast we all laid off and talked, and the first thing that come out
legs dangle in the water, so as to be comfortable, and lit his pipe,

the preacher he begged him to speak to the people, and he done it. He
after a long and tiresome walk through the underbrush they entered

VII.	Wayside Work	79

the place, and people crowded on the pavement and in the doorways and
He listened to her with perfect indifference, while she chose to entertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convinced her that all was safe, her wit flowed along.{36}
For the first few days I got on pretty well with Frau Weidemann’s boarders, who were all showing themselves very amiable and kind to me. One night they asked me to go to[201] the theatre, where a travelling troop was giving a performance. And such a theatre! We found ourselves in a long room with a small stage at one end, lighted by three petroleum lamps suspended from the ceiling, which smoked horribly and were very dim; in fact they gave more smell than light. The grey holland curtain came up by the aid of two cords drawn through an iron ring. The band was supplied by local talent, all the musicians being labourers and workmen from Cernobbio, our gardener in the number, who received 20 centimes per evening. As to the performers they were all more or less bad. It was the benefit night of the leading actress, who was to be a mother in three months, and you could see it at a glance. Our seats in the first row cost only one franc. The audience consisted chiefly of Lamperti’s pupils. Lamperti has produced many divas, Marcella Sembrich in the number. The mæstro was present at the play. He carries very lightly his eighty years, and has just taken, for second wife, one of his favourite pupils, a very pretty young creature.
world, and the only property.”
“But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another opportunity.”

She then proceeded to inquire into the measures which her father had intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter.
“Oh, _I_ don’t know. But he’s got to have it. All the nobility does.”
                Most recently updated: November 16, 2023
George Saintsbury
with a rope, and lay him in the wigwam and show this handbill and say
and I knowed it. I studied a minute, sort of holding my breath, and
I shall now inspect the question more minutely; for all I have said hitherto is not so much an apology for luxury, as an exposition of the inconveniences attending its being made the principal object of taxation: I beg to be excused, if I grow unwillingly more familiar in my style, when the dignity of the subject seems to require one of suitable dignity in the manner of treating it.
Eighth Hypothesis.
emptied. In the bar I afterwards found some biscuits and sandwiches
come true; en heah she _is! Dah_, now! doan’ talk to _me_—signs is
The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman and the Lion now thanked the Good
that made the ground heave. The one towards Staines answered him. There
Thirdly, Whether all those extraordinary, usurious, and unjust benefits, arising from those oppressive taxes which I have been mentioning, reduced to their proper point, by taxes that would not increase the price of any article beyond a known degree, would not naturally reduce the value of every thing to that necessary price I have[236] spoken of,—to that price which every thing ought to maintain, that the imaginary oppressed might not actually oppress the imaginary oppressors,—that all things may be preserved in a just balance, without any person experiencing a change in his condition;—and consequently, without the consumption of any article being diminished, unless fancy or fashion should transfer it to another article that will indemnify for the deficiency.[9]



Some days later, at a musical party, given by my uncle, the Prince Prosorowski-Galitzine, the master of the house said to me significantly, “Well, Vava, I congratulate you!” But he did not conclude his phrase, for mamma, who tried to preserve me from the intoxication of overpraise, made haste to change the subject of conversation. I was tortured with curiosity and got the whole story out of my cousins, the Prosorowskis, who told me that the Emperor at the fox-hunt had asked their father all about me and said a lot of flattering things, congratulating him on having such a niece.



druther not tell you why; and if you was to blow on them this town
The author, from her childhood, followed affectionate advices and good examples, and noted every day her impressions of everything she saw and heard about her. She puts in these pages all the freshness and sincerity of her woman’s heart.
full of joy; but when I glimpsed him in the lightning my heart shot up
come mighty near getting here in time.’ But then I says again, ‘No, I

“Henderson,” he called, “you saw that shooting star last night?”
time on record. And he said it would make us all celebrated that had a
No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and cast her eyes round the room in quest of some amusement; when, hearing her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly towards him and said,—
The town of Nagasaki glitters in the sunshine in the distance, buried in verdure. We exchange the habitual salutes with the Japanese men-of-war. One of them had hoisted the Russian flag. I sought refuge on the commander’s bridge, where the cannonade was less deafening.
“I have received a letter this morning that has astonished me exceedingly. As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its contents. I did not know before that I had two daughters on the brink of matrimony. Let me congratulate you on a very important conquest.”
“But my lan’, Mars Sid, how’s _I_ gwyne to make ’m a witch pie? I doan’
returns,
THE FIGHTING BEGINS.

“Looky here, Jim; does a cat talk like we do?”

“Goodness sakes, would a runaway nigger run _south?_”
most outrageous row busted out in the cellar a body ever heard; it was

worthy vicar was very pluckily holding an early celebration, and his
Independent of the advantages which would arise from a truly free and judicious system of commerce, viz. 1st, That of procuring what we have not, by means of some article which we have in abundance, and which our neighbours want;—2dly, The bartering of the superfluity of our best articles in one kind, for the superfluity of what is best in a different kind;—3dly, Not to barter what we can make cheaper than others, except for goods which would cost us more were we to manufacture them;—independent, I say, of these three,[337] advantages, where would be the inconvenience, though our bartering should be confined merely to the innocent folly of exchanging one toy for another, or one rag for another? The great, the true, the only advantage, of an exchange of property, would not even in this case be lost to mankind; the man who is employed only in marking the game, while two persons are amusing themselves, whole days, in tossing a ball from one to the other in a tennis-court, is nevertheless supported at the expence of the players. And are not the owner of the court, his wife and children, maintained likewise at their cost? If, having considered the Exchequer metaphorically, under the type of the Keeper of the Tennis Court, we afterwards, without a metaphor, consider this Keeper as a poor man who chooses this way of subsistence, do not the players pay this tax (which they impose on themselves) in favour of the poor, with more pleasure, though the tax may be greater, than a certain other tax, which perhaps becomes necessary, only from the difficulties with which we embarrass both the game of passing from one parish to another, and the game of imports and exports, which is as innocent, and more lucrative than that of tennis?
The Océanien has weighed anchor. The Isle of Ceylon decreases more and more in the distance. The ocean is as smooth as a lake, and as blue as the sky over us.
and schoolhouse, and never charged nothing for his preaching, and it


you think?”
We lived in that old cabin, and he always locked the door and put the
“You cannot be too much on your guard. Risk anything rather than her displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us again, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home, and be satisfied that we shall take no offence.”
brother reached Waterloo in a cab. On the platform from which the
sad voice in which the man spoke.


incredibly wonderful that, with that swift fate hanging over us, men
CHAPTER IV.

only his head was visible. Suddenly he vanished, and I could have
Our park is a veritable labyrinth; it is surrounded by a wall twenty feet high. Sergy lost himself when he went out riding in the park for the first time.
CHAPTER LXVII
In the afternoon the sun shone hot in their faces, for there were no


absent-minded like:



But when men were assured that there was no hope of life in the solar system for more than half a lifetime, they began an even more frantic search for still another way to overcome this last crushing blow of Nature.
“Well, I’m puzzled. Is something the matter?”
We clambered down a steep bank to which a boat was moored to cross over to the other shore, and dismissed our carriage, having decided to return by steamer. We picked our way through a dingy side-street paved with pointed[295] stones, between which weeds grew, and came up to a house of dubious appearance, with narrow iron-barred windows like those of a prison. At the sound of our bell the door was opened by an eunuch, who took us into a large room with an enormous bedstead, hung with green and gold brocade, standing in the middle. An odour of attar of roses filled the apartment. My curiosity was awfully excited; I expected to see beautiful “houris,” but was greatly disappointed. First of all appeared the Pasha’s favourite wife, looking rather pretty, with a flower in her jet-black hair, her fingers stained with henna, and saturated with perfume so strong as to make you sneeze. Behind came the second wife, an insignificant little thing, followed by the third would-be “houri,” a wrinkled old guy. For a quarter-of-an hour we stared speechlessly at each other, then losing patience, I asked our interpreter when the other nine wives would make their appearance, and she replied they were all out walking but would soon be back, but I was sure it was all a fib and that they were nothing but a myth. After a while the wife No. 1 began to talk to our interpreters in a low voice, after which they came up and told us that we had to be presented to the master of the house. Here was something that didn’t enter our programme, but we had to undergo the ordeal which seems to be the custom here. We were taken into a big room and ushered into the presence of the Pasha, a white-bearded patriarch, wearing an enormous white turban, who was sitting on a low divan upon a pile of cushions, with his legs tucked under him. A little nigger boy, one of his numerous offsprings, was playing at his feet with a wooden horse. The Pasha signalled for us to be seated, and fixed Zoe and me with a long stare over his spectacles, seeming to approve of us. He called one of our interpreters and asked if Zoe and I were sisters, and ordered her to tell us that he wanted to keep us both in his harem. Finding the proceeding of too oriental a fashion, we hurried away under the pretext that my husband was waiting for us outside. The old Satyr appeared very much displeased that we slipped out of his grasp, and when taking leave of us he gripped my hand and squeezed my fingers to make me cry out. Who could have thought of that old man being so inflammable! We ran down the stairs and rushed out, happy to have got off so cheaply from this mouse-trap. Being too late for the steamer, we took a ferry-boat. It was nearly night when we were back at the hotel, and marched in to dinner, which was half over.

“Why, this is wonderful! Whoever would a thought it was in that mare to
under a block of wood.”
cannot help me.”
February 15th.—The Chinese element has disappeared on[480] board, but in return, the number of Hindoos, Malays and Arabs have increased. They are all on the fore and aft of the ship, piled up on heaps of luggage.
also—mothers and teachers. No lackadaisical ladies—no blasted rolling
{226}



took no notice of it, they was so full of this business; and one minute
Neither can one refrain from remarking also, that from those regulations, and from many more of the same kind relative to manufactories, no other effect can result than that of buying up at home, very dear, and often of a bad or indifferent quality, that which might be purchased abroad of an excellent kind, and at a cheaper rate, and which might be paid for with[132] the productions of the earth and industry, better suited to the climate of the purchaser.

hid the raft in a good, safe place about two mile below a little bit of
After a time we went down to the cellar. Neither of us seemed disposed
treated Quelala, and dropped in the river. But my grandfather pleaded


turning about exactly like the head of a cowled human being. A kind of
“She is happy, then,” said her father, drily; “and her residence there will probably be of some duration.{367}”
that was a rest to me. I liked the old ways best, but I was getting so
whispered to me, and wanted to tie Jim to the tree for fun. But I said



bodies. And, in the second place, we all overlooked the fact that such


his might, and so tight he couldn’t walk, and couldn’t do nothing to
have been to the Emerald City many times, and it is a beautiful and
tentacles, and moving feebly after their vast journey across space.
“Set her loose, Jim! we’re all right now!”
should kill another bug or beetle I should surely cry again, and crying
in the midst of a strange people, who, seeing me come from the clouds,





woods warn’t thick, so I looked over my shoulder to dodge the bullet,
I did, two obvious modifying influences.


from home lasted me all the way, and I had a-plenty. I said I believed



And if the general augmentation of prices, which has clearly followed the debt contracted in England from 1754 to 1762, has proved advantageous to all Europe, without hurting England, why should not the general increase of[348] prices, which results, and will inevitably result from the last English debt, prove unprejudicial to England, although it will prove advantageous to all Europe?
Everybody most, leastways women, cried for joy to see them meet again
He seized his axe, which he had made very sharp, and as the leader of

XLIX.	Moscow	274
If we suppose the value of manufactories, dwellings, warehouses, and all kinds of establishments, necessary to answer all the exigencies of a stock of industry and commerce of 35,000,000, to have amounted then to 25,000,000, we must admit that the objects in the same manner necessary to a stock of 70,000,000, do likewise present us with a fourth clear saving of—25,000,000.


somebody else’s whoop, or else I was turned around.
the steam from the river, and as the Heat-Ray went to and fro over

City. It was high and thick and of a bright green color.
Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not help fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, its aspect, and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to her, as if wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him. But though everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able to gratify him by any sigh of repentance; and rather looked with wonder at her friend, that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion. When Mr. Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably be ashamed, which certainly was not seldom, she involuntarily turned her eye on Charlotte. Once or twice she could discern a faint blush; but in general Charlotte{196} wisely did not hear. After sitting long enough to admire every article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to the fender, to give an account of their journey, and of all that had happened in London, Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in the garden, which was large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of which he attended himself. To work in his garden was one of his most respectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenance with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise, and owned she encouraged it as much as possible. Here, leading the way through every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allowing them an interval to utter the praises he asked for, every view was pointed out with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind. He could number the fields in every direction, and could tell how many trees there were in the most distant clump. But of all the views which his garden, or which the country or the kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with the prospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his house. It was a handsome modern building, well situated on rising ground.
could see the sun out at one or two holes, but mostly it was big trees
strange words and noises, and he didn’t believe he was ever witched so
During Rubinstein’s stay in Moscow he was bothered by a crowd of artists “in embryo,” who all wanted to sing for “opera” without having the remotest idea how to sing, coming to ask him if he would try their voices and tell them if they had talent enough to follow the artistic career. A friend of ours happened to come on a visit to Rubinstein just at the[147] moment when a fat, neckless lady of about fifty summers was making her rehearsal. She sang like an old cat; her one idea was to be heard and she howled all her top notes so hard as to make all the dogs bark in the street. Dumfounded and horrified, our friend stopped his ears and took to his heels, running away as fast as his legs could carry him.

unavoidable, and being an expert boxer, went into him forthwith and
that went a-slipping along, black and still, hundreds of yards out from


the curate told me, and when I came to we were in darkness again, and

straw; and if you will bring him back to us, we shall thank you ever
by-and-by she let it out that Moses had been dead a considerable long
[248]

July 31st.—Towards midday the harbour of Vladivostock came to view. We have reached the end of our long voyage. I am so happy to get away from the Orel where we have been cooped up for forty-one days.

the leaves. This was the most awful trouble and most dangersome I ever
woods; for the most part the trees had fallen, but a certain proportion
and then went on to the bridge over the Serpentine. The voice grew
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms


“Don’t you what _me_, you impudent thing—hand out them letters.”
Some thought it would be good to kill the _families_ of boys that told


Woodman.
I had a nightmare last night, and with a loud scream I woke up. I dreamt that Sergy was ordered to the war and clung to him, fearing to be parted again. Sergy held me close to him and kissed away my tears, assuring me that nothing and nobody could part us now, and that I shall be with him always, night and day. He succeeded at length in calming my fears. I felt safe again under his wing and fell peacefully asleep.
Before we attend to the lender, let us advert to the State; and let it be observed, that in the case where 20 millions of cash and paper currency would have sufficed for the circulation and national transactions of all kinds, at a time when both revenues amounted to 64 millions, it is enough to find out 20 millions more, whenever, by the effect of taxation, those said revenues are raised from 64 to 128 millions; and from the instant that those 20 millions in cash and paper currency are[71] obtained, you may flatter yourselves to have established, funded most firmly and for ever, the interest of a national debt of 420 millions, the interest of which, would at 5 per cent. amount to 21 millions.
making him see all kinds of strange things, and hear all kinds of
stopped running till we got home. The old gentleman’s eyes blazed a
us is still incredibly remote, has become a present-day problem for the
“A couple of case-knives.”
But this excellent reform, while appreciated by the Government at Madras, did not find equal favour at the[Pg 136] court of Tanjore. The Rajah, dissipated, diseased and weak minded, was more and more in the hands of the rapacious intriguing people around him, nominally his servants but really his masters.
and the upperworks of a Martian fighting-machine loomed in sight over
new way to kill my love for the beautiful Munchkin maiden, and made my


after that time you can’t travel so far but I will find you.”
it. When I got up stairs I looked out at the window and see Tom doing

[Pg 149]

in these parts for a year or more.”
Jim put the quarter under the hair-ball, and got down and listened
seen, and we ventured out on the tiles, and slipped down under shelter
Hare-lip hark from the tomb!

[183]
CHAPTER LXXIII
of bottles, and wore-out tin things, and all such truck, and scratched
On Easter night a group of emigrants, who were returning[389] home after midnight service, whilst crossing the cemetery, heard a voice screaming pitifully for help. The cry was repeated at short intervals. They stared at one another perplexedly. “What’s that?” they called out loudly. “It’s I!” said someone close at hand. It was a vagabond who had fallen into a newly-dug grave, together with a goat which he had just stolen. The emigrants knotted their sashes and slipped down the improvised cord, ordering the man to recite the Lord’s prayer to be convinced that it was not the evil spirit who was playing tricks with them. The vagabond had the unhappy thought to tie his goat first to the rope, and when the emigrants perceived a long beard and a pair of horns, they took to their heels and ran away, leaving the vagabond to his sad fate, persuaded that they had seen the devil. It was only at daybreak that the vagabond was hoisted up, in a very pitiful state.
Betwixt the hut and the fence, on the back side, was a lean-to that
Near it in the field, I remember, were three faint points of light,
[423]
LXXIX.	Hong-Kong	405
[Image unavailable.]
Shoeburyness, until it was noticed that it was growing louder. At the
two vast days we struggled in undertones and wrestling contests. There
water. With infinite complacency men went to and fro over this globe

Friendship’s Offering, full of beautiful stuff and poetry; but I didn’t

us into?”


I thought if I could induce him to come into the place quietly I should
We knew our Paris well, and had a jolly good time at night, enjoying theatres and café-chantants. I did feel gay going to naughty places in the quartier Montmartre without caring whether it was proper or not. At the Chat Noir the programme was very varied, exhibiting celebrities dressed in a costume remarkable for its lack of stuff, and famed for the height to which they could raise one leg and knock their own noses with it while standing upon the other. We visited the Cabaret du Ciel and the Cabaret de l’Enfer, two rather disreputable establishments with quaint representations of bliss in heaven and tortures in hell. In the first cabaret the customers are received by a bevy of white-winged, long-haired masculine beings, and in the second one, an establishment where the lights blaze red, the attendants, attired as devils, greet the visitors making demoniac grimaces. The Cabaret Alexandre Bruyant is very amusing; the proprietor of this establishment well merits his surname of Bruyant—(noisy.) He meets his guests shouting in a voice of thunder, and making mocking jeers. When an old lady with orange-coloured hair and a very powdered face came in, he exclaimed, “Oh, la belle brune, n’a-t-elle pas un teint eclatant?” (Oh, the dark beauty, hasn’t she got a dazzling complexion?) A general laugh arose. Then he came up to me and patting my shoulder roared, “Pauvre petite créature, comme elle a l’air maladif!” (“Poor little thing, how ailing and sickly she looks!”) The newcomers, feeling rather scared at being addressed in such a rough manner, and displeased at being made to appear ridiculous, wanted to get away, but when they saw that this queer reception was one of the peculiarities of the house, they settled themselves comfortably at separate little tables, and laughed in their turn good-humouredly at the reception of new arrivals.

the desert, so she may know a way to cross it.”
time was:
this Thing in the field was the third of the ten cylinders they had


striding along like men.” Most of them were excited and animated by
Men go happy or miserable as they have healthy or unhealthy livers, or
“Who that knows what his misfortunes have been can help feeling an interest in him?”
January 14th.—During the whole night we found ourselves in the position of Nansen. It is only towards morning that the sea was free from the ice. The barometer mounts visibly; the proximity of the Caucasus is perceptible.
with the enemy.
and fast, and make him swear to be silent as the grave, and put a purse
Agriculture, impoverished by your prohibitory law, will then lose, not only what she should get by being at liberty to export, but also what she must find to assist you in procuring her impoverishment, by paying the land-tax necessary to pay those very rogues and idle fellows, whose business it is to destroy her only remaining resource against your cupidity—smuggling.
beside him. Then he called to his companions to rise, and again they
Towards evening the breeze seemed to rise, the surface of the sea began to ripple, and soon a veritable squall arose. During our dinner a big wave dashed into the dining-room through the portholes. After dinner, when we mounted on deck to look at the boisterous sea, a spray of water splashed right into my face. I gazed deeply impressed at the elements in fury. How small is man in the presence of such a struggle! It was difficult to keep one’s equilibrium on the rocking deck, and I tumbled out of my chair rolling with it to the other end of the deck. One of the passengers laid hold of me by my dress and hauled me out of danger, just in time, for without his aid I should have slipped overboard.

We reached Kars without any adventure whatever towards night. A crowd of red-fezzed Turks surrounded our carriage as soon as we arrived at the market-place, and stared at us in a rather hostile manner. We tried in vain to make ourselves understood and looked helplessly about us, when I suddenly perceived in the crowd Mr. Danilevski, a Russian officer whom I had known at Alexandropol. I greeted him with a radiant smile, for if he was not the rose, he had been near the rose. My heart was inclined to fail me when I asked for Sergy, and my discouragement was profound when Mr. Danilevski told me that my husband had already started for Erzeroum. Fate treated me with exasperating asperity, and his departure left me inconsolable; I wondered what on earth I should do with myself in Kars; fortunately Sergy had kept his lodging, and Mr. Danilevski proposed to escort us thither.

The publishers have to thank the Rev. F. Penny for three illustrations from vol. i. of “The Church in Madras,” and the Rev. J. A. Sharrock for one illustration from “South Indian Missions.”
Elizabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no{300} business at Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it. She must own that she was tired of great houses: after going over so many, she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains.

long as we live. _No_. What we want is to go out of here quiet, and
When Aunt Em came there to live she was a young, pretty wife. The sun
waded breast-high across a torrent of water that was rushing down from
Providences, and a poor chap would stand considerable show with the
The next day we had gone coaching again. This time I had the front seat of the coach. My neighbour was an elegant young man who had the manner and the bearing of a Prince of the blood Royal. Having taken the day before a Royal Prince for a colonist, Sergy this time promoted my neighbour to the post of State Minister at least, and I felt sure he was no less a person than a Royalty travelling incognito. At a stoppage one of the horses had cast a shoe, and one can easily imagine how we felt when my aristocratic neighbour began to shoe the horse—he was a blacksmith! Our driver put into good spirits by frequent sips taken at the stoppages, seemed to have completely forgotten his business. He drove recklessly, taking the corners in a way that made me gasp; I had to hold fast to the seat not to be thrown out of the omnibus at every turn. I couldn’t bear it any longer and begged our driver to go slower, but it only made him rush down the inclines at the speed of an[244] express train, turning in the same time his back to the horses and chatting with the passengers. He boasted of how well he could manage his long whip, and waving it right and left, he caught the rake of a villager who was passing on the road. Luckily the idea didn’t come to our driver to lift the man like a spilikin in the air. Half-way on we stopped at Ventnor, a resort for consumptive patients, to give a rest to the horses. We saw numerous invalids drawn through the streets in their bath-chairs. We continued our way by an avenue of trees bending over and forming a roof, and towards four o’clock we rattled into the quiet village of Carisbrooke, and tore like a hurricane through the narrow streets, scattering the crowd of dogs and hens before us. The village with its white cottages and grass growing liberally out of the broken pavement, looked very cosy. We saw a group of women all down on their knees cheerfully doing their washing in the stream, laughing and chatting together, and village children who were playing at soldiers near a puddle where the ducks were quacking. The foaming horses came to a stop before the Red Lion Inn, and everyone descended. We had dinner at the inn, consisting of soup tasting like dish-water, and slices of mutton not thicker than a sheet of paper, and they charged us five shillings for the meagre repast! A two hours’ halt gave us time to visit the picturesque ruins of old Carisbrooke Castle, after which we flung ourselves with satisfaction upon the grass under a stack of hay, and had for company an ancient white cart-horse who chewed his bunch of hay under an old ash tree. We felt quite bucolic, it was so cool and nice here, and the new-mown hay smelt so sweetly. Meanwhile our coachman had put out his horses and gone to lie down. When we returned to the inn we found him stretched full length on the grass under the shade of a big tree, his face covered with his hat, sleeping the sleep of the just. The postilion put him on his legs with some difficulty, for the brave man had fortified himself still more with plentiful libations at the bar of the inn. The horses were put to with the aid of the postilion, and we drove back to Shanklin at the rate of twenty miles an hour. The photographer who had taken a photograph of our group in the morning, just before we had started for our tour, was waiting on the high-road and handed to each passenger a copy of it.
Going to the edge of the pit, I found it occupied by a group of about
“Miss Bingley,” said he, “has given me credit for more than can be. The wisest and best of men,—nay, the wisest and best of their actions,—may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a joke.”
Emerald City.
years. Gayelette made up her mind that when he grew to be a man she
THE MISSION CHURCH BUILT BY ZIEGENBALG, 1717
sky; something flat and broad, and very large, that swept round in a
“What news from the common?” I said.
6th July.—At dawn we speeded through the ranches of California, and soon approached the town of Sacramento. Our train dashes now on its way to the Pacific. We felt already the sea breeze, and soon appeared the Gulf of San Francisco and the waters of the Pacific Ocean. Our train[337] was pushed by workmen along an artificial dike to the station of Bonifacio, after which we rolled towards Oakland, where our train after having been divided in three parts, was put on a ferry. When we touched the other shore the train was made up again, and took us straight to San Francisco.
Sept. 10th.—The wind that had risen in the night brought rain. We intended pushing on to Khabarovsk for the night, but the fog being very dense, we dropped anchor before Kasakevitchi, a large village scattered on a hillock.
“For two years,” he writes, “I have discharged the duties of a resident. A resident usually receives 700 star pagodas, or £300 sterling. I have not received anything nor have I asked it.”
him.

“Did you groan?” asked Dorothy.
candlestick into handy sizes, and Tom put them and the pewter spoon in
In a letter written about this time Schwartz opens his heart to his friend at Halle on his own spiritual experience, and from this we can gather how simple was his faith in God.
about midnight he must a kicked his gun in his dreams, for it went off

The duke bristles up now, and says:
down! A kind of cold shiver went through me, and then I struck out for
Putney and the river. The aspect of the place in the dusk was
stayed about one night longer than I ought to, and was just in the act
[250]
Any one desirous to have this fact confirmed, may be informed of it by nine tenths of the French planters, provided they be taught that the time is now come, when every useful truth[269] may be spoken, even with energy, when accompanied by decency. This once ascertained, he is no native of America who will refuse his evidence; an American believes in every thing that is just and reasonable, the very instant that it is pronounced.
scampered out of sight, with all the mice hurrying after her.

lowing of a cow.
So everybody laughed and said all right, and the man got on. The minute

It ought to be placed on record that this grateful prince did not only honour his benefactor by an affectionate epitaph; he showed how much he revered his memory by building an orphanage and school and maintaining by his own generosity many poor children, he also gave every opportunity for his Christian servants to attend the services of their own Church. He never forgot his friend. When Dr. Buchanan visited the Rajah some time afterwards he was led up to where the portrait of Schwartz hung upon the wall of the palace. “He then discoursed,” says the visitor, “for a considerable time concerning ‘that good man,’ whom he ever revered as his father and guardian.”
Thirdly, In consequence of some prohibitions or restrictions equivalent thereto, which afford to the national manufacturer the means of selling his goods 10 per cent. dearer than he could do, if such reasonable duties were laid upon foreign industry, as would leave national industry in possession of the advantages, which she has a right to, and deprive her only of the iniquitous privilege of ransoming those by whom she is fostered:

reckon I had hunted the place over as much as a hundred times; well, I
brains at all,” he answered sadly.

On the following day of our arrival we were awakened by the sound of the rain beating against the window-panes. It did not hinder Sergy to go and take his first bath. It was low tide and the bathers were taken out into the sea in a small cabin drawn by a horse.

be deeply obleeged if they will mention it to their friends and get
A chorus of boisterous laughter came from the other rocks, and Dorothy
I was enjoying the many pleasures St. Petersburg could offer, and was bombarded with invitations of every kind; people were asking me to dinners, dances and all sorts of delicious things. We came home at most eccentric hours, turning night into day. I liked the admiration I excited. As soon as I entered a ball-room, I became surrounded by a circle of partners, quarrelling with each other for the privilege of a dance with me. My ball-programme was soon scrawled all over; I mixed up my dancers and began to wonder how I could possibly manage six youths at once. They drew lots for the right of dancing with me, and as neither seemed inclined to give way, they would end by half tearing me to pieces between them. I danced nearly every dance with two partners, and how I danced, with all my soul in it, for I never did things by halves. Hot but indefatigable, I flew round the room, dancing as though I would never tire. My partners wanted to flirt with me in the intervals but I never gave them the time, keeping them whirling me round till they had not much breath left for talking. Towards the end of the evening my hair became untidy and my train torn to pieces, every scrap of trimming on it destroyed.

shot when I was telling how him and me put in that dratted night

had been cut.


“Well, I’ll try,” said the Stork, “but if I find he is too heavy to




Yet, “to enjoy, is to obey,” says Pope:—To make the best use we can of the creation, is the thanksgiving the most worthy of the Creator.—There is not a man therefore who ought not to repine at seeing the general rate of prices increase in vain, since this very rise compels us to lavish, in coin, a considerable quantity of those two precious metals, gold and silver, which would prove more agreeable, if turned into plate, or even into small pocket-statues, designed for the private worship of those who would blush only in public, for this kind of idolatry. I should like therefore to examine, in regard to prices, what is natural, what necessary, and what forced; in order to find out what might be saved, if people would attend only to the necessary average.
“But you are not entitled to know mine; nor will such behaviour as this ever induce me to be explicit.”

 A Little Monthly Drunk
A special opportunity presented itself after Schwartz had completed three years of his term at the University. It was in the mind of the old missionary, Schultze, to prepare a new and corrected edition of the Holy Scriptures in the Tamil language, and also a tract in the same tongue to be sent out for distribution among the natives of India. Young Schwartz was asked to qualify himself to help in the preparation of these by studying Tamil and for some months this new engagement occupied much of his time. While he was still working at this the call came for him to devote himself henceforward to a missionary life and service.
Daytimes we paddled all over the island in the canoe, It was mighty
 Tom rose square up in Bed

A great many crowned heads had gathered in Moscow. Amongst the European guests there were several exotic personages who had come from Siam, Japan and other distant countries.
Hole.

that we were relieved of our fear of the Black Smoke. But later I

that the pail was lying in several small pieces, while the poor
This winter we had to give tiresome “At Homes” every Sunday from four to six. I was so pleased when those tedious two hours were over.
June 22nd.—About a hundred fierce-looking men, who had formerly belonged to the brigand band of the famous Mechrali, assembled before our house after dinner with their chief, Temir-Aga, who is seventy years old but still as brisk and nimble as a young man. He had previously been chief of a band of highwaymen who had spread terror through all Anatolia about twenty years before. The Turkish Government could find no other means to subdue him than to appoint him chief of one of the districts in the province of Erzeroum. Temir-Aga profited by every available occasion to assure my husband of his entire devotedness. Sergy sent for these men to ascertain that they had received their soldiers’ pay regularly. They were not pleasant men to meet in a dark lane, and are to be watched closely all the[124] time, in order to prevent them from troubling the peace of the citizens.
Ten thousand years ago the sun had grown too cool to supply heat enough for man; it was no longer possible to live on the frozen planets, and the two greatest of them had been hurled across the system to feed the dying fires. Jupiter and Saturn had been sacrificed. Neptune and Uranus had long since escaped from the weakened clutches of the vanishing sun, and now of the family of original wheeling planets, only four were left: Mars, Earth, Venus and Mercury. And now again the fires of the system were dying too low. One and a half million tons of matter must be destroyed every second in that titanic furnace to supply a comfortable amount of heat. In our day three million tons of matter vanish every second, to be poured out as a mighty flood of heat and light that sweeps across the depths of space to us. The inner planets had been drawn far closer to the parent body, but even these heroic measures were failing.
river. All safe. So I took the gun and went up a piece into the woods,
and with an extraordinary number of jointed levers, bars, and reaching
If Oz will not give you any brains you will be no worse off than you
“Then that accounts for it. In the civilized countries I believe there
you can easy find somebody that does, and a good deed ain’t ever

“Not as you represent it. Had she merely dined with him, she might only have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you must remember that four evenings have been also spent together—and four evenings may do a great deal.”

“That is true,” agreed the Woodman. “My axe may be of service to her;
would up and ask him would he let them kiss him for to remember him by;
Illustrator: E. W. Kemble
a-near your room since Miss Mary Jane took you and the duke and showed

brightening dawn—streamed up, whirled, broke, and vanished.
the waterworks towards the Albert Road), and emerged upon the grass

you’ve went away for a few hours for to get a little rest and change,
As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than the last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not long enough to determine her feelings towards one in that mansion; and she lay awake two whole hours, endeavouring to make them out. She certainly did not hate him. No; hatred had vanished long ago, and she had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him, that could be so called. The respect created by the conviction of his valuable qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for some time ceased to be repugnant to her feelings; and it was now heightened into somewhat of a friendlier nature by the testimony so highly in his favour, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light, which yesterday had produced. But above all, above respect and esteem, there was a motive within her of good-will which could not be overlooked. It was gratitude;—gratitude, not merely for having once loved her, but for loving her still well enough to forgive all the petulance and acrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all the unjust accusations accompanying her rejection. He who, she had been persuaded, would avoid her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this accidental{326} meeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance; and without any indelicate display of regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where their two selves only were concerned, was soliciting the good opinion of her friends, and bent on making her known to his sister. Such a change in a man of so much pride excited not only astonishment but gratitude—for to love, ardent love, it must be attributed; and, as such, its impression on her was of a sort to be encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though it could not be exactly defined. She respected, she esteemed, she was grateful to him, she felt a real interest in his welfare; and she only wanted to know how far she wished that welfare to depend upon herself, and how far it would be for the happiness of both that she should employ the power, which her fancy told her she still possessed, of bringing on the renewal of his addresses.
while the stars were still in the sky I turned once more towards
Our situation was so strange and incomprehensible that for three or
_up_ that pistol, Bill.”

of a horse atop of me. We’d been wiped out. And the smell—good God!
destroyed,” said the girl.


into the road, my boy?”


Another pause, and he broke out again like one demented.


Thirdly, If we except a poll-tax, which we should suppose laid by Divine Justice, and which, in the present hypothesis, should wrest from the lender only a twelfth part of his enjoyments, where is the system, which, in the supposition of a tax of ten millions, being now necessary in England, would not deprive him of a fifth part of those enjoyments?—We shall see presently that a compound-tax would perhaps prove still less favourable; but how much has he to dread, in all cases, from the indirect taxation of the monopoly, which it is impossible duly to estimate!

plumb until daylight this morning; and I never see a nigger that was a

“How shall we get down?” asked Dorothy.
of mud and froth into the air. The tentacles swayed and struck like
very pluckily pulled up and returned to his help. It seems she had had
“The nigger run off the very night Huck Finn was killed. So there’s a
and see my face was like looking down a joint of stove-pipe. Jim said
looked up as it passed. Some of those who saw its flight say it

do as your mother told you.”
your brains in their proper place.”
“Have you seen any Martians?” I said. “Since I crawled out——”
The town-council organised a banquet for three thousand soldiers belonging to the Preobrajenski guard regiment within a few miles of Moscow, in a village bearing the name of that regiment. Our Emperor was present at the festival; he walked round the refreshment tables set up near the Imperial pavilion, and lifting up his glass, His Majesty drank to the health of his soldiers who threw up their caps in the air and shouted with all their might.
By means of that valuable work, I see, from the year 1700 to 1775, and that in the greatest detail, strengthened by all the proofs that the[95] nature of the subject can admit of, a constant superiority of exports, which, in the space of 75 years, amounts to the enormous sum of 267,774,769l. (I have overlooked the fractions of each article.) This is, in the total amount, much more than one half of the gold and silver imported into Europe from America, during the same lapse of time; but, of this period of 75 years, 30 must be attended to, wherein the superiority of English exports comes up very nearly to five-sixths of the general importation of those two precious metals, which were to make good so many other balances. We should also observe, amongst those years, a most flourishing one, wherein that English favour absorbs, as it were, all the silver imported into Europe; and five other years still more wonderful, where it surpasses that general importation by 10, 12, and even 1,300,000l.; for, in 1750 the general exportation of English goods exceeded the importation of foreign produce, by 7,359,964l. and yet all that product of the mines, belonging to Spain and Portugal, is estimated only at 6,000,000l. sterling per annum.
low-spirited and on the watch-out.
When the Scarecrow found himself among his friends again, he was so

doorstep and looked anxiously at the sky, which was even grayer than
mystery of the night. And as it flew it rained down darkness upon the
the left a busy little digging mechanism had come into view, emitting
Orleans. That didn’t help me much, though; for I didn’t know the names

It’s all too bulky to stop. That’s the first certainty.’ Eh?”

attempt this crossing. He turned to Miss Elphinstone, suddenly
    

feeling. I remember I flung away the cigar with a certain wasteful
you get to the village. Shut the door and blindfold the doctor tight

_first_ and right _now_, and catching them when they come,” I most
7thly,
The Atomic Giants needed no oxygen or carbon—any element would do. But they needed elements that they could decompose for their energy. Any atom under normal conditions would do, but if that atom was made incombustible they too died. This new force that was so deadly to them, was a force created by the energy of matter. The electrons of matter were altered by the application of terrific spatial strains, and they would no longer react in the same way and would not decompose as did the normal electron. They merely prevented the use of atomic energy wherever they were. Thus the "fuel" of the Atomic Giants was made incombustible and they died.
journey,” remarked the Lion.
pit. Already men, weeping with joy, as I have heard, shouting and

to the Land of Oz, how she had found her companions, and of the

The nigger kind of smiled around gradually over his face, like when you
His voice was hoarse. “Where do you come from?” he said.
for the place where it would be easiest to get into the forest.
Very gently, when my mind was assured again, did they break to me what
says:
it, and so escaped out of that destruction. There were no oars in the
duke, though they was all over tar and feathers, and didn’t look like



opening, and window after window in the houses opposite flashed from
his nose I let drive, and if he’d a stayed where he was he’d a been a

salable stuff, too.”
Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said something of his concern at having been prevented by business. They then went away.
She ought to have had more sense, you must confess.
I have often heard military bands playing in the streets of Erzeroum, but they generally executed funeral marches, whilst platoons of soldiers accompanied their chiefs, victims of the terrible epidemic, to their last dwelling-place, and one can easily conceive my joy when I perceived from my window the first detachment destined to reinforce our army, entering Erzeroum this morning, preceded by a military band. The Mussulmans must be very much annoyed to see our troops increasing, as up till now the number of our soldiers diminished every day.

little paddle-boat, and the pouring foam that her wheels flung behind
So’ll my old man if you want him to. You see, you’re a runaway
Martians had resumed the offensive. So far as one can ascertain from
I was not in a condition to respond to civilities just now, looking very hot, dusty and unbrushed, and presented altogether a very disreputable appearance. I would not be seen in such a state, and as it was too late to pay tribute to vanity, I feigned a bad headache in order not to take part at the dinner which had been prepared for us in the state rooms of the stations, transformed into beautifully arrayed saloons.

build this City, and my Palace; and they did it all willingly and well.
thought I was a great Wizard. Of course I let them think so, because

and saw no one at all in the room. They kept close to the door and
it back, and brought along a hank of yarn which she wanted me to help
“Our leaders pursued other things; the welfare of the public was entirely forgotten, private interests, pleasure, luxury were come to a stupendous height. They were warned three months before Hyder’s invasion but they despised the warning saying, ‘Hyder might as well fly as come into the Carnatic!’ None could persuade them to the contrary till they saw his horse at their garden houses. Then consternation seized them, nothing but confusion was visible. Hyder pursued his plan, took one fort after another, till he got possession of Arcot.... Now what is to be done? I say with Jeremy! ‘Be thou not terrible unto me, O God’. This calamity is from the Lord and doubtless He intends to purge us from our sins and take away our dross ... our infidelity, our contempt of divine things is beyond description and brings upon us the wrath of God. Heathens and nominal Christians were asleep and minding nothing but the things of this world. Who knows but they may arise on hearing the thundering voice of the law.”
right into the middle of the group. Toto had always loved to chase mice
blackened heather and ruined buildings that stretched far and wide,
House.	      	156. Charing
and belting a Sunday-school superintendent over the head with it—or any
side, and the channel was down the Missouri shore at that place, so we


the common people in England had anything but the vaguest astronomical

Close on its apparition, and blindingly violet by contrast, danced out
I spent such a happy week in my old country home! What a lot of sweet reminiscences! I was in my dear little room again, in which I recalled the old days. I saw myself as a child, a half grown-up girl and a happy bride. The old village people hadn’t forgotten me and seemed glad to see me; as to my parents, one can easily imagine how happy they were to have me with them again.
CHAPTER XXVI
Therefore it was decided to start upon their journey the next morning,
stuffed with straw, like mine, you would probably all live in the

to put a pen to.”
road. Not so much so, indeed. It looked like a rusty gas float. It
fragments upon our heads. I was knocked headlong across the floor
brains in your head you would be as good a man as any of them, and a
every night for four weeks to a done all that work, Sister Phelps. Look
prowling dogs had left such an examination possible, I have already
the flies. There was sheds made out of poles and roofed over with

out” together under the scattered gas lamps as ever there had been. The

the bread, both far gone now in decay, and a beer bottle overturned,
“I will tell you my story, and then you will know.”
bulled right along, spite of all the duke could say or do, and I tell
“I’m not surprised that you are,” returned Dorothy. “They must be
place, and so forth and so on, and then I got easy again. She was right

“Good heavens!” cried Mrs. Elphinstone. “What is this you are driving
vestiges of reason or forethought. Practically he had already sunk to


pommel. I had seen him before. It was young Harney Shepherdson. I heard

I think ought to be done. The tame ones will go like all tame beasts;

offered me ten cents to help him pull a skiff over the river and back

branches and dirt. So she’d had a rough time.

usual. Dorothy stood in the door with Toto in her arms, and looked at
again set eyes on a Winged Monkey, which we were glad to do, for we
out, and they did; and Aunt Sally she come in, and when we got back she


21st June.—To-day the dinner was excellent; we had awfully good things to eat and champagne gratis. The chef had surpassed himself in tarts and all sorts of dainties in honour of our last night on board.
[257]
the tapping of their trowels. At the thought I extended my hands
not say nothing to nobody. I said I would. So I slid out and slipped
We took an apartment which looked out on to the Piazza Vittorio, where the Municipal band played in the afternoon. The weather was cold and raw, it rained steadily and we were forced to remain indoors.
A few days after our arrival, I had to be presented to the Grand Duchess Olga Fedorovna. Whilst waiting to be received by Her Imperial Highness I was shown into a big library; I sat down and began to turn over some illustrated magazines when the Grand Duke came in and shook hands with me with his usual graciousness. His Highness drew my arm through his, telling me that he wanted to present me himself to his spouse. Whilst we proceeded to the Grand Duchess’s private apartments, the Grand Duke asked me, all of a sudden, if I hadn’t had enough of my husband yet. I wonder what put such a poor idea of my constancy into his head! At all events it was a little too soon to ask that question.
But would it not be better to owe nothing to foreign nations? For to this one point we ought to confine all the lamentations about Dutch creditors.
“He did not talk to me of his own arts,” said Fitzwilliam, smiling. “He only told me what I have now told you.”



Then these strange streamers of fiery red seemed to condense to two main streamers, reached out and out—touched the great ships.
tried the best I could to kinder soften it up somehow for myself by
locked up their house. I went in again, according to my promise, to get
March 26th.—The baptism of the Malakan soldier took place to-day in the Armenian cathedral, which was so crowded that the “cavasses” had to clear a way for us to pass. The Metropolitan officiated in Greek and addressed himself continually to me in that language. As I couldn’t understand a word, I didn’t know how to answer and what to do, and was very comic, I am sure, in repeating aloud the Greek phrases that he dictated to me. Mr. Popoff, an officer of the light-infantry, acted as Godfather. Our Godson had to be completely undressed, which took place behind a screen, and then brought in to us covered only with a white sheet. I didn’t know where to cast my eyes whilst he was being[104] dipped in the font, which was no other than the big soup-boiler of the brigade to which our Godson belonged. I did not dare to glance at Sergy and pressed my lips together, trying not to shake with laughter, and drew a breath of profound relief, when I realised that the ceremony of baptism was over.

[4]Since my writing the above I have seen the account-book (Bilan) of another nation; I shall notice it in its proper place.

dead bodies of men, burned horribly about the heads and trunks but with
The artilleryman hesitated at the gate.

another attack from the Martians. I do not think that nearly enough
The Persian Consul has sent me this morning a large basket of fresh oranges and lemons, which came from Trebizond, and Erzeroum is still buried in snow. I had another present to-day, a splendid roasted turkey-cock sent to me by the wife of the President of the Turkish Municipal Council, who warned me of her visit, so as to be quite certain of meeting no man in our house.
Further Reasons why all Ideas of a favourable Balance in Money, different from that which I have supposed, should be rejected.

Equilibrium necessary in all things.—On the surest means of establishing it.


they slid him edgeways between two barn doors for a coffin, and buried
cellars, and many of the survivors had made off towards Woking village
October 15th.—To-day, we start for Java, in the Dutch East Indies, on the Godavéri a steamboat of the Méssageries Maritimes. The ship makes the trip in thirty-six hours. What a chance to see the most beautiful country in the world! The voyage will not be a pleasant one however, because we are sure to be roasted alive, our cabin being on the sunny side. The captain, fat and jovial, is a weather-beaten experienced old seaman, who has had long practice in these far away waters; it is twenty-five years already that he has plied between Singapore and Java, fighting with the waves. The gallant old mariner has hoisted the Russian flag in our honour. The passengers for the greater part are Dutchmen, and half-castes (a cross-breed between Dutch colonists and Japanese.)

of his candle and thinking. Then he turns off slow and dreamy towards
Across the Thames, except just where the boats landed, everything was


nor Henri IV., nor none of them heroes? Who ever heard of getting a


joints, so that I could move around as well as ever. But, alas! I had
the big clear river, which was the free States, and wouldn’t have no
voice and went to the Throne Room, where he rapped upon the door.
dark? If you don’t hitch on to one tooth, you’re bound to on another,
coins and models in it, and so forth. Yet it was a little too large for
told them he was a pirate—been a pirate for thirty years out in the
The roads were very bad, very hilly and rough. We climbed with difficulty the steep ascents, and descended with still greater difficulty. Our driver, a peasant boy of about sixteen, drove atrociously, cutting corners and racing down steep hills. At a descent, which he took at a tremendous pace, a part of the harness gave way and the horses became uncontrollable. I was on the act of jumping out of the carriage when the Cossack, who sat on the box, succeeded in holding in the horses.

with? Now I want to ask you—if you got any reasonableness in you at
obscurity.
I throwed the paddle down. I heard the whoop again; it was behind me

It is not recorded in this letter, but it is worthy of note, that the vessel from which they were landed at Cuddalore was quite shipwrecked on her departure at the mouth of the river.





“We can get along without it,” I says.
humanity? I am. We’re down; we’re beat.”


raising the case generating the Heat-Ray as the first shell burst six
A greater work—a quieter, invisible work—was being done by tireless workers in the laboratories. Fifty-three hours a day they worked in the great government laboratories on Earth. On Venus the shorter day made shorter hours desirable. But steadily the scientists were working on their problem. At last the Minus Energy was developed. They were to try it out before equipping the entire fleet with it. At last ten ships were equipped and sent with a scanner machine to Betelguese.

On the thirteenth day I drank some more water, and dozed and thought
TULJAJEE AND SERFOGEE.

“Well,” said the Cowardly Lion, drawing a long breath of relief, “I see
want to try _that_ no more. And then I went on and told her all what I
grew into distinctness as they rushed towards the corner, hurried past,
noise, and spanking down the opposite slope of Maybury Hill towards Old


fixed it up away down in the woods, and cooked it there; and we got it
_Lally Rook_, and she blowed out a cylinder-head and crippled a man.
Dinner over, we had music in the saloon. After my solo on the concertina, Mr. Baumgarten, who had been inspired by my performance, and was by nature somewhat of a poet, improvised a piece of poetry of the most tender nature, with the following dedication: “To Mrs. Barbara Doukhovskoy, in remembrance of a never-to-be-forgotten night on the Volga.” It is spoken there of love, moon and the rest. The poetry ended with the words, “Oh, enchanting night on the Volga, can I ever forget thee?” How sweetly poetical! Who could have believed fat Mr. Baumgarten to be so gifted!
CHAPTER XCI

We were just in time for the Channel-boat, but our first impression when we stepped on board was not very favourable, thanks to a battery of basins placed under the sofas of the saloon; I began to feel sick on the spot and hurried up on deck where the air felt cool and delicious after the close atmosphere of the saloon. Leaning on the rail, I looked out at the fast disappearing French coast. There was no wind and the ocean was as smooth as a lake. We had a first-rate passage and it only took us three-quarters of an hour to get to Folkestone. We soon perceived the white cliffs of England.
was a good fight, friend.”


The opening of the new asylum was celebrated with great pomp. The Directress of the establishment hurried forward to meet us and led us straight to the chapel where a Te Deum was sung, after which we were shown through the asylum, containing 600 old people of both sexes. It gave also shelter to an officer’s daughter who was not quite right in her mind. Her bridegroom had been mixed up in some political affair and sent to the galleys and she had gone mad from the shock. The poor insane woman is barely thirty years old, but looks fifty at least, arrayed in a costume which our grandmothers wore in their youth. She leads a very secluded life, and never speaks to anyone. We saw her walking in the garden her eyes fixed on the ground, pretending not to see us.
“My second command to the Winged Monkeys,” said Glinda “will be that
and so did his leg; but by-and-by the drunk begun to come, and so I
have aimed at extermination so much as at complete demoralisation and
We anchored at Helsingfors in the evening and went on shore to stretch our legs. I wanted to boast of the first Russian town before our fellow-passengers, who were visiting our country for the first time, but failed, alas, for the boulevards were full of half-drunken Russian sailors, loafing about, elbowing us and using bad language. Fearing a skirmish, we hurried back on board. At St. Petersburg we parted, with regret with our French friends, who invited us to pay them a visit, some day in Paris.
the clothes-line; and I found an old sack and put them in it, and we
“You shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is in love with you and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. She follows him to town in the hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he does not care about you.”
There is every reason to believe that on his return Schwartz not only discharged his mission but exhorted the authorities to play their part with honesty and straightforwardness, and this was not perhaps a welcome or acceptable admonition. Of this remarkable visit not a record remains in the archives of the Company; possibly had such a faithful note been made it would have been a witness against the provocation and trickery which marred their administration. But Schwartz had done his duty and again he refused any personal advantage, even handing over to the Board at Madras the three hundred rupees given him by Hyder. All he would agree to was that an English orphan school might be built with some of it at Tanjore.
cried over her, and I found a good enough place for me under the bed,
The wind raises great waves, which sweep our deck. We shall have a good tossing about on the treacherous Caspian Sea, no doubt.
It is etiquette on all the boats of the Méssageries Maritimes that before eight o’clock one may wander on the decks in the négligê of early morning in the tropics, but on the stroke of eight bells, one must disappear very promptly to array oneself for breakfast. This morning amongst the passengers scattered here and there on the deck, in various stages of undress, I saw my fat admirer curiously arrayed, muffled into a sort of poplin of very light material, which gave him a most comical appearance and set off rather too well every curve of his anatomy.
The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth much attention for any of these new friends; and she could do nothing but think, and think with wonder, of Mr. Darcy’s civility, and, above all, of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister.{318}
we had, and so forth. The beech trees below the house were burning
in the small hours of Monday by the sound of door knockers, feet


hadn’t no confidence. You do that when you’ve lost a horseshoe that
“Would Mr. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original intention as atoned for by your obstinacy in adhering to it?”
reach to the main drain on Putney Hill—I had my first inkling of the
Fifthly, What difference can there be between a regulation which raises the landed revenue in a kingdom, from 6 to 9, followed by a re-action in industry, which raises equally to 9 what usually went for 6; and another regulation which would begin the same operation in industry, and should be equally followed by a proportionable re-action in agriculture?
always luck for me; because as soon as that rise begins here comes
dasn’t set up. So the thing was working very well, Tom said; he said he
down a long avenue, in the half-light of the early dawn, the curve of
It was a kindly nature they seemed to have met here. And the work began.
come in close, where the bread did. When she’d got pretty well along
for him. Well, _wasn’t_ he mad? He said he would show who was Huck

“They’ve gone away across London,” he said. “I guess they’ve got a
The present revenue of England is stated at 63 millions; that of Scotland, at about 7 millions; collectively, 70,000,000l. It will be seen hereafter, that 65 or 75 millions would give the same essential results: I must however add, if any thing more should be wanted, that, in his estimate, Mr. Young does not include the horses, hemp, flax, vegetables, fruit, nor hops, &c. all of which are reproduced annually, and augment considerably the number of exchanges held out to industry.
CHAPTER XXVI.
add to the confusion.

tell the truth this time, though it does seem most like setting down on

over us. There was a yell at us, and a jingling of bells to stop the
I see it warn’t nothing but a dictionary, so I laid my hand on it and
The streets were alive with crowds on their way to the temple, a structure of grey stone with a red roof, set in a lotus grove on the shores of a lake. A large avenue leads to the courtyard of the temple, the ground all strewn with white sweet-smelling jasmine flowers, which deadened the sound of our steps. Within the gates, under the vaulted archways, crowds of people gathered around a dozen of Singhalese, devoted to the sale of candles, the white sacred flowers to be laid in the lap of the statue of Buddha. Flaming torches burnt at the entrance of the temple. The whole spectacle was fantastical, just like a decoration of Lakmĕ. Under the portico of the temple, a band of native musicians beat loudly the tom-tom and buck-skinned calabashes. On the top of the broad steps leading into the interior of the temple, we removed our shoes and were taken over the temple by apathetic saffron-robed bonzes (Buddhist priests) with shaven heads, and arms and feet bare. They led us by way of many tile-paved corridors lit by lamps suspended from roofs of arabesque cedar-wood, and strongly incensed candles. The temple is of marvellous richness; the altar and the doors are of carved ivory, large frescoes cover the walls representing hell with flames, devils and so on. In every nook and corner we saw the effigies of Buddha. There was an important service in the temple just now. A group of bonzes, after having washed their heads and their feet, advanced towards the sacred relic, suspended in a tabernacle over a symbolic lotus flower with golden petals studded with precious stones. The chief priest fell on his knees, muttering a prayer, and then drew from the tabernacle a gold casket, from it he took a second then a third, a fourth, and a fifth. With the opening of every box the priests repeated their genuflexions. There appeared at last the innermost, and soon the receptacle, set with diamonds and rubies. Then the priests carefully opened and discovered to view an enormous tooth yellow with age, which assuredly never grew in any human mouth. During the whole time the tom-toms and other barbarian instruments made a horrible noise. Two simple rules govern the production of native music—First: make as much noise as possible all the time; and, second, to heighten the effect, make more. There was a heavy perfume of flowers and incense—very enervating—inside the temple, which made us hurry away. Buddhist priestesses, with shaved heads like the priests, dressed in long yellow robes, accompanied us to the door, throwing at us sacred flowers, jasmine and lotuses. Crowds of Brahmin beggars, demanding money, were gathered in the porch.
But on her returning to the drawing-room, when her letter was finished, she saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that her mother had been too ingenious for her. On opening the door, she perceived her sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as if engaged in earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion, the faces of both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from each other, would have told it all. Their situation was awkward enough; but hers she thought was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by either; and Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when Bingley, who as well as the other had sat{426} down, suddenly rose, and, whispering a few words to her sister, ran out of the room.

“I am afraid, Mr. Darcy,” observed Miss Bingley, in a half whisper, “that this adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine eyes.”

got it or not? Why, you talk like a muggins.”
anyway, because most of the time they couldn’t a treed me because I
All this time I saw no human beings, and no signs of the Martians. I
I was up stairs in a second, and down the lightning-rod in another one,

In some cases the discussion of Christianity revealed the philosophic and alert mind of the Hindu. Schwartz had one day been preaching the Gospel when a Hindu raised the point with him that he and others in India really worshipped the same God as the Christians only they gave him another name. To this argument Schwartz replied:
“This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did everything; made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow’s debts, and got him his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of trouble and economy. Had it been your uncle’s doing, I must and would have paid him; but these violent{464} young lovers carry everything their own way. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow, he will rant and storm about his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter.”
“I haven’t the faintest idea,” said the Tin Woodman, and the Lion shook
bedroom windows. Henderson went into the railway station at once, in
many voices, the gride of many wheels, the creaking of waggons, and the

warn’t anything but a book-mark to keep her place, and I might go and
virtue of it London had still seemed alive, and the sense of life about

going on behind his house. A man stood with his back to me, talking to


best things in the world.”
were reloaded in frantic haste. The overthrown Martian set up a

way, where folks had to walk around her, and she’d stretch out and shut



these vestiges. . . .
“Why _he_—”
Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself; but his manners were always so pleasing, that, had his character and his marriage been exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all. Elizabeth{387} had not before believed him quite equal to such assurance; but she sat down, resolving within herself to draw no limits in future to the impudence of an impudent man. She blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of the two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of colour.



manifest the Martians were about us. No sooner had the curate overtaken
“You did!”
“You had five dollars and ten cents left. Did you speculate any more?”
The absurdity which might be imputed to such an idea I shall partly do away, by stating the effects of laying up treasures, as has been the fancy of several princes, and which is supposed profitable by Mr. David Hume, who, methinks, ought to have been one of the first to rest assured of its inutility, after his excellent observations on money.

going, these men said, to Ostend.
O no. Then list with tearful eye,

“You are the first men I’ve seen coming this way this morning,” said
In the afternoon the appearance of the common had altered very much.
people crying, and again “Black Smoke!” The contagion of such a
tumultuous ruins of their comrade.
with the old woman, waiting for me to come after her.
and blow on our dead-beats.


now. One says:

“If we are ever able to learn what Wickham’s debts have been,” said Elizabeth, “and how much is settled on his side on our sister, we shall exactly know what Mr. Gardiner has done for them, because Wickham has not sixpence of his own. The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be requited. Their taking her home, and affording{374} her their personal protection and countenance, is such a sacrifice to her advantage as years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this time she is actually with them! If such goodness does not make her miserable now, she will never deserve to be happy! What a meeting for her, when she first sees my aunt!”
“But, Huck, it’s all jis’ as plain to me as—”
“Betsy” (this was a nigger woman), “you fly around and get him
told Ogilvy and he took my place. The night was warm and I was thirsty,
considerably cracked in his head, and that makes him foolish.”
So out he went, and down cellar went I. The hunk of butter, big as a
After dinner we were carried in palanquins about Victoria Town. Our porters panted like short-breathed horses whilst ascending the steep streets, which wasn’t pleasant at all.
stuck on a pole in the middle of a river. I am afraid I shall never

any more I’ll get down there, too, if I swim; and we’ll take and tie

stars and drift logs and rafts that come down, and then went to bed;
The town of Canton is surrounded by a thick wall. Every street in the city has a gate which is locked at eight every night, the heavy iron doors are bolted and no one is allowed to enter or go out of Canton. All the junks and sampans stand in a line along the bank and are strictly forbidden to come alongside Shamin at night. At nine o’clock in the evening the guards on the bridges beat the retreat, making a terrible noise with drums, maddening tom-toms and pipes several yards long. Thousands of crackers are let off. To crown all the retreat ends by loud gun-shots.
if there warn’t any good-luck signs. He says:
I closed the door noiselessly and crept towards the window. As I did
We were hopelessly hemmed in by the Black Smoke all that day and the
and the terrible fascination this peeping had, although I felt an
I was soaked with hail above and puddle water below. It was some time
“‘Swim out, my fine fellow,’ cried my grandfather, ‘and see if the


conversation. I got a compartment to myself, and sat with folded arms,
and here and there some facet in the great wilderness of roofs caught

me a reassuring sense of hiding. The wall was some six feet high, and


she use this Golden Cap, for which reason she did not like to do so
_I’ll_ do. I’ll wait, and when he comes back if he says he’s got to go

Opposite Andalousia an Alpine village has spread itself ungeographically, with its cattle, shepherds, watchmaker-shops and wooden toy-makers. Amidst natural glaciers and water-falls, an animated crowd dressed in the costumes of all the Swiss cantons, walk about. We saw the house where Bonaparte passed the night on his march with his army of 30,000 men across the St. Gothard pass, with all the furniture just as it was then. There was the armchair by the hearth in which the great man sat, gazing into the glowing coals. What pictures did he see in the flames? Did his thoughts wander back to Josephine, or to new laurels and glory?
there’d be somebody laying down in it, because people often done that
“Push on!” was the cry. “Push on! They are coming!”




father. You ought to been ashamed of yourself to stand by and hear it

arrangements to alter the route of the Southampton and Portsmouth
and there I had to lie until I felt better. Just like parade it had

“You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend your feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been. Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best wishes for your health and happiness.”

It is reported that the Turks circulate exaggerated rumours about the pitiful state of our troops and say that the moment for revenge against the Christians has come. What troublesome times we are living through, good God!


At the end of April my husband came home to spend a whole day with me. Oh, the joy of being together after those two horrid weeks of separation and suspense! Those few hours of calm, of quiet, put life into me again, and roused me from my lethargy. Everything changed when Sergy was here with me; I felt no fear whatever, but I knew that very soon Sergy would have to go back to that dreadful war, and I should be left all alone, lonelier than ever. That short visit only increased the bitter pain of renewed parting. “How shall I ever let you go away again,” I murmured, embracing Sergy tearfully. But I had to do it, and my sorrows came back, and the house seemed blank again.
I struck an idea pretty soon. I says to myself, spos’n he can’t fix
“Your picture may be very exact, Louisa,” said Bingley; “but this was all lost upon me. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably well when she came into the room this morning. Her dirty petticoat quite escaped my notice.”
[159]

investment of their encampment, as we should the furious unanimity of
“Had you then persuaded yourself that I should?”
flew, and a piece of it came clattering down the tiles and made a heap
his mouth, for his jaws were tightly rusted together. He became greatly
airtight, after which he announced that the balloon was ready.

As soon as we stopped before the house inhabited by my husband, I jumped out and bounded upstairs three steps at a time, and rushed into Sergy’s study, my heart beating wildly. The next instant I was in my husband’s strong arms, listening with rapture to his voice. “My wife, my love,” he repeated constantly and smothered my face with kisses. It was no dream, I was resting on Sergy’s breast and felt plainly that one can become mad with joy. What ages we had been apart, and now my darling husband was wholly given back to me. I nestled against him and the world seemed to me a pleasant place again and I forgot that I had ever been wet and cold and lonely. I have him now for good and all and always. The day of suffering was over!
had ceased a fortnight since suddenly caught the news, until all
You’re the houn’ I’m after, and I’m a-gwyne to have you, too!”
When Boq saw her silver shoes he said, “You must be a great sorceress.”


answers the bell. Next morning, ‘Chop off her head.’ And he made every
“Nor was he less feared, for he reproved them without respect to situation and rank when their conduct deserved condemnation, and he told all persons, without distinction, what they ought to do and what to avoid, to promote their temporal and eternal welfare. The King frequently observed that in this world much was affected by presents and gold, and he himself had done much by these means, but that with Padre Schwartz they answered no purpose.... His garden is filled from morning till late in the evening with natives of every rank who come to him to have their differences settled, but rather than his missionary duties should be neglected the most important cases were delayed.
“It’s a good job they got him.”
The “Corridas” generally take place during Saint’s days feasts, all the profit out of them is assigned to charity. The Spanish benevolence is of a very blood-thirsty nature as it appears, a queer pretence of religious feeling with barbarous cruelty. The excitement of the forthcoming bull-fight had invaded the town. The Matadors have just arrived from Madrid, accompanied by their “Quadrillas,” and have put up at our hotel. They are travelling all the year round from one town to another. After Saragossa they are going to take part in the bull-fights of Sevilla. One of the waiters of the hotel procured tickets for us for the “Corrida,” which was to take place on the following day, on the “shady side,” which costs twice as much as those on the “sunny side.” After lunch we sallied forth to the arenas, and had to walk all the way as there was no vehicle to be had. On the day of a “Corrida” the streets are alive with streaming crowds of people, in their gayest dress and mood, on their way to the “Plaza de Toros.” The houses are adorned with flowers and[258] banners; pretty women hung over the gaily-dressed balconies. When we approached the arenas a compact throng stood round the entrance door, and my heart gave a quick throb. Twelve thousand people could be accommodated in the great bull-ring, which resembles an enormous circus. Above was the clear blue sky. In the centre is a sanded place for the bull-fight, encircled by a wooden barrier, six feet high, over which the “Toreros” jump to escape the bull in wild pursuit. The bull-fight was to commence at two o’clock and we had more than an hour to wait yet. The tribunes were lined already with rows of gaily clad spectators. Some of them had brought baskets filled with empty bottles which they intended to throw at the head of the Matadors who happened to be clumsy in killing the bull. Soldiers were stationed everywhere; not unfrequently their services are called into requisition, for nothing excites a Spaniard more than his national bloody game, and disturbances often occur. We sat amid a haze of cigar smoke which made me quite giddy. Amongst a group of ragamuffins a quarrel arose which nearly ended in a fight. An army of grooms dressed in scarlet blouses and wearing yellow caps (the national colours) began to water the arena. The entrance of the President of the Bull-Fight was the signal for the band to strike up, and it continued to play at intervals during the horrible performance.
After breakfast I wanted to talk about the dead man and guess out how


“Now I can have a _good_ look at you; and, laws-a-me, I’ve been hungry



wonderful things. There were four of them in this country, and they
WITH no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and sometimes cold, did January and February pass away. March was to take Elizabeth to Hunsford. She had not at first thought very seriously of going thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the plan,{190} and she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater pleasure as well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her desire of seeing Charlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. Collins. There was novelty in the scheme; and as, with such a mother and such uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would, moreover, give her a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would have been very sorry for any delay. Everything, however, went on smoothly, and was finally settled according to Charlotte’s first sketch. She was to accompany Sir William and his second daughter. The improvement of spending a night in London was added in time, and the plan became as perfect as plan could be.
“Come along,” said the Scarecrow heartily, and Dorothy added that she
haven’t got here in time.”
time to give the crowd the slip; but that big husky had me by the
And while I am engaged in this description, I may add in this place
full of hope, and Dorothy breakfasted like a princess off peaches and
This morning we nearly ran over a camel. The encounter with these quadrupeds is very disagreeable, for it is only by repeated loud whistles that our engine-driver can make them leave the rails; they kept running before the train all the time.
“Why, Tom Sawyer, how you talk,” I says; “Jim ain’t got no use for a
“If you want to know, go and find out. If you stay here botherin’
raftsman on such a craft as that.

folks don’t go to church only when they’ve got to; but a hog is
“‘Still,’ said he, ‘this is not enough, for even if I read this I cannot rightly conceive the idea of what God is.’
One day Buck and me was away out in the woods hunting, and heard a


due South.”
candlesticks, and spoons, and the old warming-pan, and most a thousand

night was warm and still, and a little oppressive; the sound of guns
“There,” says he, “if that line don’t fetch them, I dont know
short. There was poverty, sorrow; the poor were trodden in the dust,

strange and beautiful country.
he’d told in it where his money was hid, and how he wanted the rest of

Huck Explains.—Laying Out a Campaign.—Working the Camp—meeting.—A

Brigadier-General Marvin, and tell him all you know. He’s at Weybridge.
So the duke he told him all about who Romeo was and who Juliet was, and
For some time past I had noticed that my wooer was altered, not the same fellow at all, looking like a phantom of his former self, a wreck of the handsome Shildecker of former days. I knew it was all my doing, but asked him impishly what was the matter with him and if he could ever manage to stop looking as if he were in a dentist’s chair. He told me that my coolness gave him innumerable sleepless nights, and that I ruined his life.


driver in the artillery, and had only come into action about seven. At


their mouths open and look him all over, same as if he was a wonder.
fight one day for half an hour against three Grangerfords, and come out
Amazing Stories Quarterly Summer 1930.
July 23rd.—We are going swiftly down the “Amour.” Towards evening we landed at Mokho, a large Chinese town, where we were invited to dinner by a Chinese General, the chief of the district. We saw him advancing towards our boat with measured steps, accompanied by his suite. He greeted us with great dignity, and when the usual ceremonies were terminated, after much bowing and scraping, according to Chinese fashion, the Mandarin conducted us to his abode, a small cottage with a dilapidated-looking roof. Before the cottage my husband was received by a Chinese guard of honour, who after having presented arms, threw themselves face downwards on the ground. At the sound of an enormous drum they stood up, shouting piercingly, and raising up their halberds in the air, whilst all around rifles were being fired. Chinese soldiers were standing in groups, carrying signs[387] of their rank on their back and chest, written on disks of white stuff. We entered a square room and took our place at long table set with Asiatic dishes, amongst which a sucking-pig occupied the first place. I sat on the right of our host, who was very attentive to my wants; he piled my plate high by means of small ivory sticks. The table was spread with all sorts of curious looking foods. This wonderful dinner did not come in courses, but the whole of it was placed on the table at once—a Gargantuan meal: soft-shell crabs, sausages of mouse-meat, little fried animals looking like spiders and other horrid things stood in a long procession. Every dish was unfamiliar; I didn’t know at all what I was eating. Having at last discovered a dish to my taste, I helped myself with a fresh portion of it, and oh, horror! it appeared to be dog’s meat. The Chinese General clinked his empty goblet with my glass full to the brim, which signified that I had to drink the whole contents of it. Our host never cuts his nails as it seems, for they were of phenomenal length, veritable claws. I was told afterwards that the length of the nails of a Chinaman are a sign of aristocracy: it means he never works. Through the half-opened door we saw a crowd of Chinese soldiers straining their necks to peep over each other’s heads and satisfy their curiosity. At parting, our host bade us a courteous farewell, and presented me with several pieces of silk.
Shore,’ he says; and up she comes, Next morning, ‘Chop off her

“That is where the Good Witch of the North kissed me when she bade me
“Oh, yes; but one is never so pretty after being mended, you know,”
I carried the sack about a hundred yards across the grass and through
of ourn is one of the cleanest I’ve struck in history. Well, Henry he
wound many coils about his body and head and legs, until he was unable

CHAPTER I

good friends. But now that each of them has had what he most desired,
CHAPTER L
resurrection. They say he was a sight to look at. Your uncle’s been up
down again, and went to watching, same as before. Jim said it made him

often that he is mended in a hundred places, and doesn’t look at all

blanket the river. But in a little while I see a pale streak over the
boy.”
CHAPTER I.
“Looky here, Huck, what fools we are to not think of it before! I bet I

motive as I had. I staggered through the trees, fell into a ditch and
“Upon my word,” said Mrs. Gardiner, “I begin to be of your uncle’s opinion. It is really too great a violation of decency, honour, and interest, for him to be guilty of it. I cannot think so very ill of Wickham. Can you, yourself, Lizzie, so wholly give him up, as to believe him capable of it?”
“Come along, Toto,” she said. “We will go to the Emerald City and ask
watch. By-and-by he come out, and we went and set down on the woodpile

“He came down to see the place”
south, and as they turned their eyes that way they saw ripples in the
The life that I had to lead was entirely out of my line. I hate state receptions, state manners; grandeurs weigh heavily upon me, and etiquette to the laws of which I must submit. I have got a court like a little queen, everyone is charming to me, but I, ungrateful being, should have liked warm friendship[500] far better than respectful homage. I had hundreds of acquaintances, and not a single intimate friend, and I was badly in need of one. I hated my reception days when callers flocked in on us, and I had to talk to people, only for the sake of talking, pretending to be pleased when all the time I want to say “Oh, do go away!” One of the disadvantages of being the wife of a Governor-General was the necessity of suffering bores gladly. As soon as the clock struck six, and the last guest had departed, I hastened to step down from my pedestal and put on with delight my dressing-gown and stretch myself in an easy chair. How I long to get away from all these ties of public life, to stay at St. Petersburg and live the life of a simple mortal, independent, and apart from the so-called world, and be free of all pomp. But there is no use my thinking about it. It’s silly to want the moon.

5ᵒ.
sold away from the town. I can’t ever get it out of my memory, the
cactus-like branches formed a carmine fringe to the edges of our
and head of the Tin Woodman, until at last he was straightened out into
miserableness.


my brother saw some of the fugitives from West Surrey. There was a man
we was out of the cabin, and we had to rush, and they heard us and let

“After all, it may not be so much we may have to learn before—Just
“Of course; bother them kind of names, a body can’t ever seem to

after the first tumultuous uprush and outflow of its impact, it sank


candle that was on a pine table. I didn’t know her face; she was a
yours faithfully

to our room, and judged I would take a nap myself. I found that sweet
him worth bothring about.

tramped off in a hurry for the crick, and crowded through the willows,
crowd far away on the left, towards Woking, seemed to grow, and I heard
faces of these people were haggard, and their entire appearance

was sorry for them poor pitiful rascals, it seemed like I couldn’t ever
says:

He learned they were the wife and the younger sister of a surgeon
letting on we was at it a hundred and fifty year. It wouldn’t strain me

to light on his head and get the pins in their feet. When all were

“_Yes_, sir! I know you _do_ know, because you done it yourself!”
12ᵒ.
[33]

“I am no longer surprised at your knowing only six accomplished women. I rather wonder now at your knowing any.”
and then such another hugging and kissing I never see yet. And
anybody would go fooling around there.
We made ourselves as comfortable as we could in our stuffy little cabin. Towards evening we entered a dense fog, and could not see four paces ahead. The captain does not leave the poop, and every five minutes the fog-horn throws piercing shrieks into the black night.
[Image unavailable.]
any more that a nigger ain’t got any histrionic talent. Why, the way
there was nothing at that time between them and London but batteries of
away into the sky; not a cloud in it. The sky looks ever so deep when
lying beyond it in the sunset light, panting, stirring ineffectual

“There; you see it says ‘for a consideration.’ That means I have bought
little goody-goody saying of some kind, and the duke he was around
“Sit down, my dear; I think I have found the way to get you out of this
grass coming from that direction also.


“Shucks, it ain’t calling you anything. It’s only saying, do you know
“Jim, this is nice,” I says. “I wouldn’t want to be nowhere else but
Another day we had to dinner Mr. De Windt, an English writer, who came for a few days to Khabarovsk, after having visited the Island of Saghalien. In remembrance of our short acquaintance, he sent me his last work from London, a very interesting novel.
About an hour from Tokio stands an Orthodox Cathedral built on a hill. The archbishop, who was by birth Prince Kassatkin Rostovski before he turned monk, has for thirty years already propagated Christianity in this country. He has converted a great number of Japs and has built many schools. In one of these schools Japanese girls are taught the art of painting Russian ikons (holy images). We went to vespers to the cathedral, and all got into rikshas, each with two men, one to pull and the other to push. The road rises steeply to the church porch and our riksha-men had a very fatiguing ascent, perspiration was pouring down their faces. From afar we heard church bells ringing. When we entered the large cathedral, we saw a great number of natives; the men stood grouped on the right side and the women on the left. The priest, a converted Jap, in orthodox clerical attire, officiated in Japanese language. The scholars of the Orthodox school sang in chorus; I could make out only one word, “Amen.” When the service was over the archbishop asked us to come and have a cup of tea in his drawing-room.
then—the penitentiary, you bet! But that trick took ’em to the


in the morning, sure; and she would squeeze my hand, or maybe kiss me,
post office with a special wire to an evening paper.
“I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing. She has two nieces of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion of her.”
CHAPTER XXIII.



“Be still!” I implored.
This ancient kingdom, adjoining that of the Nabob of Arcot on the southern side, was at this time under the rule of Rajah Tulsi, otherwise called Tuljajee. It was described by Schwartz as “a well watered garden upon which a large population managed to live, though oppressed and robbed in the most unscrupulous manner. If the ground yields one hundred bushels of rice the King takes seventy and in time of war the whole is seized without compunction. Therefore it was a proverb with the people ‘Without stealing we cannot live.’” To this place Schwartz was destined to bring the later years of his life, with his ripe experience, wisdom, tact and unquenched enthusiasm.

Bricksville and say they’ve got the men that played the Royal Nonesuch,

“He always inspired respect, no one dared to trifle with him. He had a good deal of policy and great sagacity on emergencies. His influence was supreme; his word law; his example and conduct consistent, frank and benignant, but with a firmness and almost sternness of purpose which kept all around him in implicit subjection. Mr. Kohlhoff’s strongest impression is of the authority he had acquired—no one dared or dreamt of opposing his various missions. He was master of[Pg 195] everything and everybody. He, the father, and all the other missionaries, catechists, children, his family. Schwartz was, in short, father, priest, and judge. He was accustomed to say, ‘Will you prefer my punishment or the Rajah’s?’ ‘Oh, Padre, yours!’ The word was no sooner said than the sentence was awarded. In the science of governing mankind and in habits of business he must have resembled Wesley.
a valley of ashes. The fires had dwindled now. Where flames had been
I went around and clumb over the back stile by the ash-hopper, and
 He sometimes Lifted a Chicken

Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike: he had a pleasant countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women, with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, and the report, which was in general circulation within five minutes after his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared he was much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with great admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be proud, to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not all his large estate in Derbyshire could save him from having a most forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared with his friend.
“I’m very sorry,” returned Dorothy. “Please forgive us.”
sickly eggs by the barrel, and rotten cabbages, and such things; and if
From Spa the doctor sent us to Boulogne-sur-mer. From the top of the belfry of the cathedral of “Notre Dame de Boulogne,” one discerns the shores of England in fine weather. I burned with impatience to cross the channel, and one bright morning my desire was accomplished; we embarked[21] on a ship going to Dover. It was the first experience I ever had of the sea, and nevertheless I proved a very good sailor, though the passage of the “Pas-de-Calais” was not at all pleasant; there was a heavy swell and the sea-breeze was so sharp, that I had to hold my hat all the time. There was a curate on board with his son, an Eton boy, who fell in love with me on the spot, but I did not take much notice of him, for he looked such a baby that one would be positively ashamed to bother with him.
have no trouble about snags; the lightning was glaring and flittering
heaved under foot and a heavy explosion shook the air, smashing two or
floods, wars and volcanoes, have done before to men! Did you think God
[98]
Fortunately, the Witches of the North and South were good, and I knew
it has done much to promote the conception of the commonweal of
would get me out of their claws, and _I_’d be all right; but there’d be


never reached me, about four o’clock, and spent the evening at a music
mind was blank wonder. My muscles and nerves seemed drained of their
but she didn’ want to, but she could git eight hund’d dollars for me,

Well, that was all easy, so we done it. All through dinner Jim stood
“What for?”

dumbfounded and dazzled by the flashes of light. Had that death swept
In her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes planned her marrying Colonel Fitzwilliam. He was, beyond comparison, the pleasantest man: he certainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but, to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage in the church, and his cousin could have none at all.{228}

the twilight I ventured out again. I went through a shrubbery, and
“Did you ever see us before?”
“Get?” I says; “why, they get a thousand dollars a month if they want
house.”


strength of the earth’s gravitational energy.” On that last text their
raft, after all. Other places do seem so cramped up and smothery, but a
November 16th.—We arrived this morning at Krasnovodsk, where I took my passage on the Korniloff. The weather is bright and clear; the sea is shining in the sun, promising us a favourable crossing.
6thly.
de dogs ’ud track me; ef I stole a skift to cross over, dey’d miss dat
were to be admitted at once.
far that a current of air struck it and carried it many, many miles
sally, and in front of me Humanity gathered for the battle, I made my
“To Jane herself,” she exclaimed, “there could be no possibility of objection,—all loveliness and goodness as she is! Her understanding excellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating. Neither could anything be urged against my father, who, though with some peculiarities, has abilities which Mr. Darcy himself need not disdain, and respectability which he will probably never reach.” When she thought of her mother, indeed, her confidence gave way a little; but she would not allow that any objections there had material weight with Mr. Darcy, whose pride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from the want of importance in his friend’s connections than from their want of sense; and she was quite decided, at last, that he had been partly governed by this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of retaining Mr. Bingley for his sister.

“What was that?” she asked timidly.
“Well, I’d ben a-runnin’ a little temperance revival thar, ’bout a
The third night the house was crammed again—and they warn’t new-comers
to look at the dime and bite it to see if it was good, he whispers to
and then they bust out a-crying so you could a heard them to Orleans,
CHAPTER XXX.
them—lots of times I dream about them.
races. The Tasmanians, in spite of their human likeness, were entirely
minute. Turn him loose! he ain’t no slave; he’s as free as any cretur
essence of the matter. Heat, and invisible, instead of visible, light.
“I hain’t got only a dollar, and I want that to—”
“Why, blame it all, it ain’t the _prisoner’s_ plates.”

their pit, and there was a sound of hammering and an almost continuous
appeared to be enormously thick, and it was possible that the faint
the complete overthrow of his intelligence, to perceive that my sole
catch you fooling around that school again, you hear? Your mother
return for my help—such as it is. You must keep my secret and tell no



“I warn’t up at the Pint in the mornin’.”

CHAPTER XXXV.
After lunch we went again strolling about and left ourselves just time for a turn in Hyde Park before dinner. I[163] begged for a four-wheeler instead of taking a hansom to drive there, dreading that sort of conveyance.
Serfogee Rajah took immediate steps towards the erection of a monument to commemorate the virtues of[Pg 184] his beloved friend, and, writing to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, begged them at his expense to have prepared and send a marble monument to his memory to be placed in the church, and near the pulpit where he preached. He closed his request with the words, “May you, honourable sirs, ever be enabled to send to this country such missionaries as are like the late Rev. Mr. Schwartz!” The work was entrusted to Flaxman, and comprised a beautiful group in bas relief representing the death-bed scene, where among some children and friends Serfogee, the Hindu prince, is holding the hand of his dying friend and receiving his blessing. The inscription is as follows:—
and, while I sheltered in the cabmen’s hut, had contrived to telegraph
“We’re working well,” he said. He put down his spade. “Let us knock off
residents. At the station he heard for the first time that the Windsor
I studied awhile and see my chance; then I says:
Whack comes the thimble, and the child snatches her claws out of the
[40]
Now this very proprietor receives of his 60 millions revenue, or rather of the revenue of his land, no more than about 20 millions; (this is nearly the result of Mr. Young’s statement: it will be seen, in the sequel, that more or less would only alter the proportion of the shares, without having the least influence either on the application of the principle, or on its consequences): the 40 millions overplus is swallowed up, viz. for the daily pay of the labourer, 20 millions, and 20 millions for the other charges with which the estates are encumbered, tythes, profits of farmers, &c. &c. It follows, of course,

During the summer manœuvres a squadron was quartered in our village. The chief, a provincial “lady killer,” with a face upon which high-thinking had never been expressed, was the possessor of a very inflammable heart; he fell a victim to my blue eyes, and it wouldn’t have been me if I hadn’t tried to get up a flirtation with him, though he was ridiculous to the highest degree, and saluted me so funnily, bringing his heels together with a snap. He used every means in his power to conquer me and made the most wonderful eyes at me; (when mamma was not looking of course). He began to be immensely sentimental and sang to me to a guitar accompaniment, old love songs, something very pleading and lamentable, with a burden of “I love thee so!” turning up his eyes a good deal as if he was in pain. He was not gifted with much perception of time and tune, my Troubadour, and I could hardly keep serious when he looked so doleful, with his hand pressed to his breast and his eyes devouring me with a passionate gaze.

St. George’s Hill, Weybridge, and the village of Send, southwest of
Secondly, Of all those branches of industry to which such an addition of revenue gives constant life;

Prince Dolgorouki, the Governor General of Moscow, gave great receptions on Sundays after mass held in his private chapel, where the fashionable world met to stare at each other and criticise each other. After service, the Prince invited everybody to take tea and chocolate in his apartments adjoining the chapel. During the reception I noticed that the over-ripe damsels, fearing to be classed as old maids, kept apart from the married matrons. It was very comical to see them planted stiffly on the edge of a sofa in their virginal nook, trying to look young and waiting for future husbands who did not come.

“Oh, yes,” I says, “I _would_. Of _course_ I would. I wouldn’t lose no

“It is unlucky,” said she, after a short pause, “that you should not be able to see your friends before they leave the country. But may we not hope that the period of future happiness, to which Miss Bingley looks forward, may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful intercourse you have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction as sisters? Mr. Bingley will not be detained in London by them.”
He had many disappointments, as all who seek the[Pg 169] welfare of others are bound to have, but he cherished with thankfulness the souls of those who had been given him. And not only amongst the heathen. As chaplain of the English troops he found a thrilling pleasure in gathering together little groups of soldiers and instructing them in the knowledge of God and His righteousness. He knew that a soldier’s life is such a test of character, that anything less than faithfulness and consistency would never be tolerated in the barrack room. A man who wears the King’s uniform must either be a Christian in deed or a Christian not at all. This was true then, as it is to-day. We get some very interesting glimpses of work in the ranks and of brave good men who fought a good fight in more senses than one in those days long ago.
then something struck me. I says, now I reckon the widow or the parson
The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of hauteur overspread his features, but he said not a word; and Elizabeth, though blaming herself for her own weakness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke, and in a constrained manner said,—
kept a-raging right along, running her insurrection all by herself, and
When Sergy returned to Moscow he told me that Baron Korff was not leaving his post at present, but that a temporary function, that of adjunct to the Governor-General of the far east of Siberia, had been proposed to my husband.
“Wait a minute!” called the Scarecrow. He had been thinking what was
begin to fumble with the pad-lock, and heard a man say:

So he laughed again; and so did everybody else, except three or four,

 She hugged him tight



berries. Just as I was passing a place where a kind of a cowpath
“Why, who’s got it?”
brother looked past this charging leviathan at the Martians again, and
“Why, live stock—cattle, you know. I put ten dollars in a cow. But I

The 18,000,000 consumed on the produce of industry, as granted to the principal traders, seem to raise them to 4,000,000 above their real value; I mean, that which is acknowledged in the produce of agriculture. It is not under colour of the supposed interest of the enormous principal, which gives motion to the manufactures and to the inland trade; it is necessary that industry should contribute its stock, as well as agriculture. The principals laid out, by the[16] one or the other, are a matter of indifference to the state; it can speculate but on their produce, and pays exactly the interests, when it rates at the same value the result of the labours of both; but, to the 70 millions assigned as the indisputable produce of industry, (supposing a laborious man to be as good as any other equally industrious) we must add the intrinsic value of the rough materials on which industry hath wrought: This accession, which is also fair and equitable, will furnish, not only the 4,000,000, which annually exceed the home consumption just mentioned, but likewise all the millions necessary to secure, and mean while explain, this gradual increase, which it would be difficult not to trace in trade, as it is observable in the landed property. The latter is doubled within the space of 90 years; from whence we are forced to conclude, that the annual savings of the farmers, and owners living on the spot and cultivating their estates on the true principles of husbandry, have sufficed to discharge, not only the public burdens, and to defray the manuring expences, but also to double the produce and the general means in the most important article. It remains now to examine, whether the savings of the manufacturers, traders, and other supporters of industry, are as indisputable as those made by the cultivators.
“May we see one another in a world where sin and sorrow are not to be met with!”

“Why, to saw Jim’s leg off,” he says.
if I didn’t think the ice was getting mighty thin sometimes. She says:
“Your attendance upon her has been too much for you. You do not look well. Oh that I had been with you! you have had every care and anxiety upon yourself alone.”

watching the sad fate of her comrades and thinking it would soon be her
the shingle-nail fell out on the floor, and he just merely picked it up
VILLA D’ESTE
might be butchered by means of guns so soon as the screw opened. It
So I smouched one, and they come out nine, same as the other time.
One morning we took a carriage and went over to Monte Carlo, situated at some hours’ distance from San Remo. We followed all the time the beautiful Corniche road, cut out in[266] the rock. Our driver, who made the journey for the first time, did not know that he had to take a pass, and was not allowed to go further. It is lucky that we found a carriage on the Italian side of the frontier, at Ventimiglia, which brought us to Mentone, where we took the train to Monaco. Here a new disappointment awaited us! We were too late for the train and had to wait hours for the next one. To shorten the time, we went for a stroll through Mentone, and entered the first hotel to have lunch, but it was not mealtime at the hotel, and we returned fagged out and ravenous to the railway station.
fools _us_ but the Injun Territory robbers too, and actuly gets _away_
mile back from the river, and he treated me so bad I couldn’t stand it

long as we could stand up; but we had a good deal of a hole to show for
It was on the third day, if my memory serves me right, that I saw the
The oscillatory motion was imparted to this by one tentacle of the
but when he did open his eyes and roll off the truck he was very glad
it this way and that and lifting again; of a long suspense, and then of
it.”
peddle out such a fish as that by the pound in the market-house there;
it. We can spare it.”
“Do I know you? I know you clear through. I was born and raised in the

suspicioned I was around. They took and shoved the bag through a rip in
Blodgett, I s’pose I must say, as I’m one o’ the Lord’s poor servants.
tobacker in his coffee;” and found so much fault with it, and with the
start that had any sense in it, except coming out so cool and cheeky
her head this way or that and miss them.
Rot him, I forgot he was a preacher. I see I was up a stump again, so I

Let us then suppose that agriculture, judiciously determined by wisdom not to suffer the[202] least encroachments on any part of her cell, or mechanically led by cupidity to justice, boldly raises the price of her wheat from 40 to 50s. and the rest of her products in a due proportion; her general revenues will then be increased from 60 to 75 millions; each of the three parts interested therein will therefore stand at 25 millions, but will be reduced to 21,666,666l. 13s. 4d. when the tax is paid off;—

Halliford whither we fled to escape the Black Smoke. There I will
indefatigable, at work upon the machines they were making ready, and
“We never thought of that. Fact is, I reckon we’d come to consider him
out-of-work clerks and shopmen working side by side with the customary
“They may come here,” she said again and again.
other stuff to eat; and sometimes I lifted a chicken that warn’t
“You are very cruel,” said her sister, “you will not let me smile, and are provoking me to it every moment.”
hard in the torrent to recover it.

CHAPTER LII
hear him long after he was lost to sight in the dust. Some of the

_that_ way—they’d be no good. They haven’t any spirit in them—no proud
saddled on to a lot of poor niggers, and you never say a word for ’em.
[Pg 2]

I dived—and I aimed to find the bottom, too, for a thirty-foot wheel
lights, but it was something up in the air. I believe they’ve built a
They worried over that awhile, and ransacked all around for it. Then
there. We put all the other things handy at the back of the cavern.
columns through the gaps in the heavy foliage.
satisfaction out of him.
sea and sky. They were all stalking seaward, as if to intercept the
Tom says, in a puzzled-up kind of way:
two blankets, and the skillet and the coffee-pot. I took fish-lines and
beat!”

not seem to be as friendly as the Munchkins, and I’m afraid we shall be
move de lantern roun’ so. I had my pipe en a plug er dog-leg, en some
band, and never tell any of the secrets; and if anybody done anything
They both craned their heads out of the window, straining to hear what
Tom said all women was just so. He said they was made that way for some
provisions. As they grew hungry the rights of property ceased to be

He came, and in such very good time, that the ladies were none of them dressed. In ran Mrs. Bennet to her daughters’ room, in her dressing-gown, and with her hair half finished, crying out,—
“Well, then, let it go, let it go, if you’re so bull-headed about it.


upon Mars.
widow’s Providence, but if Miss Watson’s got him there warn’t no help
A singularly appropriate phrase it proved. Yet the next day there was
[Pg 148]
[19]

Compelled by necessity to have recourse to paper-money, will it be long before they are[180] made sensible, that nothing more than internal credit is wanted to make this paper equal to coin, and answer all its purposes for ever, if they should be thus wisely inclined,—if this measure should be found the only means of curbing effectually the cupidity of those with whom they shall have occasion to trade?
it?”
written by an eyewitness of their advance. The Sunday papers printed
December 21st.—At seven o’clock in the morning the command of the captain resounded, and the engines began to throb, but the boat, held by the ice, did not move, and hope had been abandoned of starting to-day. It will be a polar cruise that we shall have to undertake, as it appears.
started for the common to see the “dead men from Mars.” That was the
CHAPTER XIX.

everything was so still and lonesome.

falling somewhere every night. Nothing’s to be done. We’re under! We’re

“These are home questions—and perhaps I cannot say that I have experienced many hardships of that nature. But in matters of greater weight, I may suffer from the want of money. Younger sons cannot marry where they like.”
and loaded her up with rag rope, and put on a dough roof, and shut down
you’re always a-wandering off on a side issue. Why can’t you stick to



    Alas it was too late;
Store tobacco is flat black plug, but these fellows mostly chaws the

the camp-meeting.
about, invisible but audible. Looking through the telescope, one saw a
“Hil-lo, hol-lo, hel-lo!”


“Perhaps there are wild beasts in the forest now,” said Dorothy.
“Why, it’s because you ain’t one of these leather-face people. I don’t

“Yes, the widow told me all about it.”
smoke, and a long caterpillar of lighted windows, went flying
“Why, they rub an old tin lamp or an iron ring, and then the genies
times and thrashed me, but I went to school just the same, and dodged
 Fishing
We met at the Exhibition Mme. Diane Bibikoff, a French lady, married to a Russian dignitary, living in Moscow, a very pretty young woman, full of spirits, and Parisienne to her finger tips. One day whilst visiting the Exhibition together, I suggested entering a barrack on the Champs de Mars bearing the inscription, “On the waves of the sea.” It appeared to be a carousal with boats rolling over cardboard waves. Mme. Diane stepped into one of these boats, but as I did not like to be sea-sick at shore, I could in no way be persuaded to follow her example, and left poor Mme. Diane to her fate. After the first going round she began to beg for mercy and entreated them to stop the machine, but she had to make the regulation circuits, and stepped out of the boat more dead than alive. The situation was too much for my gravity, and I was seized with a fit of uncontrollable laughter. Mme. Diane will not want to repeat the experience.

we all started. It was about sundown. The doctor he led me along by the
“Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness on one side of your lawn. I should be glad to take a turn in it, if you will favour me with your company.”
logs sawed off and up-ended in steps, like barrels of a different
a-front of us he lifts his hat ever so gracious and dainty, like it was
Well, the woman fell to talking about how hard times was, and how poor
He shall suffice me, for He hath sufficed,

the rolling wheels. “Let us go back!” he shouted, and began turning the


Whether the monster of a competition (in point of trade) supposed unconquerable on account of the low prices with which it should be armed, be not as fantastical as that of a balance always favourable?
 “Who’s There?”
wonderful place; but I have never been permitted to see the Great Oz,

ODE TO STEPHEN DOWLING BOTS, DEC’D
Well, by the end of three weeks everything was in pretty good shape.
curtain and a row of candles for footlights; and that night the house
anybody from that town again I’d be ready to get down and lick his
down through the texas-hall we see a light! and all in the same second

daytime; and about this time they was through with the job and was

When we got home Aunt Sally was that glad to see me she laughed and
you see; and while they was full of it, next day, back comes old Finn,

KARS
and praised up this tragedy, and said it was the most thrillingest one
Having agreed not to divulge these alarming tidings, Sergy tried to look cheery when he returned home, but I saw at a glance that he was very pale and nervous, and guessed at once that he had brought bad news; when I heard him give orders to have his horse ready at any time of the night, I understood all. He had to go! Oh, to think of it! Oh, to think of it![80] For some minutes I could not collect my faculties, everything swam before my eyes, it was altogether such a terrible blow! The first shock of horrible surprise over, I resolved to show myself as self-possessed as I could. Time enough for tears and grief when Sergy would be gone!

It didn’t take me long to get there. I shot past the head at a ripping
Every time a man died, or a woman died, or a child died, she would be


They seemed amazingly busy. I began to ask myself what they could be.
wouldn’t be fair and square for the others. Well, nobody could think of
couple of cabs, the forerunners of a long procession of flying
First you know you’ll get religion, too. I never see such a son.”
grunted around everywheres. You’d see a muddy sow and a litter of pigs


birthday come they hung flowers on it. Other times it was hid with a
“What’s the matter with you, Jim? You been a-drinking?”
“Hello! When was that?”

come in? Well, den, you kin git yo’ money when you wants it, kase dat

Whether it could possibly cost England more than 5 millions sterling, (found once for all) to secure for ever, in the most solid manner, the payment of the interest on a debt of 238[ix] millions, that interest rated at 9 millions, of the same currency?
The negress slave proposed a nigger-boy to me, when suddenly the idea struck her that I should wish to appropriate her little son, and she hastened to warn me that he was a mulatto and not a thoroughbred nigger; she told me that I could order one from Diarbekir, and that he wouldn’t cost more than five hundred francs, and added that I could also procure for myself from that same place a splendid young negress who could speak several languages, but she warned me charitably that these learned negresses were often unprincipled, and dangerous to keep, on account of their propensity to seduce the master of the house! I replied laughingly that in that case I should certainly prefer to buy a nigger boy. When coffee was brought in, the negress and the slave sat down on their heels upon the floor to sip it, they daren’t do it otherwise in the presence of their mistress. After a while the negress asked permission to go and smoke in the corridor; it was only a pretext to have a peep at Sergy and his aide-de-camp, who were just then in the next room. In leaving our house the President’s wife, who had severely remonstrated with the negress for her improper curiosity revealed to her by her little son, could not resist the temptation of stealing a glance at the imprisoned gentlemen through the chink of the door. She invited me to come and see her soon, promising to show me the best dancing girls (bayadères) in Erzeroum.

“Come in,” says the woman, and I did. She says: “Take a cheer.”

around and waited on him, and says, “Will yo’ Grace have some o’ dis or
And when it was all done me and the hare-lip had supper in the kitchen

he’s one er dem chuckleheads, you know. But he’s lucky, dey say, en I
“Oh, I see, now. You might a said that in the first place and saved
to the house on Putney Hill where he had made his lair. It was the coal
“Oh,” said Dorothy, “I’m awfully sorry for you.”
My husband was received on the pier, carpeted with a red cloth, by all the military and civil authorities of the town. We were bowing to right and left as we proceeded between a living hedge of officers and smart ladies. The soldiers of the garrison saluted Sergy with loud hurrahs. The Mayor of the town came up and presented my husband, according to the Russian custom, with “Bread and Salt” on a beautiful silver dish, and pronounced a long welcoming discourse. Chinese and Corean deputations also presented “Bread and Salt.” I received a whole lot of bouquets tied with ribbons bearing welcoming inscriptions.
interval, a hissing like the hissing of an engine. These noises, for
strange horror of its appearance. The peculiar V-shaped mouth with its
“Conjecturing as to the date.”
And then when I went up to bed she come up with me and fetched her
when they all come riding in, two and two, a gentleman and lady, side
“In one of the pagodas at Puttur there resides a learned Pandaram who is generally friendly and does not seem entirely to reject instruction. We both seated ourselves on a bank of earth near a street. This brought together a concourse of inhabitants. The Pandaram said: ‘My chief question to you again and again has been this: How shall I arrive at a knowledge of God whom I cannot see?’ I replied, ‘It has often been stated to you that heaven and earth declare the glory of God. Reflect then attentively on the creation and you will soon be convinced that no other than an Almighty, All-wise and All-gracious[Pg 84] Being produced it. This Creator we ought in justice to reverence and adore, but you render this honour to the creature and not to the Creator.’ ‘This,’ said he, ‘is all good but it does not satisfy me, this knowledge is not of the kind I seek.’ ‘Well,’ I said, ‘do you desire to have a clearer and more perfect knowledge? God has in great goodness afforded it. He has taken compassion on ignorant man and given freely to him His word and true law, whenever He has revealed all the doctrines which are necessary to the attainment of everlasting happiness. He has made known to men, rebellious, corrupt, and lost, the Saviour of the world, as the restorer of forfeited blessedness and the way in which that salvation is to be attained. In short, all that can make us holy and happy is in this word of God made known to mankind. Read and meditate upon it with prayer to God, so will it become clear to you. Compare it also with your heathen instruction and the superiority of the Divine word will soon be discovered.’
me yell every time, but dasn’t answer, because he didn’t want nobody to
see the doctor coming till he was gone again.
Jim begun to breathe heavy; next he begun to snore—and then I was
Blessing to princes, to people, to me,
No doubt the thought that was uppermost in a thousand of those vigilant
nobody but us, and no excitement to offer them, they only just said
Si le præmium d’exportation le plus pardonnable, est autre chose qu’une injustice devenue nécessaire pour en balancer une infinité d’autres.
star and who was persuaded that a meteorite lay somewhere on the common
In 1773, the period at which Sir Charles Whitworth closes his statements, the exports from England were rated at 285,776l. and the imports from France at only 44,484l.—On this the enthusiastic admirers of the Balance in favour bless their stars that their country imports now[126] 50,157l. less in French goods, than it did in 1699, and that, in order to secure this advantage, England experiences no other damage than that the French are fallen in their imports from England only 1274l. since the year 1699.
In the afternoon the sun came out, and we went for a stroll to the Chine, a picturesque narrow pass which descends to the sea-edge. The Chine is, for its own sake, well worth a visit to Shanklin; the admittance is only twopence each. We sat down to rest on a crooked arm of a fallen tree, and listened to the music of a small water-fall down below.
It was Jim’s voice—nothing ever sounded so good before. I run along the
foreign country, and so forth. She seemed, poor woman, to imagine that
308,	l. 13, for will content, read will not content.



that was what made me so long. I knowed he would see I was wet, and


heard a low rumble, as of the growling of many wild animals. Toto
So the Scarecrow followed him and was admitted into the great Throne
and rode him all over the State, and then set him under the trees

CHAPTERXXVII.
woods, northward as far as Street Cobham before I parted with him.

September 5th.—This afternoon twenty-five naval officers came to be presented to me; they were sent by their commanders, who wanted to entertain me on their cruisers.
to Harvey and William, and told where the six thousand cash was hid
warn’t the likeliest, nuther, because the first haul was the pick of


their heads bobbing and skimming along, away up there under the
bed, because a body don’t see such a storm as that every day in the
Woodman and the Cowardly Lion; and we are going to the Emerald City.”
for they had never seen a dog before.

Mary wished to say something very sensible, but knew not how.
My thoughts were in a state of chaos. I was glad to know at least what to expect. That painful uncertainty tortured me; for days I had been almost without sleep, feeling the sword of Damocles suspended over me.
“My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world of your excellent judgment in all matters within the scope of your understanding, but permit me to say that there must be a wide difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that I consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with the highest rank in the kingdom—provided that a proper humility of behaviour is at the same time maintained. You must, therefore, allow me to follow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which lead me to perform what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting to profit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant guide, though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by education and habitual study to decide on what is right than a young lady like yourself;” and with a low bow he left her to attack Mr. Darcy, whose reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose astonishment at being so addressed was very evident. Her cousin prefaced his speech with a solemn bow, and though she could not hear a word of it, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words “apology,” “Hunsford,” and “Lady Catherine de Bourgh.” It vexed her to see him expose himself to such a man. Mr. Darcy was eyeing him with un{125}restrained wonder; and when at last Mr. Collins allowed him to speak, replied with an air of distant civility. Mr. Collins, however, was not discouraged from speaking again, and Mr. Darcy’s contempt seemed abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech; and at the end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way: Mr. Collins then returned to Elizabeth.
they would do me no harm; but the Witches of the East and West were

Golden Cap, and said, “Why don’t you use the charm of the Cap, and call

This place was a tolerable long, steep hill or ridge about forty foot
incontinently disengaged an enormous volume of heavy, inky vapour,
February 26th.—I am laid up with a bad cold and look hideous with my nose twice its size and my eyes half theirs. I wonder if my Australian admirer would keep faithful to me if he saw me just now? Sergy wanted absolutely to send for the doctor, but I said that it was quite unnecessary and had my own way.

Two men came past them. Then a dirty woman, carrying a heavy bundle and

advice, you’ll let me borrow a sheet off of the clothesline.”

“Oh, no, not everybody. A good many thinks he done it. But they’ll get

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Adventures of Huckleberry Finn
“Gracechurch Street, Sept. 6.
“I see what you are feeling,” replied Charlotte; “you must be surprised, very much surprised, so lately as Mr. Collins was wishing to marry you. But when you have had time to think it all over, I hope you will be satisfied with what I have done. I am not romantic, you know. I never was. I ask only a comfortable home; and, considering Mr. Collins’s character, connections, and situation in life, I am convinced that my chance of happiness with him is as fair as most people can boast on entering the marriage state.”
was the landlord of the Spotted Dog, whose conveyance I had taken.
light as a feather right straight off, and my troubles all gone. So I

“Good-_ness_ gracious!” she says, “what in the warld can have become of


November 1st.—The sea is quite smooth and still our ship rocks very unpleasantly. We are approaching the verdant island of Ceylon, the most marvellous meridional point of India. The air is so pure that we perceive the Peak of Adam, at thirty miles off from Ceylon, the legendary site of Adam’s burial ground.
There was much shouting and general tumult. We were jolted hither and thither by hordes of passengers with their bundles, baskets, children and pet animals. I felt a little lost amid all this bustle. Our Russian consul, Mr. Olarowski, was on the quay to meet us. Thanks to him, a gallant official of the custom quickly marked crosses on our luggage without opening it.

and then go rumbling, grumbling, tumbling, down the sky towards the
CHAPTER LIX.

Henderson, Ogilvy, and the others. But there was little I didn’t know.

“I never saw anyone so shocked. He could not speak a word for full ten minutes. My mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in such confusion!”



nigger-head.”
for, young man?”
ears. He made a sudden movement backward, and I, fearful that we were
and Chertsey lines were now interrupted. The porters told him that
Whether the trifling jest of luxury be not equally as innocent as the diversion of exporting and importing; and how much the most fastuous, the most profuse, the most sensual of all monarchs, consumes, above the most avaricious of all his subjects?
“You _dear_ good souls!—how _lovely!_—how _could_ you!”
“What news?”
He came up to the fence and extended a handful of strawberries, for his
On the Object of all Ministers of Finance in laying Taxes.	192
I had shut the door to. Then I turned around and there he was. I used
out of the distant grey haze.
November 4th.—When I mounted on deck this morning, my fat Esculapius came up to me, and crushed my fingers in his grasp; I gave a little squeak, for he had forgotten my rings. He had a drooping appearance, and looked profoundly miserable and martyrlike because yesterday I avoided him and looked the other way when he drew near. Nevertheless he took a chair in a way that told me distinctly of his intention not to desert me, and as I felt at the moment that I would have given anything to be deserted, I pretended to be absorbed in a thrilling novel. A long drawn sigh which escaped him failed to produce the intended effect. He said now in low, mournful accents, that I made fun of him, and doubted whether I had any heart at all.
“Who? William Fourth? Well, I bet I have—he goes to our church.” I


the picture it said “And Art Thou Gone Yes Thou Art Gone Alas.” These
January 19th.—We weighed anchor at noon. The sea is very rough, and I remained in bed all day, preparing myself for a bad crossing.

on, and towed her over very nice and quiet, and the nigger never made
man, catch him up in one of its steely tentacles, and knock his head
It is the most generally received and best respected opinion, that taxes should in preference be laid on the articles of luxury. There is not a man possessed of the least feeling and[60] honesty, who does not approve of this maxim, and whose wish has not often been that the wealthy only should pay the taxes. Canting enthusiasts further add, that the expence and luxury of the rich, prove the ruin of the nation. Be it so. But when the question is, to define what is luxury, in order to subject it to a tax, every individual exclaims, that it begins precisely with those articles which the mediocrity of his means, places above his reach. Instead of laying a tax on beer, would it not be better to increase that on hackney-coaches? says a porter who is stopped at a crossing, by one of the above vehicles; whilst the supposed idler who sits in the coach, and pays for it, exclaims, at the sight of a gilt carriage, that crosses and stops his way: What! 500l. laid out on a single article of luxury! Would it not be better to tax the owner by so much, and apply the produce to the maintenance of fifty poor objects during six months? But, my dear Sir, the manufacturing of this very carriage has maintained a far greater number. If you begin with the man who extracted from the mine, that gold, which, with indignation, you see glittering on the wheels; if it is not beneath you to notice the child employed in driving away the flies that might have hurt the gloss of the varnish when first laid on; and if[61] you end your list only with those who, instead of horses, dragged the carriage into the coach-house of that stately man, whose pomp gives you so much offence; would it have pleased you more if all those hands had been paid for doing nothing? The rich man alone, say you, ought to pay the taxes: but it is impossible that they should be paid by others, “if it be true, that every man, destitute of a capital, can pay nothing but at the expence of the capitalist.”
repeated this over and over again.
“No, she ain’t either of them.”
“Ay, no doubt: but that is what a governess will prevent; and if I had known your mother, I should have advised her most strenuously to engage one. I always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady and regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it. It is wonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in that way. I am always glad to get a young person well placed out. Four nieces of Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; and it was but the other day that I recommended another young person, who was{207} merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite delighted with her. Mrs. Collins, did I tell you of Lady Metcalfe’s calling yesterday to thank me? She finds Miss Pope a treasure. ‘Lady Catherine,’ said she, ‘you have given me a treasure.’ Are any of your younger sisters out, Miss Bennet?”
off! he’s biting me on the neck!” I never see a man look so wild in the
“Miss Mary Jane, you can’t a-bear to see people in trouble, and _I_
“Looky here, Bilgewater, what’r you referrin’ to?”
them. He heard the Maxims rattle for a time and then become still. The


something long and black, the flames streaming from its middle parts,
She was engaged one day, as she walked, in re-perusing Jane’s last letter, and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not written in spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by Mr. Darcy, she saw, on looking up, that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her. Putting away the letter immediately, and forcing a smile, she said,—
for it. The skiff was half full of plunder which that gang had stole
whistling note that rose above the droning of the pit, the beam swung
buildings seemed to deaden and cut it off again. It came in a full tide

“You been down cellar?”
be alone with my aching miseries, locked myself in.
“All right, then, I’ll _go_ to hell”—and tore it up.
arm, and our baggage got put off at a town above here last night in the

baggage! That’s _mighty_ good!—and mighty ingenious—under the
the first branches they bent down and twined around him, and the next


and carried the sleeping girl between them through the flowers.
struck out for shore, shoving it ahead of me. But I made out to see

“Here I is, Huck. Is dey out o’ sight yit? Don’t talk loud.”



flew into the cornfield, but as soon as they saw me they flew away
wore a white gown that hung in pleats from her shoulders. Over it were
The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off the next morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement. One enjoyment was certain—that of suitableness as companions; a suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear inconveniences—cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure—and affection and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were disappointments abroad.
a lark.

October 2nd.—This morning, whilst we took our coffee,[404] a weird procession of gentlemen, in extremely impromptu costume, with towels over their arms, passed by on their way to the bath-cabin. After luncheon the captain led us over the inner mysteries of the ship. We went down the deck ladder into the engine-room, where he, who would taste purgatory, had but to find employment there. The stokers are all niggers, who support better that stifling atmosphere than their white brethren.
out a line of action, and drove me at times, thus pent up and
On the Object of all Ministers of Finance in laying Taxes.
(My revenge for the comparison of my Greek
“Come here, child,” cried her father as she appeared. “I have sent for you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr. Collins has made you an offer of marriage. Is it true?”
says, in a low voice:
Our menagerie is enlarged. A native inhabitant of Tashkend presented me with a wild horse caught in the mountains, striped like a zebra, with long donkey ears. The animal was placed in the same enclosure with the reindeers, and a she-donkey was given to him as a spouse, which helped to tame the wild horse. Donkeys are very cheap in Turkestan. One can get a splendid specimen for the sum of twelve roubles, and a working ass for five roubles.


acknowledge, candid and frank, I ain’t very well fixed to meet it and

“Why, you must mean the Apthorps, ain’t it?”
Soon as it was night out we shoved; when we got her out to about the
A steamer has just come in, towing a large barge with about one hundred women sentenced to penal servitude, who are to be taken to the Island of Saghalien, where women are in a minority, in order to cohabit with the male convicts.

But this time I somehow got to talking to him about his wife and young


dangers, where there warn’t one of them furnished to you by the people
directions carefully and put the Cap upon her head.
August 24th.—The day for leaving Khabarovsk came at last. We started this afternoon for the Land of Desire, to St. Petersburg, darling place. Colonel Serebriakoff, his wife and Mr. Shaniavski, accompanied us on our long voyage.
 The King shakes Huck
out. But Tom said he would let me help him do it. Then he took a look
shore; and it was well a boat didn’t come, for we hadn’t ever thought
connection with it; and there warn’t no floor to the shed, nor nothing

preforeordestination, and I don’t know what all, that it did seem to me

its more familiar features.
children, acting the same way the little niggers was doing. She was
The king got out an old ratty deck of cards after breakfast, and him
It was me he pointed at. The doctor says:
It is incontestably, in the first place, so much of it as is necessary to answer the progressive increase of the prices and products, both of the land and industry; the bank-notes cannot suffice to that augmentation, but in their ordinary proportion to the real specie in circulation; all supplement of bank-notes, which in the needful hour exceeds that proportion, must soon be replaced by real specie; on this exactness stand the credit of the Bank, and the vast advantage accruing therefrom to the public, and to the State; but from thence also results a greater inutility of accumulating money before it is wanted.
afraid to back down—afraid you’ll be found out to be what you
“What makes me feel so bad dis time ’uz bekase I hear sumpn over yonder
“Did you sing out?”
matter now. “Boom!” I see the white smoke squirt out of the ferry-boat’s
With the Gardiners they were always on the most intimate terms. Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing her into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them.
I am not an expert driver, and I had immediately to turn my attention

“We therefore sat on the steps of one of their temples, near an enormous idol car, which during their festivals is sometimes drawn by two or three thousand people. Mr.[Pg 146] Schwartz protracted his address for another half hour, and when he left them they all united in thanking him for the pains bestowed upon them. But should you, however, ask such people afterwards, what reason they would assign for not embracing a doctrine which it was impossible for them to refute and which they could not help pronouncing truly admirable, they return answers like these:—
within the cylinder was unscrewing the top!
Martians feed. After that experience I avoided the hole in the wall for

to see how me and Jim was getting along with the pens. It was most

thunderclaps in my ears. People were landing hastily on both sides of
on the coffin with his screw-driver. I was in a sweat then, and watched

clothes as what he had; and he had a gold watch and chain, and a

I _was_ scared, now, I tell you. But there warn’t no getting away, you
enter his presence alone, and he will admit but one each day.
We were invited to a ball given on an American man-of-war, the “Franklin,” which anchored in the harbour of Villefranche. The ball was too delightful; I highly enjoyed myself and nearly danced my shoes off. There never was anything to equal the amiability of the officers of the frigate; their commander, Captain Folger, was awfully charming to us and hoisted the Russian flag in our honour.
there; I knowed he would take an interest in this kind of business, and



he warn’t the horriblest looking outrage I ever see. Then the duke took
Monkeys nor she, herself, dare hurt the girl in any way. She looked
poison of the flowers, and here they laid her gently on the soft grass

“Well,” he says, “you needn’t be afeard no more, becuz they’ve got him.
my life. See how soft the dried leaves are under your feet and how rich
was among the dead on the common. The soldiers had made the people on
A great festivity was given on the Khodinka Field for the people. On both sides of the Imperial pavilion large tribunes were built for the higher dignitaries of our town and the guests, and just opposite an immense stage was set up for the mob. I sat surrounded by all the great ones of the earth. As soon as Their Majesties appeared, surrounded by a glittering court, the performances in the different shows broke off and hurrahs were heard from all sides, whilst hats and bonnets flew up in the air. After the patriotic enthusiasm got appeased, an allegorical cavalcade in fancy dress defiled before us, after which baskets full of fruit and sweets were dealt out to the populace. We had to dine in a restaurant in the park, all our servants having a holiday that day.
know me for your friend, and for your unselfish friend, too. Now listen
could find anything to laugh at.
crush any building in its path. It was reached by a trap door in the
pit was still in darkness; the mighty engines, so great and wonderful
man to be looked up to and liked. There warn’t no more popular man in
Dorothy, fearing Toto would be killed, and heedless of danger, rushed
recognised writer on philosophical themes, and he, a common soldier;
The fallen Martian came into sight downstream, lying across the river,

CXV.	Suez	482

Tom Sawyer.”


room, the walls of which glistened with countless emeralds.
but a limited supply of material for its production or because they did
“As the due administration of justice is indispensably necessary for the prosperity and happiness of every state, I request you will establish regular courts, and be careful that impartial justice be administered. I heartily wish you would renounce your idolatry and serve and honour the only true God. May He be merciful and enable you to do it.”
down and watch a camp fire—no, sir, she’d fetch a dog. Well, then, I
 The Duke Wrote


his drink and gluttony, and to go on into London. There, it seemed to
The French Consul came to pay his respects to my husband in the afternoon, accompanied by Mr. Emelianoff, a young compatriot of ours who teaches Russian in one of the schools in Canton. We kept them for dinner. The cooking is abominable. Among other unappetising dishes we had an underdone beefsteak surrounded with slices of oranges. But the milk products are good; a Dutch settler has brought out of Australia a score of beautiful cows, and has established an excellent dairy-farm at Shamin.
“We have lost our way,” said Dorothy. “Can you tell us where the
that I stood there alone, the last man left alive. Hard by the top of
for I was flying around, this way and that and t’other, but it was
cylinder. At the sight of that we crawled as circumspectly as possible

must be a very uncomfortable thing not to be alive. Those creatures

 On the Raft
“Oh, Lord! yes; there is nothing in that. I shall like it of all things. You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us. We shall be at Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some balls, and I will take care to get good partners for them all.{389}”

Pikesville, and Mr. Phelps has got him and he will give him up for the
sweet and contented as an angel half full of pie, I wish I may never!


Energetic measures are being taken to check the progress of the epidemic. The plague is daily decreasing, and the Emperor charged the Prince of Oldenbourg to thank my husband for the energetic measures he had taken to battle with it.

and listen if you can hear ’em coming.”
quiet lane running eastward. Presently he came upon a stile, and,
it.”
Like burnt meat! I was hurt across the back by the fall of the horse,





of it. That night fell the seventh star, falling upon Primrose Hill. It

As Tanjore will have considerable attention in the subsequent story of the spread of Christianity in this part of India, it is only fair to make some reference here to the earnest native who started the work in these earlier days. He was an outcast Pariah, by name Rajanaiken, a Roman Catholic, whose mind was awakened by reading Ziegenbalg’s translation of the New Testament, and forthwith, with great courage and devotion, he threw in his lot with the Protestant missionaries. He gave up his position as an officer[Pg 27] in the service of the King of Tanjore, became a catechist, and, though persecuted with vindictive cruelty by the Jesuit Beschi, he stood faithful. His father was killed and his two brothers were wounded at his side by the emissaries of this man, but he was himself spared to do a good and permanent work among both heathens and Christians, and died in 1771 at the age of seventy-one.
now and again over our shoulders. Once or twice we stopped to listen.
to do with him, the ignorant tramp, with his idiotic Greek and Hebrew,
western side.

from ours was in what one might have thought a very trivial particular.
Now that sweet Teddie Thomson’s gone!
“But if you have got them to-day,” said Elizabeth, “my mother’s purpose will be answered.{41}”
a triangular aperture between a beam and a heap of broken bricks in the
in Aunt Sally’s apron-pocket which was hanging on a chair, and t’other


It was fifteen minutes before I could work myself up to go and humble
“If you were aware,” said Elizabeth, “of the very great{288} disadvantage to us all, which must arise from the public notice of Lydia’s unguarded and imprudent manner, nay, which has already arisen from it, I am sure you would judge differently in the affair.”
The signal for the beginning of the Bull-Fight was given. A man dressed in black, as if he had already donned mourning for the death of the bulls, went to the door exactly opposite to us and unlocked it carefully, concealing himself behind the door, and out rushed bull No. I., a magnificent black animal, with a rosette fixed on his shoulder representing the “hacienda” (torril) from which he came. The huge wild beast galloped into the middle of the ring and then stood still, as though bewildered by the noise and sudden transition from darkness to brilliant sunlight. A “Capador,” running swiftly and waving a red shawl, darted before the bull and retreated rapidly backward, leaping over the barrier. The animal dashed at the shawl with a resounding bellow, and lunged with his sharp horns at the cloth. A Banderillo approached him now, holding in his hand his long darts, the ends of which were shod with little barbs that once firmly planted in the flesh, hold on tightly. He awaited the bull, like the spider watches for the fly, in order to plant his banderillas into him. If the bull is not sensitive enough, to complete the cruelty, the banderillas are charged with crackers (fuegos) which burst in his flesh. A slight stream of blood appeared trickling down the bull’s shoulder; he made a mad rush and stood now facing the Banderillero, strictly on the defensive, legs apart, head down, back humped, and tail lashing the air—a[260] picture of power. The ferocious-looking animal with blood-shot eyes, his red nostrils quivering, pawed great lumps of sand and dug furiously with his mighty horns at the banks of the arena, giving thus the time for the Banderillero to jump over the barrier. We were told that at one of the preceding “Corridas” an infuriated bull, following the example of the fleeing Banderillero, jumped after him and found himself in the stalls amidst the audience. That did not sound very promising! Soon the whole body of the bull became one bloody mass. The people shouted in the stalls. Both men and women became unconscious monsters excited by the horrible spectacle. It was too hideously cruel! I burned with indignation and applied bad epithets to the Spaniards, calling them as many bad names as I could in Russian. The Picadores now pushed their horses on the bull, trying to prick him with their lances. The poor animal, with a loud snort, lowered his head, and with tail arched wickedly, he charged furiously upon one of the Picadores and plunged his horns into the horse’s side, rolling him over. I covered my eyes with my hands to keep off the dreadful sight. Looking up accidentally, I nearly had a nervous attack, and started back with a cry of horror. A horse was there before me, his four hoofs up in the air, disembowelled, with two streams of blood pouring down its gored sides, rolling in convulsions in mortal agony. I shall never forget the sight of this quivering, dying creature! The executioner, dressed in a red blouse, ran up to the horse and, with a butcher’s knife, he deftly cut the poor animal’s throat, giving him the touch of mercy. After fifty minutes of this horrid sport the bugle sounded for the final act, the putting to death of the bull. It was Legartijo’s turn to kill the first bull. Wrapped up in his “capa” he strode out into the ring with a firm step and approached the President’s box, whom he saluted with a theatrical flourish of his hat, after which he extended his “mulata” (sword) and made his announcement to present the bull to the President. Then he threw his hat to the audience, to be kept until his return, and advanced slowly, with an almost devilish expression of cruelty on his face, his sword hidden in the folds of his “capa,” to his victim, and began his “passadas” (passes), whilst the bull, who was by now one bleeding lump, stood motionless and trembled all over, his eyes out of their sockets and tongue hanging out. For the space of half-a-minute both man and beast stood as if turned to stone, then with a quick movement Legartijo stuck his sword up to the hilt into the neck of the bull, nothing but the handle remaining visible. The tortured animal tottered to his knees, bowed his head in the dust, rolled over and died. It was a master-stroke, and the air resounded with deafening applause; flowers and cigars[261] (the highest token of Spanish approval) were thrown into the arena at the Torero’s feet. More bugles, and at the same moment a door was flung open and in galloped the team of mules; the bleeding corpses of the martyred animals were hooked to their yoke by the hind legs, and off they went full speed round the arena, dragging the corpses on the sand. It was unworthy of mankind; my nerves could not stand it any longer, and I had but one desire—to flee from the spot. We struggled with all our might but couldn’t pass, being encompassed on all sides by a dense crowd, and we had to return to our seats.

The old man made me go to the skiff and fetch the things he had got.
little spring of clear water, where Dorothy drank and bathed and ate
excited shouts, and staring, staring hard at a few heaps of sand. The
Chapter III

Juliet. How does that strike you?”
Effects of an Impost exclusively laid on Luxury.	208
Q. Will you add further: And provided also that the service done, falls not on the land-owner, or on[320] the proprietor of some money within your nation?—Yet thus far would you finally be led by that system of prohibitions and restrictions, almost equally extravagant, to which you are so devoutly attached.—But such a plan can succeed only to a certain degree: be pleased to observe, that hitherto you can boast of no other advantage but that of the first attack.—Sole and absolute arbiters as you are of your own prices by the monopoly you have obtained, if agriculture had not advanced those of her products in the same proportion, would not your land-owners be compelled to seek abroad for a country where monopoly should not be so obligingly countenanced? For you do not, I presume, flatter yourselves that you shall be able to induce your Parliament, in the age we live in, doubly to tax the property of those who might look abroad for a remedy against your extortions:—the many laws of that kind consigned to your annals, (and which you would not fail to quote as a precedent,) must seek in the ignorance and barbarity of the age that gave them birth, an apology for their establishment; but at this present time!—Such shades in the picture of the Land of Liberty, instead of setting off the beauties of its other parts, would annihilate the very idea of that liberty. It is by justice and freedom that we are attracted and retained; it is by injustice and[321] restraint that we are expelled, and kept at a distance. Be pleased then, in fine, to observe that nothing can result from those plans, the iniquity of which you have no more searched into than you have thoroughly examined their consequences,—from those prohibitions and restrictions, the effects of which must be counterbalanced by contradictory regulations,—except the pitiful advantage of having perverted the nature of the prices on every article. What is necessary to counteract the effect of an injury done to the generality, will always mechanically be brought about by that very generality. Would it not be more advantageous for men, to agree amongst themselves, like intelligent beings, on some plans accounted equitable by all,—on plans the analysis of which the projector might bear without a blush?—Were a few points agreed upon, it would not perhaps be difficult to settle all the others.
Richmond, and the disintegrating organism of government was, with a


BY THE
THE KING’S CAMELOPARD
Something was moving to and fro there, very quietly; every now and then

might as well lend him the key and done with it. Picks and shovels—why,
The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits, in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the greatest share. The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had produced, of what Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister’s match—which she had feared to encourage, as an exertion of goodness too great to be probable, and at the same time dreaded to be just, from the pain of obligation—were proved beyond their greatest extent to be true! He had followed them purposely to town, he had taken on himself all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a research; in which supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he must abominate and despise, and where he was reduced to meet, frequently meet, reason with, persuade, and{400} finally bribe the man whom he always most wished to avoid, and whose very name it was punishment to him to pronounce. He had done all this for a girl whom he could neither regard nor esteem. Her heart did whisper that he had done it for her. But it was a hope shortly checked by other considerations; and she soon felt that even her vanity was insufficient, when required to depend on his affection for her, for a woman who had already refused him, as able to overcome a sentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship with Wickham. Brother-in-law of Wickham! Every kind of pride must revolt from the connection. He had, to be sure, done much. She was ashamed to think how much. But he had given a reason for his interference, which asked no extraordinary stretch of belief. It was reasonable that he should feel he had been wrong; he had liberality, and he had the means of exercising it; and though she would not place herself as his principal inducement, she could perhaps believe, that remaining partiality for her might assist his endeavours in a cause where her peace of mind must be materially concerned. It was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that they were under obligations to a person who could never receive a return. They owed the restoration of Lydia, her character, everything to him. Oh, how heartily did she grieve over every ungracious sensation she had ever encouraged, every saucy speech she had ever directed towards him! For herself she was humbled; but she was proud of him,—proud that in a cause of compassion and honour he had been able to get the better of himself. She read over her aunt’s commendation of him again and again. It was hardly enough; but it pleased her. She was even sensible of some pleasure, though mixed with regret, on{401} finding how steadfastly both she and her uncle had been persuaded that affection and confidence subsisted between Mr. Darcy and herself.



clothing of a lovely emerald-green color and wore peaked hats like


it. But the duke says:

babies are waiting in the nest for me. I hope you will find the Emerald
hats, and putting them on, and scratching their heads, and changing
“I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us. It was more than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such attention. His acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling.”
“If we make haste,” said Lydia, as they walked along, “perhaps we may see something of Captain Carter, before he goes.”
crack my heels a few times—I couldn’t help it; but about the third


Bulrushers, and I was in a sweat to find out all about him; but



a verse or two myself, but I couldn’t seem to make it go somehow. They
sustained and cheerful hooting from the Martians.
pushing on, and I was urging him to keep up his strength by eating when
had stopped now with a folded gown in her lap, and had her face in her


might rest until the Great Oz was ready to receive them.
“Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You must give me leave to judge for myself, and{137} pay me the compliment of believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and by refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise. In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbourn estate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter may be considered, therefore, as finally settled.” And rising as she thus spoke, she would have quitted the room, had not Mr. Collins thus addressed her,—
of the court, all dressed in rich costumes. These people had nothing to
Then we see the Church of Rome diplomatically trying to meet the desire of Kubla Khan to make some alliance with the Christian Kingdoms of Europe against Islam, their common foe. It is an amazing fact, well worth keeping in mind, that, after the visit of Polo to his court, the[Pg 10] Khan of Persia actually wrote letters to the French King asking for “a hundred Christians, intelligent men, acquainted with the seven arts, well justified to enter into controversy and able clearly to prove by force of argument to idolators and other kinds of folk that the law of Christ was best, and that all other religions were false and naught; and that if they would prove this he and all under him would become Christians and the Church’s liegemen.” It is disappointing to find that this open door did not admit the pure Gospel; it was a cry from Macedon with no St. Paul to answer it.
de camp-meet’n’ right arter breakfas’ en be gone all day, en dey knows


questioned my intellectual superiority to his—I, a professed and
“Why do you wish to see the terrible Oz?” asked the man.
Well, I know what I’s gwyne to do: I’s gwyne to set down here and
CHAPTER XXXVII.
I would marry, so that I might not become lonely.
the truth when he is in a tight place is taking considerable many

I couldn’t think of anything reasonable, right off that way, so I says:
“Well, that’ll answer. Now you go along out there, and lay low till
begun to work he most always went for the govment, this time he says:
pint is down furder—it’s down deeper. It lays in de way Sollermun was

The part of taxation, which now remains to be considered, is that which, at every instant, presents to any one, a secure and useful employ of all the capitals at his disposal, and of all the savings which prudence hath induced him to make. The utility of the public funds, which are nothing else but the national debt, might seem established by these few words; but further details are necessary.
[462]
Jim and me come up all right, but pa was drunk, and Ike was only four
collapsed noisily, and I did not dare continue. I lost heart, and lay

ones that ain’t the most anxious to pay for him when they’ve got their
“Did you see a man in the pit?” I said; but he made no answer to that.

“Yes,” he said, “fly.”

the leaves. I see the moon go off watch, and the darkness begin to
out a pie that was a satisfaction to look at. But the person that et it

and branches. Shall we go there?”
more and more, and sung louder and louder; and towards the end some
“And which of the two do you call my little recent piece of modesty?”
As soon as the misunderstanding with Japan began, a great number of functionaries sent out their families to Russia, by land; one couldn’t travel by sea for the moment, because Japanese men-of-war swarmed in the neighbourhood[391] of Vladivostock. Sergy wanted to follow their example, and send me away, but I would not part with him now, and announced positively that I should not move from here.

natural leaf twisted. When they borrow a chaw they don’t generly cut it

Mars Tom, I’s willin’ to tackle mos’ anything ’at ain’t onreasonable,
“I’m sorry to say it,” I says, “but Hanner’s the very one.”
thing, many’s the time I made myself go up to the little room that used
We had such a delightful fortnight in Nice. The days went like lightning and the hour of our departure approached. I detested the idea of going back to dull Stuttgart to pursue my studies, but I had a compensation in the person of my darling Bobbie.
“Why, Buck, they might have scalped us all, you’ve been so slow in
crossing it, followed a footpath northeastward. He passed near several
brains as soon as we get to the Emerald City.”
soon have rattlesnakes aroun’.”
stand by and see the rules broke—because right is right, and wrong is

[7]Let the question on this very point be asked of any one, who can remember, and compare. I except no article whatsoever of industry, which is brought to perfection.




“A great many indeed,” said her companion, with a sigh.
a level—both barrels cocked. Boggs throws up both of his hands and

crossed the crick, here comes a couple of men tearing up the path as
in en bust it all up. A body can’t tell yit which one gwyne to fetch
Glinda the Good stepped down from her ruby throne to give the little
the human future must be greatly modified by these events. We have
their wings should be tied and they should be treated as they had



CHAPTER XIV
hand, and I took it. “I crawled up a drain,” he said. “But they didn’t

shining through the smoke that drove up from the tops of the trees,
water, it softens iron, cracks and melts glass, and when it falls upon
dropped down with his back against the door, and said he would rest a

gardening was as generous as it was enthusiastic. At the same time he
but they didn’t come from high enough up the river; but at last there
Perhaps I am a man of exceptional moods. I do not know how far my
The Scarecrow went in and found the little man sitting down by the
“I cannot say how that tender and mournful complaint moved me. It was as if Jesus stood before me, telling me ‘I have that against thee.’ My heart was quite melted down. Yes, no doubt too many things, otherwise good in themselves, are done without that noble spirit of love. O that my heart might bleed for that unaccountable coldness[Pg 99] with respect to the love I owe to my blessed Redeemer! I repent of it sincerely, though not so as I wish, remembering how great the fall is. But how cheering is the promise which that beloved Redeemer gives to all those who overcome that coldness and strive to be fervent in love. They shall ‘eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God, they shall enjoy the sweet favour and love of God, they shall see and taste how good the Lord is.’ May this inestimable promise keep up a fire of love in our heart! May we condemn all coldness and mere formality in religious exercises! I hope your heart is burning with the love of Christ, as the heart of the disciple on the road to Emmaus. Indeed, materials to kindle that fire within us are not wanting, provided we take care and be vigilant. Let us then mutually excite one another as long as we have opportunity, and let not the multiplicity of business damp that holy flame, which ought to be burning continually. My heart wishes you may be always a shining light!”


way _he_ feels about it. Here, Mary Jane, Susan, Joanner, take the
“The man who attempted a discussion with either a Hindu or a Mohammedan at a mela or in the bazaar was as good as done for if his intellectual equipments were not equal or superior to that of his adversary; and such an equipment means not only a thorough knowledge of the Scriptures, but also an intimate acquaintance with the sacred literature of his opponents, when possible in the[Pg 200] original languages, and sufficient theological and dialectic training to measure the distance against their system of religion. Further, it lay in the very nature of things that converts from high castes, who had only found the pearl of great price after long and sore conflict, should themselves burn with desire to commend this great treasure to their fellow-countrymen, and that as educated men they not only possessed the ability to profit by, but likewise might equitably claim a thorough theological training.”
with hesitation, “You are very kind, but there must be some mistake. I

“Mary Jane’s nineteen, Susan’s fifteen, and Joanna’s about

if _these_ two ain’t frauds, I am an idiot, that’s all. I think it’s
place six or seven mile off to stow me in, where they might hunt till
Mr. Wickham’s attention was caught; and after observing Mr. Collins for a few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relations were very intimately acquainted with the family of De Bourgh.


It was nearly as big as an elephant, and the green throne seemed hardly


and I stood behind the king and the duke’s chairs and waited on them,
ON OUR WAY TO JAPAN
walking over fields of soft grass dotted here and there with daisies

if you will kindly wipe away my tears, so that I shall not rust.”
of the clockwork of the telescope, the little slit in the roof—an
ashamed of the human race.
We met at a dinner-party a few days after his arrival. At the sight of him my heart began to beat very quickly. Do what I would to banish him from my thoughts, I never ceased to love him; but he looked so frigid when he came up to me that I was cut to the quick. Surely he might look a little more pleased at seeing me! Was he doing it to provoke me? I felt that something had broken between us and that we should never be the same to each other after that night. My anger rose against him and I tried to look stolidly indifferent, and if possible, to be more frigid than he was. I ignored Serge Michailovitch the whole evening and behaved shockingly, talking a lot of stupid nonsense; I did not know myself what I was saying and mamma looked disapprovingly at me across the table. I own that my behaviour was shameful and that I deserved to have lost the best husband that ever a woman desired. When I got home the evil spirit went out of me and I felt awfully remorseful. I would not lose Serge Michailovitch for anyone or anything in this world. I was not going to run away from my happiness, and at any price I had to see him again and make it up with him; whatever happened, I must not let him go. I resolved therefore upon the desperate step of writing to him, and it had to be done at once or my courage would fail me. I sat down and scribbled a few lines telling him that I wanted to apologise for my extremely silly conduct. His answer contained an appointment for the following afternoon at four o’clock; he asked me to come out for a ride with him. I passed a restless night glowing with impatience at the next day’s rendezvous. I wanted to see him so much, yet I dreaded the ordeal. How could I meet him? How could I look into his face again?

all; by the time we had left a mile of woods behind us and struck the
remains a puzzle. The terrible disasters at the Ealing and South
about his brother’s last moments, and the king he told it all over
In the afternoon the members of the Town Council came in to congratulate my husband on the occasion of to-day’s solemnity; their President, Mehamet-Ali-Bey was accompanied by a group of white-turbaned “mollahs.” Sergy made a long speech to them, translated by Egueshi. He thanked them for their activity, for the order that they maintained in the town, and promised them to express to Ismail-Pasha his gratitude for having chosen such worthy members for the municipal council; he ended his speech by telling them that the Russians occupied Erzeroum by the will of God, and that it was the duty of all the inhabitants to submit to their destiny and to strictly obey our authorities. My husband[111] made a rich present to Ali-Effendi in the name of the Russian government; he gave him a beautiful gold snuff-box, adorned with diamonds which cost 4000 francs.
it would make a cow laugh to see the shines that old idiot cut.
reached for some of it as quick as I could to throw over my left
“Hamlet’s which?”
When Dorothy stood in the doorway and looked around, she could see
nigger I ever see. So I went to talking about other kings, and let
[22]
“Don’t you believe it. We’ll fetch you a little one and you plant it in
save at the price of his life.

“Leastways, _I_ did.”
something to eat before I went ashore; so he took me in the texas to
“The Witch of the East was proud of those silver shoes,” said one of
such a position, fired one wild, premature, ineffectual volley, and
Frau Weidemann losing patience, said she would have him[207] punished for daring to be so rude, and wouldn’t take him with his sister for their habitual walk next morning.
At the corner of the bridge, too, I saw one of the common contrasts of
My wife was curiously silent throughout the drive, and seemed oppressed
“My dear Miss Eliza, why are not you dancing? Mr. Darcy, you must allow me to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. You cannot refuse to dance, I am sure, when so much beauty is before you.” And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr. Darcy, who, though extremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantly drew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William,—

the bucket and gourd; I took a dipper and a tin cup, and my old saw and
It was nearly night when we perceived the tops of numerous minarets. My long journey had come to an end; Erzeroum was reached at last.
 Spanish Moss
“That’s all right,” said the Stork, who was flying along beside them.
“I am not one-and-twenty.{208}”
reckoned. He said he could size their style. So next morning he got
the lawn to the corner of the house. He bent down and stepped softly.

out, and if they tried to come any such game on him he knowed of a


be much company for him, except Mary Jane, the red-headed one; and so
“I am sure I know none so handsome; but in the gallery upstairs you will see a finer, larger picture of him than this. This room was my late master’s favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used to be then. He was very fond of them.”
Subject.
The worldliness of the European residents was always a disturbing aspect in the eyes of Schwartz, and writing to his friend Mr. Chambers on 20th July, 1785, he speaks of these things, knowing that his correspondent as an earnest Christian will appreciate what he says:
I treat my little ’Lizabeth so ornery. She warn’t on’y ’bout fo’ year
could see was a mass of towers and steeples behind the green walls, and

Tragedy.
black gloves with his softy soothering ways, putting on the last


Then we took the trunk and put it in my wagon, and he drove off his way
obleegd to get along home to England as fast as they can? And do you
Emerald City would blind you. Even those who live in the City must wear
We continue to have no news of the Nijni-Novgorod, the ship on which my husband’s aide-de-camp had embarked with all our household. We asked the consul to cable to Singapore and got the same reply: “No news.” We begin to get very anxious.
When Henry Martyn was travelling in India in 1811, a Captain Kinsey, who had been brought up by Schwartz, told him: “It is said that Schwartz had a warning given him of his death. One clear moonlight night he saw a light and heard a voice which said to him, ‘Follow me.’ He got up and went to the door, here the vision vanished. The next day he sent for Dr. Anderson, and said, ‘An old tree must fall.’ On the doctor’s perceiving that there was nothing the matter with him, Schwartz asked him whether he perceived any disorder in his intellect, to which the doctor replied, ‘No.’ He and General Floyd (now in Ireland), another friend of Schwartz, came and stayed with him. The next fifteen days he was continually engaged in devotion and attended no more to the school; on the last day he died in his chair.”

In September Sergy had to go up to Vladivostock, where he had some business to attend to. He sent me news regularly. On the 11th September, the anniversary of our sojourn at Khabarovsk, Sergy thanked me by wire for having shared his exile during a whole year.
They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough bass and human nature; and had some new extracts to admire and some new observations of threadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had information for them of a different sort. Much had been done, and much had been said in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of the officers had dined lately with their uncle; a private had been flogged; and it had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married.{78}
excited fools hadn’t let go all holts and made that rush to get a look,
VII.	In St. Petersburg Again	50
cannot bring myself to describe what I could not endure even to
“No—leastways, not all at once—that is, I don’t think I ever see them
Q. With what view?
had it, up and down, hour in, hour out, and nobody never said a word
“My whole meditation is the death of Jesus, that I may be like Him. The whole world is a mask. I wish to be where all is real.”
The pavilions of the different States are picturesquely scattered along the banks of the Seine. All these magnificent buildings, made of plaster, will be in three months’ time reduced to the level of the “Champ de Mars.” One can’t believe that these enormous palaces are only temporary visitors, like the people, and will be destroyed in a few months, after the closing of the Exhibition. It is only the “Palais des Beaux Arts,” built of brick and mortar, which will not be thrown down. A most beautiful and interesting collection of old masters is exhibited in this building. We became so fascinated with some of these wonders, that we could hardly get away from the place. It amused me to see how insufficiently cloaked statues upset the decorum of a pair of prim old maids in large turned-down hats surrounded by green gauze veils, unlovely and unloved creatures, belonging to that sort of Puritans who do not admit kisses because no one ever kissed them. This part of the Exhibition is situated near the principal entry on the side of the Place de la Concorde, with the famous “Parisienne” made of stone and perched very high on the top of a triumphal arch. It is queer to see the reproduction of a fashionable lady dressed up-to-date, posted in such a dangerous and uncomfortable place; we are accustomed to see symbolic figures in that risky position, defying in posture to the laws of equilibrium.
Dim and wonderful is the vision I have conjured up in my mind of life
dust hung in heavy clouds along the road to St. Albans.
save for such stragglers as myself, already accomplished in this part

Sunday League excursions. A nocturnal newspaper reporter, mistaking my
“and that is the same thing. See!” she continued, pointing to the
when good luck’s a-comin’ for? Want to keep it off?” And he said: “Ef
with the name of Thomas Lobb, Greengrocer, New Malden, with a smashed
the first time in his life; and, poor as he was, he was going to start
heavy, or could have meat and greens with his bread and water; but they
The ball was a great success, and the whole entertainment went off admirably. Many Christian inhabitants brought their families to this ball; elderly Armenians and Greek matrons, gorgeously dressed, sat against the wall, and watched our dancing. Supper was served for two hundred persons, and continued till very late. We returned home at dawn, escorted by a military band. We had two Turks at dinner to-day, Ismael-Bey and Maksoud-Effendi. I could hardly keep from laughing in looking at the desperate efforts that they made in serving themselves with their knives and forks; how gladly they would have thrown away these instruments of torture to be able to tear their meat with their fingers!
we can; not novels and poetry swipes, but ideas, science books. That’s
bowing before the little girl. “What do you wish?”

“I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly beyond my own party.”

[425]
the eruption at all had I not met Ogilvy, the well-known astronomer, at
He said that would do. And that gave him another idea, and he says:
few furtive plunderers hunting for food. Near Tillingham they suddenly


turn on, like a girl; not from the wrist and elbow, with your arm out
the king says, “I knowed it; I reckon _that_’ll convince anybody the
A telegraphic office is just opened. No telegram can be sent without my husband’s permission as censor. Heaps of telegraphic despatches are brought to him every day. The first telegram was sent by Sergy to Ismail-Pasha, the former[100] governor of Erzeroum, in which he congratulated the Turkish warrior on the inauguration of the telegraph.



more’n two hours befo’ this wrack breaks up and washes off down the
they had to live, and how the rats was as free as if they owned the
“This ain’t no thirty-seven year job; this is a thirty-eight year job,
“Maybe he won’t. But we got to have it anyway. Come along.”
would be a very different thing, and nobody but a mean, ornery person
“Well, hain’t he got a father?” says Tom Sawyer.

this, and went again to Waterloo station to find out if communication
something of his quality, I could divine the stress he laid on doing

a nice innocent-looking young country jake setting on a log swabbing


“We will be down as soon as we can,” said Jane; “but I dare say Kitty is forwarder than either of us, for she went upstairs half an hour ago.”
“The men shan’t come and part us, I am determined. We want none of them; do we?”
calico. You do a girl tolerable poor, but you might fool men, maybe.


“I believe her to be both in a great degree,” replied Wickham; “I have not seen her for many years; but I very well remember that I never liked her, and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent. She has the reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe she derives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune, part from her authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride of her nephew, who chooses that everyone connected with him should have an understanding of the first class.”
A. Aye—and with all our hearts and souls, if, when thus buried, it could bring to us the same benefit as when it is rendered useful to some one else; but alas! that secret is not yet found out: it might be possible, however, to pray for an Act of Parliament, compelling the nation to pay the interest of all the sums thus interred by us; and the wisdom of such an Act would be the more conspicuous, as it would keep within the[319] reach, under the very hand of the nation, all the money she might have occasion for, whenever she should think it expedient to declare war against France, our natural enemy. Till such an Act is framed, we shall follow the example of Holland; we shall keep on the carrying trade, by which the Dutch have gained so much money notwithstanding our Navigation Act, which we fondly hoped was calculated to effect their ruin: we shall carry from Russia to Sicily, from Constantinople to Poland, from Stockholm to Cadiz, from Lisbon to Venice, whatever may be carried from one place to the other, and this we shall do at the lowest prices, in order to get the preference of the Dutch. It is a great pity that this cannot be effected without benefiting the land-owners, and the proprietors of some money, in all the countries where we may stand in competition for that carrying trade, not only with the Dutch, but with all the national monopolists who shall not have as yet been dexterous enough to force from their legislature, laws as favourable to commerce as those we have obtained; but in fact, what matters it to us whom we serve, provided we get a good profit from the service?

Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded of her sister’s ready acquiescence.

me gathered the invisible terrors of the Martians; that pitiless sword

forecast for man a final structure not unlike the actual Martian
the lieutenant. “What’s brewing?”
“Well, I don’t know. But per’aps if we keep them till they’re ransomed,
“Oh, _do_ shet up!—s’pose the rats took the _sheet? Where’s_ it gone,
17ᵒ.


so hot from its flight through the air as to forbid his near approach.
As we went by our house I wished I hadn’t sent Mary Jane out of town;
going on talking; but she jumped up and wiped it off with the back of


under his foot a chain embattled, for slavery, with a chevron _vert_ in

to Paris. Thence the joyful news had flashed all over the world; a
sudden whirl of black smoke driving across the road hid him for a
crafts. It’s lovely to live on a raft. We had the sky up there, all
found out soon after.
what they could to keep off the dull times for her. So she took and
way, and safe. Then you come out and spread the news around, and get

A GLIMPSE OF THE MAN HIMSELF.

form of them, nor recognise the black objects they were busied upon.

roof line of the college itself looked as if a hundred-ton gun had been

about a week longer. After that the talk got further and further away,
which was east and which was west, and that was the reason they were

the wall, turning the half-light of the place into a crimson-coloured

“’Fraid to _live!_—why, I was that scared I dasn’t hardly go to bed, or


“For my part, I am content in knowing I am as brave as any beast that
see a raft sliding by, away off yonder, and maybe a galoot on it
standing up till he told us we might set down. This done him heaps of

showed; it was white; not like another man’s white, but a white to make
ON THE
“Don’t be no rougher on him than you’re obleeged to, because he ain’t a
King Lear and a drownded A-rab all in one, and it most scared the
herself under the hedge close by my brother, weeping.
“Yes, sir, it’s the best way. Ma used to always say that.”

the Great Oz how to get back to Kansas again.”
Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Jane now came up.

“Your Ladyship has declared it to be impossible.”
all locked and chained; so he took my canoe, and said for me to wait
Mary Jane was off working for the auction than around in reach of
competitor altogether. On Mars, however, just the reverse has

greater part of the house had collapsed. Contrasting vividly with this
wreck for Miss Hooker’s remainders, because the captain would know her

“My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.”


his breath, and letting it down again when he breathed it out—and after
you—well, let me see—oh, I’ve got it—you can do Hamlet’s soliloquy.”
 Stealing spoons
“They had forgotten to leave any message”
upon Mars. The seriocomic periodical _Punch_, I remember, made a happy
difficult that the Scarecrow often stumbled over the yellow bricks,

Let me ask whether that mass of prohibitions and restrictions, which legally establishes monopoly in England, be any thing more than a mass of privileges granted to a chosen few, to the prejudice of the whole community? Were we to look at every particular regulation, and consider it distinctly, is there one which would not find the whole nation against it, except the humble Petitioners who share in the benefit? And must it not be very strange to imagine, very absurd to say, and above human power to effect, that a system of regulations, not one of which favours above one man against thousands, should, upon the whole, be serviceable to the State?
this place but _I’d_ find out who done it, s’I; ’n’ moreover, s’I—”


schoolroom—containing globes, forms, and copybooks. When he followed me
themselves, they would surely have destroyed me. As it was, I lived in
ever so fine; and down by the village was the river, a whole mile
“They are the people who live in this land of the East where the Wicked
mustering, and in the west the sky was still a pale, bright, almost
Leatherhead, for my wife was there.”
For who would fardels bear, till Birnam Wood do come to Dunsinane,

last they grew vexed that Oz should treat them in so poor a fashion,
explored, and much of the desolation the Martians had caused was
like red-hot teeth, and her monstrous bows and guards hanging right
barked after her loudly enough when she had gone, because he had been
concern, and observe her in compassionate silence. At length she spoke again. “I have just had a letter from Jane, with such dreadful news. It cannot be concealed from anyone. My youngest sister has left all her friends—has eloped; has thrown herself into the power of—of Mr.{340} Wickham. They are gone off together from Brighton. You know him too well to doubt the rest. She has no money, no connections, nothing that can tempt him to—she is lost for ever.”
[xii]

January 16th.—We arrived at Petrovsk in the afternoon. We are in Europe here, and although we have got a three days’ railway journey before us, St. Petersburg seems quite near.
the facts for me. Preachin’s my line, too, and workin’ camp-meetin’s,
they’ve got to do it by rubbing it on the wall. _They_ wouldn’t use a
The Rev. Christian Frederic Schwartz,
spite of the heat of the day, from Woking and Chertsey, so that there
“Oh, Jane,” cried Elizabeth, “was there a servant belonging to it who did not know the whole story before the end of the day?”



“I always did like flowers,” said the Lion. “They seem so helpless and
New costumes, new scenery, new appointments!
“He has been so unlucky as to lose your friendship,” replied Elizabeth, with emphasis, “and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all his life.”



Bill to come. I crawfished as fast as I could about two yards, but the
pony round. “We cannot cross this—hell,” he said and they went back a
Doctor Robinson. I felt very good; I judged I had done it pretty neat—I

“Whenever she spoke in a low voice”
It was a close place. I took it up, and held it in my hand. I was
intently for them. Later I saw against the light of Woking station a
mo’; so I’s jes’ dis minute a startin’ de raf’ down towards de mouf er
you are sure to get.”
“Well, then, what did you want to kill him for?”
deef en dumb, Huck, plumb deef en dumb—en I’d ben a-treat’n her so!”

“And do you like her?”
They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs. Bennet, in the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes which the good-humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour’s visit, had revived.
“Half a mile, you say?” said he.


“I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours,” he coldly replied. She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in silence; on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree; for in Darcy’s breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towards her, which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger against another.

Next morning Sergy went to secure tickets for the first boat leaving for London; there was one starting on the following day. When Sergy returned we drove to the Zoological Gardens, the best in Europe. Rotterdam does not inspire me; the houses are built on piles and look as if they were all on one side, and the canals, like those of Venice, are dirty and stinking. After the Zoological Gardens we visited an exhibition of Dutch painters, and saw posthumous pictures said to be painted by Rembrandt. Before returning to the hotel we drove through the park by a broad avenue bordered with elegant villas belonging, for the most part, to rich merchants. Dying of thirst, we drew up at a café and ordered tea. A waiter brought a teapot with boiling water and two cups and nothing else, and told us that the visitors had to supply their own tea and sugar in this singular restaurant!
But me and Jim was consulting—and thinking. And after we’d thought a



It is a long and tedious journey from St. Petersburg to Tashkend; we have to cover 4,600 miles to reach our new far-away abode.
window. There was a woman about forty year old in there knitting by a

“Why, how long you been on the island, Jim?”
At the end of the month of May, Mrs. Kohan, my singing mistress, arrived from Moscow with her two little daughters. Her husband has recently been appointed military doctor at Khabarovsk.

scarcely realise that living quality.
woman possibly mean by calling her a sorceress, and saying she had
half a mile away, stooping over something in the field. I have no doubt
Miss Bingley’s attention was quite as much engaged in watching Mr. Darcy’s progress through his book, as in reading her own; and she was perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. She could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her question and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be amused with her own book, which she{71} had only chosen because it was the second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, “How pleasant it is to spend an evening in this way! I declare, after all, there is no enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a book! When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not an excellent library.”
the main point?”
in with my latchkey, closed, locked and bolted the door, staggered to


After freeing my hair and clothing of the straw and chaff, we set off at sunrise. When we passed the village of Kepri-Kay, a pestilence-stricken Russian camp, I had to put my handkerchief up to my nose for the horrible smell which hung in the air.
ROTTERDAM
conscience got to stirring me up hotter than ever, until at last I says
“We dare not harm this little girl,” he said to them, “for she is
November 7th.—At the first break of day we reached the sun-baked city of Aden, a British possession on the southern coast of Arabia, lying on the Red Sea trade route between Europe and the East. The multiplicity of rocks, and the absence of trees, are the two most striking features of the landscape. Not a blade of grass is to be seen anywhere, and all around there is desolation. Aden looked rather a dreary spot: just a little cluster of white buildings lying at the feet of slate-coloured rocks. The burning sand, the sun, and the flies render the town quite unbearable. Opposite the port of Aden is Sirah, where the Arabs pretend that Cain, after the murder of Abel, came to take refuge. The town has but little local colouring. It was founded specially as a maritime station; it gives shelter to traders and about a dozen hotel-managers. The town looked baking hot. The want of water is cruelly felt. Stone reservoirs have been constructed to catch rain-water, as there is no other natural supply whatever. The only difficulty is that it practically never rains, so the reservoirs stand empty. It is nearly three years since it rained in these parts. The water is distilled now from the sea, and an immense manufactory to fabricate artificial ice has been built, changing completely the condition of local life. The inhabitants have now plenty of water, and can refresh themselves with iced drinks ad libitum. They are even undertaking to arrange a square with verdure and trees out of a sand plot. Every morning hundreds of camels bring the necessary provisions for the daily use of the inhabitants, from the oases of the interior.
Chapter XVI

It is the quality of the land that determines the division of its products: however ungrateful the soil, the man who cultivates it, first deducts what is necessary for his subsistence, and a trifle more; the rest is divided amongst the landlord and some others, for one reason or another admitted to a share. This division, determined by the most general quality of the land, brings down the proprietor, who farms out his estate, to about one third of its productions, and reduces nearly to the like proportion, those who are employed in wresting them from the bottom of the earth.
The Rescue
high as Dorothy’s waist. There were also pretty little barns, with
Towards night we arrived at Baku, where we have a special train placed at our disposal. The railway between Baku and Petrovsk is not open officially, and we had to advance at a snail’s pace. I thought we should never get to Petrovsk if we crawled like that.
it to get out; but there ain’t only just the one way: we got to dig him
and says:
[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]
“Couldn’t they see better if they was to wait till daytime?”
“Be this our aim—and may our hearts (ah! our slippery hearts) never swerve from the path to that[Pg 126] heavenly Canaan! May we never murmur or lust after the things which we have once renounced! May we be faithful unto death and so realize the crown of life! Remember me likewise when you come before the throne of mercy that my approaching age may not be unfruitful but blessed.”
Fourthly, That the superiority of industry, activity, and capitals, in a nation, gives her no other advantage, than that of supplying those countries with which she trades, with further means of increasing their own industry and activity: Now,
Thirdly, If the little private calculations, of which I have spoken, did not rectify (as I contend they do by degrees, and as they ought to do[357] sooner) the mistakes of the grand calculations in the administration of finances; that is to say, if the land proprietor did not increase the price of his commodities, in proportion as the tax bears heavy on that article of luxury which he still persists to consume: it would appear still more heinous in the eyes of the moralist; for those artificers who, without remorse, without a blush, should employ themselves in the work of Satan, of which the consumption should continue the same, would subsist undisturbed in peace and plenty on that very work, whilst a considerable number of scrupulous artisans, employed hitherto on articles free from censure, but of which the consumption should have decreased by the counter-blow of the taxes on luxury, would most scandalously be left starving and unemployed.
hap.

mouth, and then settled back again in his chair comfortable, and was
Nor to your friends, nor to your foes,
From Kepri-Kay I made all the way on horseback, the roads being too rough for carriages. I felt tired, so very tired, and oh, so cold! The wind began to blow harder every minute, and made me nearly lose my equilibrium. On the top of a steep mountain we encountered General Avinoff, who was returning to Kars. Seeing me so lightly clad he made me put on his big fur boots, which had to be held up by bits of rope tied on by my Cossack attendants.
[Image unavailable.]


“Your commands shall be obeyed,” said the leader. Then, with a great

“As evening approached and I was about to depart, a man of respectability sent to me out of the fort, requesting me to wait a little as he was desirous of speaking with me. He came rather late and then we discoursed about the Christian doctrines, as well as heathenism and its soul destroying nature. He heard in silence. The Lord’s Prayer, which I paraphrastically explained to him, pleased him.”
the most part problematical, continued intermittently, and seemed if

learn before we’ve got a chance. And we’ve got to live and keep
clear again he saw the monster had passed and was rushing landward. Big
“I wouldn’t shake my _nigger_, would I?—the only nigger I had in the

next morning. And he would do it just as indifferent as if he was
till she found the paper, and as soon as she read it she looked glad;
I stared. Strange as it may seem, I had not arrived at this fact—a fact

In spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be her feelings, in the expectation of his arrival, Elizabeth could easily perceive that her spirits were affected by it. They were more disturbed, more unequal, than she had often seen them.
on. It was his way when he’d got his plans set.
“After the crows had gone I thought this over, and decided I would try
“Who are you and where are you going?” asked the Stork.
“She had better have stayed at home,” cried Elizabeth: “perhaps she meant well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one cannot see too little of one’s neighbours. Assistance is impossible; condolence, insufferable. Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied.”




So they all lay upon the ground except the Scarecrow, and he stood up

all—what kind of a show would _that_ give him to be a hero? Why, they
running over the crest of the hill escaped.
May 21st.—The banks of the Volga are low and sandy in these parts; the sky has become grey, the water has taken a dull colour, and the rain is beginning to fall heavily.


bed when I wanted it. And yet, you know, it’s kind of natural to hide
there. Dorothy went to get him, and saw such delicious fruit hanging
Our Consul—Mr. Bakounine—was on the quay. It was nice meeting someone from the part of the world I was born in. The warm and damp climate of Java had not suited our Consul; he looked very thin and white. Mr. Bakounine was extremely kind and gave all his time to us.

The Godavéri set sail at ten o’clock in the morning. Adieu, Java!
talked about it in their leisure, but it certainly did not make the
right off and work his way back to the Indian Ocean, and put in the
ain’t no trouble ’bout _that_ speculation, you bet you. Say, gimme a

first time there’s an alarm. Yes, I reckon that’ll be the best way.”
hearn me: he’s crazy, s’I; everything shows it, s’I. Look at that-air
of means; go _before_ breakfast.”
I took the bag to where it used to stand, and ripped a hole in the
Richmond................................... Mr. Kean.
give a big surge to bust his way in and get a look, and the way I lit
“He has made me so happy,” said she, one evening, “by telling me that he was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring! I had not believed it possible.”
main one; and when I begun to get towards our house I aimed my eye and


his tail. Then the Lion began to swim with all his might toward the

After dinner the duke says:
“But then I should not have had my wonderful brains!” cried the
who in the dingnation’s a-going’ to _pay_ for it? Do you reckon your
“If one could but go to Brighton!” observed Mrs. Bennet.

for the first time in his life he was too tired to chase a butterfly
a-trying to steal out of slavery, and his name is _Jim_—old Miss

whom I spoke. All over the district people were dining and supping;
X.


“Oh then—some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Our instrument is a capital one, probably superior to —— you shall try it some day. Do your sisters play and sing?”
pay. Then we got out, and I was in a sweat to get away; but nothing
“A farmer by the name of Silas Ph—” and then he stopped. You see, he
“If fifteen cows is browsing on a hillside, how many of them eats with
for a moment there was silence. And then began a shrieking and a
rush by and get away, but a lot of dogs jumped out and went to howling
gripped his hand.
said, “you must tell me; for it is very uncomfortable walking in the
A telegram has just arrived announcing that the Russians are to leave Erzeroum directly after the surrender of Batoum. Parleys with Turkish authorities are going to be immediately entered upon. Oh, what joy, joy, joy! It is almost too good to be true!

We took seats in the omnibus belonging to the Hôtel de Paris, drawn by three richly harnessed grey mules with half-shaven tails like poodles. After lunch we went out for a stroll round the town, which does not differ greatly from other European cities. There is a continual thoroughfare in the streets of Madrid. We made our way with difficulty through a crowd of lookers-on surrounding a mountebank who was selling an elixir against toothache of his own concoction. He was standing on a chariot, dressed up in a swallow-tail and silk hat, and uttered in a loud voice the panegyric of his remedy. When passing the Royal Palace we saw a squadron of Blue Hussars, a company of infantry and two cannon drawn by mules, who came to relieve the guard. This ceremony takes place every day, and always gathers a great crowd, kept back by a line of soldiers. Before returning to the hotel we went through the Museum where we admired the marvels of art painted by Murillo, Velasquez, Michael Angelo and other celebrities. Murillo’s “Madonna Anunziata” and Tintoretto’s “Paradise,” an immense picture in which appears, between the chorus of angels, the lovely face of the painter’s wife, attracted particularly our attention. A party of negroes, very up-to-date, were walking about the Museum and seemed very interested with all they saw.

and stood around the stile a while, and then went on around the garden

But then, to a far greater extent than now, the difficulty in the minds of unbelievers was the inconsistent lives and character of professing Christians. The European population was by no means a good example of what the Christian religion did for a man; of course, in many cases the difficulty arose from the common mistake of supposing that because a man had a white face and came from a Christian country he was necessarily himself a Christian. A wealthy native merchant who was growing old and could speak in Danish, English, and French, came with this respectful inquiry—“Sir, be not displeased, I wish to ask you a question. Do all Europeans speak like you?” To this Schwartz made answer that all Europeans were unfortunately not true Christians, but there were many amongst them who were sincere and real in their belief in Christ, and these prayed for the conversion of the Hindus. This was, however, a surprise to this honest and venerable inquirer, and he frankly expressed his opinion of the Christians with whom he had met, who at any rate were Europeans: “You astonish me, for from what we daily observe and experience we cannot but think them, with very few exceptions, to be self-interested, incontinent, proud, full of illiberal contempt and prejudice against us Hindus and even against their own religion, especially the higher classes. So at least I have found it with the majority of those with whom I have had any intercourse.” Still more plainly did the girl pupil of a Hindu dancing master retort when Schwartz told them that no wicked and unholy person could possibly enter the Kingdom of heaven. “Alas, sir,” she cried bitterly, “in that case hardly any European will ever enter it.”
The remaining Monkeys threw pieces of stout rope around the Lion and
“Our fort,” he writes, “contained the best part of the inhabitants of the country, who flocked hither to escape the unrelenting cruelty of the enemy. Daily we conversed with these people and tried to convince them of the vanity of their idols and to induce them to return to the living God. They readily own the superior excellence of the Christian doctrine, but remain in their deplorable errors for various frivolous reasons. It were to be wished that the country people having suffered nearly four years all manners of calamity would consider the things which belong to their eternal welfare, for which my assistants pray and labour in conjunction with me. But though this fruit of our labour has not hitherto answered our wishes, still I am happy in being made an instrument of Providence to instruct some and to warn others. Who knows but there may come a time when others may reap what we are sowing.”
wide and full of rushes—and ducks too, you might say, in the season.

they did twenty-four hours of work, as even on earth is perhaps the


I longed for the winter to be over; the days passed slowly, very slowly. I was in very low spirits and wanted Sergy most awfully, my one desire was to see him; I thought of him morning, noon, and night. He had grown so dear to me that I could not do without him. We corresponded regularly and I only lived from letter to letter. Every morning my father entered my room, sat down on the edge of my bed and dropped a letter into my lap. Sergy wrote such delightful epistles which I devoured greedily.
fancied there might be other men upon Mars, perhaps inferior to

“If Oz had taken a dose of the same courage he gave me,” added the

told him he could cure anybody with it and fetch witches whenever he
“Why, Aunt Sally, there ain’t but nine spoons _yet_.”
hands; but I recollected it wouldn’t be much like the king to let
I shall again suppose, as another result, that it has been a mistaken notion, to imagine that the revenue of the People must be lessened, in order to increase that of the Prince:—What is that to the Prince—what is it to the People—provided both be now convinced, that it is not possible to enrich the one, either really or nominally, without enriching the other in the same manner, and in the same proportion?
end was still embedded. As soon as Ogilvy saw me among the staring
“Miss Elizabeth Bennet.”
breakfast.
to crying fit to bust.
Their organisms did not sleep, any more than the heart of man sleeps.
a spider.

said, at Neasden. But they did not come into my brother’s view until
Thence I would make a big detour by Epsom to reach Leatherhead.
In Richard III.!!!
“He meant, I believe,” replied Jane, “to go to Epsom, the place where they last changed horses, see the postilions, and try if anything could be made out from them. His principal object must be to discover the number of the hackney coach which took them from Clapham. It had come with a fare from London; and as he thought the circumstance of a gentleman and lady’s removing from one carriage into another might be remarked, he meant to make inquiries at Clapham. If he could anyhow discover at what house the coachman had before set down his fare, he determined to make inquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible to find out the stand and number of the coach. I do not know of any other designs that he had formed; but he was in such a hurry to be gone, and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that I had difficulty in finding out even so much as this.{359}”

judged we could get some of them again. No, there warn’t no real

It will not be in regard to the situation of a country, which might allege a difference of 7 or 8 per cent. in its prices, as an insurmountable bar to competition, that I shall examine in what manner that very competition might be established; I shall suppose a nation in the 6th, 7th, and 8th hypotheses, wherein wheat is rated at 40s. per quarter, by a series of revolutions in the coin, or a multiplication of taxes, or by an increase in wealth; and I shall place it in opposition to another nation, considered as paying few or no taxes, and humbly consuming her wheat at the rate of 26 or 27s. the quarter.
and kill people who come near them, but they cannot get out of it. . .
combines with argon to form a compound which acts at once with deadly

sorts of little knickknacks and jimcracks around, like girls brisken up
SINGAPORE
Civilizing Huck.—Miss Watson.—Tom Sawyer Waits.
“How does I talk wild?”
The agents of the Volunteer Fleet gave us constant news of the Nijni-Novgorod. The last news were rather alarming. The boat had left Hong-Kong on the 28th September and hadn’t arrived at Nagasaki at the end of October. Days rolled on and nothing further was heard of the missing ship. At last we had a satisfactory telegram from Vladivostock, announcing that our household and trunks had arrived in safety. The unloading of the boat was done at once, and our servants took the train to Nikolskoe. A boat named the Khanka was waiting for them on the “Oussouri” river. Our servants must hurry as fast as possible in order to arrive at Khabarovsk before the “Amour” was frozen. In the beginning of November our trunks had not yet reached Krasnoyarsk, and the “Amour” was beginning to get covered with ice; in a short time all communication with this Cossack settlement, which is three hundred miles away from Khabarovsk, will be interrupted. Sergy wired to the captain of the Khanka offering the sum[380] of one hundred roubles to his crew, if they managed to arrive at “Novo-Michailovsk” before the river was altogether frozen, but the captain did not manage it however, and we got news that the Khanka with its thirty-five passengers, was caught by the ice within a few miles of a small village called Kroutoberejnaia, where the boat will be obliged to winter. Some of the passengers, a travelling dramatic company going to act at Khabarovsk among them, managed to make their way to that village. The passengers could find only one cottage to shelter them all. My parrot, who travelled with our household, helped to keep everybody in good temper, repeating his favourite cry “stuff and nonsense!” And thus, thanks to “Polly” good-humour was re-established, but not for very long, for no supplies could be got in the surroundings of Kroutoberejnaia, and the provisions on the boat coming to an end, the passengers had the prospect of starvation, as well as the danger of being attacked by “hounhouses” (Chinese bandits.) My husband sent a dozen Cossacks to protect them. It was with great difficulty that these men got to the village where the passengers of the Khanka were sequestered, the roads being almost impracticable. However my husband succeeded in sending a hundred carts to bring over our luggage. The first transport had arrived at last, but instead of our pelisses, for which we waited with such impatience, the trunks contained only our summer things, and in what a lamentable state! The band-boxes containing my hats were completely turned into pancakes. On the 29th November the last transport arrived with 120 big cases. All day long the unpacking was going on, the work of convicts, while joiners and upholsterers were busy mending our furniture. Many valuable things were completely ruined.
found him awake I reckoned we could put up a yarn for the family that
from the outside.



“Yes, of course,” replied Oz. “I am tired of being such a humbug. If I


the time; so at last Bud seen it warn’t any use, so he stopped and
But it may be urged, a man buying stock in the public funds, would lend to the seller (were no such funds established) the sum which he gives for his purchase.—That he might do so, there is not the least doubt: But could he depend on receiving the money at the time appointed for the repayment? May not the best man to-day, be a bankrupt to-morrow, and break for a million; and if the enterprise, to the execution of which a merchant appropriates, to be paid in six months, that portion of his capital,[46] which till then has been to him unprofitable, should require that punctuality which alone could insure its success, will not prudence compel him to give up six months interest, that his undertaking may not be left entirely to chance?—Will not the public have lost the fruit which might have been reaped from that dormant capital, had the owner been at liberty to dispose of it?—And, will the same public flatter themselves that the six months interest which the merchant was obliged to sacrifice, in order to secure the execution of his plan, will not be reckoned in the expenditure?
supposes they must have filled outside London, for at that time the




largest place the Martians had made—and from behind these heaps there
That was the order I wanted, and that was the one I played for. I
We spread the blankets inside for a carpet, and eat our dinner in
country of the West, and the ground was untilled.


In the main hall of Madame Tussaud’s Museum an orchestra was playing. Amongst the many wax-figures we saw groups of Royalties in the robes and jewels of other times. We were in the company of all the remarkable old Kings and Queens of England and France. We stopped before William the Conqueror, asking Matilda of Flanders to sit down, and Richard Cœur de Lion in domestic argument with sweet Berengaria, whom Madame Tussaud describes in the catalogue as a “Fair flower of Navarre.” Feeling thirsty we entered a bar-room, where we took a sherbet. The waitresses who served there were negligently dressed, with their fringes kept in curling-pins. Their reign only begins at night, when they put on their best attire and try to make themselves irresistible to their customers.
Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr. Darcy, was in such misery of shame that she could hardly keep her seat. It drew from her, however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually done before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to make any stay in the country at present. A few weeks, he believed.
which was a little bigger, and she would turn into the room with her
of being watched, I beheld something crouching amid a clump of bushes.
for noise and horse-play.
moon, and tears running down her cheeks; and she had an open letter in
“To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is, above her ancles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! what could she mean by it? It seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence, a most country-town indifference to decorum.”
the hard floor would not hurt their feet. Of course they took pains not
In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister; and oh! how ardently did she long to know whether any of his were directed in a like manner. Sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than on former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notion that, as he looked at her, he was trying to trace a resemblance. But, though this might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to his behaviour{322} to Miss Darcy, who had been set up as a rival to Jane. No look appeared on either side that spoke particular regard. Nothing occurred between them that could justify the hopes of his sister. On this point she was soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurred ere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted a recollection of Jane, not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of saying more that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared. He observed to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and in a tone which had something of real regret, that it “was a very long time since he had had the pleasure of seeing her;” and, before she could reply, he added, “It is above eight months. We have not met since the 26th of November, when we were all dancing together at Netherfield.”
But when I got to shore pap wasn’t in sight yet, and as I was running
the mob would get nearly to them they would break and skaddle back out

hidden stood out now gaunt and terrible in the pitiless light of dawn.
XIX.	Moscow	135



the straw I am stuffed with would come out, and that would spoil the
“I was your father’s friend, and I’m your friend; and I warn you _as_ a
wives quarrels considable; en dat ’crease de racket. Yit dey say

We shall weigh anchor only to-morrow morning, because it is dangerous to sail on the “Soungatcha” by night, the river being very narrow and winding. After supper the sailors lighted up the boat with Bengal fires, and barrels of burning tar were placed along the banks of the river. I sat up half the night on deck, stretched in a basket-chair chatting with Mr. Li about St. Petersburg, and awakening so many far-off memories.


 “Courting on the Sly”


Heading to Chapter XL.	278
they warn’t. The frocks was hung along the wall, and before them was a
country, broken here and there by intervals of dimly glowing and
dressed in a pretty green silk gown, entered the room. She had lovely
again—I couldn’t help it, and I couldn’t rest easy. But nothing come of
And oh! how happy we shall be!
[Pg 58]
The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay to Mr. Wickham’s charge exceedingly shocked her; the more so, as she could bring no proof of its injustice. She had never heard of him before his entrance into the ——shire militia, in which he had engaged at the persuasion of the young man, who, on meeting him accidentally in town, had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life, nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what he told{256}

she could find no one to love in return, since all the men were much
foot, and was giving it up. But they didn’t yet a while. They turned
October 14th.—Our Consul gave us to-day a first rate dinner. His house is very stylish: all his servants are christened Chinamen, who have come from Pekin, where they form a large colony. Their ancestors were Cossacks taken prisoners by the Chinese in the seventeenth century.
“Honor bright, your majesty, I’m telling you the truth. I hain’t been
there was in the country.”
“Tenderly flirting”	290

My first act on coming to this water was, of course, to slake my
“Well, you’re innocent, ain’t you! Does three hundred dollars lay


government had gathered at Birmingham, and that enormous quantities of
“I shall take the heart,” returned the Tin Woodman; “for brains do not
gone and he was around again. I made up my mind I wouldn’t ever take


They found the ladder so heavy they could not pull it up, so the
got a long ways below the town. We come in sight of the little bunch of
“George Jackson, sir. I’m only a boy.”
“Dear Lizzy!”

and nonnamous letters from the robbers, and get up and down the

his corner, waiting for her.
sweeps!”

Our walks through the Exhibition lightened visibly our pockets. The prices of all the objects exposed for sale are exorbitant, money melted like snow and we came home utterly penniless.


August 12th.—I saw a mirage to-day: a lake with some trees around appeared on the horizon. In the desert in fine weather, mirages are often to be seen, but they always appear in the form of water.

LXII.	Chicago	332
2dly. It is no less impossible to imagine, that the number of sailors being nearly in a triple proportion to what it was, and the quantity of exports probably augmented on account of the burden of the outward-bound ships, a diminution should have taken place among that class of people, equally precious to the State, for establishing and ascertaining its wealth and strength, as the cultivation is indispensable to secure and support its very existence.
brother had come.
“Well, then, you’ll have to stay in the cabin when me and Jim leaves.”
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
horse rose close upon him, and in another moment, half rising, he had
kind, but the kind that makes you feel like when you are eating bread
The little vessel continued to beat its way seaward, and the ironclads
greasy blue woollen shirt, and ragged old blue jeans britches stuffed
back, clawing at the air—bang! goes the second one, and he tumbles
CXIV.	From Singapore to Suez	478
“No, indeed. I don’t know anything. You see, I am stuffed, so I have no



“Yes,” I said.
“No, I didn’t lose it all. I on’y los’ ’bout nine of it. I sole de hide

out—big enough to let me through. Well, it was a good long job, but I

then _them_ again; and then says: “These old letters is from Harvey
months it takes to show on her if she’s got it.’ But never mind, if you
canoe?”



the smouldering pine woods that sheltered the second cylinder. As it
a heap of fiery ruins. Then the Thing shut off the Heat-Ray, and

only one dog, but he made a most powerful racket, and he kept it up
huge snowcaps gather and melt about either pole and periodically

dispense with muscular exertion at a pinch.
me and my sisters any way you want to, and don’t give us no receipt for
At the age of four I could read and write fairly well, and chatted freely in French. I was immensely proud when my nurse ended putting me to bed in the daytime, and when I was old enough to sit at table, able to handle my knife and fork properly. My greatest delight was to ride on my brothers’ backs and to be swung by them in a sheet, that they held by the four corners and lifted me as high as they could, whilst I crowed gleefully, my bare legs waving happily in the air. Mamma hastened with my nurse to my rescue, and carried me off, paying but little attention to the wild shrieks with which I requested to be tossed higher and higher. There was a speedy end to all this fun; destiny itself interfered to stop these aerial gymnastics: I had a bad fall one day, tumbling out of the sheet, and my infatuation for this sport disappeared completely.

Well, Aunt Polly she said that when Aunt Sally wrote to her that Tom

It was a source of infinite delight to me to creep on the knees of Mr Vremeff, an intimate friend of my parents, a charming old gentleman with snowy white hair, and hear him relate entrancing fairy tales for which I had an insatiable appetite. As soon as he had finished one story, I asked for another and another.

he can’t? _I’ll_ take it out of you. Who told you you might meddle with

Towards the beginning of May, in consequence of a sudden burst of hot weather, we left the town and betook ourselves to Petrovski Palace, the French Exhibition was just opposite the Palace. It was a grand affair; lots of people were flocking in to see the splendid show. Punctually at ten o’clock in the morning we heard the whistle announcing the opening of the Exhibition. Every time I visited it I felt myself as if transported by magic from Moscow to Paris. All the sections are very interesting and instructive. My cousin, Prince Leon Galitzine, one of the richest wine makers in the Crimea, had a splendid stand where he regaled everybody gratis with his wines. I dreaded to pass close by, because my cousin always forced me to taste the different sorts of wines, which made my cheeks, already burning like fire because of the great heat, pass gradually from red to crimson, and it was most unbecoming.
Next day was Sunday, we went again to the cathedral to hear mass. It was the archbishop who officiated this time and also in Japanese. During the Holy Sacrament he said a few words in Russian to us. The baptised natives were sitting on the floor on their heels. I saw women suckling their babies, and was very much astonished when a little Jap came running to his mother, and springing suddenly on her lap, began to suck her with great appetite. We invited the archbishop to dine with us at the hotel. He was not a bit a bigot, he ate meat and listened with pleasure to the sounds of a waltz played by an orchestra during dinner-time.
Wednesday, for Ryo Janeero, where my uncle lives.”

Since then he had been skulking along towards Maybury, in the hope of
running in the street, distant drumming, and a clamour of bells. Red

makes one forget he is afraid.”
and his family must do it, and he mustn’t eat and he mustn’t sleep till
Under this point of view, the idea I start deserves to be examined; but I once more entreat the reader not to pronounce finally upon it, until it has undergone the full exposition which I propose to give it. Nor shall I think I[79] have written in vain, if I succeed only in making it appear so feasible, as to induce some abler hand more deeply to investigate it. Where is the man who would not wish to find it true? where is the man who could have an interest in finding it otherwise? I confess, perhaps to my shame, that it has engrossed my attention for a long series of years; I apply it to every thing, I square it with every thing; and the more I consider it under all the suppositions which my fancy suggests, the more I compare these suppositions with all the facts which it is possible to ascertain, and which seem to bear any relation to the subject, the more am I convinced, not only that the matter stands thus, but even that it is impossible it should be otherwise.
again, but only for a minute; I reckoned I wouldn’t stay on hand till


On the third day of the Christmas week, the Goldes organised dogs’ races on the ice. Five pairs of dogs dragged the sledges. The fancy took me to experience that mode of polar locomotion. I established myself sideways on the shaft with my legs projecting over the sledge, and was afraid all the time of the dogs who ran behind me biting at my heels; they really looked as if they contemplated making their lunch off my legs.
Christian Frederick Schwartz. (From a painting in the possession of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge)			Frontispiece
As long as we shall suppose, in a country standing by itself, the same products, the same consumption, the same quantity of money, the same freedom, no reason can ever be assigned for an increase or falling-off in the price of any article generally known, and of general use; but,
and not say nothing about it, nor let anybody know, because we wanted
Page	149,	last line, for 1581, read 1551.

“No, but there won’t be nobody to see what I look like, _anyway_.”
they done it. The price of the paper was two dollars a year, but he
“There is one thing,” I said, to allay the fears I had aroused; “they
“Certainly. But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a most natural consequence of the prejudices I had been encouraging. There is one point on which I want your advice. I want to be told whether I ought, or ought not, to make our acquaintance in general understand Wickham’s character.”
Oh what a booby, dear, I was,

“Your father’s estate is entailed on Mr. Collins, I think? For your sake,” turning to Charlotte, “I am glad of it; but otherwise I see no occasion for entailing estates from the female line. It was not thought necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh’s family. Do you play and sing, Miss Bennet?”



swiftly into the luminous clearness above the clouds in the western



“Heave that blame lantern out o’ sight, Bill!”


dark, dimly seen objects lying in contorted attitudes here and there.
have folks around then.

that ten cents? Give it here.”


about temperance and such things till the old man cried, and said he’d
It is marvellous to see what the faith and persistency of these brave men could accomplish. This is what Ziegenbalg writes about the building of their little church:

of unripe wheat—reached Chelmsford, and there a body of the

CHAPTER THE LAST.
“Lady Catherine,” said she, “you have given me a treasure”	200
the truck was a thousand times bigger than any of the mice who were to
future ordained.
already extended far away to the east and west—to the Byfleet pine
It’s the way they always do.”
Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those in the room.
“This is my fight,” said the Woodman, “so get behind me and I will meet
“The present always occupies you in such scenes—does it?” said he, with a look of doubt.

respectable and well brung up; and had a character to lose; and folks
heard anything like it.

I can sum up all that I have said hitherto, by transcribing a couple of pages out of a pamphlet written in America in the year 1774, laid before the Academy of Sciences in 1778, and printed at Paris in 1781. I should certainly be excusable had I no other motive in this respect, than to prove that my opinions are neither suggested by, nor depending on circumstances. The reflexion contained in the following quotation from that pamphlet, on the war that broke out in 1779, is but a survey of the new order of things, which would not have presented itself to my mind, had it not been in my power, even then, to have published in several large volumes, that which I now comprise within three hundred and some pages, in order to render its perusal less laborious to the reader.
14thly,
is possible to imagine, a sky of gold, barred with long transverse
and taking possession of the conquered country. They do not seem to


ferry-boat hunt, and right away after he up and left. Before night they

antagonist with astonishment. To their intelligence, it may be, the
blubbers out a pious goody-goody Amen, and turns himself loose and goes
Shepherdson or bust. Well, dey’ll be plenty un ’m dah, I reck’n, en you
of civilisation, of the massacre of mankind.
he’d druther not take a child away from its father. So Judge Thatcher

family would take supper here with them this evening, and help set up
covered with wrinkles, her hair was nearly white, and she walked rather
“City life does not agree with me at all,” remarked the Lion, as they
man lying. He was as black as a sweep with the black dust, alive, but

“_Good_-bye. I’m going to do everything just as you’ve told me; and if


rattled and a bottle smashed, and then came a heavy bump against the
torrent of Black Smoke, from which the ironclad drove clear. To the


mouth of White River, and it took us three days to fix it. Which was
though I did not know his name—and accosted. But it was scarcely a time
At last the farewells were over. Groups collected on the wharf and tried to say still more last words and good wishes to their friends crowding against the rail. The Peru whistled a prolonged note, the gangway was hauled up, the moorings were cast off, and the steamer glided quietly away from her stopping-place, carrying us to Asiatic shores and an unknown future. Sergy waved his hand cordially to Mr. Artsimovitch and the Vice-Consul. I stood beside him all smiles. A tugboat towed us with some difficulty among the numerous boats surrounding us, and we sailed through the narrow entrance of San Francisco, known as the Golden Gate. We are hopelessly off from terra firma for eighteen days.
“Run fast,” said the Scarecrow to the Lion, “and get out of this deadly
two or three inches deep in _all_ the places. The hogs loafed and
Elizabeth obeyed; and, running into her own room for her parasol, attended her noble guest downstairs. As they passed through the hall, Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and drawing-room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be decent-looking rooms, walked on.{434}
contrasted conspicuously with the Sabbath-best appearance of the people

Our four days’ stay at Chicago seemed very short to me. Every morning we went to visit Chicago’s World Fair. The exhibition commemorated the fourth century of the discovery of America by Christopher Columbus. The day was Sunday. A holiday crowd pushed and elbowed about the various attractions, middle-class people for the most part, and negro beauties and dandies. We walked through the sections of the Exhibition, where nearly all the exhibited objects are provided with the curt warning: “Hands off!” The Americans in general, do not shine for their politeness! Whilst standing before a show-window, a policeman approached us and asked what nation we belonged to. We said we were a company of French tourists who had come to see the World’s Fair.
Now at the time we could not understand these things, but later I was

THE EXODUS FROM LONDON.
no food, or no drink either, on the eleventh or the twelfth day.
with his coat sleeve.
[Image unavailable.]


Thereupon the Wicked Witch enchanted my axe, and when I was chopping
The Scarecrow, who was in the lead, finally discovered a big tree with
to lay in another lot. But we got them laid in, and all the other
name of the one we got aground on—or—Now I struck an idea, and fetched
rest of his life trying to turn the pirates into the true path; for he
“Then you must go to the City of Emeralds. Perhaps Oz will help you.”
 “Here I is, Huck”
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The voice of the void

After some delays, caused by the incessant warfare in the district, he started on his journey inland to Tanjore, and arrived there on the 20th April, 1769. His first duty was to visit the mission stations and schools and then he sent word that he would like to interview the King or Rajah. This was readily complied with and he tells us how favourably impressed he was with one who, though naturally much under the influence of the Brahmins, had an open and intelligent mind toward religion. Tuljajee was by no means an ordinary Indian despot; he was a good Sanscrit scholar and had indeed written some poems in that classic language; with a desire for information and of a natural dignity of manner, this ruler, then in the prime of life, was quite worthy of that special interest[Pg 91] which Schwartz was destined to have in him. That he was fond of ease and sought any means to indulge his fancies might be expected. At five o’clock in the afternoon of the 30th April, 1769, Schwartz was ushered into his presence, finding him seated on a magnificent couch suspended from pillars and surrounded by his high officers of state. The missionary was invited to take the seat provided before him and a good feeling was established when in Persian the visitor spoke to the King, who said immediately that he had received a good report of him. Schwartz thanked him warmly for these kind expressions and trusted that God might enrich him with every blessing. As the interpreter had not fully delivered this statement, one standing by said, “He wishes you a blessing.” The King was pleased. “He is a priest,” he said, and was still further impressed when Schwartz, to enable him to understand more easily, began to speak in Tamil.
“Now oil the joints in my arms,” he said. And Dorothy oiled them and
Chicago is a dirty, noisy commercial town, and looks a tremendously busy place. The smoke of the factories blacken the sky; the soot stains the sparrows, making them look quite black. We walked through the broad, straight streets of the Great Grey City, stopping before the shop windows. We saw a shop bearing the inscription “Food and dog’s medicine.” In a hair-dressing shop a woman was sitting on a high seat with her back to the window with wonderfully splendid hair falling down to the ground. We entered the shop to see if the woman’s face corresponded to her beautiful golden hair, but, alas, she appeared to be very unattractive. Her hair served as advertisement for a patent elixir to make the hair grow. How people have sometimes to earn their bread and butter.

the girl was thankful the Scarecrow did not have to eat anything, for
curate, who was still timorous and restless, was now, oddly enough, for

May 31st.—Nine o’clock in the morning. In the distance the coasts of the Caucasus rise with snow-clad mountains. We soon reach Baku, the town of petroleum. A noisy crowd of Persians, Tartars and Armenians throng on the quay; the hubbub of voices was almost deafening. My husband profited by the stoppage of our ship to visit the town. He was shown the famous Black Town, where the naphtha is exported. According to the most recent theory, the substance of naphtha is the produce of the petrification of animals and marine plants. It is not easy to make a fountain of naphtha spout out, sometimes it is only after two years of boring, the layer of ground penetrated being sometimes twenty metres thick.

judged I’d got to do the other thing—lay for them and eavesdrop. About
“Our habits of expense make us too dependent, and there are not many in my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention to money.”


mo’ mixed-up en splendid den what dat one wuz.”
middle of his cavortings on the stage; then somebody give a signal, and
Once or twice of a night we would see a steamboat slipping along in the
staple again, and the door was locked as good as ever. Tom was joyful.
and fewer of the other flowers; and soon they found themselves in the

they were afraid of me, and promised to do anything I wished them to.
they wanted them, but because they had a bit of money that would make
March 21st.—My husband introduced an American clergyman to me this morning, who is working as a missionary in Erzeroum. He has come to ask Sergy to give him a large supply of bread and money, but Sergy said that he could give him but a small sum. The Russian government has, in fact, assigned a monthly subsidy for the poor population of Erzeroum, not only for the Protestants, but for all the indigent, independent of their religion or nationality.

Both of them spoke up and says:

So I wilted right down on to the planks then, and give up; and it was
CHAPTER XII.
land.

up-bound steamboats fight the big river in the middle. I told Jim all
heard the pattering of tiny feet, and many of the small gray mice came

his eye lights up like he judged he’d got the king _this_ time, and
“Hello, Jim, have I been asleep? Why didn’t you stir me up?”
This they decided to do. The next day they called the Winkies together



From time to time disguised Turkish officers, spies for certain, began to appear in Alexandropol. There were some skirmishes in the town, unfriendly demonstrations between the Christians and the Mussulmans. A great activity was noticeable in Alexandropol, and I listened to the sounds of drums and the rumble of the big guns through the streets with increasing uneasiness.
grounds, were the heaped masses of earth about the sixth cylinder. A

And did the sad hearts thicken,
“It is more than I engage for, I assure you.”
with the ashes of the diseased; and says if his poor brother laying
CXVII.	Port Saïd	485

But is the nation in general as happy in our days as it was in those of William III? Have those causes, which tend to produce a decrease in the population, no manner of influence on the people’s happiness? And is not the reality of such causes more self-evident, than the pretended proofs adduced universally in favour of its increase?
“Well, I reck’n he _did!_ Dey warn’t gwyne to mix you up in it. Mars
curate, or of sumptuous dinners; but, asleep or awake, I felt a keen
Leatherhead, terrified, in danger, mourning me already as a dead man. I
around front, and see her setting there by her candle in the window
left as far as they could see; and, besides, they did not dare change
There were already a couple of score of passengers aboard, some of whom

dark, and now and then she would belch a whole world of sparks up out
wreckage of the familiar: patches of ground exhibited the devastation

A month after dispatching this letter he was taken ill with hoarseness and a sudden cold, and his old friend, Dr. Kennedy, hastened to his side and gave him all the relief possible. But his sickness was very distressing, and he had to endure much pain. It was a comfort to him that his colleague, Mr. Kohlhoff, was present during this indisposition, and on the 4th November, 1797, he was further cheered by the unexpected arrival of the Rev. J. D. Jaenické, his beloved helper. Although greatly weakened and sometimes suffering so much that he cried once: “If it be the will of the Lord to take me to Himself, His will be done. May His name be praised!” He never showed any impatience, and his mind was at peace. He was able to sit up still, and asked that the Sunday School children should gather in his parlour and sing their hymns to him, and then he gave them a little talk on some Bible subject, and commended their young hearts and lives to God in a touching prayer. This was the usual practice every evening, and when the[Pg 175] native children had gone home he called the English boys and girls to come near to him to read their chapter, and then join in singing their favourite Watts’ hymns. One of which he was very fond, and called his beloved hymn, began with the words:

CXII.	Saigon	474


I was to be taken out in St. Petersburg for my first season, and presented at Court. How my heart palpitated at the idea of my first dance! I made my appearance in public in Kharkoff, at a ball given by the Count Sievers, the governor of the town. I am not afflicted with shyness, nevertheless I was seized with a sudden access of bashfulness on entering the ball-room, and feeling horribly uncomfortable with the big bouquet that my brother had given to me, I flung it on the floor in the ante-room. It was not long, however, before I was quite at my ease again, enjoying the ball enormously, and dancing to my heart’s content all through the evening.
We spent a whole fortnight in Paris, which is a lively and beautiful city, the jolliest place in the universe. I was quite in raptures with the French Metropolis and the numberless attractions it offers. I woke the next morning in high spirits, pleased with the idea of being in Paris. The street-vendors and news-boys awoke me early, shouting each their wares. Here goes a woman wearing a hat with the inscription “I shave dogs,” who is leading a beautifully shaven poodle by the chain. The poor animal seems quite worn out, and lies down on the pavement at every two steps. I was overcome with pity for that unfortunate living advertisement and felt still more sorry for a young woman turning a barrel-organ with one hand, and rocking her baby, laid down in a sort of cradle, with the other one.
axe and they all passed through the forest until they came to the road
Them poor things was that glad and happy it made my heart ache to see
could a got out of that window-hole before this, only there wouldn’t be
[Image unavailable.]
Either
July 27th.—The weather is quite warm, one feels that we are nearing Japan. Half-naked Japs and Chinamen lay stretched on mats in the hold, fanning themselves lazily, whilst their spouses are occupied in dressing their hair. They grease it with an ointment which makes it stick together, and mould it into a solid mass. This marvellous structure is left without being taken down for a week at a time. These voluntary martyrs sleep with their necks resting on a sort of wooden footstool placed under a thin bolster, which supports the neck, not the head, so that not one hair should be put out of place. They are evidently acquainted with the French proverb which says, Pour être belle il faut souffrir.
It was on the sixth day of our imprisonment that I peeped for the last

“Bilgewater, kin I trust you?” says the old man, still sort of sobbing.
stared, and says:
 Keeping off Dull Times
home and amongst strangers that way. You can’t be too careful. I ain’t
mineral waters; and the water mains and drains are empty. Well, I was
meant that I was in a crossing; so I changed off and went that way.
less than an hour.”
“And that, I suppose, is one of your sisters?”
London about me gazed at me spectrally. The windows in the white houses
was all nice pictures, I reckon, but I didn’t somehow seem to take to

let him, before this beautiful creature, she looked upon him sweetly,
reached Edgware about seven, fasting and wearied, but well ahead of the
up the river, and her relations down the river, and about how much
slipped around through the woods and come in from behind without their
[487]
and
bank, the warships turned northward, and then abruptly went about and

“By all means,” cried Bingley; “let us hear all the particulars, not forgetting their comparative height and size, for that will have more weight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I assure you that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in comparison with myself, I should not pay him half so much deference. I declare I do not know a more awful object than Darcy on particular occasions, and in{65} particular places; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening, when he has nothing to do.”
ninety or one hundred miles. It seemed to him that it fell to earth
me than we saw either the fighting-machine we had seen before or
fresh and sweet to smell on account of the woods and the flowers; but

smashed handling-machine I came upon the red weed again, and found the

“Well, there’s five niggers run off to-night up yonder, above the head
side of the country and came to another china wall.

Let us now suppose the trade of England exhibiting to its foreign correspondents, in the year 1762, this total in exports of 13 millions (at the old prices) under the name of 14 millions 300 thousand pounds, (a price rendered unavoidable by the advance in the prices of all commodities, on account of the taxes); and let us suppose these correspondents to have, really and annually, no more to pay them than 13 millions of their own manufactures, indicated by this modest number, because they had not the honour to support, during seven years, a war the most brilliant and successful in the memory of man, in Germany, America, and India. I think one of the three following consequences must be the result:
sun at a mean distance of 140,000,000 miles, and the light and heat it
intending to give me the slip one of these days, and come back and dig

There were sad, haggard women tramping by, well dressed, with children
in two; then sometimes the one that owns the tobacco looks mournful at
people together and get them to pay to see the circus,” he explained.
dropped in our tracks and started somebody sings out:

 VI. THE WORK OF FIFTEEN DAYS.
how the people yelled and laughed, and kept it up. But I didn’t see no
used to niggers, and suppos’n’ ’em honest, like servants in England.

were like the eye sockets of skulls. About me my imagination found a
can get time to make a new one. And it’ll be the third I’ve made in
Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention of anything concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill-humour, and wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sight of Miss Lucas was odious to her. As her successor in that house, she{167} regarded her with jealous abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to see them, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and whenever she spoke in a low voice to Mr. Collins, was convinced that they were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself and her daughters out of the house as soon as Mr. Bennet was dead. She complained bitterly of all this to her husband.
slowly the hissing passed into a humming, into a long, loud, droning

only as I clambered among the ruins that I saw, with a start, this




hare-lip done the same on the other. Everybody clapped their hands and
“_Do_ with it? He can hide it in his bed, can’t he?” That’s what they
“I don’t know; leastways, I kinder forget; but I thinks it’s—”
Mrs. Berger is a really kind-hearted stewardess, and nurses me devotedly. She enters my cabin on tiptoe, bringing a soothing cup of tea with a drop of brandy, when I feel too ill to go down to lunch. But no persuasion of the motherly stewardess could get me out of my cabin, until she called in the ship’s doctor, who forced me to go on deck for a little fresh air.

had done his best, so she forgave him. As he said, he was a good man,
beast.” Here he mewed so like a kitten that Toto pricked up his ears


Malgré toutes les précautions que l’Auteur a prises jusqu’ici pour ne pas effaroucher ses Lecteurs, il lui reste un tel pas à franchir, qu’on le voit presque à genoux pour supplier qu’on lui permette de le franchir en vingt fois s’il n’y réussit pas en dix; c’est-à-dire, qu’il desire beaucoup que son Ouvrage ne soit pas condamné définitivement, avant d’avoir été lu jusqu’à la fin; en effet il n’est pas impossible qu’une proposition détachée, dont le ridicule est frappant[403] à l’exposition, devienne cependant très-raisonnable lorsqu’elle aura été successivement rapprochée de toutes celles qui doivent la suivre.—
Southend and Shoeburyness, and south of the Thames to Deal and

[510]
of their houses. You’d better go along and report yourself to
“There; I reckon it’s all right. Come in.”
“I don’t reckon he does; but what put that into your head?”

pass the night with them; for this was the home of one of the richest

and came down to the water’s edge not fifty yards from where I stood.
getting earlier now, and pretty soon some of them watchers would begin
The crowd washed back sudden, and then broke all apart, and went
“It’s good daylight. Le’s get breakfast. Make up your camp fire good.”
A multitude of dogs, I could hear, fought over the bodies that lay
the war, no bacteria except those already known as terrestrial species

“Melted! Well, that is good news, indeed,” said the man. “Who melted


Elexander when I catch you. And don’t go about women in that old
titles and estates—the infant real duke was ignored. I am the lineal
Reverend Christian Frederic Schwartz,


to Sunbury.
S’il ne résulte pas du rétablissement toujours infaillible & purement méchanique de l’équilibre dans tous les prix, que les taxes sont d’une innocence absolue en elles-mêmes;—s’il est au-delà d’une espèce de taxation, qui n’augmente la masse générale des prix que du montant précis de la taxe;—si toutes les autres n’en triplent pas l’effet;—si la plus pernicieuse, après la capitation, n’est pas celle du luxe;—& si du moment où toutes les taxes bonnes ou mauvaises, ont réagi sur tout, le fardeau de la dette nationale n’est pas évidemment nul dans tous les pays.
names of, and so called them what’s-his-name when he got to them, and
in a minute.”
[413]
So I started for town in the wagon, and when I was half-way I see a

before them a high wall which seemed to be made of white china. It was



“But upon my honour I do not. I do assure you that my intimacy has not yet taught me that. Tease calmness of temper and presence of mind! No, no; I feel he may defy us there. And as to laughter, we will not expose ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a subject. Mr. Darcy may hug himself.”
that was my money. Where is he?—I want my nigger.”

with two hundred elephants, and six hundred camels, and over a thousand
enfeebled condition, too fatigued to push on.
by the cold world, ragged, worn, heart-broken, and degraded to the
tend door for him a minute, and then he started around for the stage


heard me, and can tell what I said. Says I, for two cents I’d leave the

everybody in it he could invent, and I getting a little nervious, and
honey. Dat Jack’s a good nigger, en pooty smart.”
Reflections on the two foregoing Articles.
revolver.
and go browsing down the creek that leads out of it to find the robbers

was a small semi-detached villa, and I found nothing eatable left in
“And—may I ask?” said Elizabeth; “but the terms, I suppose, must be complied with.”
Little Tommy Barnes was asleep now, and when they waked him up he was

I was up in a second and shinning down the hill. I looked over my
and well. But to those who are not honest, or who approach him from
“I do not know when I have been more shocked,” said she. “Wickham so very bad! It is almost past belief.{280} And poor Mr. Darcy! dear Lizzy, only consider what he must have suffered. Such a disappointment! and with the knowledge of your ill opinion too! and having to relate such a thing of his sister! It is really too distressing, I am sure you must feel it so.”

Towards midday we approached Sretensk. Sergy was waiting for me on the quay, surrounded by a large suite and a group of ladies, who came up to greet me. I immediately went over to Sergy’s boat on which I received many visitors. During dinner we suddenly heard loud shouts of alarm. It was a big raft full of emigrants which had broken loose from the shore and was drifted straight on to us. It had been rather a bad moment. In less time than it takes to write, I had jumped out on the quay, and just in time, for a collision took place; the raft struck against our boat and was carried away further by the torrent. A steam-launch was sent after it, which brought it back safe and sound to the port. In the evening there were fireworks on the quay.

pitching so helplessly. It would seem they were regarding this new

the people love me. I am not as powerful as the Wicked Witch was who
“Ebenezer! Hitherto the Lord hath helped me. To-day I entered upon my seventy-first year. O the richness of His grace, compassions, and forbearance, which I have experienced during seventy years! Praise, honour, and adoration are due to a gracious God, Father, Lord and Holy Ghost for the numerous proofs of His abounding grace. Who am I, poor, wretched sinner, that Thou hast led me till now! O, my God, forsake me not in my old age but let me record, for the encouragement of others, the mercy which has spared, pardoned, and comforted me, and may they be induced to put their trust in Thee!

“Out of the way, there!” bawled a coachman, towering high; and my
watch below till twelve, but I wouldn’t a turned in anyway if I’d had a
Pap was agoing on so he never noticed where his old limber legs was



7thly.
followed, and the Scarecrow came next. The Lion, although he was
half a dozen men—Henderson, Ogilvy, and a tall, fair-haired man that I
it.”
We started in the afternoon on our way to the equatorial regions. Whilst we passed before the Khabarovsk, the sailors waved their caps and cheered us loudly.
They entered the woods, and, bidding adieu to the river for a while, ascended some of the higher grounds; whence, in spots where the opening of the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of the valley, the opposite hills, with the long range of woods overspreading many, and occasionally part of the stream. Mr. Gardiner expressed a wish of going round the whole park, but feared it might be beyond a walk. With a triumphant smile, they were told, that it was ten miles round. It settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed circuit; which brought them again, after some time, in a descent among hanging woods, to the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts. They crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of the scene: it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and the valley, here contracted into a glen, allowed room only for the stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered it. Elizabeth longed to explore its windings; but when they had crossed the bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner, who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought only of returning to the carriage as quickly as possible. Her niece was, therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house on the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but their progress was{312} slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge the taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much engaged in watching the occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talking to the man about them, that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in this slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth’s astonishment was quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of Mr. Darcy approaching them, and at no great distance. The walk being here less sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him before they met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared for an interview than before, and resolved to appear and to speak with calmness, if he really intended to meet them. For a few moments, indeed, she felt that he would probably strike into some other path. The idea lasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view; the turning past, he was immediately before them. With a glance she saw that he had lost none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his politeness, she began as they met to admire the beauty of the place; but she had not got beyond the words “delightful,” and “charming,” when some unlucky recollections obtruded, and she fancied that praise of Pemberley from her might be mischievously construed. Her colour changed, and she said no more.
grass, partly. But anyway, _one_ thing is proved—_these_ two ain’t
her Testament, and left it in the seat at church between two other
as the river carried us away.”
“No, sah; not as _I_ knows on.”

frighten him that he will grant all I ask. And if he is the lovely
to study and think again, I reckoned he was changing his mind. And so

too various for me; I couldn’t stand it. Well, when the place couldn’t
I saw a gaunt cat slink crouchingly along a wall, but traces of men


His visit to England was specially gratifying to Ziegenbalg. He was personally for the first time to meet all those good friends of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge who had so liberally supplied him with money, books and letters full of encouragement. At a meeting of the Society he was welcomed with an eloquent Latin address, to which he replied in Tamil. Before his return the aged missionary was presented to King George I, the Prince and Princess of Wales, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London and other eminent persons, and afterwards in 1717 the King wrote him a letter in Latin in which he said: “We pray you may be endued with health and strength of body, that you may long continue to fulfil your ministry with good success, of which we shall be rejoiced to hear, so you will always find us ready to succour you in whatever may tend to promote your work and to excite your zeal.”
Mr. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too much engrossed by his own thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas was his neighbour, till Sir William thus began:—

china, even to their clothes, and were so small that the tallest of

themselves.
“Well, they all do, Jim. _We_ can’t help the way a king smells; history



he discovered it only through noticing that a black mark that had been
now and then if I reckoned he could a got lost, or hurt, or maybe
Nor would it, in my opinion, be a more difficult talk to prove, that from a real and gradual reimbursement, no other advantage could result, than bringing about by degrees and more[48] imperceptibly, an evil which would prove equally unprofitable to all.
All of a sudden the lightning let go a perfect sluice of white glare,
cabs. They stopped at the Square as if undecided which way to take, and

do no good. He cussed away with all his might, and throwed his hat down
One day we made an expedition to New Jerusalem, a large monastery standing in the neighbourhood of Moscow. It is a vast stone building surrounded by a high wall, one mile in circumference. There are forty-two altars in the church, which can hold up about ten thousand people. Every Sunday the Bishop, surrounded by a group of priests dressed in white sacerdotal vestments, performs the Easter mass before the Holy Sepulchre, the exact copy of the Sepulchre in Jerusalem. There is an hospice near the church where pilgrims find shelter and board for three days at the expense of the monastery.
scrutiny of the red planet.
make a raise for me. Well, Balum he tuck de money, en when he wuz in



Darcy, after inquiring of her how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner did—a question which she could not answer without confusion—said scarcely anything. He was not seated by her: perhaps that was the reason of his silence; but it had not been so in Derbyshire. There he had talked to her friends when he could not to herself. But now several minutes elapsed, without bringing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, unable to resist the impulse of curiosity, she raised her eyes to his face, she as often found him looking at Jane as at herself, and frequently on no object but the ground. More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when they last met, were plainly expressed. She was disappointed, and angry with herself for being so.



down to the little brook and filled it with clear, sparkling water.
behave?” Then she told me all about the bad place, and I said I wished
the very end of the nineteenth century, expressed any idea that
again, and I knowed the current had swung the canoe’s head down-stream,

Q. As it is impossible to prove that such a conduct is equitable, how will you be able to prove it to be advantageous to the State?
Shall he leave industry in possession of one fifth of his former comforts?—Then industry would be debarred from the sale of that fifth part; one fifth of its artificers would be left without any other resource than that which the highway might afford, and the main object of the taxation would be defeated in the following year, unless exportation should make up to industry for the want of home-consumption, (the only one by which a State can prosper,) and the deficit of the tax laid on the home-consumption, should[211] be compensated by another tax on foreign consumption, that is on the exports.
way, and then they go out of the way. That’s what we are now—just ants.

Still, for many days they grieved over the loss of the Wonderful
They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked fast to get rid of him; and unwilling, for her sister’s sake, to provoke him, she only said in reply, with a good-humoured smile,—


Smoke came by hearsay. He heard that about half the members of the
are the most sluggish things I ever saw crawl. They may keep the pit
good when it’s cooked right—and whilst I eat my supper we talked, and
said he was going to start a band of robbers, and I might join if I

artilleryman’s teaching, I sought out food and drink. I had found oil
“Why, I never heard nothing from you,” says Aunt Sally.
decadence, the gifts to human science it has brought are enormous, and
Whatever is combustible flashes into flame at its touch, lead runs like
there to do up your majesty’s room, or something, s’posing you was up;
rubbish that drifts in. Weaklings go out again.”

We went tiptoeing along a path amongst the trees back towards the end


over.
CHAPTER CXIII

cutthroats from over in the Indian Territory going to steal your
turn, and I’d give something to know how much they’d take for it. I

near to cover Dorothy with dry leaves when she lay down to sleep. These
running up the little street in the bright sunlight just as the shop
I now return to the three millions interest brought upon this nation by the last war; and I demand, what reason can prevent similar effects resulting from similar causes?
security. Boun’ to git yo’ money back a hund’d times, de preacher says!

and should be treated with respect?”


The projector now showed the members of the crew of the ship working busily at the makeshift apparatus. They were using hand disintegrators for power supplies. The apparatus was that which they could salvage from the wreck, and faulty. Frequently as they watched they would see the connections arc across, the scene would fade, then come back as quick work repaired the connection. The disintegrator power units were much overloaded and heated so badly that they had to run them in relays. They could not attach more; there was insufficient cable.
A large portion of the cylinder had been uncovered, though its lower
nigger, and they’ve got him. Was you looking for him?”

Just then a bell rang, and the green girl said to Dorothy, “That is the
heaved and pulsated convulsively. A lank tentacular appendage gripped
“It has been a very agreeable day,” said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth. “The party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. I hope we may often meet again.”




up into the heat of the afternoon. Never before had I seen houses


“Whatever we do let us do it with humility and submit the whole to God who can mend and rectify what is amiss. When I read the Evangelists, particularly the speeches of our Saviour to His disciples towards the latter end of His ministry, I think they consist mostly of admonitions to humility. And when we consider how long God has borne with us, I think we should not soon lose patience when we endeavour to mend others. Yesterday we treated[Pg 101] in church of Ephesians vi. 1-6. To walk worthy of our vocation or calling, how necessary! And in order to do so, humility is placed in the front. Meekness follows as a consequence and forbearance. O may the Spirit of Christ lead and strengthen us at all times.”
“I beg your pardon. I will try again. At present I am not in love with Mr. Wickham; no, I certainly am not. But he is, beyond all comparison, the most agreeable man I ever saw—and if he becomes really attached to me—I believe it will be better that he should not. I see the imprudence of it. Oh, that abominable Mr. Darcy! My father’s opinion of me does me the greatest honour; and I should be miserable to forfeit it. My father, however, is partial to Mr. Wickham. In short, my dear aunt, I should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; but since we see, every day, that where there is affection young people are seldom withheld, by immediate want of fortune, from entering into engagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than so many of my fellow-creatures, if I am tempted, or how am I even to know that it would be wiser to resist? All that I can promise you, therefore, is not to be in a hurry. I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his first object. When I am in company with him, I will not be wishing. In short, I will do my best.”
a soul, and then lay down again in the shadow of a hedge. I seem to

“Won’t they hurt me?” asked the girl anxiously.
going to do?—how you going to get around it? Jim’s _got_ to do his
Original publication: United Kingdom: John Long, Limited, 1917
(White lies.)

could hear him through the blanket.
“Not a bit of it,” answered the Lion. “I should like to live here all

sounded more like the working of a gigantic electric machine than the

one day, after that, when I stole a watermelon out of the nigger-patch
after the stock.” Then he ran toward the sheds where the cows and
I spent that night in the inn that stands at the top of Putney Hill,
majestying him, and doing this and that and t’other for him, and
It was Mme. Beurgier who had lifted up the veil of our incognito by buying a sewing-machine for me. She had ordered it to be sent to Vladivostock, and the order for the machine gave the information about our party. Happily we were leaving San Francisco on the following day. I was greatly amused by the idea that it was a sewing-machine that had revealed our secret.
crying “Mother!”

part of the next until they came to the rocky plain where the Tin
a heart; for a fool would not know what to do with a heart if he had
candles, and I reckon they did; I wonder they don’t walk off with the
XIII.	Alexandropol	76




night and found the raft gone, we said, ‘That little rascal has stole
I won’t let to-morrow go by without stopping up them holes.”
near the park gate, I came upon a strange sight—a bus overturned, and

(née Princesse Galitzine)
confusion indescribable; but in and beyond the town the road forks
I now return to the point which requires no kind of supposition, I mean the real consumption.—Let[371] us pass from that very insignificant possessor of 500 properties, to the greatest Monarch upon earth.—What difference is there between his consumption and that of the meanest of his subjects?—He has the choice of every thing, such is the ne plus ultra of his power: three, four, or five pounds weight of nourishing food, are really as sufficient for the one as they are necessary to the other;—and on all points, what is the object that procures to the Monarch either advantage or pleasure, the price of which as paid by him, were it even of fourfold the value, is not exactly composed, both of the amount of the sustenance that was necessary to the production of that object, and of a sum which will infallibly pay for other productions, which must be purchased to forward new ones—from which the people will constantly have deducted their necessaries, before they are permitted to satisfy the superfluities, the luxury of any whosoever?—Such is that never-ending screw, that adorable chain, which nothing can stop or break, unless it be the insanity of a monster, who should receive that fourfold price, and bury it under ground, lest it should prove useful to society.—That wretch was very consistent with his feelings, who wished the Roman people to have but one head, that he might exterminate the whole[372] nation at a single blow; but the phœnix will ever rise from its ashes; and Humanity, with all her resources, all her rights, would be reproduced from the very stones, were it possible that not a single head should escape the sword of that consistent being who might wish to cut them all off.
down in the middle and busted, like an old basket.

then a strip of emerald green; for Oz had a fancy to make the balloon

feel any hardness against them any more in the world. It was a dreadful
“And what will they do with us?” I said.
Wizard, and then they would be vexed with me for having deceived them.
about it, and they said everybody went to the show looking very
all the other Monkeys at once agreed to the condition, and that is how
The little girl, seeing she had lost one of her pretty shoes, grew
bite us?”
left-handed look out of the corner of his eye, and so I knowed enough

reason of the other voices of the trumpet——”
leaning up against every awning-post, and he most always had his hands
My convalescence was slow; I was laid up for six long weeks, coming round from my illness day by day, and nursed with much tenderness. As soon as all danger was over, the doctor permitted me to be transferred to Dolgik, though I was still weaker than a new-born babe—a mere shadow of my former self.
you might scour at them till you rotted, and then they warn’t worth a
“That is very true,” said Elizabeth; “though it had not occurred to me before. His debts to be discharged, and something still to remain! Oh, it must be my uncle’s doings! Generous, good man, I am afraid he has distressed himself. A small sum could not do all this.”
reliable.” Then he says: “But he done us a good turn with the spoon,
entered the Throne Room he greeted her pleasantly:

Elizabeth felt that they had entirely mistaken his character, but said nothing.

LXIII.	San Francisco	338
shoulders and brown faces, and long black hair and black eyes. They

seemed as if some monstrous pen had flung ink upon the chart. Steadily,
sweat and sweat, and feel all cramped up. Well, then, the old thing


deal. After breakfast the king he took a seat on the corner of the

In passing the Public Gardens, we saw a coloured placard glued to the wall, announcing that a tribe of “Samoyedes,” brought out from Russia, from the government of Archangel, were exhibited in the gardens-enclosure. As it was a little corner of our Fatherland we went in and were greatly disgusted to see these Samoyedes devouring huge chops of raw meat, dipped in warm blood. Ugh!... the horror!... The Esquimos, after having ended their nasty meal, rode all around the gardens in small cars, driven by reindeers. There are only four of these animals left now, the rest have been devoured by the savages!
But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectation she made no answer.
In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk to Meryton, and see how everybody went on; but Elizabeth steadily opposed the scheme. It should not be said, that the Miss Bennets could not be at home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers. There was another reason, too, for her opposition. She dreaded seeing Wickham again, and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The comfort to her, of the regiment’s approaching removal, was indeed beyond expression. In a fortnight they were to go, and once gone, she hoped there could be nothing more to plague her on his account.

“Well, you just own up, first, that you _did_ hide that money there,

juice-harp; but I reck’n dey wouldn’ take no stock in a juice-harp.”
hands of the military authorities. The soldiers I addressed didn’t know
“Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane, while she was ill at Netherfield?”
the hills. On Tuesday the little party, still set upon getting across
To this specific charge Schwartz had a clear denial to give. On the occasion referred to, he was visiting some villages whose inhabitants were infamous thieves, and it is true that when he took off his stock some thievish boys did take it away. But neither that nor the buckle was stolen by Christians, they were pure heathen, and even they restored the property and handed over the boys for punishment.
couple of years; but we can’t. Things being so uncertain, what I
I join together the two balances of France and England, which probably fall much below, and which cannot be above, what I have stated them to be; and I see that those two formidable bugbears, after having annually devoured, according to their own account, 7 millions sterling, have, in the end, and very fortunately too, only digested something less than 2 millions, viz. the bugbear of France, 12 or 1300 thousand pounds sterling; and the bugbear of England, about 5, 6, or 700 thousand.

sorrowful.

farther into the sky.
of the panic—in a little island of daylight, cut off by the Black Smoke
“What are you prowling around here this time of night for—hey?”

“I am now going away to make a visit. While I am gone the Scarecrow

within twenty feet of the ground grey and indistinct and was
Release date: October 1, 2004 [eBook #36]
When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose, the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to Mrs. Collins, gratefully accepted, and immediately ordered. The party then gathered round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they were to have on the morrow. From these instructions they were summoned by the arrival of the coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr. Collins’s side, and as many bows on Sir William’s, they departed. As soon as they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her cousin to give her opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings, which, for Charlotte’s sake, she made more favourable than it really was. But her commendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means satisfy Mr. Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her Ladyship’s praise into his own hands.{209}

August 10th.—To-day I started for St. Petersburg, where I am going to spend two months. There were many people to see me off. The Grand Duke was at the station. He handed me a big bouquet and a beautiful rose-coloured satin box of bonbons. I received so many bouquets that my husband’s aide-de-camps had not arms enough to hold them. One of the lady members of our collective book for the benefit of the lepers, presented me with an enormous bouquet, bound with a white ribbon with a swallow perched on a telegraphic wire painted on it, and underneath “Revenez” was imprinted in golden letters, with the signature of all the writers concerned in the book. Before the train started the Grand Duke told me he was very pleased that I entered my car holding his bouquet, without any rivals to it.

that’s the way of it. The best way’s to let it go, and keep still about
 In a Tearing Way
room, which was the spare room, and in the night some time he got
The control ship proceeded directly to the most pleasant of the planets, with its guard, and the other ships were sent to watch the planets lest the Atomic Creatures return. Then on the planet the men began to set up one of the great receiving stations. From the sides of the ships ran mighty power cables to the powerful station. Then across space there came expert engineers, workmen, instruments and tools, working machines, constructor robots, and then great pieces of machinery so huge they could send only one section at a time. With these a new station was built to replace the temporary one.

Great Oz dwelt.
greatest city in the world just as Monday was dawning—the stream of
the bars of the gate, “I can starve you. You shall have nothing to eat
nearer her size. But I bet she done it, just the same—she was just that

“Go to the strangers and sting them to death!” commanded the Witch, and
They walked on without knowing in what direction. There was too much to be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects. She soon learnt that they were indebted for their present good understanding to the efforts of his aunt, who did call on him in her return through London, and there relate her journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the substance of her conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on every expression of the latter, which, in her Ladyship’s apprehension, peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance, in the belief that such a relation must assist her endeavours to obtain that promise from her nephew which she had refused to give. But, unluckily for her Ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrariwise.
In the afternoon the rolling of the ship increased, the wind blowing steadily across the Atlantic, raised majestic swells. Our steamer pitched and rolled like a walnut. The passengers stumbled and slipped from their chairs and sprawled on all fours without any dignity. I passed the greater part of the day in our cabin, and climbed on deck just before dinner to call Sergy. We executed a pas-de-deux in our common effort to meet; my feet suddenly went back, while my body was travelling forward. I got my feet together at last, and clung to the rail not to be swept overboard.
September 10th.—After having made a long halt at Zevine, we overtook a large detachment of emigrants going to Kars on their way to America. On the passage of the Saganlough we rejoined the rifle battalion. The officers invited us to dismount and sit down to lunch on the grass with them. When we came to Karagalis, a tiny hamlet composed of a few cottages, the hut in which we were to pass the night appeared[131] so dirty and miserable to us that we preferred to sleep in the open air, stretched on mats on the grass outside.
that?”
“‘It is true,’ I said, ‘God is present everywhere and to every one of his creatures but it does not follow from this that you are to adore and worship every creature. If you regard the heaven, earth, sun, and moon, as evidences of the power, wisdom, and goodness of God and as creatures that lead to the Creator you do well; but if you invoke the creature, you ascribe to it the glory which is due to God alone and fall into idolatry. Besides the creature is not perfect but only a frail image of the Almighty. Can an idol which is unable to see, speak, or move, adequately set forth to you the majesty, greatness, wisdom, and goodness of the living God?’
in vehicles grew more numerous every moment. “Black Smoke!” he heard
CHAPTER III.
and says:
settled down to business, and nobody in sight around the yard; then Tom

April 7th.—Our landlord, an Italian chemist named Ricci, has transformed himself into a famous physician here, his daughters go to the French school and wear “tchartchaffs,” when they start out of doors. Eleonora, the eldest Signorina Ricci, came in this afternoon to announce to me the visit of the wife of the President of the Town Council; I ran to the window and saw an araba (a Turkish chariot,) covered inside with red cloth approaching our house. The araba was drawn by a pair of beautiful white bullocks, a red-fezzed boy of about twelve was following behind mounted on a tiny pony, and two male servants were running on each side of the vehicle. When the carriage stopped at our door, three women, wrapped up in black veils, stepped out of the chariot and entered our drawing-room. The President’s wife, an outrageously painted young woman, was followed by her little son and two female slaves, a white one and a negress; Turkish ladies of fashion never go out without their attendants. The negress in her scarlet vestment with large printed black flowers reminded me of “Asucena” the Troubadour’s mother. She has been brought over from Stamboul where her mother still resides in the Sultan’s harem. This black Venus was bought by the President’s wife for the sum of a thousand francs. Through Eleonora as interpreter, I was able to carry on a conversation with my Turkish guests, in which harem life was the only topic. The Mussulman women are incapable of seeing anything beyond it, their souls are asleep, they are dull and unimaginative, without any keen interests, and deplorably ignorant; most of them never turn the leaves of a book or trace a word upon paper. The President’s wife told me that she was surnamed “Blue Hanum” on account of her blue eyes. She paid me a lot of compliments and appeared very astonished that my husband allowed me to associate with men and that he permitted me to appear before them unveiled. She plagued me with childish questions about my sentiments towards my husband, and in her turn she related to me the sensations that she experienced at the time when her husband had two wives; both consorts cried bitterly each night when their Pasha gave his preference to the rival spouse. She told me with a smile of satisfaction that her rival died a few years ago, leaving her an undivided sovereignty over her husband. Harem slavery begins at the age of twelve, till then Turkish girls are as free as European children, but on[108] her twelfth birthday the girl becomes a woman, she adopts the “tchartchaff” and is condemned to see the world darkly through a veil. Henceforth she is a prisoner in the harem.
pallet in it. The king said the cubby would do for his valley—meaning
“The spiteful old ladies.”
But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner’s curiosity; it was not their wish to force her communication. It was evident that she was much better acquainted with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of; it was evident that he was very much in love with her. They saw much to interest, but nothing to justify inquiry.
there was scarcely enough for herself and Toto for the day.

mixed, and then they bowed and said, “Our duty to you, sir, and madam;”

The scene of this combat does not lie in England; we have seen that there they think of nothing more than to keep the balance even, and make up, as fast as possible, each in his own department, for the injustice granted to the importunity and cupidity of others, without any other inconvenience arising therefrom, than that of having a very large surplus, excessively dear, and that of not being able to procure what is wanted at the lowest rate, nor of the best quality. Even Smuggling, which follows certain regulations, with bludgeons and pistols in hand, cannot produce any great effect on the sum of national labour, though it may perhaps considerably influence the revenue of the Exchequer; it is probable[266] that the smuggler exports as much English work into France as he imports of French work into England; and that, in this respect, the gain of the most fortunate individual comes to very little: my intention is, to speak here of a combat, which has lasted a hundred years between the French fair trader and the American smuggler.
thoughtful optimism. I remember he wound up with my health, proposed in
At last I answered him. I sat up.
“His life, his heroism, his proud reserve and confident assurance that all his failings and faults arose from a single-minded desire to carry out the intentions of his time, are summed up in the words by which he declared his own vindication and his accuser’s condemnation:
of yellow brick and turned again toward the Emerald City where the
“This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. I had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I must so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly foolish.”
the practicability of his astonishing scheme, and the reader who thinks
The above question, so apparently simple, so readily to be resolved in the affirmative, would grow perhaps more intricate, were it ushered in by some previous queries, which might permit us to foresee the effect of the national wish, when accomplished, if it could be obtained by the easiest answer that could be given; for the case, no doubt, is not to examine, whether it would not be better to have borrowed, without being[122] obliged to return, than to pay an interest after the money has been borrowed. In the state of things, the question alluded to, to be fair and within the pale of common sense, must mean nothing more than this: Would it not be better, that the proprietors of the two millions interest, paid to a foreign nation, should make their residence in England? And in this case it leads us, by degrees, to the following query: Would it not be better, if all and every man in the world, who has money to spare, should come to spend it in London? Then indeed London would be a dear place to live in! And this is, methinks, the most dreaded effect arising from taxes. O ye, whose covetousness knows no limits but the bounds of the earth! do ye pretend to be the sole inhabitants thereof? Can ye draw off the capitalists of a country, without completing its ruin? Can ye effect its ruin, without losing both that portion which the produce of your soil secures to you in the produce of that nation’s industry, and the share which the produce of your industry has secured for you in those of her soil?
I hain’t ever goin’ to tell.”

The nominal Value of the generality of Exports, considered in different Periods, and with respect to its Effect on foreign Correspondence.
“Nemmine why, Huck—but he ain’t comin’ back no mo.”
petting and flattering up the snakes and spiders and things, on top of
On the other side of the great mountain range they found their answer. Here, too, was a vast area of green, rolling meadow, but far out across it they could see a great bare spot, where only the dark, raw soil was visible. They swung the armada toward it, and shot forward to investigate, but before they had come within a thousand miles of the spot there suddenly appeared as from nowhere an army of the Atomic Giants. No doubt this bare spot was their home, and from the great area it seemed that they must inhabit it in great numbers. The powerful radioactive effects of their force-fields no doubt killed every plant.
head and pitched around and yelled; but every time he come to himself
“Has your governess left you?”
be all right.”
ain’t you? And you can’t get away with that tooth without fetching the

Bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Bennet spent the morning together, as had been agreed on. The latter was much more agreeable than his companion expected. There was nothing of presumption or folly in Bingley that could provoke his ridicule, or disgust him into silence; and he was more communicative, and less eccentric, than the other had ever seen him. Bingley of course returned with him to dinner; and in the evening Mrs. Bennet’s invention was again at work to get everybody away from him and her daughter. Elizabeth, who had a letter to write, went into the breakfast-room for that purpose soon after tea; for as the others were all going to sit down to cards, she could not be wanted to counteract her mother’s schemes.

about the old palace, and their branches stretched gaunt and dead, and
satisfied; so the duke got out his book and read the parts over in the
Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaid whether Pemberley were not a very fine place, what was the name of its proprietor, and, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for the summer? A most welcome negative followed the last question; and her alarms being now removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the next morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike to the scheme.
My husband’s health had failed a good deal of late, and the doctors have ordered him an absolute change and rest. Sergy was overworked and a good holiday will set him right. He wants to take a long leave and go abroad for some time. Kissingen was recommended by the doctors, but we meant to have a jolly good time and went first to Paris to visit the World’s Fair. Mr. Shaniavski was nominated as representative of the Turkestan section and was sent before us to Paris. He met us at the Gare du Nord, accompanied by four Bokharians and a Turkoman, sent to the Exhibition to look after the rich objects exposed by the Emir, and to serve also as a vivid decoration in the Asiatic section, where the place of honour was assigned to Turkestan. These decorative personages, when passing through St. Petersburg, attracted much curiosity by their magnificent costumes, it is not astonishing therefore that they produced a great sensation in Paris. When our train came to stop at the platform, we saw a crowd of eager spectators waiting to see the arrival of the exotic personages whom the Orientals had come to meet, expecting to see no less a person than a Rajah. People stood on chairs to get a peep at us, and great was their disappointment, when simple mortals clad in European dress, stepped out of the train.
The above sum regulated the markets; coffee was set up at eight or ten pence per pound; sugars sold per quintal thirty or forty shillings currency; the inhabitants were in perfect ecstacy: I shall say nothing of the device practised in[261] order to hook in, by means of those 2000l. about thirty times the value of that sum, and yet satisfy every body: that is foreign to my subject; but I will say, with pleasure, that an honest gentleman, moved at the distressed situation of another who was dunned by merciless creditors, gave him in hard cash a trifling part of the sum he wanted, and for the remainder furnished him with his own bills of exchange on London, assuring him that those to whom they might be presented would take them for cash without any demur. Those bills had fully the promised effect; the same gentleman obliged several other persons; the benefactor soon met with competitors, all difficulties disappeared by means of scraps of paper on London, and the debtor who, on the landing of the precious metal, had deemed himself too lucky to sell his coffee at ten-pence and his sugar at 40 shillings, now offered impudently his bill on London, indorsed by some patron, if a creditor refused to give him 45 shillings for his sugar, and twelve-pence for his coffee.
welcome. But he needn’t a worried—it was jest what I was at.”
From Paris we went to Spa, a bright watering place, lying in a high valley of the Belgian Ardennes, three hours by rail from Brussels.

We dined in haste at the hotel and walked to the quay, where we took the steam-launch belonging to the hotel to be transported to the Melbourne. I felt at home when I stepped over her familiar side. Some of the old faces were among the crew, and the head steward was the same.

CHAPTER II.
the old pine table, still a-begging; and then he went to crying. I
come back to his own.”
say, “What d’ I tell you?” Then one of them says, kind of soft and
“Congratulate me. I am going to Oz to get my brains at last. When I
in no sense a signal, but merely the expiration of air preparatory to

reply—the man was killed—decided not to print a special edition.
“Well, my idea is this: we’ll rustle around and gather up whatever

“E. Gardiner.”





Then as now too often the argument against Christianity is the inconsistency of those who profess to believe in it. This strikes a Mohammedan, for instance, very much, and while it is, of course, no logical excuse, he will make much of it to the detriment of the power of the Gospel. Schwartz met with this on every hand; Anglo-Indian Society was not at a very high moral[Pg 85] water mark in the days of the Company, and it did not escape the criticism of those dark and watchful native eyes. There is an incident which illustrates the position at Trichinopoly in the year 1768.
That night, too, there was another jetting out of gas from the distant
“After the tenth shot they fired no more—at least, until the first



A long, miserable night followed. Oh, what I was suffering! What agonies, what tortures! Worn out with tears, I fell asleep, but was suddenly awakened by a loud voice pronouncing my husband’s name. A moment later I was out of bed and rushed to the window, seized with a sudden dread that some misfortune had happened to Sergy. It was an express messenger covered with dust, who had brought a letter from my husband. He wrote from the first halting place of our army, a Turkish village situated about ten miles distance from Alexandropol. I read that epistle till the pages were blotted with tears. Short as it was, there was enough love in it to make the letter doubly dear. I kissed the paper over and over again; then I kissed the “My own darling” with which the letter began, kissed the “Your loving husband” with which it ended.
river, everything was quiet, and we paddled over to the tow-head and hid
Every Sunday I go to church, where I try to hide myself behind one of the pillars, having the uncomfortable sensation of being stared at. The deacon of the cathedral is a legendary personage. He was born in America from a Russian colonist and a negress. In his early youth he embarked as ship-boy on board an American vessel which was wrecked on the shores of Vladivostock. One day, as the boy sat on the beach-seat overlooking the sea, forming plans for his future, dressed in rags and famished, he attracted the attention of a rich Austrian merchant, who took him to his house and employed him as aid to his cook. But the[381] castaway, hearing the silent call of the sea, ran away to America, where he became a sailor and ultimately an officer. His second escape from shipwreck was still more romantic. The current sent him with two comrades on a block of ice on which they passed eight days. Being famished, they began by eating their boots, and then decided that one of them should be sacrificed to be devoured by his companion, they drew lots and that terrible fate fell upon the poor castaway who offered up a prayer for preservation, and vowed that if this miracle was vouchsafed, he would become a priest. He had given himself up for lost and was about to blow out his brains, when they perceived, quite close, a black mass. It was an enormous seal which they killed on the spot, and which served as a sumptuous feeding-ground until they were rescued by a passing ship. The future deacon, in gratitude, carried out his promise.
happened to think of something. I knowed mighty well that a drownded


company, and while the woman was busy laying the table the man asked:
“the Martians are coming!” and hurried to the next door.


piece and some other money, but I reckoned I better save it, because
burning without the accompaniment of an obstructive crowd. A little
across the common. The Cardigan men had tried a rush, in skirmishing
old man’s britches after he goes to bed, and shove off down the river

very sorry he was so pushed, and so was everybody; they wished he could
So the next day after the funeral, along about noon-time, the girls’
though he may have reached Omaha safely, and be there now, for all we
“Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs, between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end, and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me, because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get a girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that he is mercenary.”

“It is written inside the Golden Cap,” replied the Queen of the Mice.
name, and the names of the very dogs, and begged and _begged_ him not
he allowed he would let him scrabble them all on. Jim said it would
Then the faint metallic jingle returned. I traced it slowly feeling
“Care of him! Yes, I really believe Darcy does take care of him in those points where he most wants care.{232} From something that he told me in our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted to him. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I have no right to suppose that Bingley was the person meant. It was all conjecture.”
_Huck Finn._
“Yes, I have had a letter from him by express.”
Much to my egotistical delight, the roads were encumbered by falls of great masses of snow, and we were to have a whole week of each other’s company until they were cleared away. In my secret heart I was cherishing a wild hope that new avalanches would fall and that we should be the longer together, but, alas, the roads were getting all right and the dreaded day of our second separation rapidly approached. I grumbled a good deal at having to leave Tiflis again; I had never been so sorry to quit any place before.
Mr. Darcy’s letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style, and still different from either was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in return for his last.
Towards midday, when we entered the “Golden Horn,” we were plentifully rewarded for our bad passage by the enchanting view of the bay, the harbour of Constantinople being one of the most beautiful in the world. We passed the Citadel and the “Dolman-Baghtcha Palace,” where Mourad, the deposed Sultan, is kept prisoner; all around the castle stood sentinels. We glided now along the verdant shores of “Boyouk-Dere,” the summer residence of the Ambassadors, and dropped anchor at Constantinople.
’mongst de drift-wood, en kep’ my head down low, en kinder swum agin de

Every day in Paris was too short for me, and I left the Great Babylon with immense regret. Sergy went to Kissingen to begin his cure, and I returned to St. Petersburg to publish my book.

“Watchman your grandmother,” I says; “there ain’t nothing to watch but
who was just unlocking the doors of the public-house by Horsell Bridge.

“The Shepherdsons don’t, father. They always take advantage.”
buil’ a biler-factry; en den he could shet _down_ de biler-factry when


[Image unavailable.]


the conflict. As I came through Ockham (for that was the way I
Tin Woodman wept for several minutes, and she watched the tears
greenish smoke came out of the pit in three distinct puffs, which drove
[2]Jerome, Epist. lxx.
But the raft was nearly done, and after the Tin Woodman had cut a few
makin’ it mighty warm for the rummies, I _tell_ you, and takin’ as much



either side of his funny, wee nose. Toto played all day long, and
 XV. WHAT HAD HAPPENED IN SURREY.


green he was completely covered with cracks, running every which way
had been driving, while a third with difficulty held the frightened
MARRIAGE
 Sherburn steps out

With the Chinese every month begins with the new moon. This year the 14th January was their New Year’s day. The Chinese quarter of the town was brilliantly illuminated, and a procession of monsters made of paste-board, marched through the streets. An enormous dragon made of paper, a nightmare beast, was carried by Chinamen hidden from[384] view, giving the complete illusion that it was creeping along. The monster is so long that a score of men is required to carry it. Behind the dragon came Chinamen oddly arrayed, carrying garlands of coloured paper-flowers and chains of fantastical form hanging on long poles, bearing huge banners with different religious devices. All this was accompanied by a loud flourish of trumpets, and the gongs made all the time an infernal noise.

waiting, and everything was proceeding in the most ordinary way. A boy
of the poppy bed to the green fields, where he could breathe the sweet,
as made me pity him. Then he slept awhile, and began again with renewed
a chaw of tobacco of their own. They get all their chawing by
Already they were busy with returning people; in places even there were
having a better time in the graveyard. She was at work on what they
bill he was the “world-renowned Shakespearian tragedian, Garrick the



“Yes. And couldn’t the nigger see better, too? After midnight he’ll
to Foulness and Shoebury, to bring off the people. They lay in a huge
lonesomest sound in the whole world.
Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew; and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character, in her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time all intercourse was at an end. But at length, by Elizabeth’s persuasion, he was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation; and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her resentment gave way, either to her affection for him, or her curiosity to see how his wife conducted herself; and she condescended to wait on them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the visits of her uncle and aunt from the city.
That night when I went to bed, passing through the dark corridor, I suddenly felt a tight grip on my wrist, it was Hermann, who giving an emphatic tug at my skirts, said in a husky whisper, “That’s you who must have clean hands, because you are a young lady, and as to me, I may have them dirty as much as I like. I cannot be always washing myself and always thinking of my nails, like grown ups!”
things you’re going to do. The pitifulest thing out is a mob; that’s

through their destructive tubes advanced. Never once, after the Martian
“I wish you joy. If you love Mr. Darcy half so well as I do my dear Wickham, you must be very happy. It is a great comfort to have you so rich; and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will think of us. I am sure Wickham would like a place at court very much; and I do not think we shall have quite money enough to live upon without some help. Any place would do of about three or four hundred a year; but, however, do not speak to Mr. Darcy about it, if you had rather not.


sides out. As for the Ball of Fire, the false Wizard had hung that also




remember them, half the time, somehow. Yes, she said, say she has run
live there? says I. No, nobody, says they. I didn’t say any more, but I

more!”
dressed; his head was bent under his body, and he lay crumpled up close

“I ain’t joking, either.”
Towards evening, the town became animated; the streets were full of bustle. Europeans go out in the streets bareheaded, and seem to have forgotten their hats.
straight for Mr. Lothrop’s.”
Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence would give pleasure; and, instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with the liveliest emotion, that she was the happiest creature in the world.

CHAPTER LXXIV

“The widow, hey?—and who told the widow she could put in her shovel
“Hello!” replied the Tin Woodman calmly.
2dly.
about it seemed charred as if by a sudden explosion. No doubt its

If the re-coinage has been in the proportion necessary to re-establish exactly the former facility in all the channels of circulation, the former prices will return after the inevitable fluctuations; the quarter of wheat, for instance, which at some period of the revolution, will have been raised to 20s. will fall back to 5s. as it was at the beginning, although the shilling contains only half the silver that it contained at that time, 130 grains we shall say, instead of the 260 or 264 it contained in the year 1300.

a-floating along, talking and singing and laughing. But somehow I
KOBE
set her loose! Boys, we done it elegant!—’deed we did. I wish _we’d_ a

after all; but the old crow comforted me, saying, ‘If you only had
We sit down to meals four times a day. At nine o’clock breakfast, at one—tiffin, at four—tea, at seven—dinner. The food is good, but a trifle heavy for the tropics. To-day after dinner, the officer upon duty came up to Sergy to show him the log-book in which all the incidents of the day are noted. At nine o’clock precisely the sailors sang the evening prayers, after which all the passengers went to bed.
“Indeed, mamma, you are mistaken,” said Elizabeth, blushing for her mother. “You quite mistook Mr. Darcy. He only meant that there was not such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in town, which you must acknowledge to be true.”
Ten planets they found circling the mighty star.
Everybody agreed to that. So I judged they had our gang in a pretty
“The officers of the ——shire”


ELIZABETH’S spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Mr. Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her. “How could you begin?” said she. “I can comprehend your going on charmingly, when you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first place?{467}”
whistling and giving off volumes of steam, sails being let out,


September 25th.—Yellow spots appear on the water, it means that we are going to enter the great Yang-tse-kiang, the sacred Blue River; a false nomenclature, as the river is not blue but yellow; just the same as the Blue Danube, which nobody has ever seen of azure colour. We anchored at the mouth of the Woosung, nine miles off Shanghai and have to wait till morning, the water being very low.

“Well, I never got ’em, Sis.”

We got an old tin lantern, and a butcher-knife without any handle, and

hain’t come back sence, and they ain’t looking for him back till this
third Martian, erect and motionless like the others.
XCI.	Nice	433
“Over there in the river,” answered the little girl.
born a rabbit Snippy.”
was about two mile above our house; so sometimes when I went up there
Then the ring-master he see how he had been fooled, and he _was_ the
evident magnitude of the trouble. His mind was inclined to run, even as

her and killed her,” she replied.

suff’rers; because as soon ’s it’s found out ’at we didn’t own it—which
and nobody to bother us. I had to skip around a bit, and jump up and

arch of the Tower Bridge, and the sailors and lightermen had to fight
“Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say; but it would not be near so much like a ball.”



“And my mother—how is she? How are you all?{351}”

the man on horseback stopped. My brother looked up, and the man with

I went on into a little bower, and sat down.
Employed as a Protestant missionary from the Government of Denmark, and in the same character by the Society in England for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge, he, during a period of fifty years, “went about doing good,” manifesting, in respect to himself, the most entire abstraction from temporal views, but embracing every opportunity of promoting both the temporal and eternal welfare of others. In him religion appeared not with a gloomy aspect or forbidding mien, but with a graceful form and placid dignity. Among the many fruits of his indefatigable labours was the Erection of the Church at Tanjore. The savings from a small salary were, for many years, devoted to this pious work, and the remainder of the expense supplied by individuals[Pg 188] at his solicitation. The Christian Seminaries of Ramanadporam and in the Tinnevelly province were established by him.
I stood regarding this. I made a step towards it, and it rose up and
no use, none of the genies come. So then I judged that all that stuff
“While I can have my mornings to myself,” said she, “it is enough. I think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements. Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of those who consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for everybody.”
looked at me steady without ever smiling, and says:
“On looking up.”
“How can I get there?” asked Dorothy.
it is not only more distant from time’s beginning but nearer its end.
hats of the men were blue; the little woman’s hat was white, and she
She was roused from her seat and her reflections, by someone’s approach; and, before she could strike into another path, she was overtaken by Wickham.
hundreds of yards further than you could see before; dark as sin again
immense and powerful wings on his shoulders.

November 14th.—A grey sky, grey rocks, and a grey sea! The wind has gone down and everybody is on deck. On a placid sea we sped westward, sighting the mountain ranges of Corsica and Sardinia.
and started upon their journey.
and violet were as black to them. It is commonly supposed that they
he had a bullet in the calf of his leg.
“The first pleasing earnest of their welcome”	345
around the neck of each mouse and the other end to the truck. Of course
of a spinning-wheel wailing along up and sinking along down again; and
The moment had arrived when we could delay our departure no longer. Before leaving, I was bidden to Gatchina, the summer residence of the Empress Dowager, which is an hour by train from St. Petersburg. On arriving at Gatchina I found a carriage from the Imperial stables waiting for me, which took me to the Palace. I was ushered through a long suite of rooms into the one where the Empress sat. Her Majesty came up to me and was most gracious and charming. She said kindly words of welcome and wished me a happy voyage.
Sergy wanted me at first to remain in St. Petersburg with my mother, promising to come and fetch me in the middle of the winter; but the thought that I should be separated from him for so long a time, and that seas should roll between us, was a veritable torture to me. Where he goes, I am bound to go too. I can’t let him go alone to that impossible land, I can’t and I won’t! My only wish is for Sergy’s happiness. I am ready to sacrifice anything for him and to brave a lot of discomforts. I am determined to follow my husband. At least we won’t have half the globe between us.


for articulate conversation.
buildings suddenly set alight.
The Gilberts have left Erzeroum for good this morning. I got up very early to bid them good-bye, and saw two enormous vans standing before their house-porch. One of these vans was to serve as a carriage, for there are no post-chaises to be had in Erzeroum, and the other vehicle was[126] assigned for the luggage. When everything was ready for starting, the Gilberts clambered into their waggon which began to move, jolting heavily on the rough pavement, and soon disappeared out of sight round the corner of the street. I was awfully sad to lose the Gilberts, but the thought that we should soon follow their example, consoled me.
There is one reason, amongst others, why the memory of Christian Frederick Schwartz deserves to be kept green in the history of missions. It is not generally known that the consuming passion for the conversion of the heathen which burned in the soul of Henry Martyn was kindled at the torch of this veteran witness for the faith. While still a student at Cambridge, Martyn was profoundly impressed by reading his journal and letters, and when he himself arrived in India, ten years after the death of Schwartz, he took counsel with many who, like Dr. Kerr, could stir his heart with first-hand stories of the venerable missionary they had known and loved so well. Happily for us, these records which moved Martyn so deeply are still preserved, fresh and vivid, a veritable classic in missionary literature.
“It is the same at the South,” said another, “for I have been there and

sunken, and seen in remote perspective, they appeared far less

support of personal familiarity with these several forms of speech.
I judged he wouldn’t come back that night. I waited till I reckoned he


“Can you spell, Buck?”



Possiet is marked as a town on the map, but it looks more like a large village. We saw from afar a triumphal arch erected on the quay. The crowd on the pier cheered us loudly. Nine big barges approached our steamer and the disembarking of our soldiers began. Sergy went on shore to visit the camp, situated twenty-eight miles from Possiet. As to me, I installed myself with my book on deck, awaiting his return. A fresh breeze succeeded to the stifling atmosphere. How nice it was!
“By this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried letter; I wish this may be more intelligible, but though not confined for time, my head is so bewildered that I cannot answer for being coherent. Dearest Lizzy,{336} I hardly know what I would write, but I have bad news for you, and it cannot be delayed. Imprudent as a marriage between Mr. Wickham and our poor Lydia would be, we are now anxious to be assured it has taken place, for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone to Scotland. Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left Brighton the day before, not many hours after the express. Though Lydia’s short letter to Mrs. F. gave them to understand that they were going to Gretna Green, something was dropped by Denny expressing his belief that W. never intended to go there, or to marry Lydia at all, which was repeated to Colonel F., who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from B., intending to trace their route. He did trace them easily to Clapham, but no farther; for on entering that place, they removed into a hackney-coach, and dismissed the chaise that brought them from Epsom. All that is known after this is, that they were seen to continue the London road. I know not what to think. After making every possible inquiry on that side of London, Colonel F. came on into Hertfordshire, anxiously renewing them at all the turnpikes, and at the inns in Barnet and Hatfield, but without any success,—no such people had been seen to pass through. With the kindest concern he came on to Longbourn, and broke his apprehensions to us in a manner most creditable to his heart. I am sincerely grieved for him and Mrs. F.; but no one can throw any blame on them. Our distress, my dear Lizzy, is very great. My father and mother believe the worst, but I cannot think so ill of him. Many circumstances might make it more eligible for them to be married privately in town than to pursue their first plan; and even if he could form such a design against a young woman of Lydi{337}a’s connections, which is not likely, can I suppose her so lost to everything? Impossible! I grieve to find, however, that Colonel F. is not disposed to depend upon their marriage: he shook his head when I expressed my hopes, and said he feared W. was not a man to be trusted. My poor mother is really ill, and keeps her room. Could she exert herself, it would be better, but this is not to be expected; and as to my father, I never in my life saw him so affected. Poor Kitty has anger for having concealed their attachment; but as it was a matter of confidence, one cannot wonder. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you have been spared something of these distressing scenes; but now, as the first shock is over, shall I own that I long for your return? I am not so selfish, however, as to press for it, if inconvenient. Adieu! I take up my pen again to do, what I have just told you I would not; but circumstances are such, that I cannot help earnestly begging you all to come here as soon as possible. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well, that I am not afraid of requesting it, though I have still something more to ask of the former. My father is going to London with Colonel Forster instantly, to try to discover her. What he means to do, I am sure I know not; but his excessive distress will not allow him to pursue any measure in the best and safest way, and Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Brighton again to-morrow evening. In such an exigence my uncle’s advice and assistance would be everything in the world; he will immediately comprehend what I must feel, and I rely upon his goodness.”
off perfectly flat; won’t amount to nothing—won’t be nothing _to_ it.”
So they all made fun of him, and called him cry-baby, and that made him



He was most fifty, and he looked it. His hair was long and tangled and
at it so fiercely that he cut it in two. At once the tree began shaking
But his 20 millions revenue, have, as I have said, the same component parts as the 40 millions which he is obliged to give up for the expences of cultivation, and other incumbrances attending property:—he cannot therefore increase them to 25 millions, without raising by one twelfth the total amount of the 60 millions of landed revenue; this will at once carry up the quarter of wheat from 40s. to 43s. 4d.: this is therefore an advance of 8⅓ per cent. on his commodities:—upon which we must observe, that no increase will take place[213] in the wages of the mechanic, or of the husbandman; for the objects of luxury are the only ones which we suppose to have been taxed: such is the infernal side of this heavenly system.—Yet this is not all.
“This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,” said he. “How near it may be to mine, I cannot pretend to say. You think it a faithful portrait, undoubtedly.”



“Oh, gracious!” cried Dorothy. “Are you a real witch?”
must be, if the nebular hypothesis has any truth, older than our world;


stanchion and traded his new coat for a jug of forty-rod, and clumb
people make me do things that everybody knows can’t be done? It was
Travelling into Tinnevelley, we find Schwartz busy establishing a Christian church at Palamcotta where a number of converts had gathered together and with the help of some English gentlemen had built a little church, and here he preached to a good congregation, with eighty persons, to whom he administered the Sacrament. He is not, however, unmindful of the need of discipline and some elements in the church were rather unsatisfactory. “But this,” he adds, “is no more than what are usually united together, wheat and chaff.”
People were actually clambering down the piers of the bridge from
CHAPTER CXVI
“I will not be interrupted! Hear me in silence. My daughter and my nephew are formed for each other. They are descended, on the maternal side, from the same noble line; and, on the father’s, from respectable, honourable, and ancient, though untitled, families. Their fortune on both sides is splendid. They are destined for each other by the voice of every member of their respective houses; and what is to divide them?—the upstart pretensions of a young woman without family, connections, or fortune! Is this to be endured? But it must not, shall not be! If you were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to quit the sphere in which you have been brought up.”

“He knew how to give me brains, and very good brains, too,” said the

“When it comes to that, maybe you’ll let me ask, what was _you_


nearly busting. I popped out to my armpits and blowed the water out of
nigger till he’s been in the State six months. Here’s a govment that

The sentimental German passenger did not coo his romances to me now. He suffered from liver complications and sea-sickness, and lay stretched on a bench on the deck, looking dreadfully green in the face.

the pit, advancing from the direction of Horsell, I noted a little
cabin considerable, first on one leg and then on the other, holding


and rehearsing—as the duke called it—going on all the time. One
alike.”
“No, sah—nuffn else.”

regulations; but there’s one thing, Tom Sawyer—if we go to tearing up


“Now I am well aware,” he goes on to say, “that some will accuse me of having boasted. I confess the charge willingly but lay the blame upon those who have constrained me to commit that folly. I might have enlarged my account, but, fearing that some characters would have suffered by it, I stop here. One thing, however, I affirm before God and man, that if Christianity in its plain and undisguised form were properly promoted, the country would not suffer but be benefited by it.

“It don’t make no difference how foolish it is, it’s the _right_
thinking. Then he says:
barometer. I had slept but little, though my wife had succeeded in
don’t look to me like the truth is better and actuly _safer_ than a


Night festivals were given three times a week at the Trocadero, when the Eiffel Tower was illuminated with thousands of electric lights of all the brightest colours of the rainbow, as well as the beautiful “Fontaines Lumineuses,” lighted up in a wonderful way.
my head.”
anything seaward. And then a swift movement of the steamboat (she had
DEAD LONDON.
While we laid off after breakfast to sleep up, both of us being about


4. _Here, homeless and friendless, after thirty-seven years of bitter
stones at the giant mass. After I had spoken to them about it, they
the mass, surprised at the size and more so at the shape, since most

of the threatened shipping.
the water’s edge seemed to me to be for a moment horror-struck. There
I didn’t care nothing for the compliment, but I was glad to be let off,

Huckleberry; we’ll come down to the village on her.”
he took great care never to be cruel or unkind to anything.

grateful, and said I was the best friend old Jim ever had in the world,

beasts; and that’s what it’s got to be. That’s why I watched you. I had
“And so you ain’t had no meat nor bread to eat all this time? Why
“Indeed!” cried Wickham, with a look which did not escape her. “And pray may I ask—” but checking himself, he added, in a gayer tone, “Is it in address that he improves? Has he deigned to add aught of civility to his ordinary style? for I dare not hope,” he continued, in a lower and more serious tone, “that he is improved in essentials.”
Tom says:
And pursuant to this idea of a holiday, he insisted upon playing cards
“Nothing is more deceitful,” said Darcy, “than the appearance of humility. It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an indirect boast.”
wall again to his place. You could see it was a great satisfaction to


“Not much. I’ll stuff Jim’s clothes full of straw and lay it on his bed
It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for Longbourn, before she told her sister of Mr. Darcy’s proposals. To know that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own vanity she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation to openness as nothing could have conquered, but the state of indecision in which she remained as to the extent of what she should communicate, and her fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurried into repeating something of Bingley, which might only grieve her sister further.{272}
kinds of adventures they’d had in other times along the river.
the texas and the pilot-house; and do you reckon anybody’s going to
We had to leave Paris for the sea-shore and proceeded to Dieppe, where we took a room in a private house, intending to remain there a fortnight at least, but after our first bath we decided to leave on the morrow to another bathing resort, for the water wasn’t pleasant and the landscape discouragingly rain-blotted. It was to Trouville we gave the preference, and went quietly out of the house with our dressing-bags in rather guilty haste at daybreak, before our landlord was up, to catch the first train to Trouville, feeling like fugitives from justice. We walked on quickly towards the railway station, as there were no cabs about at that early hour. Sergy had to come back again to fetch our boxes and pay our account; he told our bewildered landlord that we were suddenly summoned to Paris on business, but it did not prevent, I am sure, the old man from taking us for a pair of unlawful lovers, who had come stealthily to spend a clandestine night at his house.
lightning, saw between my feet a heap of black broadcloth and a pair of







I should like to start as soon as possible.”
kept her very snug and warm, and she slept soundly until morning.
Gradually now the men within were awakening. The scene in the control room shifted to the flagship's engine room, as clicking relays shifted the connection to another viewplate on the distant ship. The mighty engines loomed huge above the tiny cots of the sleeping engineers. Here too was the mighty cylinder, but now it was seen as the core of a gigantic coil, into which ran great cables from huge, soft-purring generators. Even the forces of material energy required straining to operate that great electron distorter.


“Well, did you have to go to Congress to get it?”

tired of it, and allowed they would “lay out a campaign,” as they


be and what they was for. And told him how to keep a journal on the
Towards evening we arrived at Brientz, an Alpine village buried among the hills, at a few minutes’ distance from the very summit of a huge mountain clad with perpetual snow. As it was getting dark and we had still a long way before getting to Chamonix, our charioteer pulled up his horses at the door of a cosy hostelry where we put up for the night. The inn proved to be old-fashioned and clean. We were shown by the inn-keeper into a clean, white-washed room, where supper was offered to us, consisting of cold chicken and eggs. A robust maiden with blooming country cheeks and rather staring eyes, came in and laid the cloth. Directly after supper, I returned to my room and was already in bed when Sergy brought me a glass of fresh foaming milk. The rain had ceased by this time and we breathed the good scent on the pasture grounds coming through the open window. A stream, tumbling its way busily over the rocks, made a never ceasing music of its own, and a jingle of bells came down from the village church ringing for vespers. The nights are chilly at the height of five thousand feet, and this time we were glad to have eider-downs to keep us warm. There was a great storm in the night; it is well our charioteer advised us to stop here. We were out of bed at break of day to resume our journey. The weather promised to be fine, the sun shone brightly. We saw on the verge of a forest a withered old granny bending under the weight of a bundle of twigs and fallen branches that she was bringing home for fuel. As we drove along, whilst our horses were climbing slowly up a steep hill, we encountered a band of children with knapsacks on their backs, climbing up the hill on their[185] way to school. The girls had quill-pens sticking from under their hoods. Sergy spoke to the children and made them a little examination in geography. Their answers were satisfactory, they pointed out on their maps the place where Russia stands and received some coins in recompense. Soon before our eyes, amongst the glittering peaks of the Alps, rose the majestic “Mont Blanc.” Not long after, Chamonix was reached.
“It is you,” said he; “the man from Woking. And you weren’t killed at
Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired he would tell her what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections. Mr. Darcy replied, with great intrepidity,—

We are in a long, narrow pass: above us hang abrupt rocks and below flows a serpentine river. Our train makes right angle turns, and it seems as if we were turning all the time on the same spot. Towards night we entered the States of Sierra Nevada; we are now at only a day’s journey from Mexico. The towns, rivers and mountains have Mexican names. A Mexican pedlar selling curios and silver filigree jewellery, entered our car. Sergy bought me a finely worked brooch in the form of a mandoline. We enter a narrow wooden tunnel built to protect the line from stone avalanches, which took a whole hour to go through.
I plunged at once into all the gaieties of St. Petersburg society. Everything was so new and delightful to me! My first social appearance was at a great Court ball. I was brought out by my aunt, the Princess Kourakine, a lady of honour to the Empress. I had such a ravishing ball dress with a very long train. One of mamma’s friends had lent me a carved ivory fan of great value, which I dropped in the snow stepping out of the carriage. The fan lost some of its lustre, but what a dazzling lustre presented itself to my eyes when I entered the palace and mounted the splendid staircase lined with powdered footmen in gorgeous liveries. Everything was magnificent and I enjoyed the ball madly. I was not acquainted with a single soul in the place, nevertheless I became instantly surrounded by a circle of partners. I never amused myself so much before. The first dance over, my cavalier, a brilliant officer of the guards, piloted me through the ranks of dancers to the refreshment-room to get an ice. As we passed by the Emperor, who was engaged in a conversation with my Aunt Kourakine, His Majesty gazed at me fixedly and asked who I was. My aunt came over and led me to the Emperor and formally introduced me. His Majesty began by questioning me about myself, my home and my parents. I forgot to be frightened and answered[34] without the slightest flutter of embarrassment, and we soon fell into a comfortable talk. The Emperor asked me if it was my first grown-up dance. “Oh, no, Sir, it’s my second one,” I announced proudly. The Emperor smiled and expressed his desire to see me henceforth at the Court balls. Perceiving my partner, who was trying to conceal himself behind a column, the Emperor asked me if it was my cavalier. “Oh, yes, Sir, and I am keeping him waiting such a long, long time,” I blurted out in one breath. It was indeed a dreadful breach of court etiquette, but I was so inexperienced in the ways of society that a transgression against Court laws appeared of little importance to me. The Emperor seemed much amused by my outspoken manner and said: “Well, go on dancing, I will not deprive you any longer of that pleasure.”
I shall begin with a general observation on taxes.
So they got ready to go down stairs again. The duke says:
horses and runaway niggers on them, all over the walls. The duke shed
With Dorothy hard at work, the Witch thought she would go into the
more than I did, and it was in vain I pointed out that our only chance
“Let me first see how he behaves,” said she; “it will then be early enough for expectation.”

Tuljajee, the Rajah, according to the custom of his country, being now childless, for he had lost by death his son, his daughter, and his grandson, adopted as son the ten-year-old boy of his cousin and, after formally acquainting the English governor of the fact, on the 26th January, 1787, he sent for Schwartz to bless the child. “This is not my son,” said he, “but yours, into your hands I deliver him.” And the old missionary reverently replies: “May this child become a child of God.” Later on with much emotion the Rajah begs a favour of his friend: “I appoint you guardian of this child, I intend to give him over to your care, or literally to put his hands into yours.”
The time now came for him to be removed to a better school, to complete the knowledge of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew which he had up to a point acquired. Schwartz was now in his sixteenth year and his father took him to the adjoining town of Cüstrin, where he might at a more advanced academy prepare himself for the University course. It is clear that this wise parent foresaw the risks which lie in wait for a youth away from home, and as he[Pg 30] walked with his boy, giving him many admonitions, he also told him that he must exercise self-denial, live a life of economy and simplicity, fear God, and not forget his father. He showed his wisdom in giving him only a limited supply of pocket money, which would at any rate be a safeguard against luxury and its many temptations, to which some of his fellow-students soon fell an easy prey. When he came home for his first vacation his father took him aside and gave him again some excellent advice. “My dear Frederick,” he said, “you may perhaps have sometimes repined on comparing your homely food and clothing with that of others, and possibly you may have thought that your father did not love you so much as the parents of some of your friends, but I trust that your own good sense and the painful example of their failure will have led you to perceive my reason for inuring you to hardships and never encouraging you to self-indulgence. I may now justly hope that in whatsoever situation it may please God to place you, you will be qualified to sustain it.”
’Tis a consummation devoutly to be wished.
previous night. One man—the first—had gone to St. Martin’s-le-Grand,
Signor Gorgolli came back the next day and the day after. He tried to get up a flirtation with me and was always hanging about me, twisting up the ends of his moustache and[204] prepared for conquest. He paid me compliments upon my looks and said that he came to Cernobbio only on my account, at which I assumed an expression of extreme innocence, and pretended not to understand what he was driving at. He was certainly a very compromising young man, and I tried to avoid every occasion of meeting him, but he was such a fool, and would imagine anything except that he is not wanted. Presuming young idiot!
August 30th.—The weather is heavy and stormy; it has been raining for the last twenty-four hours. I remained all day indoors.
the river. Now I thought of something else. So I went and got the bag


from the town, trenching on Smith’s monopoly, was selling papers with
This time my stay at Tashkend was but a very short one. At the end of a fortnight I was on my way back to St. Petersburg.

perfectly true, because she _is_ going there to speak about their
struggling spasmodically; a wounded soldier my brother noticed, men
would be caught in the silken bag. Gradually the balloon swelled out
face noway and be satisfied, because she allowed there was something
“And I shall get back to Kansas,” cried Dorothy, clapping her hands.
So I says to myself, here’s another place where I got to resk the
“Why, it’s from St. Petersburg—it’s from Sis.”


for a copy of that paper.
Indian Ocean—and his crew was thinned out considerable last spring in a
puncheon floor in summer-time because it’s cool. If you notice, most
For a moment I heeded nothing of the heat, forgot the patent need of
is _Jim_ gywne to say it? No, sah—I doan’ budge a step out’n dis place

Elizabeth tried to join in her father’s pleasantry, but could only force one most reluctant smile. Never had his wit been directed in a manner so little agreeable to her.

“I don’t care whether ’twas little or whether ’twas big; he’s here in
CHAPTER XVI.
of them could climb down, and for a moment it seemed that their journey

and a cloud of slowly sinking black vapour drove along the Thames and
caught as we’re wanted. A Martian has only to go a few miles to get a
alarm; and not to be the least afraid, because we would see he got

CHAPTER XII.

off—they’re cold; let go. Oh, let a poor devil alone!”
“I know it,” returned the Lion, wiping a tear from his eye with the tip
evidently lived, that also was painted green. They passed by several of
grey.” He looked over his shoulder suddenly. “Only a rook,” he said.
that man died, the bees must be told about it before sun-up next
Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She approached, and saw the likeness of Mr. Wickham, suspended, amongst several other miniatures, over the mantel-piece. Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how she liked it. The housekeeper came forward, and told them it was the picture of a young gentleman, the son of her late master’s steward, who had been brought up by him at his own expense. “He is now gone into the army,” she added; “but I am afraid he has turned out very wild.{304}”


The Exhibition, decorated with flags and banners, occupied a large space. In the first place we were taken to see the section of work-horses, cows, sheep and pigs in their stalls. All these animals, enormous in size, were well worth looking at, especially the pigs, long and low, with no legs to speak of, interested me much. The prize-animals had placards hanging round their necks, bearing the inscription: First Prize, Highly Commended, and simply Commended. On a big square we watched the show of the carriage, saddle and cart-horses, their manes plaited and interwoven with wild flowers and ears of corn, and their tails jauntily braided with red cords. Then came the jumping competition in which the first riders were to prove what they and their horses could do in clearing hedges, hurdles, water-jumps and other obstacles. Special experts were observing the print of the horses-hoofs on the sand, in order to see which one had made the longest leap. One of the horses bolted before a water-ditch and all the[246] brave experts took to their heels, carrying off their chairs with them. There was suddenly a stir on the ring and stifled shrieks. It was a swarm of bees, which, leaving their hive, had settled on the head of a poor lady. Luckily a doctor who was present, rushed to her aid and began to scrape off with his pen-knife the bees from their victim’s face, which had become all at once one blistered mass. We had dinner in a big refreshment tent, during which a red-coated military band played the best pieces from their repertoire. Towards evening it began to rain, and we hurried back to Shanklin.
and got away as quick as I could. I cried a little when I was covering

the green waves of Regent’s Park, the Langham Hotel, the dome of the

after which they walked away through the trees. The Witch gave Dorothy
We are back from our exile; home in Russia! At last our wanderings have come to an end. We have crossed the globe almost in all directions by land and sea, but I know of no place as dear as St. Petersburg.
kitchen towards the opening. Irresistibly attracted, I crept to the

Broad-sword conflict

over him, too; but I reckon that was sort of piling it on, maybe.
steamboat, in style, and pay him for his lost time, and write word
slaughter they perpetrated, point also to an entire ignorance of the
the incompatibility. At Halliford I had already come to hate the
pouring _en masse_ northward.
you all night till you went to sleep about ten minutes ago, and I
bottom of it with the saw, for there warn’t no knives and forks on the
“But you see that Jane,” said her aunt, “does not think so ill of Wickham, as to believe him capable of the attempt.”
So then I got a shovel, and then we picked and shoveled, turn about,
flaming gases rushed out of a gun.”

he said to it. Niggers would come from all around there and give Jim
laid it down, and fetched it, and give it to her. She says:
Well, then they sailed in on the general investigation, and there we
iron gates of Hyde Park. I had half a mind to break into the Natural
prepared men’s minds for the reception of the idea.

Jim he allowed they was made, but I allowed they happened; I judged it
thirty men, likely. She had five big wigwams aboard, wide apart, and an
1893, in a long-defunct publication, the _Pall Mall Budget_, and I
abreast of me I see there warn’t but one man in it. Think’s I, maybe
we was all bunched in the front door. Tom had his store clothes on, and
near me to a yelping dog. Then the sound came again, this time from the
“Go on!” said the people, thrusting at him. “They are coming! Go on!”
like a steamboat without any lights. There warn’t any signs of the bar
It is certain, that merely by knowing how the matter stands, we know how to proceed accordingly; and that, in the long-run, every thing arranges itself in the least exceptionable manner that the system of taxation will permit. The following is probably the course which things would take, in the system of a land-tax, if it[197] were necessary now to lay on the land a new tax of 10 millions annually, supposing always the landed revenue at 60 millions, and the quarter of wheat at 40 shillings.
Q. Your hopes then are, that Smuggling will make up for the injuries you propose to do to the productors; but how will you compensate to the[313] State for the loss it sustains by a clandestine exportation?
When the card tables were placed, he had an opportunity of obliging her, in return, by sitting down to whist.
you a many and a many a time, and I’ll _pray_ for you, too!”—and she
nostrils—indeed, the Martians do not seem to have had any sense of
The duke done it, and Jim and me was pretty glad to see it. It took
mind you don’t work your jaw any _between_ here and there.”

“He ain’t a-comin’ back no mo’, Huck.”

bright sunshine came in at the window, flooding the little room. She
surface of our minute sphere. Now we see further. If the Martians can
After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows to admire the view, Mr. Collins attending them to point out its beauties, and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worth looking at in the summer.{204}

“I am sorry to hear that; but why did you not tell me so before? If I had known as much this morning, I certainly would not have called on him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we cannot escape the acquaintance now.”

whips, like the arms of an octopus, flashed across the sunset and was
I knowed I was all right now. Nobody else would come a-hunting after
“Shucks!” says the king, very sarcastic; “but _I_ don’t know—maybe you
read it off like coarse print. Do you reckon you can go and face your
And warn’t the cooking good, and just bushels of it too!
shape again.
“Oh, mamma, do the people hereabouts know I am married to-day? I was afraid they might not; and we overtook William Goulding in his curricle, so I was determined he should know it, and so I let down the side glass next to him, and took off my glove and let my hand just rest upon the window frame, so that he{388} might see the ring, and then I bowed and smiled like anything.”
[3]

“A missionary,” he writes, “must guard against being cast down and dissatisfied, for this, especially here, is a poison to the body and highly pernicious to the soul, because thereby faith, love, and hope decrease, nay absolutely perish, and when the people remark that such an one is discontented, it is an impediment to the way of his labouring on their souls; from which nevertheless our comfort ought to arise. Whenever I meet with anything disagreeable I go and catechize for an hour. This employment sweets even bitter to me. No missionary must give way to complaining. We must be witnesses for our Lord and not converters merely. One could wish indeed that, as three thousand souls were converted by Peter’s sermon, a visible abundant blessing might rest on our labours. Meanwhile sowing has its season, and reaping has its season, and, moreover, it might still be a question whether, with such great success, we should hold fast humility of heart. The best way is to labour diligently and then to pray that God would bless our labour.”

“I’ll sit here,” said my brother, “if I may”; and he got upon the empty
But Schwartz would also see that our western culture has armed the educated Hindu with a scientific unbelief which is the destructive enemy of his religion and bitterly assails our own. With so much to thank God for he would also recognize that there is still need enough for fervent prayer and faith that India may be saved.
couldn’t seem to get my mouth to tell her what would make her see that
a concussion as I have never heard before or since. So close on the
because the nigger might get away, and then I’d be to blame; and yet
Q. But the law will either succeed, or fail in its effect. If the law succeed, will you not be the author of that diminution of the products, which the low price you intend to set upon those products must unavoidably occasion? And if the law fail in its effect, do you not uselessly deprive the State, 1st, of the produce of the smuggler’s labour, whom you hope to see hanged, or at best, mutilated; and, 2dly, of the produce of that labour which would have been performed by that army, partly composed of rogues, partly of idle fellows, now to be set upon the watch to detect and apprehend the smuggler, keep him in close confinement, and lead him finally to the gallows, or to the galleys?—Who is to pay those rogues and idle fellows?
“To complain I have no cause; except when I consider how often I have disobeyed Him. Then I have reason enough to complain of myself. But I know the[Pg 141] exceedingly great mercy of my God, who is willing to cover my sins and to heal all my infirmities.


me, and after looking at me carefully he perched upon my shoulder and
At that time the road was crowded, but as yet far from congested. Most
says:
 The Doctor

Reflexions on a very strange Revolution in France.
blinded by the storm.
And whilst we was a-standing there in the dimmish light, here comes a
three nights. I never see money hauled in by the wagon-load like that


17th June.—We are surrounded again by a thick fog. The syren was blowing all the time. We are in the season of icebergs floating from the Arctic Ocean. About six o’clock in the morning the cabin-steward rapped sharply at the door of our cabin, warning us that there were icebergs in view. I hastened on deck, but the fog was so dense that I couldn’t see two steps before me. Besides icebergs there are sandbanks to be avoided in these parts, and the steersman’s eye, accustomed to pierce sea-fogs, searched in the darkness; he signalled an iceberg, but I strained my eyes uselessly, when suddenly a gust of wind broke the mist, and we saw a huge mass floating quite close to us.
barking merrily all the time.
we want?”

Nearly everyone on board has a flirtation going on. At nightfall in nice flirting corners, on the part of the deck far away and out of the sphere of electricity, couples sat hand in hand deeply immersed in their eager whispers, out of the lights of the ship’s lanterns.
en look at it a minute. Dah’s de stump, dah—dat’s one er de women;
“That is the most unforgiving speech,” said Elizabeth, “that I ever heard you utter. Good girl! It would vex me, indeed, to see you again the dupe of Miss Bingley’s pretended regard.”
myself down—yes, I did it myself. It’s right I should suffer—perfectly
only escape from the destruction that, generation after generation,

“Why, pap and mam and sis and Miss Hooker; and if you’d take your

The Pantheon, where the remains of King Vittorio Emmanuele repose, is the only ancient edifice in Rome, which is conserved perfectly intact. It has no ceiling, and the Roman sun and the Roman moon shine through the open roof. The sepulchre in which the body of Vittorio Emmanuele is laid is covered all over with garlands of flowers and is guarded by three veterans of the Italian army, who watch over a big book in which all those who wish to honour the memory of the “King Galantuomo” sign their names.

Thirdly, Of all the profit which the fair trader, the instigator of that barbarous law, gets annually on the importations and exportations which that additional income requires;



“And quite alone? Have all her friends left her?”
“We’re eatable ants.”

“Yes, he went on Tuesday, as I wrote you word.”
“Money! my uncle!” cried Jane, “what do you mean, sir?”
By-and-by he says:

But wishes were vain; or, at best, could serve only to amuse her in the hurry and confusion of the following hour. Had Elizabeth been at leisure to be idle, she would have remained certain that all employment was impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had her share of business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to be written to all their friends at Lambton, with false excuses for their sudden departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Mr. Gardiner, meanwhile, having settled his account at the inn, nothing remained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of the morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could have supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to Longbourn.{345}
Well, he cried and took on so that me and Jim didn’t know hardly what
“What letters?”
I had again enough of Shildecker, but it was no such easy matter this time to get rid of him; having gone so far, he was not to be turned back, he meant to follow us to Venice. (He would have followed me to the end of the world if I had let him!)


“A shell in the pit,” said I, “if the worst comes to the worst, will

“I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me when we met at Pemberley. You blamed me for coming?”
down Exhibition Road. I stopped, staring towards Kensington Gardens,
Pa’s luck didn’t hold out; a steamboat run over the forrard corner of
I stared about me, scarcely believing my eyes. All the machinery had
take that. Some day I’ll lie down in it and forget it all, and my poor
degraded down into such company.” And he begun to wipe the corner of
journey by yourselves? _You_ know they’ll wait for you. So fur, so
“As you meant me to go?”
seemed blood red, and threw an unfamiliar lurid light upon everything.

at Chertsey, heavy firing, and that mounted soldiers have told them to
were found. That they did not bury any of their dead, and the reckless
a large, loud roar, which was so fierce and dreadful that Toto jumped

have it; Tom said he’d _got_ to; there warn’t no case of a state
Dorothy looked at him curiously. His head was quite bulged out at the

fecundity. Its seeds were simply poured down into the water of the Wey
middle of the Mississippi. Then we hung up our signal lantern, and

CHAPTER XCIII
[Pg 162]
The shell burst clean in the face of the Thing. The hood bulged,
the Great Wizard, he might be angry and destroy you all in an instant.”
That in Thy cross is stored,
It must a been close on to one o’clock when we got below the island at
looked into it they could see it was also very deep, and there were
The Last Shirt.—Mooning Around.—Sailing Orders.—The Witch Pie.

his little mistress. Toto did not really care whether he was in Kansas
used with such deadly effect, and the generator of the Heat-Rays
. But the horror of them!”

drop everything and cut.
Several farm waggons and carts were moving creakily along the road to
In one cart stood a blind man in the uniform of the Salvation Army,
In spite of Mme. Kethoudoff’s hospitality, we moved that same night to the Hôtel des Étrangers, where we shall feel ourselves more at home and independent.
nailed on at different times; and they leaned every which-way, and had
succession of flashes as I have ever seen. The thunderclaps, treading
“Oh, no,” answered the Woodman. “I shall not feel it at all.”
 XIII. HOW I FELL IN WITH THE CURATE.
time after time, and that I have seen four, five, and (once) six of
thirsty. It is Lord Garrick.”
danced on the wall and ceiling of the study. A sharp, resinous tang of
his chains loose, you slip there and lock them in, and can kill them at
badly that I cannot move them at all; if I am well oiled I shall soon
him they were out of sight, so he come aboard. He says:

trading-scow, and it was so dark we didn’t notice the wreck till we was
vanished, and the spirit of all those watching batteries rose to a

Head, made out of many thicknesses of paper, and with a carefully
whisper, “_He had a rat!_” Then he drooped down and glided along the

It was an agreeable surprise to wake up and find land all around me. To-day is the birthday of His Majesty the Emperor of Japan. At daybreak I heard the beat of the drum from an English cruiser lying on the Quay, a warship bound to Siam where a mutiny has recently broken out.[349] Two American cruisers deafened us with artillery discharges. Their admiral, who has put up at our hotel, has sent a military band to play during tiffin. In the afternoon Sergy went to visit a military Japanese school where the officers are taught to inculcate, by suggestion, bravery to their soldiers, and how to vanquish, at the same time, their enemies. I sat by the window awaiting my husband’s return, and looked through the chinks of a blind, whence I could see without being seen. Life over here is all new and strange to me. Everything seems elfish—men, trees, houses. Flat-faced aborigines patter along noisily upon wooden clogs, dressed in the garments of old Japan. They seem all alike; when you’ve seen one, you’ve seen all. The women are clad in gaily flowered kimonos, girded by a wide sash tied into a gigantic bow, their hair beautifully dressed with mock-flowers and combs and pins, their feet placed on small planes with two little pieces of white wood, in front and behind, just like small stilts. The married women are recognised by their shaved eyebrows and blackened teeth with oxide of iron. They indulge in this fearful custom in the view of alienating all masculine admiration, and remaining faithful to their husbands. But do their husbands remain faithful to their wives, their virtue being so unattractive? That is the question! The Japanese girls grow fast under the Southern sun, and many of them, at the age when little girls in Europe play at dolls, are married materfamilias. I see philosophical-looking babies, with a button of hair at the top of their head, strapped on their mother’s back by a scarf, their bald heads falling backwards as though they would drop off. I am unable to recall any single occasion on which I saw a Japanese baby smile. Little children straddle astride on the hip of bigger children, who run after the passers-by with unencumbered hand outstretched. Artisans and tradesmen in blue cotton tunics, with the description of their trades printed in white on their backs, were setting their wares on the pavement, where they thought themselves most sure of attention. Vendors of green cocoa-nuts, slices of melon and sweetmeats, and victual merchants expose for sale in the streets along the walls, on planks, grasshoppers fried in oil and other nasty things. Just in front of our windows is the stand of the rikshas. I see a porter, his face hidden under an immense straw hat, advance towards the riksha-men, stooping under the burden of two cases, at the bottom of which very hot cinders keep the dishes hot. The portions, put into small saucers, are microscopic. The riksha-men, sitting on their heels on the ground, thrust their food into their mouth by the aid of two little sticks.

hired, and there was a ferry across the river. On the Shepperton side
everyone knew she had been the means of destroying the Wicked Witch and
upon the heap of coins, and began thrusting handfuls in his pocket. A
garden beyond Roehampton I got a quantity of immature potatoes,
peg on the wall, he opened another gate, and they all followed him
CHAPTER XXV.


it was, with gigantic machines here and there within it, huge mounds of
and her back was turned we slid for the cellar cupboard and loaded up a
Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment; yet she tried to the utmost to speak with composure when she said,—
or leave it, it mayn’t be no ’count, s’I, but sich as ’t is, it’s my
he kissed her sixteen or seventeen times—and then up she jumps, with
what we desire. So be of good cheer, my friends, for all will yet be


there. There was trouble ’bout something, and then a lawsuit to settle
annihilated the entire population of London, as it spread itself slowly
that warn’t romantical enough for Tom Sawyer; no way would do him but

“Is dat so?”
hung so thick we had to back away and go some other way. Well, on every
one-laigged nigger say de bank’s busted. So dey didn’ none uv us git no
[358]
brass warming-pan which he thought considerable of, because it belonged
try to not do it any more. That is just the way with some people. They
rare and brilliant plumage sang and fluttered in the trees and bushes.
The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman were rather frightened at first, for
When the Scarecrow had bowed, as prettily as his straw stuffing would
We had dinner out in that broad open passage betwixt the house and the
[403]
brighter than he is—when you are well polished—and I am sure you will
“How shall we cross the river?” asked Dorothy.

Toto barked sharply and made a snap at the tin legs, which hurt his
[Pg 174]
“Trouble has done it, Bilgewater, trouble has done it; trouble has

plough tearing through the water, tossing it on either side in huge

For the second time that day this girl proved her quality. To force
them. They’d had all the dogs shut up, so they wouldn’t scare off the
“Don’t speak of it,” replied Oz.
“Why, they’re for _style_. Don’t you know nothing?”


murdered. I says:

is still hope.”
fronds were already whitened in patches by the spreading disease that

bigger and held crowds of people. The benches was made out of outside

call upon “George.” My brother was horrified and perplexed. So soon as
says:
good shot with it generly, but she’d wrenched her arm a day or two ago,
and _injected_ it into their own veins. I have myself seen this being

“Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak to you.”
“Yes, almost every day.”
country calm and peaceful under the morning sunlight. We were far
“Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment.”
Then the Guardian of the Gates put on his own glasses and told them he

On that same day we visited an asylum for the lunatics. The whole staff of doctors came up to meet us. We walked first to the women’s section. The patients were wandering in the park in groups. One of them came up to my husband[501] to entreat him to release her, asserting that she was in perfect health, but would certainly go raving mad if she was forced to spend one more night in such company. That woman had come a few days ago to ask Sergy to permit her to embrace the Mussulman religion. She told him also that in hatred of one of the high dignitaries of the city, she had written to him, that she cursed him and all his family. It appeared she bought a revolver with the intention of shooting him. She was seized in time, luckily, and brought into this lunatic asylum to test her sanity. Another insane creature, grinning idiotically, approached me and stared at me from head to foot. She became very fierce all at once, and began to abuse me, calling me all sorts of bad names, and accused me of having stolen her best frock. When we approached the section of the raving lunatics, roars and shouts reached our ears. Though trembling with fear I would not be led away and kept tight hold of Sergy’s arm, clinging fast to him. Behind an iron-barred window we saw a horrible moustached creature, standing with her arms folded across her chest, glaring ferociously at us with an expression so malignant, that Satan would have been jealous of her. She believes herself to be a man and becomes terribly agitated when she sees a woman. She beckoned to me suddenly making dreadful gestures and demoniac grimaces. Sergy hurried me away. We made but a short visit to the men’s section. We saw a man mad with love for the Empress. The poor maniac writes long letters every day to his lady-love, but receiving no answer, he guesses that everybody plays him false and that his letters are not sent. He was lying on his bed when we approached him and turned suddenly his face to the wall and his back to us. I heaved a sigh of relief when we left these sad quarters.

she came to the gate at noon and asked, “Are you ready to be harnessed
drenching hail. So far as I could see by the flashes, the houses about
opposition they had aroused. In the latter aim they certainly
. ! The wine press of God!”
stairs behind him. His landlady came to the door, loosely wrapped in



nuther; but we allowed we’d tackle it. It warn’t quite midnight yet, so
It would be a difficult matter to trace out, with exactness, the progress of the taxes; but it appears to me, that whatever be the mode of establishing them, there is not a subject who does not contribute his share sooner or later, unless nature should annul the burden, even before the clashing of private interests should have succeeded in settling the division upon equitable principles.
’Long ’bout six in de mawnin’ skifts begin to go by, en ’bout eight er
CHAPTER II
he must climb up the lightning-rod. But after he got up half way about

this fur all right, but I was hard and tight aground now. I see it
ILLUSTRATIONS.
“Mighty few—an’ _dey_ ain’t no use to a body. What you want to know
return to London, the pressure of the flight drove the people in an
“Yes’m.”

_is_ I? Is I heah, or whah _is_ I? Now dat’s what I wants to know.”
hear me roar they all try to get away from me, and of course I let them
on the hard bricks. It never hurt him, however, and Dorothy would pick

“You are uniformly charming!” cried he, with an air of awkward gallantry; “and I am persuaded that, when sanctioned by the express authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail of being acceptable.”


road with a cough, and was shot across the table, and took one of the
lay of the land. According to my plan, I was going to turn up there
Q. What have you got by that idea, if it be probable that there is not above 25 or 30 millions in specie within the kingdom, and if it be proved evidently that it is impossible you should have more than 35?
Says I:
night.

He opened the big box, and Dorothy saw that it was filled with

MOSCOW
shut up in a room; but he had too much sense to let this worry him, so



Where the log forked I could peep through.
all the other work he had to do on pens, and inscriptions, and
had gone away to breakfast at Henderson’s house.
look best, and then scratch out all the other arms; but, as I was
mankind. It may be that across the immensity of space the Martians have
His eyes flamed, and he pointed a lean finger in the direction of


the sound of great guns. Six distinct reports I counted, and after a
chattering and laughing, and the sun came out of the dark sky to show

of guns, and a form of black shadows moving. Everyone struggled to the
And with another bow, the Monkey King spread his wings and flew away


“Where do you set?”
I see my chance; so I skips up and says:
riverbank a tree full of fine fruit. This pleased Dorothy, who had
The inauguration of the gymnasium for young ladies took place on the 30th August. The head-mistress and the architect who constructed the gymnasium, met us at the door at our arrival, followed by one of the youngest pupils, a pretty little girl, who recited an ode composed in favour of my husband, with a little complimentary address to me, after which the bishop performed a Te Deum before the image of[388] St. Barbara, my Patroness, which was painted from my portrait.

 Witches

night, lit only as it was by the slender moon, the stars, the afterglow
them, but with courage that’s borrowed from their mass, and from their
towards the struggle. One of the men desisted and turned towards him,
CHAPTER XXXVI.



CHAPTER XLIII.
rolled over and over wonderful fast, kicking things every which way,
harm in it. It was only a little thing to do, and no trouble; and it’s
I have adopted the estimate by which England is supposed to contain 9,300,000 inhabitants; one-third cultivates the land, one-third is engaged in manufactures, and of the remaining third, 600,000 at most share among them the neat produce of cultivation and the arts, in proportion to the capitals with which they keep in play those two engines of opulence. All the remaining part of the people, as dependents under whatever denomination, look, for their subsistence, to the friendship, humour, pride, or wants of the 600,000 proprietors.
being put to bed, young people were wandering through the lanes


“Perhaps it would have been better,” replied her sister.
“Not begun. All that’s happened so far is through our not having the
Hurrah! On the 20th of April the Minister of War sent a telegram to my husband announcing that Japan had consented to our terms. I could jump for joy!







“What’s them?” I says.
“Not at all.”
Virginia Water or Guildford. They were busy making the necessary


“He’s white.”
Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth. These were the contents:—
He unlocked the door, and I cleared out up the river-bank. I noticed
passed over it. Looking towards the river, we were astonished to see an
hadn’t got to the end of it yet. He said he druther see the new moon


Schultze, however, declined to move, and as a consequence Sartorius and Geister began the work at Cudalore (as then spelt), where the former died in 1738 and was buried in the English burial ground with every mark of respect.

gesticulating with his crooked fingers and bawling, “Eternity!
there, and Jim and me laid into that grindstone and walked her along
very friendly.
“Why?”
knew was brave enough for any emergency, but he was not the sort of man
“Oh, please don’t, boys; I swear I won’t ever tell!”
come to a standstill. Then the people begun to holler at him and make
south—clatter, clatter, clap, rap, and it had gone. A dim group of
“Jim, don’t act so foolish. A prisoner’s _got_ to have some kind of a
“Well, I did. I said I wouldn’t, and I’ll stick to it. Honest _injun_,
till next time, too.

lovely complexion, and perfectly beautiful, and looking just like a
signal rockets burst and rained their sparks through the night and

A. No; Smuggling will give to the parties injured by the prohibitory law, a fully sufficient means of extricating themselves.
By his last will and testament Schwartz left all he had to the mission. He had never married, and had, therefore, no family obligations to consider, but a hundred star pagodas, equal to about £43 in English currency at that time, he directed should be divided amongst his sister’s children. His two gold watches were to be sold and the proceeds given to the poor, thirty star pagodas were to go to his personal servant, and a few silver articles to his friend, Mr. Kohlhoff, as a token of his hearty love. But, apart from these trifling specific bequests, all his savings, together with such property as he had built with his own money, were devoted to the maintenance and support of the work he loved so well. His own personal needs had always been few, his life almost ascetic in its simplicity, so that he was able to put by the allowance from the Government as chaplain to the soldiers, and yet he was generous to the poor, and always ready to help young catechists in their studies. As we have seen, he consistently refused to accept any presents from either European or native rulers to whom he had been of service, and this in a time and place when fortunes were easily made and bribes excused redounds greatly to his credit. A more disinterested and faithful man never served his God and country better than he.


swerved aside, blundered on and collapsed with tremendous force into
light, and sort of singing to myself. By-and-by one showed. Jim sings

“There,” said he; “now you have a heart that any man might be proud of.

Bible there mostly.
CHAPTER XXII.


ground, now pouring swiftly over a crest into a new-found valley,

living thing in the pit.

be a hero, and so would we. But I reckoned it was about as well the way
kinder felt like he was watching me. But I knowed I could tire him out
out of the twilight of the kitchen into the darkness of the scullery.
“I am sure I shall break mine,” said Lydia.
my servant’s box, lugged it out, clapped it beside her on the tail of

panting along under heavy burdens; one husband and wife were even

Murders the innocent sleep,
The possibility of Mr. Collins’s fancying himself in love with her friend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two: but that Charlotte could encourage him seemed almost as far from possibility as that she could encourage him herself; and her astonishment was consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, and she could not help crying out,—
“But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities,” replied her uncle. “Your great men often are; and therefore I shall not take him at his word about fishing, as he might change his mind another day, and warn me off his grounds.”

“Perhaps preparing for his marriage with Miss de Bourgh,” said Elizabeth. “It must be something particular to take him there at this time of year.”

In the afternoon we again visited the curio shops, where we saw a lot of pretty things, whilst half-naked boys, enveloped only in yellow gauze, were fanning us with wide palm fans, and flourished a feather-duster to keep the mosquitoes off. The master of one of the shops, stout and phlegmatic, sat perched on a high seat, his hands hidden in the long sleeves of his kimono. He rose when we entered, bowing and muttering something we didn’t understand. He ordered a pretty Japanese woman to bring us cooling drinks. When Mme. Beurgier asked him, through the interpreter, if the pretty creature was his wife, the fatty replied curtly: “She is my mistress.”
or what. But towards daylight we got it all settled satisfactory, and

man he was on hand and looking his level pisonest, up there longside of

said we must slick up our swords and guns, and get ready. He never

sleep.
them, never fear!”
KHABAROVSK
point of the lane and road; the crowd roared like a fire, and the dust
hedgerows and through plantations, and watching keenly through the
All taxes, it is said, fall on the land at last. Land is the true, the only spring of wealth; wealth should be taxed at its very source.
and this’n ’ll come out all right. What’s the matter with ’em?”
[299]


Un Editeur doit encore plus au Public qu’à un Ouvrage auquel il seroit même assez flatté de procurer une petite fortune; je crois donc être obligé (in foro conscientiæ) de prévenir que ce n’est qu’après avoir parcouru cinquante & quelques pages qu’on soupçonne pourquoi l’Auteur n’a pas annoncé dès la première, les singularités qu’il se proposoit insidieusement d’établir pied à pied dans sa brochure: mais enfin on peut alors pressentir ce qu’on doit attendre d’un homme qui vient de conter que les taxes ne sont qu’un petit mal, que la Thésaurisation en seroit un très-grand, qu’un remboursement est au moins inutile,—& qui aussi-tôt annonce modestement qu’il pourra bien, par la suite, lui échapper quelques bizarreries,—comme s’il pouvoit y en avoir de plus complettes que les trois propositions dont je viens de rendre compte.
Says I, “_me-yow! me-yow!_” as soft as I could, and then I put out the
to sell him down the river, and _said_ so; and she set him free in her
if any of them’s floating around after me I’ll give them a show. I


So I done it. But not feeling brash.
leaving, the key come from the house.

The murderers of our Tzar were caught and brought to trial; they were all sentenced to death. The sole executioner existing in Russia had been sent for from Moscow to execute them. Sophia Perovski, the daughter of a high Russian functionary, who had participated in the conspiracy plot, fled to Switzerland and for some time eluded her pursuer, a political spy who had been sent to trace her. The detective craftfully succeeded in making her fall in love with him and follow him to the frontier, where she was arrested and brought for trial to St. Petersburg. Not a very handsome proceeding on his part I must say! When Sophia Perovski appeared before the tribunal, she was told that she would be hanged if she did not denounce all her accomplices; but she absolutely refused to divulge their names, and exclaimed with splendid indifference, “I do not dread your gibbet, I only dread the misfortunes which befall my beloved brethren!” However, when the choice was given to her to be hanged or delivered over to the mercy of her beloved brethren, she threw herself at the Attorney’s feet, imploring him to condemn her to the crudest punishment, but only not to give her up to the mob.
“My dear,” replied her husband, “I have two small favours to request. First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the present occasion; and, secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the library to myself as soon as may be.”

great gulf they had made, overtaken by a death that must have seemed to

stairs; and when I sold ’em I hadn’t missed the money yit, so they got

this way we’d have to knock off for a week to let our hands get

We continued our journey on the following day and arrived at sunset at Toulon, where we had to wait patiently for the train, which left for Biarritz at four o’clock in the morning, in a bare room at the station, where we had the privilege of dozing on hard horse-hair chairs given us. Our travelling companions lay curled up in uncomfortable armchairs, nevertheless their noses very soon emitted trumpet-sounds. I drowsed also, all in a lump on my chair and was chilled to the bone.
river, en den I’d slip in jis b’fo’ daylight en swim asho’, en take to
themselves about their various concerns they were scrutinised and
While he felt it his duty to assist the ruling powers at any time when his influence might help the cause of peace and the prosperity of the people, it was always his spiritual work which held his heart in thrall. His supreme delight was the proclamation of the Gospel, his vast parish took in its range the countless souls of Southern India; whatever their station or caste, high or low, philosophic or ignorant and degraded, they all alike needed Christ and that was enough for him. Here we get a little glimpse of him in quite an ordinary scene of his busy life, as it impressed Mr. Paezold, his fellow-worker and travelling companion.

“I dare say she will; she has got over the most trying age.”
January 14th.—To-day we visited the seminary of San Paula, built by the Jesuits. When we entered the cathedral, a young Irish monk, in the brown habit of the Franciscan order, girded with a thick cord, came towards us, breviary in hand, clinking his sandals on the flag-stones. He took my husband and his companions to show them over the seminary; he said that ladies are not admitted within the walls of the seminary, and I had to remain in the cathedral with Maria Michaelovna. We went over the church and read all the inscriptions, after which we became a little bored and were pleased when our gentlemen came back, accompanied this time by the prior of the seminary, a grey-bearded Portuguese padre, round-faced and benevolent, who happened to be less Puritan than his young colleague, and invited me to come and drink a glass of Malaga in the refectory, but I refused point-blank this time.
The Cave.—The Floating House.
For after the sailors could no longer come up the Thames, they came on

She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country. It was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Mr. Collins joining in, observed,—
We had a bad crossing; the sea was rough and the ship rolled very unpleasantly. Towards morning the wind having changed, calm came on, and I hurried on deck to rejoin Melle. Camille, my new-found friend. We established ourselves comfortably in a secluded spot on the prow of the vessel; scrambling over a pile of boxes we found a seat on a barrel of oil, and had a nice chat. Señor Lopez, who was in the mood of making the most open court to me, and followed me everywhere like a shadow, discovered our hiding place, but we packed him off very soon, and he had to withdraw, ruffled, and out of sorts.
By eight o’clock a number of boys and unemployed men had already
I sat up, and at the rustle of my motion he looked at me quickly.

“My plan is this,” I says. “We can easy find out if it’s Jim in there.
o’clock. I got up presently, walked perhaps half a mile without meeting

IV.	In Touch with the Brahmins	48

His daughter’s request, for such it might be considered, of being admitted into her family again, before she set off for the north, received at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth, who agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister’s feelings and consequence, that she should be noticed on her marriage by her parents, urged him so earnestly, yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive her and her husband at Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was prevailed on to think as they thought, and act as they wished. And their mother had the satisfaction of knowing, that she should be able to show her married daughter in the neighbourhood, before she was banished to the north. When Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother, therefore, he sent his permission for them to come; and it was settled, that, as soon as the ceremony was over, they should proceed to Longbourn. Elizabeth was surprised, however, that Wickham should consent to such a scheme; and, had she consulted only her own inclination, any meeting with him would have been the last object of her wishes.{385}

drownded:
people; so I reckon they’ve drove the owdacious loafers out of town
Je supposerai encore qu’il en résultât qu’on a eu grand tort de s’imaginer qu’il falloit diminuer le revenu du Peuple pour augmenter celui du Prince; qu’est-ce que cela fait au Prince & au Peuple, pourvu qu’ils soient l’un & l’autre bien convaincus qu’il n’est pas possible d’enrichir l’un, sans enrichir l’autre de la même manière, & dans la même proportion?
that surmounted it moved to and fro with the inevitable suggestion of a

unexpectedly dark; to me, walking out of the lighted passage of my

I was so excited by these heavy minute-guns following one another that
had been trying to think, but could not because his head was stuffed


MARSEILLES
again, and I thought.
striped, and there warn’t no harm in a million of them; but that never
There was a free nigger there from Ohio—a mulatter, most as white as a
scent of the bright flowers.
returning. The crowd about the pit had increased, and stood out black


13thly,
“It don’t make no difference what you want it for—you just shell it
think what she should do next. She could not understand how all her
were mentioned, but the tone of the dispatch was optimistic.
The idea of my being so pert!
at me with her hand and rushed past me. I turned with the rush of the
she did think of it by the time the men was ready to start, and he


When the train drew up at Charing Cross platform, we hastened to collect our belongings for there was nobody to help us down with our luggage, and we had to find our way alone to Charing Cross Hotel loaded with our hand-bags. We were accosted on our way by a little hunch-backed man who pushed up to us on the crowded platform, a real ant’s nest, and offered in very good Russian his services as guide, proposing to show us the principal sights of London. He must know foreigners by heart to have guessed our nationality at first sight. We turned deaf ears to his importunities, fearing that miserable Æsop to be a pickpocket, but he continued to trot steadily behind us and repeated: “Can I be of any assistance.”
“Well, anyway,” I says, “what’s _some_ of it? What’s a fess?”
ideas I ever struck;” but he never paid no attention to me; went right
I heard a dog barking under my window. It appeared to be a little subterranean animal called “Earth dog,” who barks loudly each time anyone passes before his hole.
“Yes he will _last_, too. You don’t reckon it’s going to take
25th July.—We arrived at Blagovestchensk in the afternoon, and will leave to-morrow at dawn. The Governor and his family came to dine on board.

not bravery, but circumspection. My only consolation was to believe
tearing off every which way, and Buck Harkness he heeled it after them,

nest, but we didn’t. The family was at home. We didn’t give it right
hopeless was the enterprise. Even the crews of the torpedo-boats and
“For my own part,” she rejoined, “I must confess that I never could see any beauty in her. Her face is too thin; her complexion has no brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Her nose wants character; there is nothing marked in its lines. Her teeth are tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes, which have sometimes been called so fine, I never could perceive anything extraordinary in them. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do not like at all; and in her air altogether, there is a self-sufficiency without fashion, which is intolerable.”



corner, and receded with their backs to the group in the lane. Along

clouds of smoke to the south—nothing but smoke, and not a soul coming
With clasped hands they hear him commending his soul to God. “O, Lord, hitherto Thou hast preserved me, hitherto Thou hast brought me, and hast bestowed innumerable benefits upon me. Do what is pleasing in Thy sight. I deliver my spirit into Thy hands, cleanse, and adorn it with the righteousness of my Redeemer, and receive me into the arms of Thy love and mercy!” A little group of native servants softly sing a German hymn, one of Paul Gerhardt’s, the words of which he had taught them in that language:
“I hain’t ever done you no harm. You know that. So, then, what you want


was most putrified with astonishment when you give me that smack.”

“Where is there any water?” he said. “He is dying fast, and very


to find his friends waiting for him, and told them of his terrible
XV.

Toto did not like this addition to the party at first. He smelled

By John W. Campbell, Jr.


of the dark.”
They had not been long together before Darcy told her that Bingley was also coming to wait on her; and she had barely time to express her satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley’s quick step was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room. All Elizabeth’s anger against him had been long done away; but had she still felt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected cordiality with which he expressed himself on seeing her again. He inquired in a friendly, though general, way, after her family, and looked and spoke with the same good-humoured ease that he had ever done.
practice. You do it pretty awkward.”
On another occasion he was fortunate enough to get a personal interview with a Romish Padre and in their discussion Schwartz strongly points out his objections to the idolatries of the Church of Rome.
After sunset I struggled on along the road towards Putney, where I
he would win his lawsuit and get the money if they ever got started on
Then Jim manned the oars, and we took out after our raft. Now was the
and leave that night if pap got drunk enough, and I reckoned he would.
The Hôtel de Java is a square, one storied building with an open courtyard in the middle and a veranda supported by pillars on the whole length of the front. The rooms are barely furnished, the floors covered with mats; there are wire nettings in the doors and windows to keep away the midges, who weren’t even honourable enough to wait until sunset before attacking you. There are no bells in the hotel and I grew hoarse calling the Malay “boy” for some information I wanted. With many gesticulations he began to gabble in an unknown tongue to me, and I was obliged to write down my requests on a bit of paper which the “boy” carried to the office. One may well imagine how promptly my demands were satisfied.

With an effort I turned and began a stumbling run through the heather.
their bread, and now she did not know what they would do for breakfast.
no property no more, nor nothing, and no way to make my living;’ so I
“Yes, sir.”
kneeled down and looked in; then she put up her handkerchief, and I see
“Have you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity?{68}”
was hot and pungent. And, indeed, a little way up the road a villa was
“Cairo? no. You must be a blame’ fool.”


But facing that crescent everywhere—at Staines, Hounslow, Ditton,
singing out, “Kill them, kill them!” It made me so sick I most fell out

Mornings before daylight I slipped into cornfields and borrowed a
him.”
the hood. At that my heart gave a bound, and I began running along the
swift liquefaction of the social body.
and blue; and although the blue was somewhat faded with many washings,

Title: Schwartz of Tanjore


the chain. And Uncle Silas he trusts everybody; sends the key to the
and then and nodding their heads—it was Levi Bell, the lawyer that was


strap, and sent them back to their work, after which she sat down to
“Oh, yes! They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were traced almost to London, but not beyond: they are certainly not gone to Scotland.”
see it warn’t no use for _me_ to put in. “Why, Aunty, it cost us a
came a deep growl from some wild animal hidden among the trees. These

invaders in a dozen striking ways; something of my schoolboy dreams of
It was already past noon. Why was I wandering alone in this city of the
next minute I whirled in on a kind of an explanation how a valley was

so cold, and then I run back across the room and in behind the door.


We stopped at the same hotel with Señor Alvarez, who soon began to show me that he was deeply interested in me. In fact I won him entirely. He was a man of volcanic passions and inflammable as gun-cotton, his eyes said even more than his words. Unfortunately the liking was not mutual, he did not make my heart beat. Though I was a girl to change her passions in a hurry, I was so taken up with Jeffrey, that I had no thought for any one else, just then; my Mexican conquest was rather amusing and kept me from yawning, that’s all, but nevertheless I gave him a fair amount of encouragement. I suppose I am a flirt, but I cannot help being nice to men. My Transatlantic adorer followed me about like my shadow; go where I would, he was ever at my heels and at last it became quite wearisome. I was awfully bored and did the utmost to show it to him by being uncivil and not nice, and he only received hard words from me. Oh! I can easily snub anyone if I wish! I told him one day, he needn’t stick to me so, but no, in spite of my rebuffs, he wouldn’t stir from my side; he only exclaimed piteously: “Princess Vava, why are you so awfully hard on me?” He was a persevering wooer that Don Alvarez, telling me that he had already fallen a victim to my blue eyes in the sleeping-car, and that he thought of me all day and dreamt of me all night since, then and a lot more idiotic bosh. He often bothered me with compliments that I affected not to hear. He likened me to Venus and told me that I was his goddess and the wonder of the world, a being created to be fallen in love with, and that I would remain as a gem set in his mind for evermore. But I only made fun of his high-flown sentiments. One night at the Opera, whilst Faust was “cooing” his romance to Margaret, Señor Alvarez asked me suddenly: “Tell me, who is the prettiest person in this house!” I raised my opera glasses and looked about me at the audience, but he told me it was useless work, for there was no looking-glass near me.


glad he had been rescued.

tree, and slipped in behind it, and so they had the bulge on the men
Several officers from the Inkerman barracks had been on the common


the shoulder of the island. I could hear the booming now and then,
“Is something gone wrong?”
[Image unavailable.]
This smoke (or flame, perhaps, would be the better word for it) was so

once and get all her people. As soon as they heard her orders they ran
“He is, indeed: but considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza, we cannot wonder at his complaisance; for who would object to such a partner?”
about midnight, and again the night after; and so for ten nights, a

She was perfectly sensible that he never had: but she wished to see whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the Bingleys and Jane; and she thought he looked a little confused as he answered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. The subject was pursued no further, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went away.{215}

every now and then; then he would hoist up his eyebrows; next he would

He stirred up, in a kind of a startlish way; but when he see it was only
“Oh! where, where is my uncle?” cried Elizabeth, darting from her seat as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him, without losing a moment of the time so precious; but as she reached the door, it was opened{338} by a servant, and Mr. Darcy appeared. Her pale face and impetuous manner made him start, and before he could recover himself enough to speak, she, in whose mind every idea was superseded by Lydia’s situation, hastily exclaimed, “I beg your pardon, but I must leave you. I must find Mr. Gardiner this moment on business that cannot be delayed; I have not an instant to lose.”
They say that Russia is going to occupy Manchuria, but they say such a lot of things! Sergy has received a cipher telegram from St. Petersburg, from the chief-commissary, asking him what is the quantity of provender necessary for the Siberian army, in case of war. Sergy is very much disturbed; the feeling of his responsibility weighs upon him. If our troops are sent out to Manchuria we shall remain quite helpless and unprotected here!
She put me in them new clothes again, and I couldn’t do nothing but
“Oh, you needn’t be afeard, sir, she carried the three of us easy
“Yes; it has often led him to be liberal and generous; to give his money freely, to display hospitality, to assist his tenants, and relieve the poor. Family pride, and filial pride, for he is very proud of what his father was, have done this. Not to appear to disgrace his family, to degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the Pemberley House, is a powerful motive. He has also brotherly pride, which, with some brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and careful guardian of his sister; and you will hear him generally cried up as the most attentive and best of brothers.”


further. Of course I was where the current set in the closest to the
her breakfast. She saw there was not much bread left in the basket, and

bit heavy-hearted about the gang, but not much, for I reckoned if they

“What’s that?” cried a boatman, and “Shut up, you fool!” said a man
Title-page	v

“We can’t possibly stay here,” I said; and as I spoke the firing
“That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline,” cried her brother, “because he does not write with ease.{62} He studies too much for words of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?”
Severe rules and regulations hang on the wall in my cabin. First rule: The striking of matches forbidden. Second rule: The rush to the life-boats before receiving permission, forbidden. Third rule: Not to take fright when the false alarm of fire was rung. This false alarm takes place once a week for the practice of the crew. Dear me, what a noise they were making! The alarm began by the piercing sound of a whistle, and loud shouts of Fire, Fire! After which the sailors rush on deck to open the fire-pumps, and pour out the water into the ocean, laughing loudly all the time.
I bought a copy for a blackened shilling I found in my pocket. Most of
November 19th.—We arrived at Paris in the afternoon and stopped as usual at the Hôtel de Calais. It was very cold in our apartment and we had a fire all day.
She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away without enabling them{418} to enter into something more of conversation, than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance. Anxious and uneasy, the period which passed in the drawing-room before the gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull to a degree that almost made her uncivil. She looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend.

September 6th.—We went in the morning to hear mass in the village chapel. The peasant girls were in their national dress, their long tresses interlaced with gay-coloured ribbons. After church, we continued our journey. We have yet many miles before us. At the next station we found a relay of four powerful horses belonging to the Prison Department. The Inspector of the Prisons, Mr. Komorski, was at the station to meet us. Our escort was increased by two Cossack officers. The horses fretted at standing, and I found them a bit over fresh; they started at a brisk pace. Our driver is a convict transported for life to Siberia, who had just terminated his ten years of penal servitude, and will be made a colonist in a short time. On the way we stopped at the house of a young engineer who is taking part in the construction of the railway-line beyond the Lake Baikal, after the Caspian Sea and the Sea of Aral, the largest lake in Asia. As soon as the horses were sufficiently rested, we proceeded on a road which had been growing from bad to worse. It is[371] constructed on marshy ground and is full of ruts and holes in which we jolted and tossed about. The shocking roads aren’t like roads at all, more like ploughed fields, inches deep in mud, and so rough that our vehicle seemed to be propelled by a succession of earthquakes wallowing in mud half-way deep. Our horses had hard work, sinking almost to their shoulders at every step. Our Heir to the throne on his tour to the Orient, when passing this way, had to be drawn by oxen.


[Pg 125]
 Every one had a Gun
I continued to display an obstinate preference for seclusion, and refused myself to callers. I might as well be shut away in prison. I had, moreover, imposed on myself the vow never to set foot out of my room until Sergy’s definite return. This life was telling upon my nerves and I fell into a condition of dreadful mental apathy. I had no wish for anything and fretted myself into a kind of low fever. I had[86] lost my sleep and hated the sight of food, and became thinner and more wretched every day, until at last I was a shadow of myself. I nearly drove my poor Helena mad with my pale face and tear-sodden eyes. At length she became so uneasy about me that she wrote the most alarming reports of my health to my mother, who started immediately for Alexandropol with my cousin, Kate Swetchine, to help me bear my grief and soothe my sorrows. They were certainly a dear comfort, both of them, but I wanted Sergy, and continued to send him daily laconic despatches with one word only, “Come.”

more; because when he said he’d do a thing, he always done it. But _I_
Woodman. “When we have climbed over it, we shall know what is on the
After about a half a minute the king drawls out:
The heat and damp of Ceylon are just as terrible as in Java. I passed a wretched night. I went to bed but not to sleep—oh, dear, no! for I just began to doze when swarms of mosquitoes recalled me to reality very soon.
I advise you to drink it as soon as possible.”
October had passed and Sergy did not come. I bombarded him with desperate letters full of exclamation points, always putting the stereotyped question when he would arrive.
a chance at him tried their best to coax him off of his horse so they
same. Jim got down on his knees, and put his ear against it and
Towards midnight the American coast showed itself to view. In the distance appeared a great multitude of twinkling lights. Our ship fired rockets and burnt Bengal fires. Alike in steerage and first-class saloon, pulses beat fast with joyous anticipation. On the after-deck stood the emigrants full of hope and expectation; they sang hymns and patriotic songs. I couldn’t help thinking of the day when they will wake up to the unpleasant realities of Yankee life. The poor wretches will not find the streets paved with gold.
“What might your name be?”


it was dangersome, because sometimes a strip of land as wide as a house
companions. When the little girl saw them coming she was afraid.
struck this house and buried us under the ruins!”
with a big broad, open but roofed passage joining it to the house; log
crawl out for the drink for which I craved. It was the eleventh day

smaller as he receded, and presently the mist and the gathering night


England with William the Conqueror in the _Mayflower_ or one of them

“He must be an oddity, I think,” said she. “I cannot make him out. There is something very pompous in his style. And what can he mean by apologizing for being next in the entail? We cannot suppose he would help it, if he could. Can he be a sensible man, sir?”


I see what _he_ was up to; but I never said nothing, of course. When I
and shot him in the leg, and we wanted him to go over there and fix it
and not tell anybody, and I said I would. Then she said she’d forgot
credible that the Martians may be descended from beings not unlike



heels of this as to seem instantaneous came a thud behind me, a clash



One has to imagine, as well as one may, the fate of those batteries

time; so then I didn’t care no more about him, because I don’t take no
besides——” He looked at me. “Aren’t you satisfied it _is_ up with
“Engaged by the river”	327

make no more noise than country dogs is always doing when anything
five or six times—and he was invited to stay a week; and everybody
Silas—_you’d_ never find it out; but you can’t lay the _spoon_ on the


pretty broad day; so I made Jim lay down in the canoe and cover up with

CHAPTER XX.

“Well, I see the niggers go in there several times.”
out the place. I wanted an axe, but there wasn’t any, only the one out
The Laos is a veritable floating palace. There are about one hundred first-class passengers on board. I found some old acquaintances from the Salasie, Melle. Jeanne Mougin amongst them, merry and pleasant as ever. She threw herself stormingly upon my neck; I was very pleased, in my turn, to have such a gay companion during our crossing. The steamer included among its passengers a nuncio of the Pope, a Pole, Zalessky by name, a high personage of the Church, who will soon be appointed to the rank of Cardinal. He inhabits Kandy and is now making the round of his diocese. Monseigneur, as he is called on board, wears a broad violet waistband over his black cassock. He is awfully nice, without a particle of bigotry. He told me, as we paced up and down the long deck, that he had been very fond of society in the days of his youth, and that it had been extremely hard for him to take final vows and to part with his moustache.
“On the evening before my going to London,” said he, “I made a confession to him, which I believe I ought to have made long ago. I told him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his affairs absurd and impertinent. His surprise was great. He had never had the slightest suspicion. I told him, moreover, that I{456} believed myself mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was indifferent to him; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness together.”

should have immediately worked my way round through Byfleet to Street

Besides, money fetches but its price in Flanders, although, according to Sir Charles, that province is indebted to England in a yearly balance of 521,201l.—Nor is money worth above its price in Germany, though the latter owes likewise to England a balance of 924,709l. annually.—In Ireland it goes for no more than its worth, though there is another balance due by that kingdom to England, to the yearly amount of 770,916l.—Nor is it above its value in France, who owes to England an annual balance of 108,073l.—Now, if money is every where nearly of the same value, we must conclude,[116] that there does not exist a nation which has not found in her annual importations of gold and silver, either considered as money, or as materials for some articles of luxury, all that she stood in need of to keep up circulation, and provide for that degree of luxury, which the actual degree of her industry requires, as much as it allows; in this case the final balance, deemed unexact, that is, in favour of England, has, in fact, been kept perfectly even. Each has sold here or there, as much as he has purchased, and vice versâ; and the prejudice England entertains on the necessity of a favourable balance, has not, in practice, dazzled the eyes of the merchant who carried on her trade: He has rejected the gold tendered to him, when his profit upon it would have been but trifling, with as much judgement as he has, with care, sought after such goods as could then yield him a greater benefit.
There were one or two cartloads of refugees passing along Oxford

To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure, unconnected with his general powers. About ten or a dozen years ago, before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in that very part of Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had, therefore, many acquaintance in common; and, though Wickham had been little there since the death of Darcy’s father, five years before, it was yet in his power to give her fresher intelligence of her former friends than she had been in the way of procuring.
Thank Heaven then, there remains, after England and France have been fully saturated, (including the general exportation to India) about 4 millions sterling, which the other States of Europe have received, one year with another, partly in plate, partly in gold and silver-lace, partly in ingots, partly in guineas, and partly in louis-d’ors, of which those who gave them still think themselves in possession, and which those who received them do not think they possess.

the ark, and maybe was old Leviticus himself. Jim cleaned up the canoe,
white folks does for their’n. It don’t seem natural, but I reckon it’s

bring their masks, and fetch a _man_ along. Now _leave_—and take your
Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to continue the subject.



“After we had cast anchor the natives immediately came on board. The sight of these poor people, who sit in darkness and the shadow of death, deeply affected our hearts, and we awakened ourselves cheerfully to work at their conversion and to recommend to them the salvation of the Gospel. Now the Lord vouchsafe to give us wisdom, grace, and strength to accomplish this purpose, since we are most unworthy to be unto them ‘a savour of life unto life.’


[336]
tell anybody to mind their manners—everybody was always good-mannered


and they was bowed and bent, and about ready to tumble in. The people

Jim always kept that five-center piece round his neck with a string,


Seven months ago now, Venus and Mars were in alignment with the sun;
V.
deal. No, sir, we’ll just go on and ransom them in the regular way.”
thanked me and rode on, and we saw them no more.


“How are you on the deef and dumb, Bilgewater?”

and listened and waited; and sure enough, when the next flash busted

“If we leave her here she will die,” said the Lion. “The smell of the
catch a nigger that was ungrateful enough to run away, _I_ wouldn’t
CHAPTER CXX

what people is dat puts dirt on de head er dey fren’s en makes ’em
living at Stanmore, who had come in the small hours from a dangerous
The thought of the confined creature was so dreadful to him that he

ST. PETERSBURG
to stick right straight along all the rest of the day and all night. It

“I mean that men like me are going on living—for the sake of the breed.
raise up and laugh at him. But it warn’t so this time. It was a
“No, your majesty.”
“His parting obeisance.”


the darkness a man blundered into me and sent me reeling back.
The Thing itself lay almost entirely buried in sand, amidst the
Above our heads two pupils of the Conservatory of Moscow played and sang all day long, practising their scales and vocal exercises not less than fifty times in succession. It was enough to make you hate music.
jumped to one side, and the pistol-barrel come down slow and steady to
Our first care in the morning was to peruse the earliest editions of the papers to see if we were found out. The reporters were on our track again. A journalist who had been tracking down Mr. Shaniavski all along, step by step, discovered him out at the Lyndhurst, and wanted to have all sorts of information about General Doukhovskoy, and again Mr. Shaniavski told him that he knew nothing about the General.
Woodman and said:


blackened pine woods of Byfleet. There was a light down below the hill,
hut; bench by the kitchen door, with bucket of water and a gourd; hound
their footing. The trees near me were dead and brown, but further a
at Ripley is said to have discharged no fewer than five at that time.


We are in the open sea, the wind is favourable, the sails are up, and our boat advances rapidly.

pointed at me, which made me wince, I tell you; the oldest, gray and
ate for her dinner.
by himself and not tied it wouldn’t look much like he was a runaway
The field mouse, now that it was freed from its enemy, stopped short;
into de woods en jedged I wouldn’ fool wid raffs no mo’, long as dey

“Well, then,—supposing them to be in London—they may be there, though for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptionable purpose. It is not likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and it might strike them that they could be more economically, though less expeditiously, married in London, than in Scotland.”
mound of rubble. I could see in any direction save behind me, to the
“Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside.”
were very kind to me, and wanted me to rule over them after the Wicked


But my feet would not touch the ground, and I was forced to stay on

An Editor owes more to the Public, than to any work, even such as he could wish to bring into some trifling repute: I think then, it is my duty (in foro conscientiæ) to declare, that it will not be till the Reader has perused fifty pages or more, that he will suspect the reason why the Writer has not announced in the very first, some singular opinion, which he meant insidiously to establish as it were step by step in his pamphlet; but, at length, we begin to have some notion of what we are to expect from a man who has been trying to wheedle us into a belief, that taxes are a trifling evil;—that thesaurisation would be a very great one;—that a reimbursement is at best useless;—and who afterwards modestly intimates, that some singularities may perhaps escape him in the sequel; as if it were possible to imagine any thing more singular than the three propositions I have just quoted.
carbonic-acid gas that pours from volcanic clefts is wont to do. And
have had it at your backs all this time.” Then she noticed Dorothy’s
The news was all over town in two minutes, and you could see the people

Although I may often appear, in the following suppositions, to lose sight of the revenue arising from industry, and pay attention to that of the land only, we must not forget the mechanical principle, or rather the force of Nature, who, sooner or later, in spite of all the subtilty of man, keeps an exact balance between those two sources of national wealth, and causes all the revolutions of the one to be unavoidably felt by the other.
He ran for water, for Eau-de-Cologne,
until all her other powers were exhausted. But now that her fierce
“Your plan is a good one,” replied Elizabeth, “where nothing is in question but the desire of being well married; and if I were determined to get a rich husband, or any husband, I dare say I should adopt it. But these are not Jane’s feelings; she is not acting by design. As yet she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard, nor of its reasonableness. She has known him only a fortnight. She danced four dances with him at Meryton; she saw him one morning at his own house, and has since dined in company with him four times. This is not quite enough to make her understand his character.”
her hand, singing out, “Begone _you_ Tige! you Spot! begone sah!” and
had stood, frowning and having his hat-brim down over his eyes, and
started up the river, deck passage, and fell overboard; and that was

“I’ll stop up them holes _to-day_,” says Uncle Silas, looking
instead of with brains, as yours is, how am I ever to know anything?”
“It is kind of you to like a Scarecrow,” he replied. “But surely you

told Uncle Silas before; and then she said she’d forgive us, and maybe
“Is the Wicked Witch really destroyed?” asked the Voice, and Dorothy
This I think is sufficient to demonstrate the impossibility of that pretended favourable balance, amounting, in the space of 75 years, to 162,774,769l. the existence of which many people imagine to be real, from the statements of Sir Charles Whitworth: for, if they would confine themselves to say, that, in the course of 75 years, England has profited in trade to the amount of 162,774,769l. I have proved much more, since I proved (p. 17 to 22) that all the benefits which have accrued, and might now be spent, form together a solid mass of clear and palpable savings; and that this mass would now be, without doubt, 332 millions, instead of 162, had the 180 millions, lent by[103] the subjects to government, and swallowed up by the war, been laid out in the improvement of lands and industry.
MECHANISM
speak.
We were near neighbours with the Podgoritchany’s, their estate is within a few miles from Dolgik. The young count was always devoted to me; he believed that we were destined for one another, and it was the hope of his life to make me his wife, but my heart was still entirely at my own disposal and I never gave him more than a passing thought, being hard to catch as a sunbeam. It wasn’t very fair, however, to keep him dangling after me like that if I didn’t mean that it should come to anything. One day, as I was practising one my favourite Chopin’s Etudes, the count came in and leant on the piano, his eyes dwelling upon me with a passionate expression; suddenly he seized my right hand and kissed it, whilst I played accords with my left one. I knew quite well what he was going to say. He implored me to marry him, but I had not yet made up my mind to part with my liberty and said “No” point blank, telling him he would have to get on as best he could without me. His face fell and he looked very miserable, my rejected lover, his matrimonial hopes being rudely shattered.
So Tom he wrote the nonnamous letter, and I smouched the yaller wench’s
girl a good-bye kiss, and Dorothy thanked her for all the kindness she


with blue tops, such as every man wore in this country, and the figure
“Where is the Emerald City?” he inquired. “And who is Oz?”

the printing office was going to make in that little town; then we
TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH
eased-up, like a person that’s had a tooth pulled out. So I went to
Blamed if the king didn’t have to brace up mighty quick, or he’d a
Whitechapel, Pudding Lane, Piccadilly, London, and the


and water, and loaded down with chains, till he’s claimed or sold!”
“I hain’t got no money, I tell you. You ask Judge Thatcher; he’ll tell
He stopped and went to studying. I says:
and hid daytimes and slept, and the bag of bread and meat I carried
“But I thought _you_ lived in Sheffield?”
THE MAN ON PUTNEY HILL.
Old Hank Bunker done it once, and bragged about it; and in less than
By jings, I most slumped through the floor! But there warn’t no time to
The crowd had pushed him in.
As we drew near Kizil-Arvat the landscape changed in character; verdure begins to appear. We are crossing an oasis. In the distance we see a caravan of camels advancing slowly. At sundown we approach Geok-Tepe, and our train stops before the tombs of our soldiers killed during the assault of the town, whilst a requiem was chanted for the repose of their souls. Much blood has been spilt here! We passed before the ruins of the fortress made famous by the heroic defence of the natives during a whole month. The walls of the fortress stretch for several kilometres.
it’s long stairs and they bounce a good deal, you know.
all day amongst the cottonwood thicket, so as to be fresh for the work,

too sick or too old was gone to camp-meeting, about two mile back in

The wonder must increase still further, when it is observed, that the same nations, in possession of the most active and most intelligent industry, are also possessed of all the cash necessary to give an additional activity to that industry, which might be required to carry on a branch of trade, as it were, at their door, but which is neglected, out of regard for old and absurd prejudices.
start in and “’terpret” it, because it was sent for a warning. He said




We had to mix a little in society, and Sergy took me out occasionally to pay formal calls, a task I particularly disliked. There seemed to be no end of card-leaving and card-receiving. It is such a bore going out visiting or holding a drawing-room—and this was my only crumpled rose-leaf. I had got thoroughly tired of the vapid folly and hypocrisy of social life, which is a daily lie, and mentally consigned all dinner-parties and deadly “At-Homes” to perdition. Nothing is more horrible than these “At-Home” days; it is such a nuisance to have to be nice to people whom in the bottom of your heart you despise, and who devote their ample leisure to passing criticisms of no tender character on their friends behind their backs. All these Grandes Dames of the so-called Best World are more like mechanical dolls moving on wires, than living, feeling women. Their lives are framed uniformly on a fixed set of rules, and their gossip is perfectly intolerable to me. They talk either platitudes about chiffons, or make remarks about the weather; they murmur mechanically hospitable phrases, and then tear their guests to pieces and mock the weak points of the very people whose hands they had just pressed.
agreement that we wouldn’t have nothing in the world to do with such

Another advantage that would accrue from that uniformity, nearly general, in all prices, if one would lend an helping hand to Nature, after having been convinced of the impossibility of reaping any other benefit from the obstacles thrown in her way, but the sad advantage of retarding her progress;—another advantage, I say, that would accrue from that kind of uniformity in prices, which undergoes no alteration, but from the wants and demands, is, that all that monstrous system of prohibitions or equivalent restrictions, must crumble of itself: for, with what face could a national manufacturer solicit the means and privilege of making his own countrymen pay 10 per cent. dearer for those goods, which another nation tenders to them at 10 per cent. cheaper, notwithstanding the expence of exportation? What reasons could he urge[290] when, instead of answering, a cultivator should rise in the national council, and ask, for the exportation of corn, an absurd premium which would instantly enhance its price 25 per cent.?—But the game of imports and exports to which this last observation alludes, requires to be treated in a separate article which it is not yet time to enter upon; all we have now to do is to think on the means of giving a free circulation to the revenue of all Europe, supposed to be increased in the proportion of 20 to 22, on account of the same increase necessary in England to pay three millions interest, without any one being the poorer for it. I shall say nothing of the facility of paper-currency, when the inutility of a national robbery shall be once generally acknowledged.
palpitating with the amazing intelligence of a huge outbreak of
unfamiliar routine of the Martians in the pit. Let me return to those

out the camp fire at the cavern the first thing, and didn’t show a
I felt foolish and angry. I tried and found I could not tell them what
“You are very kind, sir, I am sure; and I wish with all{83} my heart it may prove so; for else they will be destitute enough. Things are settled so oddly.”
Then I told him the whole thing, and he said it was smart. He said Tom

country of the Munchkins. The Quadlings themselves, who were short and
“Dining out,” said Mrs. Bennet; “that is very unlucky.”

“And what arts did he use to separate them?”
try it once—you’ll see.

tumultuous emotions that arise from that difference among men. A young

March 7th.—We are on our way to Paris. I am so happy to see the miles added to miles, and the distance separating me from darling St. Petersburg decreasing visibly. The whole country is covered with a deep mantle of snow. I wanted snow so badly in the tropics, and must be satisfied now!
was disappointed at this inanimate bulk. Some went away while I was

Then he rode on. I was scared, but a man says:
“Is it _them?_”

And beyond, over the blue hills that rise southward of the river, the
in the left side of the Tin Woodman’s breast. Then, going to a chest of
BARCELONA
and I come to you praying that you will put brains in my head instead

was not a Head, as she had seen him, but a lovely Lady.


The Late Tuljajee, Rajah of Tanjore,
As my brother began to realise the import of all these things, he
of the platform and then the other, and then a-leaning down over the


came up to her, feeling rather bruised and sore, and said, “It is
My health began to alarm Mamma; I was growing thin and pale. Our doctor believed I was overstraining myself with lessons, and instead of prescribing me a lot of horrid drugs, he had the capital idea of sending us to sun ourselves for a week or two on the Riviera. We followed willingly his agreeable prescription and set off speedily to Nice.
glittering metal.

and turned the corner, and nearly rammed my head into Uncle Silas’s
there’s Jim chained by one leg, with a ten-foot chain, to the leg of

believed they must a gone up-town to get a dog and so they lost all
the head, I am sure I shall not be given a heart, since a head has no

{ix}PREFACE.
“Too bad, too bad he couldn’t a lived to see his brothers, poor soul.
pull off his clothes and sling them. He shed them so thick they kind of
He went, and bent down and looked, and says:

I thought, surveying him.
the shoes, and after shaking the dust out of them handed them to
sugar-bowl without fooling around any. Just then the nigger woman steps
“Glory!—A-a-_men!_” And so he went on, and the people groaning and

catched in the Mississippi, I reckon. Jim said he hadn’t ever seen a
but the current was another man that would get us away from him. The
“Warnings to the people that something is up. Sometimes it’s done one
handsome—and the sweetest old gray-headed lady, and back of her two

"Sir, we were attacked by hundreds of strange beings. They seemed pools of force, living, sentient beings, but the electronic activity indicators indicated a frequency that denotes atomic forces. I believe they are beings living on atomic energy. They have no material body. Heat rays do not affect them in the least. They shed disintegration rays as a repulsor screen does meteorites. They are unaffected by our most powerful explosives. They have tremendous power. One of them took our space ship and threw it violently away with so terrific an acceleration that the neutralizer was damaged overcoming it. We tried to flee from them, but they seem to be able to go with a speed approaching that of light, and easily overtook us. Finally they forced us near this, the sixth of the ten planets, and threw us down. The machine was wrecked, but the neutralizer, crippled as it was, saved us. The matter disintegrator was broken open, and the power ray tore up the ground a bit. The atomic creatures are hunting us, I believe—they are—there they come—they can blanket our power somehow——"
England was bell-ringing. Men on cycles, lean-faced, unkempt, scorched
Release date: June 29, 2024 [eBook #73952]
its ventilators and funnels spouting fire.

“There!” cried the milkmaid angrily. “See what you have done! My cow

March 16th.—Life in Erzeroum is an Elysium after my lonely life in Alexandropol and Kars. I am in such a radiant mood that I think everything I see is perfect. I have nothing left to wish for and am able to allow myself the luxury of a piano, a lovely saddle-horse, and all sorts of nice things. Our house is one of the biggest in Erzeroum; it looks palatial after my lodgings in Alexandropol and Kars. From the top of our terrace-roof one can see the whole town from a bird’s eye view, with its sixty-six minarets rising to the sky, its imposing citadels and floating flags over different Consulates. In the far distance there is the encircling chain of the Palantek mountains, with glittering snow-peaks. The houses are low, with balustrades round them like those in Biblical pictures. There are about 15,000 inhabitants in Erzeroum; the majority are Turks, then come Greeks and Armenians. After sunset the town looks gloomy, only soldiers can be seen in the streets. As for the population, it is represented only by a multitude of errant dogs, the usual street-sweepers of Turkish towns. I hear every evening the voices of the muezzins (Turkish priests) calling to prayer: “Alla huac bar, Alla huac bar!” (God is great.)
and high, rocky bluffs on both sides. By-and-by says I, “Hel-_lo_, Jim,

his head down betwixt his knees, moaning and mourning to himself. I


it I shot out into the solid white fog, and hadn’t no more idea which
“I’d _like_ to! And I orter, too—a mean skunk!”
now no heart, so that I lost all my love for the Munchkin girl, and did
At eleven o’clock we entered the port of Suez. On the African coast rises the chain of the Dakhi Mountains; opposite, on the Arabian coast, we see the high peak of Mount Sinai, and an oasis of palm trees surnamed the “Fountain of Moses.” The ship was going to stay here for two or three hours only; it was not worth while going on shore.


against bacterial diseases—they never succumb without a severe
One or two trains came in from Richmond, Putney, and Kingston,
Let us suppose, nevertheless, that there should exist at this day, a nation pretending to be formidable in her competition, and who should only be, in fact, remarkable for her folly, that is to say, a nation so very blind, as to endeavour to keep the price of her wheat under that of all[169] other countries; I agree that the labour of her artisans would be rated in consequence, and that the produce of her industry might thus be purchased at a lower rate than that of any other nation:—but what advantage could she derive from thence in a competition abroad?⸺Though she should denominate at home the sum of her exports, only one million for instance, because she would call 100, the quantity of wheat, which elsewhere would be called 150, how could she require less for her returns than the other countries, who, by the price of their wheat, would be compelled to call 1,500,000 that which she herself would call 1,000,000?—Would not this million represent, as really, the labour of 75,000 of her workmen (their families included), as if it were by her denominated 1,500,000l.?—Besides, the place where she has carried her goods is not the end of her voyage; and it is so much more necessary for her to obtain in return the produce of 75,000 labourers (families included), adequate to what she herself has given, as being obliged to carry those returns home, where every thing sells, in the hypothesis, 50 per cent. below the price they would fetch any where else, she would lose in lowering the rates of her exports, all the fruit she might expect to reap from her voyage.—This is what escapes[170] observation. They see nothing but money in commercial operations, instead of observing that all the nations in Europe, neither do nor can require, and that England herself does not preserve more of it than the sum necessary to answer those five articles of which I have spoken in examining her balance: I shall in the sequel bring some proofs, in addition to those I have already given; but I think I have said enough here, to justify me in insisting, that the competition can be dreaded by the unjust man alone, by that man who wishes to sell the labour of 100 workmen as if it were the labour of 150, and by that man, not less unreasonable, who, compelled to sell his own goods 10 per cent. dearer, should refuse to pay also 10 per cent. dearer for the foreign goods which he would ask in exchange.—If that principle—a principle of the strictest justice, is still unknown in Europe; as an American, I glory that it is not so in America.
her?”
time to before. I begun to think how dreadful it was, even for
“Hang the troublesome rubbage, ther’s _ten_ now!” and she looked huffy
“What did you think the vittles was for?”

been melted by a bucket of water, and Dorothy at once unlocked the gate

and death to the earth. I never dreamed of it then as I watched; no one
The object of my first love was a simple servant-girl who lived in the next house. Every day I watched for her, and rushing to the window I flattened my tiny nose against the glass, and devoured her with eager eyes.
We took a stroll through the village, where we visited the home of a rich Cossack inhabitant. My husband signed himself as godfather to his little son, who lay shrieking in his cot. The wee Cossack was still unbaptised, as there was no priest in the neighbourhood.
“Do not give way to useless alarm,” added he: “though it is right to be prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it as certain. It is not quite a week since they left Brighton. In a few days more, we may gain some news of them; and till we know that they are not married, and have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over as lost. As soon as I get to town, I shall go to my brother, and make him come home with me to Gracechurch Street, and then we may consult together as to what is to be done.”
It was very dark, and the wind howled horribly around her, but Dorothy
in going to and fro, transferring everything from the second and third
IX.
“I ain’t undisposed. What’s your line—mainly?”
boats chaffering with the people on the beach, a swarm which also
he rose to his feet to find himself with a couple of antagonists again.
“From what we have seen of him,” continued Mrs. Gardiner, “I really should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by anybody as he has done by poor Wickham. He has not an ill-natured look. On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he speaks. And there is something of dignity in his countenance, that would not give one an{317} unfavourable idea of his heart. But, to be sure, the good lady who showed us the house did give him a most flaming character! I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes. But he is a liberal master, I suppose, and that, in the eye of a servant, comprehends every virtue.”
Outside the rope there was an indescribable squeeze. The crowd swayed with a wavelike motion and made a rush besieging the barrier. The human waves were kept back by several lines of soldiers and a double row of policemen. Such a crowd was almost beyond imagination.
In about five or ten minutes here comes Boggs again, but not on his
heart of its own and therefore cannot feel for me. But if it is the

speak, and to see him bow and walk along beside her.
else all these three weeks; hadn’t seen him since they was boys

But the Monkey King shook his head.
THE FRIAR AND THE LUTHERAN.
and carve the things on it, and file out the pens and the saw on it,
aside the red plants that obscured it. Once or twice I heard a faint

pride, timorous, anæmic, hateful souls, full of shifty cunning, who
about sixty, the other two thirty or more—all of them fine and

which the Winged Monkeys had tossed the Scarecrow’s clothes.
“There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those two young men. One has got all the goodness, and the other all the appearance of it.”

cottage, and Dorothy entered and found a bed of dried leaves in one
thence escaping from the country altogether.
The sun shone brightly as our friends turned their faces toward the
_two_, en give half un it to you, en de yuther half to de yuther woman.
blackest—_fst!_ it was as bright as glory, and you’d have a little
said:
accident, but the fact is so. And I assert that I watched them closely
When they were all quite presentable they followed the soldier girl
Outside, the soil was banked high against the house. At the top of the
November 11th.—The crossing from Suez to Marseilles does not take more than three or four days. The weather grew perceptibly colder. We entered the Mediterranean in the afternoon and found it very disagreeable in this season. Great billows are rising on the water and the steamer begins to rock.
It did seem a powerful long time before Jim’s light showed up; and when
Most everybody would a been satisfied with the pile, and took it on


“Design? Nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is very likely that he may fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as soon as he comes.”
[424]
drifted slowly riverward all through Monday morning, creeping nearer
First they done a lecture on temperance; but they didn’t make enough
in the main thoroughfares, but by striking through the quiet back
call, and we shall hear you and come to your assistance. Good-bye!”

The day seemed, by contrast with my recent confinement, dazzlingly







dish, beautifully carved. Placing this before the Cowardly Lion, who

He leaned on his axe and thought a moment. Then he said, “The Winkies
I went to the circus and loafed around the back side till the watchman



told. So they marched away until they came near to Dorothy. Then the

The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart; and by a manœuvre of Mrs. Bennet had to wait for their carriage a quarter of an hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how heartily they were wished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her sister scarcely opened their mouths except to complain of fatigue, and were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed every attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and, by so doing, threw a languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the long speeches of Mr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Bingley and his sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Darcy said nothing at all. Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene. Mr. Bingley and Jane were standing together a little detached from the rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of “Lord, how tired I am!” accompanied by a violent yawn.{131}



which had been translated into Tamil by Fabricius, and departed. “I withdrew,” said he, “repeating my good wishes for his happiness.”
I stepped with my husband into the handsome victoria, given to me by my brother for a wedding present, and we rode away, driven by four spirited horses. On crossing a bridge one of our steeds slipped and went down; the carriage passed over him, throwing the coachman and the footman off their box-seat. The frightened animals, feeling themselves at liberty, tore away down the road at a frightful pace. We were sitting terror-struck, seeing ourselves shut up in the carriage. Sergy made an attempt to squeeze himself through the pane of glass on the box, in order to catch hold of the reins and stop the horses. I divined his crazy purpose and clutched at him with all my force. Luckily at that moment the reins entangled themselves between the wheels, bringing the maddened animals to a stand-still within two steps of the river.
“I shall not say that you are mistaken,” he replied, “because you could not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and I have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know, that you find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which, in fact, are not your own.”
“When shall we start?” asked the Scarecrow.
by the look of the streak that there’s a snag there in a swift current
I should have run myself—I’m such a coward; but just as soon as they
“That is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as much.” And though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had been pretty much the case.
they’ll come, and then, if she ain’t too tired, she’s coming home; and
“Hold on,” says the duke. “Le’s make up the deffisit,” and he begun to
river in one summer. Such a town as that has to be always moving back,


Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on her pausing, he asked her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends. This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared; and she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking the acquaintance of some of those very people, against whom his pride had revolted, in his offer to herself. “What will be his surprise,” thought she, “when he{313} knows who they are! He takes them now for people of fashion.”
This did not hurt the Scarecrow, but it surprised him, and he looked
“I have always thought myself very big and terrible; yet such little
me. One man I approached—he was, I perceived, a neighbour of mine,

“Undoubtedly. Did you see him while you were at Lambton? I thought I understood from the Gardiners that you had.”
J’irai plus loin quoique Editeur. Je supposerai qu’il résultât aussi de cette réunion de raisons & de faits, que les moyens qu’on a crus jusqu’ici les plus propres à soulager le Peuple, étoient les plus infaillibles pour le vexer; qu’est ce que cela fait au Peuple pourvu qu’on ne le vexe plus? Le passé est-il autre chose qu’un songe?

August 9th.—This afternoon we took a trip along the right shore of the Euphrates. We came to an ancient grotto close to a basin of mineral water, about half a mile from the best quarries of the country. The stones drawn out of them are of various colours and serve for the construction of houses. The echo in these crypts, which served in former times as shelter to hermits, is remarkably sonorous. At present the natives who go on a pilgrimage to the Mussulman monastery of Hatcha-Vank, usually make a halt here. We sat down on a carpet spread under an immense tree and rested in dreamy quiet within its shade, near a big trench for irrigation filled with foaming water. The Cossacks of our escort made a fire and roasted potatoes in that sheltered nook, and the inhabitants of the neighbouring village brought jugs of excellent milk, new-laid eggs and salmon-trout that they had just caught close by. We returned home only at nightfall.

Thus each of the little party was satisfied except Dorothy, who longed
“_No!_ A servant ain’t nobody there. They treat them worse than dogs.”
“Gentlemen—gentle_men!_ Hear me just a word—just a _single_ word—if you
now she’s all fixed up agin mos’ as good as new, en we’s got a new lot


but dat’s enough. Dis one’s powerful drunk, en de duke ain’ much

So, when they came to a good-sized farmhouse, Dorothy walked boldly up
November 12th.—When I arrived at Samarkand, a telegram from the Emir was brought to me. The Asiatic Sovereign asked to be warned in advance, so that I could be received with fitting ceremony at Kermineh where he wanted to meet me, but I refused and begged him by wire not to trouble himself, because we passed Kermineh by night.
“No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. For my part, Mr. Bingley, I always keep servants that can do their own work; my daughters are brought up differently. But everybody is to judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls, I assure you. It is a pity they are not handsome! Not that I think Charlotte so very plain; but then she is our particular friend.”
“Good-bye!” they all answered, and away the Queen ran, while Dorothy
That made me feel pretty bad. About an hour or two ago it would a been
Except in the corner, where a multitude of crows hopped and fought over
invite everybody to come to the funeral—wants me to make ’em all
But by-and-by the thing dragged through, and everything was


They walked through the forest until it became too dark to go any
If they read these verses how they both would frown!
“We have obeyed you as far as we were able. The Tin Woodman and the
Mills in a vain attempt to blow up one of the invaders.


“Meeting accidentally in town”	256
WHEN they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself as much as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for her employment the examination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since her being in Kent. They contained no actual complaint, nor was there any revival of past occurrences,{236} or any communication of present suffering. But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that cheerfulness which had been used to characterize her style, and which, proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself, and kindly disposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded. Elizabeth noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal. Mr. Darcy’s shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict gave her a keener sense of her sister’s sufferings. It was some consolation to think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the next, and a still greater that in less than a fortnight she should herself be with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of her spirits, by all that affection could do.


He jumped and got the canoe ready, and put his old coat in the bottom


the drift of the current fetched me in at the bottom of the town. I
“But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavor to conceal it, he must find it out.”
urgent need of action I tried in vain to conceive some plan of escape;

Events were advancing faster than I anticipated; the storm-cloud which had been gathering had burst at last, and the time of trial had come. A telegram informed Loris-Melikoff that the Ambassador of Russia had received the

“I have come for my courage,” announced the Lion, entering the room.
wore out, I got to thinking that if I could fix up some way to keep pap
it is before _I’m_ done with you.”
“I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will soon be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as you can. But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has more to give.


I got rid of the signs of my work, and dropped the blanket and hid my
no use trying to travel with a ten-foot chain on his leg. Why, drat it,
from the outside, from somewhere inconceivably remote, out of time, out

the duke says:
“Oz himself is the Great Wizard,” answered the Witch, sinking her voice
effect. The pamphlet containing these renderings had a considerable
them.”

[Image unavailable.]
painlessly struck her out of being. Since the night of my return from
weather I used to slide out and sleep in the woods sometimes, and so

out. They have become practically mere brains, wearing different bodies
feet of shining screw projected. Somebody blundered against me, and I
“No, your grace, not as I remember, I believe.”
In regard to the danger of paper-currency increasing above the quantity wanted, it is as little to be feared, and its superabundance would soon be made as sensible by its effect, as that of a superfluity of coin.—If you double the mass of money intended for circulation, how will you prevent such articles as sold for 4 only, from rising to 8, or the additional 4 from becoming useless?—And if paper-currency be in question, how will you prevent the extravagantly-avaricious wretch, who envies others the enjoyments he denies to himself, how can you prevent[147] him, I say, from observing that paper rots in the ground, and that to bury his wealth he must exchange it for cash?—how will you prevent this want of money, immediately felt, from destroying, without resource, the credit which that mass of buried money had hitherto given to paper-currency? So long, therefore, as the paper keeps up its credit, one may rest assured that the public is not over-loaded with it. I shall, in the sequel, venture some reflexions on the true cause of that part of the increase in prices, which is attributed to the quantity of paper-currency in circulation; contenting myself here with a recapitulation of what I have just said on the different causes of the alteration in prices, according to the foregoing hypothesis, by concluding,
“He never failed to inform them”	211

better educated than the common soldier, and they discussed the
SIBERIA

“Oh dear! Yes, certainly. I am sure Lizzy will be very happy—I am sure she can have no objection. Come, Kitty, I want you upstairs.” And gathering her work together, she was hastening away, when Elizabeth called out,—



The general trade of England with the rest of Europe is not confined to some thousands of pounds sterling, to be settled once for all; it is an immense sum, which must be renewed every year. Let us begin by being thoroughly convinced of this necessity, in order to submit to its consequences: we shall find moreover that these consequences are not destructive.
signs of any unusual excitement in the streets. The afternoon papers
telling you what I was thinking. ‘Here’s intelligent things,’ I said,

afterwards, in Bushey Park. Before the guns on the Richmond and
to hurry, or they’d catch me and hang me yet, and said I was afeard you
CHAPTER XVII
forgot the heat and went forward to the cylinder to help turn. But
you take them for _proofs_, and are helped to fool yourselves by these
used to lay drunk with the hogs in the tanyard, but he hain’t been seen
“Why didn’t you walk around the hole?” asked the Tin Woodman.

and Tom stopped us there and put his eye to the crack, but couldn’t
“Perhaps,” said the Lion thoughtfully, “if I had no heart I should not
track of Tom; and both of them set at the table thinking, and not
boots. Before I could distinguish clearly how the man lay, the flicker

Whether the generality of exports from England, at different periods, considered with regard to her foreign correspondence, do not demonstrate a kind of electricity, unthought of hitherto, though not unworthy of amusing the greatest politicians at their leisure moments?
But do the persons before spoken of, come within this description? And, if the man who has laboured in his youth, chooses to repose himself in his old-age, is this pretended idleness any thing more than that otium, that leisure, so justifiable, and so sweet, after a toilsome life, when the state of the mind, and of the heart, cease to make labour necessary?—And, supposing, that after his death his wealth devolves to an ideot, must the son of[47] an industrious father, who has served the State both by his œconomy and labour, be deprived of his resource?
from the pit about the cylinder, and strike me down.
stranger, for you couldn’t start a face in that town that I didn’t
northward and eastward road running out of the tangled maze of streets


“No,” said Dorothy, “he’s made of tin.” And she helped the Woodman up


From such a connection she could not wonder that he should shrink. The wish of procuring her regard, which she had assured herself of his feeling in Derbyshire, could not in rational expectation survive such a blow as this. She was humbled, she was grieved; she repented, though she hardly knew of what. She became jealous of his esteem, when she could no longer hope to be benefited by it. She wanted to hear of him, when there seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence. She was convinced{382} that she could have been happy with him, when it was no longer likely they should meet.

and his mouth opened up like a trunk, and stayed so; and he swallowed
“I don’t know. But that’s what they do. I’ve seen it in books; and so

The road was interrupted here and there by gates which were opened by the village children, who received coppers for it. Before a wooden bridge in the form of a Swiss Chalet, we were met by a party of barefooted, yellow-haired brats, provided with long branches to chase off the flies, and square stones to put under the wheels on steep ascents. They followed us during a whole hour, waving their branches and singing Tyrolese songs. We plodded on steadily for three hours. Having reached the Hôtel Eiger we ordered saddle-horses, and went to the glaciers by a narrow way, with the rock-wall at one elbow and perpendicular precipices at the other. The rough path was so narrow that we had to ride one below the other, treading a road where a man would have scarcely room enough to pass.
The fifth night below St. Louis we had a big storm after midnight, with



and New Orleans papers; and when he mentioned the St. Louis ones it
 The Death of Boggs
“No, your majesty, we warn’t—_please_ don’t, your majesty!”
enormous headlines:

“But I would really advise you to make your purchase in that neighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. There is not a finer county in England than Derbyshire.{50}”


like a lid.
that didn’t know no more than a person’s conscience does I would pison
“You got any spiders in here, Jim?”
Russia continues to outlive troublesome times; after the war it is the anarchist conspirators who organise inquisitions, condemn to death, and hold themselves the office of executioners. A rumour has spread in town that on Easter Eve there will be a repetition of St. Bartholomew’s night, and that all the wealthy inhabitants of the city will be massacred.
and minutes that there warn’t a sound, and we all there so close

My mother’s down sick, and out of money and everything, and I come to
“Eliza Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her, “is one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the other sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I daresay, it succeeds; but, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.”
There is a prejudice much more unaccountable in England, in the proud England, than the whim of a national reimbursement; it is that prejudice which all the hired writers, pro and con, endeavour to propagate from age to age in all countries, a prejudice, on the destroying of which every unhired writer can never be too intent, that prejudice stating, that the prosperity of a State depends on one single individual. Where is that Phœnix to be found? There are always two pretenders at least, who cry at once, I am the man, and a thousand voices exclaiming together, he is the man. The prosperity of a State, be its extent what it may, solely depends on its agriculture, its industry, its knowledge, and on that degree of liberty with which those three objects can exert themselves in every way. This is the grand truth which ought to be impressed on every mind.⸺Let one great man die in a country where great men are appreciated⸺stamp on the ground, and ten such men will start up: many more will start up when every body, without respect either to face or mask, is at liberty to stand as a candidate.
“Is my father in town?”
[432]
Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach of her sister, who joined her with a cheerful look which showed her better satisfied with their visitors than Elizabeth.

Her aunt assured her that she was; and Elizabeth, having thanked her for the kindness of her hints, they parted,—a wonderful instance of advice being given on such a point without being resented.
high up above everything the spires and dome of the Palace of Oz.

February 22nd.—The monotony of our crossing had begun to weary every one. The passengers saw far too much of each other, and the good-understanding between them was cooling down. They began to pick quarrels with each other and lived in strife for the remainder of the voyage.
Then he weaves along again, perfectly ca’m, and goes to dropping in his
“We wish to go to the Emerald City,” said the child, “and we have lost
with no further injury than a cut wrist. The steep foot of Haverstock


terrible as our position was, there was as yet no justification for

Mr. Swinine was a very charming and courteous old gentleman, a real Grand Seigneur of the past generation, and a wonderful man for his age, light of step and young of spirit; there was nothing decrepit or infirm about him. The old beau, in spite of his eighty years, was a delightful host, and treated me with an old-world gallantry. His heart was not altogether withered, and in extraordinary circumstances he could even be moved. He felt a new sense of renewed youth in my presence, which heated his old blood; he told me that I seemed to have a talisman about me, and that he had never met a woman who could quicken his pulse like me. His face had the expression of a satyr and his little eyes twinkled merrily when he related to me a number of his feats and love-affairs of “auld lang syne.” He preserved, among other remote remembrances of by-gone days, a beautiful Indian shawl with which I was not a little surprised to see my bed covered; in his opinion I only was worthy of such an honour.
So the big bird flew into the air and over the water till she came to
in at the death.
inhabitants of Mars. The immediate pressure of necessity has brightened
it’s pap, though I warn’t expecting him. He dropped below me with the
now and then. The statements was interesting, but tough. Another was
certainly afraid, turned to face the Kalidahs, and then he gave so loud
told me how we was to do; then we went and waited around the
infected by the excitement of the occasion.

“Which road leads to the Wicked Witch of the West?” asked Dorothy.
sure enough, and could see us; and he sings out:
me a little for being so slow; but I told him I fell in the river, and
“Lord!” said the landlord; “what’s the hurry? I’m selling my bit of a
Kansas and Aunt Em, it did not matter so much whether the Woodman had
This they did with the vapour banks near us, as we saw in the starlight
Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that, had she chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to her as her future niece; nor could she think, without a smile, of what her Ladyship’s indignation would have been. “What would she have said? how would she have behaved?” were the questions with which she amused herself.
when he sees the canoe he didn’t like the look of her—said she was big

It is very curious to observe how these Hindus and Brahmins constantly took up the ground that they were already worshipping God and did not need to change their faith to please Him. When Schwartz was visiting Caroor, twelve miles from Trichinopoly, he made a special effort to reach these high caste men with the Gospel. He says of them:—

certain bars of aluminium in another, the black birds, and the
of the handling-machine, quite still. That night was a beautiful

“Pa, mayn’t Tom and Sid and me go to the show?”



in the straw, and he often growled in an unfriendly way at the

The duke says yes. Then there was a fine time. Everybody sings out,
“Why, how did you get hold of the raft again, Jim—did you catch her?”
perfectly easy.”

cartwheel shaved him narrowly.
silent and motionless, regarding me.
“Merely to the illustration of your character,” said she, endeavouring to shake off her gravity. “I am trying to make it out.”
The weather was very fine and the sea had scarcely a ripple. Towards six o’clock dinner was spread on deck in Swedish fashion on a long table covered with appetising dishes, and you were asked to help yourself. That is a good way, because you have the opportunity of selecting what you prefer and of taking as much as you like.
September 14th.—My husband has returned to-day from his voyage. How long the time has seemed to me in his absence!
in a dungeon: we got to dig the inscriptions into a rock. We’ll fetch a
by a small branch and shaken until he howled. But the Woodman promptly
show for me; so I laid outside—I didn’t mind the rain, because it was
them sluggishly performing the most elaborately complicated operations

Her sister, Miss Watson, a tolerable slim old maid, with goggles on,
rough ground for a quarter of a mile or more, and then I run across a

vogue, and I mention them here simply to warn the reader against the
shade trees away off in a corner; some currant bushes and gooseberry

shoulder is one of the carelessest and foolishest things a body can do.
Today, however, they were not playing. Uncle Henry sat upon the
Mr. & Mrs. Bennet
The history of India is filled with the alarms of war, state arrayed against state, plunder, devastation, and remorseless shedding of blood. Her soil has indeed been made sacred by the slaughter of her sons. But beyond this story of strife we are looking for something else and asking another question. Where and how amid these hoary creeds and worship did a knowledge of the true God as we know Him, and the Name of the Saviour of the World first come to the people of this land? The quest of this is not easy where so much is legend and pious, but perhaps not quite honest, story telling.


CHAPTER XLIII
crow of sense could see that you are only stuffed with straw.’ Then he
She longed to inquire of the housekeeper whether her master were really absent, but had not courage for it. At length, however, the question was asked by her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while Mrs. Reynolds replied, that he was; adding, “But we expect him to-morrow, with a large party of friends.” How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own journey had not by any circumstance been delayed a day!
elemental things, will have a wider charity.

of Flying,” was discovered. At Waterloo I found the free trains that
dirty dollars.
[Image unavailable.]
unhappily, I could for the latter. And suddenly that night became


passel of fools and leave eight or nine thous’n’ dollars’ worth o’


better nuss or faithfuller, and yet he was risking his freedom to do
Sixth Hypothesis.
en we better let blame’ well alone, as de good book says. Like as not

IX.	As Peacemaker with Hyder Ali	103
jam together, and you couldn’t hear yourself think for the noise. It
As for the two capitalists in land and industry, it is clear that each of them will have exactly the faculty of preparing, buying, selling, consuming, and saving, under the denomination of 30, 40, 60, &c. all that they could prepare, buy, sell, consume, and save, under that of 15, 20, 30, &c.

[Image unavailable.]
CHAPTER XXI.
It is impossible to postpone our journey to Tashkend any longer, my husband being called to his new post of duty because of the disturbances taking place in Andidjan, the capital of Fergan, a district of Turkestan. During the night from the 17th to 18th May, a revolt burst out. A band of Mussulmans, about 1,000 men, under the command of their ishan Mahomet-Ali-Halif, attacked the camp of our garrison from the side of the village Don Kishlak, adjoining the camp. The natives crept stealthily to the first barrack in which our soldiers were sleeping peacefully, and began to cut their throats. Starting up out of their sleep, the men of the neighbouring barracks drove their assailants back with the points of their bayonets. All the camp was soon astir and the Mussulmans retreated, carrying away their wounded. The “imam,” a pilgrim from Mecca, was one of the first to be killed, whilst he was reading the Koran to the rioters, who, in attacking our garrison, had planned the extermination of the whole Russian population, and putting everything to fire and sword, after having taken possession of our camp. The agitation in the country is settled down and active measures are taken against the rebels. The “ishan” is sentenced to death, together with the principal mutineers, whilst 500 natives will be exported to penal servitude to the Isle of Saghalien. I do pity these poor fanatics! Legends are told about this ishan; the story goes that some time before the last rebellion, a message from the Sultan had delivered to him a venerable relic, the hair and beard of the prophet, with the permission to commence a sacred war against the infidels. The population of Fergan, recently submitted to Russia, had attempted several times to raise a general rebellion against the Russians, nourishing towards them an implacable hatred. My husband will have to take strong measures to avoid a new outburst.
was true enough.

it, a hickry-bark ladder don’t cost nothing, and don’t waste nothing,
We were back at Lucerne towards evening, and after taking tea, we sat for a short time in wicker-chairs under the chestnuts on the quay and went to end our evening to the theatre to see a new play. I felt thoroughly fatigued and dozed off during the performance. The play appeared awfully dull and I thought the acting was atrocious, so did everyone, for the curtain dropped and nobody applauded.
“We won’t quarrel about that. Go on.”
But with them must go their own great machines, mighty mechanisms for producing their foods, for making their ships; the thousand and one things that went to make up the great structure of their age-old civilization. And huge sending stations of inconceivable power had to be erected to transmit them. Titanic projectors capable of sending a machine weighing a quarter of a million tons in one scanning. Other machines were so huge that they must be cut into sections and sent in pieces.
“She will drop the acquaintance entirely.”
fugitives that was beginning. He succeeded in getting some food at an
before me—the immensity of the night and space and nature, my own
“No’m.”
that ever was; and so he went on a-bragging about the tragedy, and
a turrible time en mos’ git drownded? Now ain’ dat so, boss—ain’t it
“Oh,” said she, “I heard you before; but I could not immediately determine what to say in reply. You wanted me, I know, to say ‘Yes,’ that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of their premeditated contempt. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell you that I do not want to dance a reel at all; and now despise me if you dare.”
Meanwhile the new Rajah of Tanjore was causing increased trouble; history was repeating itself, for he had appointed an unscrupulous man as his sirkeel who also simply exacted bribes and corrupted justice. Schwartz promptly reported this state of things to the Government at Madras and it was decided to administer the state with the help of Schwartz and Mr. Petrie, a commissioner. This led to a strong remonstrance against the confinement of the boy Serfogee in what was equal to a prison and the neglect and unkind treatment he received. There was little doubt that Ameer Sing, who had taken such solemn pledges to protect and care for him, had intended to hide him away and if possible get rid of him. It was a moment of peril for the boy and demanded instant action. Schwartz, with an English gentleman, went to the palace, asked for Serfogee and taking him by the hand told him to follow. The Rajah, alarmed, implored that the boy should not be removed, promising that he should be well cared for. Schwartz consented, but slept by the boy all night and never left him until twelve sepoys of the 23rd Regiment were set to guard. Schwartz afterwards wrote a long report to the Council at Madras, narrating the corrupt condition of the Rajah’s government and that it was imperative that the boy should be placed in more security, be properly educated and provided for. Not only so, but Schwartz prepared and submitted a clear and most able plan for the administration of justice in Tanjore. This long and statesmanlike document is a proof of his remarkable knowledge and experience of the needs of the people. “It is acknowledged,” he writes, “that the administration of justice is the basis of the true welfare of a country.”


reckoned—and then they laughed, and he said it over again, and they
and so on, and so on. If I see a stump, I took it for a man; if I trod
June 5th.—Kirkor-Effendi Schabanian gave an evening-party to-day. We remained in his fantastic garden, illuminated with many coloured lanterns, till late, admiring the gorgeous costumes of his Asiatic guests who promenaded round a marble fountain full of goldfish. It was all like a scene from the Arabian nights.




that don’t make no difference, she was most awful beautiful, and her
sorts of kind things to them, and carried their carpet-bags up the hill
I shall venture upon some remarks on the foregoing proposition.
find it out or bust. Well, I felt better right off.


LIV.	Constantinople	291
VIII.
o’clock, and the horse had an hour’s rest while I took supper with my

And nothing better than mere trash,
girls said they hadn’t ever dreamed of seeing the family separated or
LI.	Trouville	282
But still there was the urge of exploration, of adventure. There might be other battles to fight, other worlds to conquer! Already mighty exploration ships were being prepared to dispatch to half a dozen systems. Perhaps they would bring commerce; perhaps it would be wider domain. But it was that same lure of adventure that had driven the first caveman from his rocky cliff to explore the wilder lands. It was the love of adventure, another name for ambition. It would take more than ten thousand thousand thousand years to kill that!

At Tanjore one of these schools was filled with children from the best families, and the young men from the seminaries obtained good situations under the Government at Madras. Schwartz looked forward to developing in this direction a residential academy for catechists and was very anxious to start a provincial school at Combaconum, which was a very idolatrous place. But with the Rajah Ameer Sing he did not find such a favourable reception of his plans as with the old King Tuljajee, his predecessor. On this point he had the following conversation: “I spoke with the Rajah on the subject, but he seemed not to approve of it and afterwards sent to inform me of his disapprobation. I went to him and inquired how it was that he did not approve of it, especially when everyone was left at liberty to have Hindustani, Persian, Mahratta, and Malabar Schools. ‘But,’ I said, ‘the true reason of your disapprobation is a fear that many would be converted to the Christian religion. I wish you would all devote yourselves to the service of the true God. I have assisted you in many troubles and will you now treat me as an enemy? Is this right?’ He answered, ‘No, that is not my meaning, but it has never been the custom.’ ‘Ought it then,’ I replied, ‘always to remain so? There has been much done already that never was the custom.’ He said, ‘Good, good, I will do it.’”
scullery. I was struck by a sudden thought. I went back quickly and

 “Git Up”
harbor of Marseilles, that dug himself out that way; how long was _he_
They swarmed up towards Sherburn’s house, a-whooping and raging like
of it. Right then along comes a skiff with two men in it with guns, and
long’s I live!” says the man on the floor, sort of blubbering.
Then, with a faint, hoarse cry, I forced myself across the scullery. I


know you took it off, and know it by a better way than your

little things that happened one time or another in the town, or to
Lion’s back they all managed to scramble to the top. Then the Lion
everything into the canoe as quick as I could, and then went creeping
They all laughed, and Bob says:
artilleryman. “They ’aven’t seen that fire-beam yet.”
out of breath but loaded up with joy, and sung out:
better stay here all night. Take off your bonnet.”
CHAPTER XXXIX.
you do they will suspicion something and raise whoop-jamboreehoo. I do
come of it. Jim said he reckoned I would believe him next time. And he
Another day we went for an excursion to the monastery of Notre Dame de la Garde, where the church is decorated with little cardboard boats that the sailors’ wives offer, with their prayers, to the Madonna, when their husbands are at sea.

She began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in disposition and talents, would most suit her. His understanding and temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her wishes. It was an union that must have been to the advantage of both: by her ease and liveliness, his mind might have been softened, his manners improved; and from his judgment, information, and knowledge of the world, she must have received benefit of greater importance.
“I deserve neither such praise nor such censure,” cried{49} Elizabeth; “I am not a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things.”

trees about me shivered with the first intimation of the storm that was
“My dearest Lizzie,

I was powerful lazy and comfortable—didn’t want to get up and cook

It was Toto that made Dorothy laugh, and saved her from growing as gray

ourselves, by a gradual development of brain and hands (the latter


over on to the floor amongst the dogs, and begun to groan like he was
July 2nd.—Early in the morning we came in view of Aden. Our boat sets off at six o’clock in the evening, and we had plenty of time to visit the town. We landed at Steamer Point and found ourselves in a territory over which the British flag flies. We took a carriage with a negro coachman, and drove to see the cisterns, following a beautifully kept road. At a steep turning we met a long caravan of camels. To jump out of the carriage was the affair of a minute for me. I continued the ascent trudging under a broiling sun, spoiling my complexion, foot-sore and ill-tempered. A most unpleasant walk it was; the trees were too thin to give any shade, the ground was parched and cracked and scorching hot, one could easily bake an egg in it.

Towards night we removed to the sleeping-car, fitted up with a long double file of two-storeyed bunks, the rows separated by a green calico partition. The railway conductors are shiny black negroes, surnamed “Johnny,” all of them. Our Johnny, a most jolly-looking nigger, in white livery, was very talkative, his tongue went like an express train. He plied us with questions and cross-examined us about where we came from, where we were going to. Wasn’t he also a spy? At all events we did not reveal our destination. We pretended we were going no further than Niagara. In the night Mme. Beurgier went to drink a glass of water, and when she crawled in, in the dark, she couldn’t find out her sleeping-berth, and got into Johnny’s couch. When her hands touched the darkie’s slippery face, she thought she had touched a frog, and throwing herself back, she bumped her face against the boards, at which her forehead instantly developed a bump of many colours.


most busted his brains out, he thought he’d got to give it up; but
“Well, guess.”
“IHAVE been thinking it over again, Elizabeth,” said her uncle, as they drove from the town; “and really, upon serious consideration, I am much more inclined than I was to judge as your eldest sister does of the matter. It appears to me so very unlikely that any young man should form such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or friendless, and who was actually staying in his Colonel’s family, that I am strongly inclined to hope the best. Could he expect that her friends would not step forward? Could he expect to be noticed again by the regiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster? His temptation is not adequate to the risk.{346}”
around him with joy. “Never have I seen a more beautiful place.”
So he led the way and the others followed. They had nearly reached the
“Well, nobody come after me, and it ain’t right I’m always kept down; I
I reckon, and I said I wouldn’t swallow it all; and that’s every bit
spelling-book. She worked me middling hard for about an hour, and then
house-breaking.
spectacles.”
A doctor who had the reputation of making a good diagnosis had to be summoned to me. After having tapped me here and there, he said I was a bundle of nerves and prescribed a gayer mode of life for me, nothing more.
at the Lion, “if that is the case you may come in, and I will give you
that framed them, the head of the thing, was rounded, and had, one
Towards evening we arrived at Askhabad. In spite of the want of water, the vegetation is luxuriant in these parts. My uncle, General Roerberg, was the founder of the town. After the conquest of Akhal-Teke by General Skobeleff in 1881, the Grand Duke Michael, commander in chief of the army of the Caucasus, proposed to my uncle who was at that time General of Division, to occupy the post of chief of the Transcaspian provinces. He was ordered to Askhabad which was but a small village inhabited by wandering tribes. My uncle established peace and tranquillised the country which he began to rule as the Khan (Asiatic despot). In the first place he had to organise the distribution[492] of ground-plots among the natives, the army and the Russian inhabitants, and plan out the town. A few years ago my uncle visited Askhabad and found it in a flourishing state. It has at present 47,000 inhabitants exclusive of the nomad population, (a tribe bearing the name of Tekintzi,) and has two gymnasiums for boys and girls, three municipal schools, and other public establishments.

hill beyond Pyrford Church the glare came into view again, and the

The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week; and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only one card-table in the{212} evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart of the first. Their other engagements were few, as the style of living of the neighbourhood in general was beyond the Collinses’ reach. This, however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time comfortably enough: there were half hours of pleasant conversation with Charlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year, that she had often great enjoyment out of doors. Her favourite walk, and where she frequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine, was along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, and where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine’s curiosity.

steal anything we _needed_. Well, I says, I needed the watermelon. But
turning its back upon the artilleryman, began to waddle away towards
After a few hours the road began to be rough, and the walking grew so

January 6th.—In the afternoon we entered the calm harbour of Hong-Kong, and moored at New Harbour, where the boats come in to take coal. When we stepped on shore, chocolate-coloured natives, speaking all at once, fought for our luggage and snatched our bags out of our hands. We hailed a carriage which brought us to Windsor Hotel, where we took a suite of several rooms.
LADIES AND CHILDREN NOT ADMITTED.

mad, and he said he would go straight and tell all the secrets. But Tom
began to crawl very cautiously across the hot heather ash towards
mourners had got up there to the front benches in a crowd, they sung

full length. She was not much hurt, but in her fall one of the Silver


it pleased him. “I am a humbug.”
would keep it up all the rest of our lives and leave Jim to our


city! Woe! Woe! Woe! Woe! Woe! To the inhabitants of the earth by

For social distraction I have now but little taste, and delight in staying at home with Sergy. My time is well filled up and my hours are regulated as clock-work. My daily life begins early in the morning. I usually rise at seven o’clock and am never for a moment idle, working, reading, playing the piano and trying to keep the house in order. I am rather new to housekeeping, it is true, but am determined to begin it in a thorough fashion. It is not a small affair to make myself respected by our servants. The management of that unmanageable creature, the cook, is especially difficult; I have[136] had many struggles with him, and often see a sneer on his lips, but nevertheless I have never allowed him to fleece us too much. Sometimes I had a terrible turn for cleaning, and visitors often caught me perched upon a chair with my sleeves rolled well above my elbows, and my dress shielded by an apron, with a sponge in my hand, busy washing the plants in our drawing-room.
After the first years, destined, since the establishment of Societies, to be spent in endeavouring, if possible to cheat each other, it will certainly become indispensable to agree upon a fixed rule of appraisement, as unexceptionable for one country as for the other. Now, in the supposed state of the question, money cannot be that rule; for one of them demands none, and the other is not willing to part with any, not out of regard for the favourable balance, but because she would get less by the exportation of her money, than of her goods; it will therefore become necessary, for the respective advantage of the parties concerned,[161] to agree, that the labour of 10, of 100, of 1000 men in one country, shall be looked upon as repaid by the labour of the same number of hands from the other, upon a tacit proviso nevertheless, that the respective merchants in both nations shall have it in their power to ransom their countrymen, according to the proportions established in both countries, a little by the degree of estimation in which commerce is held, but a great deal by the degree of foreign competition by which the natives are or will be kept or called to order.—And what is required to prevent any injustice, and, above all, any mistrust from the merchant of one nation towards the merchant of the other?—Nothing more than to follow the practice almost generally established all over Europe.—The merchant in Rome, I suppose, will send his son to his friend in London, and vice versâ. Now if the Roman perceives that in London, where a quarter of wheat costs 40s. the article he proposes to buy is commonly sold at 80s. he will readily conceive, without having gone through a course of algebra, that some other article, which is bespoke of him in exchange, going for 54s. in Rome, where wheat is at 27s. per quarter, he will exactly pay, value for value, according to the balance and weight of the commercial sanctuary, the 80 of London with the 54 of Rome.
was no sensible transition from one state of mind to the other. I was
he got his shoulder and knee up, and again he seemed to slip back until
there ain’t nothing more to write about, and I am rotten glad of it,
head and smiled proud. The doctor says:
VENICE
Do let me carry that basket for you. I shall not mind it, for I can’t
It was with the greatest difficulty they could get her down to the
en settles de trouble by tellin’ ’um she don’t b’long to none uv um,

As Dorothy bade the good-natured Guardian a last farewell she said:
“Well, I tried to, but I couldn’t; I couldn’t budge you.”


direction away from the pit, but the chances of our emerging within
So we shoved out after dark on the raft.


heard a faint movement under my feet. The top had certainly ceased to



back streets, and sleeping with the wives they married, not because
On the very morning when we read our names in the list of the arrivals at the “Clarendon,” Sergy gave audience to a suspicious-looking compatriot of ours, who had come expressly to ask my husband’s opinion upon the treaty between Russia and America, concerning the terms on which both countries had to deliver up their respective criminals.
because the widow didn’t like it; but now I took to it again because

When my indefatigable companions returned, we walked across the park to Canada “abroad,” as they call it here, and crossed the river by a suspended bridge joining Canada to the United States. We had to pay 25 cents each to cross the Suspension Bridge, which seemed to hang over the water. This bridge had recently collapsed and was now built again.
We stepped on shore and walked to the Hôtel Belle-Vue. After lunch we took rikshas and wandered about the town. Our riksha-men stopped of their own accord before a tea-house, muttering laconically, “Something to see!” But there was only a big picture on the wall to be seen, representing a sea-battle between the Japs and the Chinese, where all the Chinese boats went down to the bottom.
“But we must cross it,” said the Scarecrow. “We’re going to the country
“All right, doctor,” says the king, kinder mocking him; “we’ll try and
One of these fellows was about seventy or upwards, and had a bald head
living thing left upon the common, and every bush and tree upon it that
So the king he blattered along, and managed to inquire about pretty
When, at last, he walked into Dorothy’s room and thanked her for
“Go on! Go on!” cried the voices. “Way! Way!”
them, hanging down from the limbs like long, gray beards. It was the
larger than the rest. On the green lawn before it many men and women
movements, it was as if some wounded thing were struggling for its life
cold bath in the afternoon. About half past four I went up to the
markings, as yet unexplained, were seen near the site of that outbreak
satisfied; but by-and-by it got sort of lonesome, and so I went and set

well out towards the middle of the river, and not show a light till we
can’t see no distance. It got to be very late and still, and then along
stuck it on the back side, and slung the axe in the corner. Then I took

twilight was now so far advanced that the blood with which its seat was
“Shucks!” he says, and looked disgusted. So I says:



Breathes forth contagion on the world,


“No,” said her father. “Wickham’s a fool if he takes her with a farthing less than ten thousand pounds: I should be sorry to think so ill of him, in the very beginning of our relationship.”
“I should imagine not.”
help. The inn was closed, as it was now within prohibited hours.
“It does beat all how neat the niggers played their hand. They let on
“Oh yes. Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Philips be placed in the gallery at Pemberley. Put them next to your great-uncle the judge. They are in the same profession, you know, only in different lines. As for your Elizabeth’s picture, you must not attempt to have it taken, for what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes?”
“Well, then,” I says, “joking or no joking, if you hear anything said
Then a strange thing happened.


We were beginning to be tired of Tokio, and on the 5th August we started to Kobe. The weather was grey and dull, the crows croaked over us foretelling rain. The road to Kobe reminded me of the Caucasus by its grand and wild landscape. We entered continually into tunnels. From afar we heard the splashing of the ocean, and in a short time our train ran along the shore. Suddenly we were caught in a terrible storm; the ocean beat violently against the beach. We were told that the typhoon, that terror of seamen, had just passed over. When a ship is caught in the centre of the furious whirlwind, she is lost for ever. Our train fought courageously with the hurricane. The wind rattled the windows and seemed to threaten to overturn our car. It won’t be agreeable on sea to-morrow!
fence. It was funny they hadn’t come in, after standing around so. I
“Well,” I says, “s’pose we got some genies to help _us_—can’t we lick
enough in this case; and, besides, Jim’s a nigger, and wouldn’t
There remains, it is true, a fourth interest, that of the Fisc, or public revenue; but if this revenue be nothing more than the produce of the taxes, this fourth interest consists of course, as the three former, in the largest quantity of products, and the greatest consumption. Now are there any other means to obtain those two objects, besides the freest and most extensive exchange, not of goods for money, but of goods for goods? Is it not perceivable, that all the four interests united, as well as each of them separately, require that no more be imported in bullion or money than the quantity necessary to facilitate those exchanges? Is not a surplus of money not only useless, but even detrimental, in diminishing our enjoyments, our possible profits, and that consumption which produces the public revenue?
was mistaken about that, for pretty soon all of a sudden along comes a

couple of case-knives.”

The water not being deep enough for landing, we had to moor some miles from the coast, at “Steamer point.” The passengers are obliged to take a small Arab boat to get on shore. Sergy and his companions went to visit Aden, but the town was so little interesting that I preferred to remain on board with Mrs. Serebriakoff. We watched from the deck a band of negro boys with only a belt round their waist, with the words “Diving Boy,” written in English. The harbour is infected with sharks, the monsters of the deep, and tragedies have happened more than once. Quite recently a[426] shark made swift work of the life of a “diving boy,” who was crushed up by the jaws of the monster in the presence of many passengers. Nevertheless his comrades were not afraid of sharks, they dived very deep under our boat and came out on the other side, holding between their teeth the coins that the passengers threw into the water, and scrambled again on board their boats. The local negroes belong to the “Somali” tribe; they are very ugly, with perfectly flat noses, immense teeth and woolly, crisp hair dyed a rich brick-red. It was too hot to remain long on deck, and I went to lie down in my cabin until the return of my husband. The order was given to close the port holes because of the loading of coal. I was scarcely to be recognised, being quickly transformed into a negress, my garments covered with oily soot.

[81]

“Yours, etc.”
the thud of trees, fences, sheds flashing into flame, and the crackling
And this Thing I saw! How can I describe it? A monstrous tripod, higher
flat on his back. The people that had seen the thing said he done it
“You mean to say our old raft warn’t smashed all to flinders?”

truck, using the strings they had brought. One end of a string was tied

grindstone, and set out to roll her home, but it was a most nation
So Tom says:
was to go somewheres; all I wanted was a change, I warn’t particular.
After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could not help reverting once more to the first, and saying,—


“You may _well_ say it, Brer Hightower! It’s jist as I was a-sayin’ to

“At length I said, as I often do to them, ‘Do not suppose that I reprove you out of scorn, no, you are my brethren, we are by creation the children of one common Father. It grieves us Christians that you have forsaken[Pg 88] that almighty gracious Father and have turned to idols who cannot profit you. You know, because you have often heard, that a day of judgment is before us, when we must render up an account. Should you persist in remaining enemies to God and on that day hear with dismay the sentence of condemnation I fear you will accuse us Christians of not warning you with sufficient earnestness. Suffer yourselves then to be persuaded, since you see that He wants nothing of you but that you turn with us to God and be happy!’ They all declared that they were convinced of our sincere intentions and that they would speak further with us.”

“Mr. Darcy!” repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement.

Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her Ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself. She heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded upstairs. Her mother impatiently met her at the door of her dressing-room, to ask why Lady Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.

“I have always liked you as you were,” said Dorothy simply.
LONDON,
“He likes to have his own way very well,” replied Colonel Fitzwilliam. “But so we all do. It is only that he has better means of having it than many others, because he is rich, and many others are poor. I speak feelingly. A younger son, you know, must be inured to self-denial and dependence.”
Several of them jumped for him and begged him not to talk that way to
Here we found an excited and noisy crowd of fugitives. As yet the


the minute I says it out crawls this nigger from somewheres and says
report followed, and a big projectile hurtled overhead towards
brain, reinforced, I suppose, by the food I had eaten, grew clear
[472]
As we were driven back to Peissenberg, we were overtaken by a terrible storm; the thunder rolled, preceded by dazzling lightning, and rain began to fall heavily. We came home drenched to the skin; my dress had the heavy soapy look that bathing-suits have, and my hat looked a sad object with its plume hanging lamentably, and rivulets of water falling from its brim.
in the time. But this time I found something at last; I found an old
“When the party entered”	12

“Here’s Huck Finn, he hain’t got no family; what you going to do ’bout

would a done at home—better, maybe, because it was so quiet; but there
We went to Tiflis towards the middle of May. On the way I made the acquaintance of two cadets of the corps des pages, grandsons of the Shah of Persia. The youngest prince, Rouknadine-Mirza, a charming chap with exquisite oriental eyes, took particularly my fancy. He had already fallen a little under my spell, and I looked upon him as a kind of blessed invention for my entertainment on this trip. As for his eldest brother, he seemed to be of rather a quiet disposition, and I did not care a rap for him.
As they walked on, the green glow became brighter and brighter, and it
would only make trouble, and wouldn’t do no good.


not wish to destroy the country but only to crush and overawe the

by wading into it and directing a jet of steam upon it.

and find out what the matter was afterwards. He didn’t ever have to
MADRID

For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,

at ’im?”
kind and thoughtful of the Scarecrow, but she laughed heartily at the



from their heeling, pitching boat, a vast iron bulk like the blade of a
about Edmund Kean the Elder, which was to play the main principal part

drunk, and went a-blowing around and cussing and whooping and carrying
“What did you say?” asked the Scarecrow, who did not know what she was
and ask for some witnesses—why, you’ll have that entire town down here
“Good gracious!” cried Maria, after a few minutes’ silence, “it seems but a day or two since we first came! and yet how many things have happened!”
IN ST. PETERSBURG AGAIN
In the afternoon we passed Trouville and towards evening we perceived the Isle of Wight with its two lighthouses pointing on the horizon. The coast soon melted away in the distance. It was our last good-bye to dear old Europe—and en route for the New World!
with miserable eyes; some gnawed their hands with thirst, or lay
all its branches as if in pain, and the Tin Woodman passed safely under
And invisible to me because it was so remote and small, flying swiftly
“What do dey stan’ for? I’se gwyne to tell you. When I got all wore out
Of all the coin circulating in England, 18 months ago there was only a sixth, and there is now much less than a sixth part, in pieces struck before the present reign. Now, in 1780, it appears that the money coined at the Mint, in the present reign, amounted only to 30,457,805l.


boat would be coming up the river or down. But I go a good deal on
At first, I say, the handling-machine did not impress me as a machine,

it—every one of them. But I’m sorry, m’am, and I won’t do it no more—I
On approaching the small town of Viznau, from where one mounts by a funicular line on the summit of the Rigi-Kulm, a vast hill mounting to the sky, we saw an engine inclined almost perpendicularly, pushing one car up the steep mountain. From the peak, tumultuous torrents formed by the melting of the snow fell down. The road up the Rigi is an extraordinary piece of engineering, and how the funicular manages to climb it, is a matter of surprise. The weather was so clear that we could actually see the people walking about on the top of the mountain, and it gave us the desire to follow their example the next day.
everybody quit thinking the nigger done it?”
Eighthly, If after enquiry, the only answer that could be given should be a negative, would it not be profitable to let the public into the secret, in order that after having observed a very singular analogy between a young nymph loaded with a column of several thousand pounds weight of air, each of them as heavy as if it were of lead, and the French as well as the English loaded annually, constantly, in the same manner, the one with 600 millions of livres Tournois, the other with 14 or 15 millions of pounds sterling, they should be led further to observe, with[277] what agility, what graces, what sprightliness, the young dancer plays with her load—“trips it along on the fantastic toe,” and with what grimaces, what groans, what lamentations, the two vigorous nations shrink under a burden which is not more sensible than air, from the instant that it is as perfectly divided?
“This,” adds Schwartz, “is an appeal which bears with too much force on us unfriended missionaries. Yes; we are constrained to admit that if any one confesses the Christian doctrine he is despised, not only by his own connections but by Europeans also. This is a hard trial.”
walking with stately strides at Dorothy’s side. Toto did not approve of
And now at Tranquebar on the 23rd of January, 1787, a large congregation is gathered of Europeans and their families, with the native Christians, to the Ordination Service of this young missionary of promise. His old father sits by his side and Schwartz preaches the sermon from 2 Tim. ii. 1: “Thou therefore my son be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.” After his ordination the young preacher ascended the pulpit and preached in Tamil and the meeting concluded with some faithful words from the missionaries present and the sacramental service.[Pg 131] It was most impressive and it is a pleasure to know that the ministry thus begun was continued through many years of faithful and successful work.
knowed very well I had done wrong, and I see it warn’t no use for me to

anything you choose to give her to write about just so it was sadful.
“But,” said Dorothy, after a moment’s thought, “Aunt Em has told me
To be sure, the broad river now cut them off from this beautiful land.
August 3rd.—At six o’clock in the evening we moored at Khabarovsk. Our arrival was announced as usual by cannon-shots. I saw a crowd of friendly faces on the quay, and shook hands all around. Khabarovsk looked very bright. Troops lined all the way to our house.
good things to eat, and fastened a little bell around Toto’s neck with

an absolute relief. Going on towards Brompton, the streets were quiet
October 27th.—The chief of the station, who took care of[508] my sleep, and was afraid that I should be aroused by the shrieks of the manœuvring engines, gave order to the engine-drivers to moderate their transports when blowing their whistles.

the Woodman at all. And as bees cannot live when their stings are

After dinner we went to see the “Arenas” where barbarous bull-fights, the favourite spectacle of the Spaniards, take place. The bull-ring is a large round building which can hold up to 16,000 spectators. We entered a chapel where Toreadors, Matadors as they are called here, say prayers before starting for the bull-fight. In the next room we saw six beds prepared for the wounded Matadors. We were also shown the stalls where stood thirty horses doomed for the next courses. The poor animals didn’t get any food or drink, “It wasn’t worth while,” said one of the grooms, as they would all be embowelled on the following day! The bulls travel by train to Madrid in a box put on wheels hardly big enough to hold them. On arriving at Madrid mules are harnessed to these boxes, and the bulls are brought behind the bull-ring where they are being kept in some dark place,[256] and just before the beginning of the “Corrida” they are pushed into the arena, with long sharp iron rods, through a door which is opened from the top galleries by a cord on a pulley.
shut the gate again.
Hilton at his house, but I was told he was expected from London by the
panic torrent that must have poured Londonward on the Sunday night




I didn’t want to set her to thinking about her troubles again; and I
resume. We stopped there all Sunday night and all the next day—the day
“It was not like the Heat-Ray,” I said, and for a time I was inclined
projectile, and the sand and gravel had been flung violently in every
At any rate, whether we expect another invasion or not, our views of

which were so brilliant in color they almost dazzled Dorothy’s eyes.


They found the forest very thick on this side, and it looked dark and
As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a mile across the park. Every park has its beauty and its prospects; and Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originally cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh.



Schwartz began perceptibly to lose strength but not heart. We gather this from a letter written by one of the missionaries at Tranquebar who found it necessary to seek his advice upon some matter and met him by appointment at Tripatore.


the door of her castle, she happened to look around and saw Dorothy
nobody didn’t seem to know what to do. But pretty soon they see that
To this, Mary very gravely replied, “Far be it from me, my dear sister, to depreciate such pleasures. They would doubtless be congenial with the generality of female minds. But I confess they would have no charms for me. I should infinitely prefer a book.”
how to keep young in spite of the many years she has lived.”

So the Wizard unfastened his head and emptied out the straw. Then he
it stands to reason. Yes, it’s a prime good idea. Where could you keep
“That ain’t got anything to _do_ with it, Huck Finn. All _he’s_ got to


The Lion and the Woodman both shook their heads, for they did not know.

a declaration of independence, and dares them to come on. That was
it beats the Nonesuch, _don’t_ it?”
been doing nothing, and was being chased for it—said there was men and
the railway stations, banked up into a horrible struggle about the
AS PEACEMAKER WITH HYDER ALI.
case with the ants.
“Well, some of the best authorities has done it. They couldn’t get the
“There won’t be any more blessed concerts for a million years or so;

CHAPTER XIV.
and then I’ll go and fix up some kind of a yarn, and get somebody to go
In those days the English were winning and stubbornly maintaining a precarious foothold in India by the ambition of the merchant, the soldier, and the diplomat; East and West had met in relentless struggle, and[Pg iv] at the gates of the Orient the white man clamoured for power and conquest. Amid the glare of this conflagration of war, Schwartz and these early missionaries quietly pursued their sacred duties, and with weapons not carnal but spiritual fought their good fight of faith. The pages of history praise the great achievements of Clive, Warren Hastings, and Cornwallis as the fathers of our rule there, but surely Schwartz is also entitled to a niche of honour as one who laid the foundation of that reign of the Kingdom of God which thousands of faithful missionaries are promoting throughout the Indian Empire to-day. It is the sacred office of the Church to preserve the blessed memory of her standard-bearers and confessors: the world will look after its own.
it is we never knew.”
OUR JOURNEY ABROAD

We took a day’s rest at Verona. It was the anniversary of the occupation of Rome by the Italian troops, and the town was dressed all over with flags. On our way to the hotel we passed the house which had belonged to the Capulet family, and saw the balcony on which Juliet appeared to Romeo and listened to his serenades. After dinner we visited the splendid “Giusti Gardens,” where we were shown a marble statue worth a fortune, resounding like bronze when you touched it, and for which an American collector of works of art had offered the sum of forty thousand francs.
and red by pouring water on them and scrubbing them with another brick;
Wizard, I must admit.”
“The day before the funeral, friend,” says the king.
around and lit into _me_ again. He give me down the banks for not
PORT SAÏD
“Here—come in here.”
June 29th.—There is not the slightest breeze; we live in a furnace. The sky, always blue, gives me the nostalgia of the cloud. This afternoon we crossed the Strait of Bab-el-Mandeb.
lynch the whole gang!”
frightened, as these birds always are by scarecrows, and did not dare

have leaped out of the water with that momentary exultation.
Ce n’est point un Traité que l’Auteur annonce: ce n’est rien de plus que des Considérations sur le Méchanisme des Sociétés. Un pareil titre n’astreint point à un plan régulier, & sauve même le risque de préparer les Lecteurs à un enchaînement d’idées qui n’échappera point à leur sagacité, s’il existe; & sur lequel on ne les abuseroit point, s’il n’existe pas. Mais dans un tableau consacré au monde comme à la patrie, aux peuples comme à leurs maîtres, il falloit que l’objet saillant, l’objet sur lequel on dirigeoit leur première attention, fût d’un intérêt assez général pour les engager progressivement à l’examen de tous ceux de ses détails qui méritent d’être approfondis, & dont les rapports sont méconnus ou mal jugés.
great pity, but my church matters has got to get along the best way
was afternoon before they came to the great wall that surrounded the
It was about eleven o’clock when we stopped at the station of Samarkand. Everywhere was the smell of pungent disinfectant. We are going to remain two days here. Sergy put up at the house of General Fedoroff, Governor of Samarkand. The town is ten miles from the station, but I prefer to remain in my car, standing alone in a side-track of the line. The road leading to the station was illuminated at night with different coloured lanterns hanging from the trees.
from one place to t’other and watching everything he done, and bobbing
the same. A boatload of people putting back came leaping out as I

 Old Hank Bunker
stride.

“Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman, indeed,” added Charlotte, “and a most attentive neighbour.”

They swarmed up in front of Sherburn’s palings as thick as they could

hill Richmond town was burning briskly; outside the town of Richmond
Hugh Thomson
that I have counted her, and that she has counted me, among the dead.
from him, screaming and crying, and took her off. She was about
When Autumn arrived, I started for St. Petersburg. It was arranged that my husband was to rejoin me in a few weeks’ time, and that we should return together to Tashkend in the Spring. I hated to part from Sergy; I shall want him horribly, but I must see to the publishing of the first part of my book and end the last part; absolute quiet is essential for rapid work. Our separation would not be a very prolonged one, and Sergy was to write every day.


into a big room where the Witch Glinda sat upon a throne of rubies.
time. You see, he was pretty old, and George’s g’yirls was too young to
Romeo...................................... Mr. Garrick.
We had all miraculously escaped from death, and weren’t hurt at all, only scared. When we sprang down, I shook with nervousness, and began to sob convulsively. It is easy to conceive the fright of Sergy’s brothers who were following us behind. They made us mount into their brougham and soon after we arrived safely at Mertchik. My favourite dog, a beautiful St. Bernard, who had been sent to Mertchik the day before, stood wagging his tail to welcome us on the doorstep.
come farther. But the little old woman walked up to Dorothy, made a low

LXXXVIII.	On the Mediterranean	430
“And they must marry! Yet he is such a man.”


pull it quite easily. Even the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman could sit


A few days later a sham-alarm was raised in the camp. I was out before five o’clock in the morning and directed my[150] steps towards the camp half asleep and yawning widely. There was still moonlight outside, and the breeze that ran before daybreak was making me shiver a little. Suddenly cannon-shots were heard and in less than two minutes the whole camp was astir. The soldiers rushed out of their tents and arranged themselves in battle-columns, whilst trumpet signals rent the air.
contorted attitudes, horses as well as men, overturned carts and

says:

I didn’t expect Sergy before three days, and taking up a piece of needlework, sat in a restless mood talking with Mrs. Unterberger, when suddenly I heard the report of a gun, followed by a second report. It was my husband who was returning to Vladivostock sooner than we expected.

Schwartz’ Pulpit, Christ Church, Tanjore	”	”	128

What a head for just a boy to have! If I had Tom Sawyer’s head I

On the next morning the soldier with the green whiskers came to the Tin
The neighbourhood of Astrakhan plays a great part in the life of the Transcaspian provinces; all sorts of wares and products are imported there in great quantity. This time our steamer is loaded with barrels of beer.
crowd towards Woking, the other a knot of people in the direction of
“Perhaps not,” said the Scarecrow, “for we mean to destroy her.”
“Poor devil, there’s something in that. We are right down sorry for
“Wh—what, mum?”
“We must be very careful here,” said the kind-hearted Woodman, “or we
“A man who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish enough to expect a renewal of his love? Is there one among the sex who would not protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman? There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings.”
doing a thing that had some good in it. And she took snuff, too; of
lightning-rod, and both of us got hurt a little, and we didn’t never
he would shout and bring the Martians upon us. For a time that scared
for leaving her, and so she’d sell him straight down the river again;
them stay said; and never thought no more about reforming. I shoved the

to pet the dogs and make friends with the nigger that fed Jim—if it

The Journey to the Great Oz
says Tom Sawyer. “We ain’t burglars. That ain’t no sort of style. We
And went right smartly through his besogne




Cap had been made for a wedding present to Quelala, and it is said to
“Oh, yes. I knowed dey was arter you. I see um go by heah—watched um

There was a concussion, and the black horse came staggering sideways,
That makes calamity of so long life;
greatest wish, and having thanked Oz warmly he went back to his

backwards onto the ground, heavy and solid, with his arms spread out.
On our way home we stopped at “Kian,” a small village where we created a great sensation, and were stared at as if we were beings from another world. The women crowded around; one of them determined to examine me closely grasped my arm exclaiming, “I have touched her, she is alive!” (Did she suppose that I was a wax-doll?)
me en de raf’. En when I wake up en fine you back agin, all safe en
except the nigger woman, which was gone, and the two young women. They
no brains and the Scarecrow no heart, or each got what he wanted.
 IV. THE CYLINDER OPENS.

“But depend upon it, Mr. Collins,” she added, “that Lizzy shall be brought to reason. I will speak to her about it myself directly. She is a very headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest; but I will make her know it.”
“No, I thank you,” she replied, endeavouring to recover herself. “There is nothing the matter with me. I am quite well, I am only distressed by some dreadful news which I have just received from Longbourn.”
How pleasant it was to be in St. Petersburg again; I felt so self-dependent in it! It was my first taste of liberty; I was my own mistress at last, and I should have plenty of opportunity to spread my wings and see the world, of which I knew nothing, but expected everything. I had a chamber of my own and felt that I had never lived till now, it was simply a foretaste of Paradise.

At once there came running to her from all directions a pack of great

“To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of either.”
We mounted on the citadel that same afternoon. Before reaching the old fortress built on the spur of the Mokattam hills, we passed threatening British cannon, which kept watch over the town of Cairo, and passed through the iron-clamped gates to the wide courtyard where stands the mosque of Mohammed-Ali, now converted into barracks. When we returned to the hotel our way was barred by a funeral procession, escorted by a group of dervishes bearing ragged banners and chanting the Koran to the accompaniment of drums, and hired women-mourners, who beat their breasts and scratched their faces wailing lamentably all the time. Behind them the favourite donkey of the deceased was led. Some steps further we were brought to a stand-still by a wedding procession. A rich palankeen, bearing the newly married couple appeared, placed on two shafts, to which two splendid dromedaries were harnessed, one behind and one in the front, covered with bright scarlet nets and decorated with tufts of white ostrich feathers and little silver bells. Camels heavily laden with the wedding gifts brought up the rear.

Suddenly he stumbled and fell; his immediate pursuer went headlong, and
mishap, and giving a loud roar that echoed like thunder, he dashed up
[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]
one of two expressions—a leaping exultation and energy or a grim

again hungry and thirsty.
There’s the respect must give us pause:
good-bye and sent me to you,” said the girl.
very tedious being perched up here night and day to scare away crows.”
My husband is promoted to the rank of General-in-Chief. He was Brigadier-General when I married him, and it is now the third and last rank that I enjoy with him.

[Image unavailable.]
I went along up the bank with one eye out for pap and t’other one out

He had swept it out of existence, as it seemed, without any
room was pretty small, but plenty good enough, and so was my cubby.
up and put ’em away; and do you reckon a nigger can run across money
“All right,” says I, “go ahead.”
And his Aunt Polly she said Tom was right about old Miss Watson setting
Charlotte’s reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.
A more particular view of the subject furnishes him with fresh reasons, which seem to him sufficient to quiet the mind of the most suspicious creditor. It is, indeed, only by means of the savings made, or daily to be made, upon eight pence (the exact proportion each individual is entitled to in the general revenue), that it has been possible to reach the summit of opulence, and that it is possible to be fixed there: but the Author seeks for such savings in agriculture and industry, as cannot be misunderstood; he observes that the savings made in agriculture, have proved sufficient, in the course of a century, not only to discharge all the public burdens, but even to double the landed revenue; and he then enters into a detail of several objects, (all easy to be ascertained,) which seem to demonstrate a similar progress in industry.
stood listening, but towards the common there was nothing stirring but
these people, whose name, much as I would like to express my gratitude
CHAPTER XLI.

district and St. Pancras, and westward and northward in Kilburn and St.
full of flour and started for breakfast, and found a couple of
When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen, they returned down stairs; and, taking leave of the housekeeper, were consigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall door.
them; and I stole it to give to you; and I know where I hid it, but I’m
time my mental condition had been a hurrying succession of vague
of silk into proper shape the girl sewed them neatly together. First
through the woods to see what I could find out. I hadn’t got far when I


me sick again if I was to do that. I wished I hadn’t ever come ashore
enough; there wouldn’t nothing go wrong again for a week.
CHAPTER XXVII.
back.
were dressed in blue, of the same shade as their hats, and wore
mortals I am invisible. I will now seat myself upon my throne, that you

wrench off the board.”
swap knives; the old man grabbed me by the hand and shook, and kept on
“Harem.”
and the dogs, but they outrun us, and we lost them; but we thought we
“I doan’ want to go fool’n ’long er no wrack. We’s doin’ blame’ well,


THE day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, who continued, though slowly, to mend; and, in the evening, Elizabeth joined their party in the drawing-room. The loo table, however, did not appear. Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watching the progress of his letter, and repeatedly calling off his attention by messages to his sister. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley were at piquet, and Mrs. Hurst was observing their game.
“That is very true,” replied the Hindu, “but if we receive even what is false and think it to be true in our heart, it is done to us according to our faith.”
crouched motionless. Then I turned to see how much of our rampart
“Why, Silas! Look yonder!—up the road!—ain’t that somebody coming?”
and rule over them and the Yellow Land of the West. Finding they were


I paddled ahead in the canoe, with the line to make fast, there warn’t
When the place was packed full the undertaker he slid around in his
“Protested he must be entirely mistaken.”

little girl who had come by the chance of a cyclone into a strange

As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen pass between the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended either or both, had they appeared to be wrong, she could no more explain such behaviour than her sister.
father, the Duke of Wellington. Well, what did he do? Ask him to show
sentinel there. I talked with these soldiers for a time; I told them of
DOLGIK
Towards the middle of the day the undertaker come with his man, and
“We will go as far as Meryton with you,” said Catherine and Lydia. Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set off together.
Scarcely had I time to take off my hat when a boy brought me a harvest of beautiful roses forming quite a large tray. It is the Kahns who have sent me this odoriferous Christmas offering.
“No, sir,” and the artilleryman began a vivid account of the Heat-Ray.



and jailed him again for a week. But he said _he_ was satisfied; said
with witchcraft. I catched a good big catfish, too, and Jim cleaned him
“Yes, my friend, it is too true—your eyes is lookin’ at this very
Instantly the wicked woman gave a loud cry of fear, and then, as
with a green carpet and lovely green furniture set with emeralds. The
trees and sunshine to cheer them, and had they not felt so sorry for


wailing sound of “Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,” reasserted itself.
calls me Sarah, some calls me Mary.”
When I got to camp I warn’t feeling very brash, there warn’t much sand
of heat passed over them, pine trees burst into fire, and every dry
Away to the South
[338]
WITH EIGHT ILLUSTRATIONS
he said, “because if any come near they may hear the spades and drop
disillusionment.
light on his studs and watch chain. He vanished behind the mound, and
from _us?_”
The Author, become bolder because he meets with no contradiction when he is alone, (and indeed he is alone very often) undertakes to reconcile mankind to the taxes by means of a first decomposition of the impost; he gives up, it is true, one part of it as burdensome, (it is truly to be lamented that this part cannot be dispensed with; luckily it is the least); but he contends boldly for the other part, as a very precious resource for that portion of the people which best deserves to engage the cares of Government.
All the large mansions on each side of the road were empty and still,
brings knowledge, and the longer you are on earth the more experience
“What ’re you alassin’ about?” says the baldhead.
“I have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within this year or two. When I last saw her, she was not very promising. I am very glad you liked her. I hope she will turn out well.”
time.”
little dark man. “You carn tell what they might do.”
LXXIII.	Khabarovsk	375
“Good-bye,” replied the Princess.
By-and-by he rolled out and jumped up on his feet looking wild, and he
you wish me to use my magic power to send you home again you must do
“He is certainly a good brother,” said Elizabeth, as she walked towards one of the windows.

believed unhesitatingly both in his forecast of human destiny and in
“What _put_ it dar? Didn’ he jis’ dis minute sing out like he knowed
the river, and didn’t have no weapon with him, which was blame’
flirtation. You may figure to yourself the hum of voices along the road
“I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the entail. How anyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one’s own daughters I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. Collins, too! Why should he have it more than anybody else?”

was a little twenty-foot yard. Some sung out “Tear down the fence! tear
around so constant that we could see them plenty soon enough to throw
git aroun’ it _dis_ time. But it’s awluz jis’ so; people dat’s _sot_,
I had to claw away from the bank pretty lively four or five times, to
of bushes, in about six foot of him, and kept my eyes on him steady. It
me—and then there warn’t no raft in sight; you couldn’t see twenty
A great number of rewards have been distributed on account of the Coronation. My husband having already got all the rewards due to the rank of major-general, received as a present from the Tzar a rich gold snuff-box set all over with big diamonds—a custom dating from the times of the Empress Catherine II.
and how gaudy they dressed, and how much style they put on, and called
Moved by a sudden thought, I looked northward, and there I perceived a
The golden evening brightens in the west,
“All the mystery of society, consists in establishing, without the knowledge, and to the greatest advantage of the parties concerned, the most equal, the most exact, and the most equitable division that possibly can be made, between the land proprietors, who are in possession of all, and the pilferers who are in possession of nothing.
lightning beginning to wink and flitter, and the wind to shiver amongst

down at Dorothy’s feet, and seeing the Silver Shoes, began to tremble

About an hour after dinner everybody was dozing around, some in their
good sermon, and they all talked it over going home, and had such a

They made the king tell his yarn, and they made the old gentleman tell
he said I didn’t need it to get out of prison with; there’s where the

the least row nor said a word from the start. He ain’t no bad nigger,
“No, my dear; I think not. I have great hopes of{82} finding him quite the reverse. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his letter which promises well. I am impatient to see him.”

“That’s what Miss Mary Jane said.”



the desert. Good-bye.”
He had been reading in the Revelation about the Epistle sent to the angel of Ephesus, whose first love had been deserted and now while still cold and indifferent many things were being performed more from custom than love. The thought of a soul in that condition deeply touched him. He writes:
XXVI.	Interlaken	179

crick ’mongst de willows, en dey wuz so much jawin’ ’bout which un ’um
ahead and get out all the niggers around, and have them waltz him into

enough, and outside was the old regular Muddy! So it was all up with
September 11th.—Rising early we remounted our horses. Amongst the crowd of villagers who surrounded us we saw a great many Armenians wearing fezzes on their heads. When one of our fellow-travellers asked an old Armenian the reason why he wore this Turkish head-gear instead of a cap, he replied candidly that he wasn’t quite sure yet to what territory he was to belong, and said that if he belonged to the Turks he would have to pay dearly for the change of his head-covering.
him, and flew for the house to get the bed ready, and scattering orders

get well of the sores, and we didn’t seem to make no headway, hardly;
“Christus der ist mein Leben.”


in the debris, and by raising myself cautiously across a beam I was

artilleryman made a rush for it and got over the railway embankment.
lights by-and-by—that was the town, you know—and slid by, about a half
attained. Such quasi-muscles abounded in the crablike handling-machine
arms stretched out and his ugly face grinning terribly; but he saw the

[332]
What is the money-proprietor to do, not having it in his power to raise the price of his money as the landed proprietor can do that of his wheat, but who, on the contrary, is invariably limited to the same nominal revenue, whilst the tax of the other 5 millions, which the humanity of the taxator had levelled at him, has occasioned a rise of 25 per cent. in the nominal value of those articles of luxury in which he indulged himself?—He will, he must leave them in the hands of industry, and confine himself to such objects as are not taxed; it is a resource, as it is at the same time a compulsive measure.—The produce of the tax will then be inadequate to the want: a second impost must then be thought on, to supply the deficit of the first.—Fall again upon luxury, cry the enthusiasts; this is more necessary than ever, for bread is already 8⅓ per cent. dearer than it was, and the land proprietors have abated nothing of their luxury; they ride still in their chariots, whilst the poor loaded porter constantly trudges on foot. Enthusiasts will never see further, and[214] those who are not enthusiasts do not yet see far enough; for they only say that it is expedient for government, that the prices of commodities be kept up, in order to facilitate the payment of the impost.—Yet, if it is expedient for government, that the prices be kept up to facilitate the payment of the impost, I conclude that it is an absolute necessity for government, that the prices do increase, when there is no other visible means to establish the possibility of paying taxes. I therefore have to answer only to the enthusiasts, and let it be as the enthusiasts will have it:⸺
“Permit me to introduce to you her Majesty, the Queen.”
creature, and very grateful.

City, to ask the Great Oz to send me back to Kansas.”

What is then the quantity of bullion really imported every year into England?
At four o’clock in the afternoon we were on our way to Saigon. The steward told me that amongst the passengers on board we had Theo, the well-known French actress, accompanied by her maid, a pretty mulatto-girl, dressed in a yellow and red striped cotton frock, with a silk kerchief on her head. The dark charms of this dusky maiden conquered the hearts of a great number of the crew. European fashions reach these remote parts. Sergy’s neighbour at table, a Japanese young lady, very tall for her Liliputian race, had discarded the kimono and wears the white woman’s tailor-made dress. Many of the men in Japan get their clothes from London, as their wives do from Paris. What a pity! Soon there will be no special customs or dress left. We shall all be exactly alike.
hot, dry summer, but afterwards I discovered that it was caused by the
“Oh, shucks!” I says; “you’re joking.”

RESPONSIBILITIES AND PATIENCE.
I didn’t hope so. They all crowded up and leaned over the rails, nearly
was of a greenish tint. At his side was a large green box.
that time. They seemed very helpless in that pit of theirs.
watched him for some time, but he did not move. He appeared to be
“This is the consequence, you see, madam, of marrying a daughter,” said Elizabeth. “It must make you better satisfied that your other four are single.”
more of these pictures to do, and a body could see by what she had done
of a lovely crockery basket that had apples and oranges and peaches and



watching the fugitives stream over Westminster Bridge, that the
the stairs, saying:

village showed not a sign of life; but I narrowly escaped an accident
hung now on the very edge of the great circular pit the Martians were
Dorothy told the Witch all her story: how the cyclone had brought her
you, and come. And they’ll just fairly swarm over you, and have a noble



pantry. I found a curious relief from the aching strangeness of the

who it was their duty to furnish them, and you had to contrive them all

“You are severe on us.”
July 15th.—The weather is lovely. We glide rapidly on the calm water. The banks are deprived of life. I have the impression of travelling in the land of the “Sleeping Beauty,” not a sound around us.
it—you couldn’t help it; it wasn’t your fault. Where did you hide it?”

And so he went on a-mumbling up stairs, and then we left. He was a

“Why, there ain’t but one.”
him remember he ain’t in his own country and amongst his own folks.”
dey was all over me. Dad fetch it, I jis’ wisht I could git my han’s on
retracted, but with three long tentacles it was fishing out a number of
Our numerous household is cosmopolitan; it consists of Sartes, Tartars, Poles, Cossacks and Germans. At twelve o’clock punctually, when the cannon is fired from the citadel, the head-butler, a very solemn personage, comes to announce that luncheon is on the table. He wears a Bokharian decoration and looks very important with his star. A smart waiter arrayed in a magnific “khalat” attends behind my husband’s chair. The aide-de-camps and functionaries on duty are invited to lunch and dinner every day.


morning, rushing over Winchester eastward, a line of flame high in the
“Oh dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. Lady Lucas herself has often said so, and envied me Jane’s beauty. I do not like to boast of my own child; but to be sure, Jane—one does not often see anybody better looking. It is what everybody says. I do not trust my own partiality. When she was only fifteen there was a gentleman at my brother Gardiner’s in town so much in love with her, that my sister-in-law was sure he would make her an offer before we came away. But, however, he did not. Perhaps he thought her too young. However, he wrote some verses on her, and very pretty they were.{58}”
showing two rows of ugly teeth, while its red eyes glowed like balls of
“Let me be rightly understood. This match, to which you have the presumption to aspire, can never take place. No, never. Mr. Darcy is engaged to my daughter. Now, what have you to say?{437}”
down at them. Heaven knows how long he had been there. It must have

“Hil-lo, hol-lo, hel-lo!” Dorothy went on, standing this time on her
watermelon or that Sunday-school book out with; and I don’t give a dead
she wanted to help out her breakfast.
thought, to my home in Maybury. But I found it difficult to get to work

[359]
“No.”
Over the Maybury arch a train, a billowing tumult of white, firelit
“That is a failing, indeed!” cried Elizabeth. “Implacable resentment is a shade in a character. But you have chosen your fault well. I really cannot laugh at it. You are safe from me.”
go alone—had reconciled myself to going alone—he suddenly roused
XLIV.	Barcelona	263



nigger—me and Sid.”
part of the next until they came to the tall tree in the branches of
again.
From the cathedral we walked to the palace; a very large crowd, which was waiting outside the church, followed us.

“You don’t _know?_ Don’t answer me that way. Tom, I want to know what

fish-belly white. As for his clothes—just rags, that was all. He had
“Bless your dear heart,” she said, “I am sure I can tell you of a way
human life, consumption, cancers, tumours and such morbidities, never
for men, and when the slow cooling of the sun makes this earth
“My dear Niece,
“Well,” says he, “dat’s all right, den. I doan’ mine one er two kings,
juries hang murderers? Because they’re afraid the man’s friends will
a-going up around the corner here to roust out my engineer.”
it was, “Yes, crush, cold world, this breaking heart”—and he left that
Elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her from Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for her calling. But no letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled.
and a wrinkled face, who seemed to be as much surprised as they were.
“Right at your elbow; if you reach out your arm you can touch him. He’s
“Are there any other lions in this forest?” he asked.
CHICAGO
De white one gits him to go right a little while, den de black one sail
hugged me, and says:
CHAPTER LXI.
air should get cold the balloon would come down in the desert, and we
came and went their figures grew misty and then flashed into clearness
“Indeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier. I believe him to be Lady Catherine’s nephew. It will be in my power to assure him that her Ladyship was quite well yesterday se’nnight.”
might be hollow.

“You have only proved by this,” cried Elizabeth, “that Mr. Bingley did not do justice to his own disposition. You have shown him off now much more than he did himself.”
I sincerely wish that smuggling might produce in England the same good it has done to the French colonies; this would appear to me very just, and the more so, since it will not be the fault of the British commerce, if that blessed contraband, after having given life to America, does not spread the same animation every where, Great Britain excepted. I have heard an English manufacturer prove at the bar of the House of Lords, that his manufactory was in want of a special patronage, by so much the more, as the size and brittleness of his ware made it a difficult point for him to smuggle it over to the continent, and as a duty of 30 per cent. had been lately laid upon it, in the two countries where it concerned him most to have it exported. Amongst other questions that were put to him, I remarked four, which would have stunned me, had I been in his place. One of these questions was as follows: “Have you not heard that that 30 per cent. of which you[270] complain, was laid in consequence of some prohibitions, or extra duties imposed in England on some articles imported from those very countries which you allude to?” I could make nothing of the manufacturer’s answers; they were so long-winded, they had been so carefully studied, they were so very full of a policy which I do not understand, that it became impossible for me to class them under any heads in my memory.

sound like the flutter of a bird’s wings, and a hoarse croaking, but
that comes handy, so it ain’t work. What’s your lay?”

“Oh,” said Lydia, stoutly, “I am not afraid; for though I am the youngest, I’m the tallest.”

wrong, and a body ain’t got no business doing wrong when he ain’t
The Lion now walked to the Throne Room and knocked at the door.

“We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that evening,” said Elizabeth. “The conduct{452} of neither, if strictly examined, will be irreproachable; but since then we have both, I hope, improved in civility.”
Sixthly, When, by a regulation respecting the corn, industry is at liberty to enhance the price of her goods, in the same proportion as the effects of the regulation have raised the products of agriculture, cannot a regulation that concerns or imposes taxes, and by which industry is forced to increase her prices by the full amount of the taxes,—cannot such a regulation, I say,[276] permit the cultivator, without inconvenience, to advance the price of the productions of the earth, in the same proportion as the taxes, or the regulation concerning them, have increased that of the products of industry?

ACROSS THE JAPANESE SEA
“Poor William, afflicted as he is, his _heart’s_ aluz right. Asks me to
“Not at all. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen.”

When the first streak of day began to show we tied up to a tow-head in a
lighting. Jim said it was a sign it was going to rain. He said it was a

“It don’t make no difference how plain it is; there ain’t nothing in



“I have been making the tour of the park,” he replied, “as I generally do every year, and intended to close it with a call at the Parsonage. Are you going much farther?”
“I knew,” said he, “that what I wrote must give you pain, but it was necessary. I hope you have destroyed the letter. There was one part, especially the opening of it, which I should dread your having the power of{453} reading again. I can remember some expressions which might justly make you hate me.”
with a radius of five miles round the Woking sand-pits, I doubt if you


through the forest he seizes an animal with a leg and drags it to his
what I already knew, that his wife had gone to London with him and had
drier position, or think at all of my imminent peril.

 Going down the Lightning-Rod
way. But at noon, when the sun was over their heads, they did not know
LX.	New York	320

for the pale glow from the handling-machine and the bars and patches of
article assured me what I did not believe at the time, that the “Secret

On the eve of our departure I received a letter from Shildecker, who wrote to me that he had taken leave of absence for a fortnight and was coming to rejoin us in Rome; but it did not detain us, to be sure, and the next morning we started for Florence without leaving our address at the hotel. I had had such an awful dose of Shildecker at Naples that it was quite enough! But “La Donna è mobile,” I found myself at intervals thinking about him, and strangely enough, I missed him now not a little that he was altogether lost and done with, and felt tenderly towards him. Such is the consistency of human nature! Being a girl of prompt action, I wrote to him, not foreboding the consequences, to come speedily to Florence. Two days later a waiter came to tell me that a young gentleman was at the door and wished particularly to speak to me. It was Shildecker in person, who rushed forward, took my hands in his and kissed them passionately, looking happy and proud beyond words, but I did not let him make too much display of his flow of tenderness and, wrenching my hands from his grasp, I told him to follow me. We entered the drawing-room together, and I blushed up to the roots of my hair when I saw mamma’s bewilderment at the unexpected appearance of Shildecker, who, without preamble, solicited my hand. Mamma with ideal composure told him that we were far too young, both of us, to talk of marriage, and that my father would certainly never give his consent. Shildecker’s face lengthened visibly, but this check did not, however, abate his hope of taking possession of me one day.

“Whosoever will follow after the Lord Christ must take up his cross. When something of this has shown itself, will you be the first to yield? Be comforted, it will all turn out better, even in the way of the Cross, than you think. And having confirmed ourselves with many beautiful texts and examples, we went out comforted and again preached repentance towards God and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.... The helper who had been ill-treated by the Romish conducted himself excellently, prayed fervently, and as soon as he was cured went forth again and preached the Word of God in the cities and villages.”
January 15th.—We have passed the night in the open field because the trains do not run yet in the dark. Early in the morning we began to advance at the rate of four miles an hour; in risky places the guards walked on in front to examine the line.
After lunch we got into rikshas and went for a ride through the streets of Yokohama. The first sensation of having a[350] human being for a horse is not agreeable, but one soon gets accustomed to it. There was a place for one person only in each riksha. Our riksha-men moved briskly in files towards the native quarters of the town, through narrow and dark streets. On each hand was a row of toy-houses mostly unpainted, with the first storeys all open to the street, each standing in a little square of a toy-like garden. We hurried on between two long lines of painted paper lanterns, a festoon of blazing rubies in the intense darkness that surrounds them, suspended before low-thatched shops, constructed chiefly of bamboo, the front wall all doorway with hanging draperies, blue and white, covered with Japanese lettering, before which stood platforms heaped high with tropical fruit. The air was full of that sweet and subtle odour which one has long learned to associate with things imported from Japan. My runner trotted as fast as a horse; I was rather frightened at first and tried in fantastical language to moderate his ardour. Our riksha-men stopped before a fountain surrounded by dwarf-trees, and after having quenched their thirst, my man-horse began to run with such a frenzy that I began to cry out for help, fearing to be upset. After a quarter of an hour of such mad driving, we arrived at the door of a native theatre lit up with pink and yellow lamps. Our drivers set the shafts of their vehicles on the ground and mopped their faces with a blue towel; their clothing was drenched with perspiration. We entered a long narrow corridor, and came into a hall lighted by a few oil lamps. The audience consisted of whole families: grand-parents, parents and children of all ages, sitting on the floor on mats. All had their dinners with them, laid on little trays. Each place is separated by a bamboo stick that must be stepped over. A boy rang the bell which was to announce the signal for the beginning of the performance. The musicians began to play upon strange instruments, which made uncanny noises of a sort to make one’s flesh creep. We seated ourselves on the floor of our so-called box. The whole representation consisted of a troupe of acrobats who went energetically through their performance and rolled about the stage upon big india-rubber balls.
“What do we want of a shirt, Tom?”

this country. He hasn’t had any too much time—and besides he mightn’t a
did not deter him from the plan of escape he had formed, and the three

Jim laid it in with all his might, for he was most about starved. Then
carried them. It was a lovely country, with plenty of flowers and fruit
We arrived at Havre the next morning at sunrise. The fog was so thick that we could not see two paces ahead of us, and had to signal our approach by shrill sounds of the fog-horn. We took the express train at Havre and arrived the same evening at Paris, where we made a three days’ halt, and then started back to Russia.
and we fished and hunted, and that was what we lived on. Every little

pocket with packets of biscuits and slices of meat. Then we crept out
“It’s a-movin’,” he said to me as he passed; “a-screwin’ and a-screwin’
finish up the rest of that part of the work, which was to plan out a
enemy and bring peace to all the animals of the forest once more.”
Bob was the oldest and Tom next—tall, beautiful men with very broad

than being a Scarecrow.”
 She puts up a Snack
Mighty soon we’ll have the cave so cluttered up with women, and fellows

“What do we want of a moat when we’re going to snake him out from under

first rock when they heard a rough voice cry out, “Keep back!”
Be it supposed, then, that the collective revenue of land and industry do amount to 112 millions, independent of the taxes.
friend, and an honest one that wants to protect you and keep you out of
“That will make your Ladyship’s situation at present more pitiable; but it will have no effect on me.”
He looked kind of hurt, and says:


Author: H. G. Wells



Egueshi related to us the cruelties committed by the Mussulmans during that siege. He pointed out a Turkish woman who had cut the throats of many wounded Russian soldiers, thus avenging herself for the death of her husband on the battle field. The enormous tomb has been done up with stones, and a big wooden cross is fixed in the middle.
come to some place.”

Next morning our guide awaited us at our rendezvous at the appointed hour. We explored London thoroughly, crossing it from beginning to end with the underground railway and other conveyances. It was mid-summer, the season for London; in the streets it is all haste and crowding, thousands and thousands of people all hurrying to some place or other. Especially the crossing of the London[162] Bridge, ploughed in all directions by omnibuses, cabs and private carriages, all tearing this way and that, made my head swim. We both drove and walked a good deal. The streets are very dangerous to cross; our old guide went before us, bent in two, one hand behind his back holding a stick. He was not very reassuring and said that in London, according to statistics, about a dozen persons were run over in the streets by carriages every day. In the City, the business part of the town, the heavy market waggons drawn by great powerful cart-horses especially attracted my attention.
So, setting about it as methodically as men might smoke out a wasps’
and discourage panic. No doubt the Martians were strange and terrible
“Why, he was in the _dark!_ That’s where he was!”

hopped down at my feet and ate all the corn he wanted. The other birds,
the morning; and Dorothy dreamed of the Emerald City, and of the good
When the Wicked Witch looked out again and saw all her crows lying in a
I shall suppose that the English government had preserved, seven years ago, the 60 millions and upwards, expended during the last war; and that, instead of laying those taxes so highly complained of, they had annually laid out of the Exchequer, the 12, 15, 20,000,000 sterling, which successively produced the last debt: what might have been the result?

smoke. His face was a fair weakness, his chin retreated, and his hair
as the rising sun struck the world to fire about me with his rays. The



a green hand at the business, and wanted to know how far it was to
back her silver snuffbox that was stole? Why can’t Miss Watson fat up?


Ripley.




Nearly all the houses in New York are twelve-storeyed, with terrace roofs which serve sometimes as play-grounds for school children. In the working quarters the municipality has organised Roof-Gardens, where the poor people can breathe a purer air than in their hovels. In Madison Square, one of the richest quarters of New York, a sculptor has arranged a study on his roof, and in the next house a sportsman has organised, at the height of ninety yards above the pavement, a big dog-kennel where he breeds bull-dogs. In Eighth’s Avenue a Protestant church with a belfry is perched on the roof of an immense building. The houses here are all divided into flats. In Broadway, the main street of New York, they are all built in different styles and architecture, and in the next street, on the contrary, the houses are all alike.
“What three?”


and as good as new.


“Oz was not such a bad Wizard, after all,” said the Tin Woodman, as he
September 23rd.—I was wakened very early by the sound of military bands playing the Russian and English anthems, and the Marseillaise, on different cruisers. In the afternoon we left for Shanghai.

“You killed the Witch of the East and you wear the silver shoes, which

last one. We took and lined her with dough, and set her in the coals,
“who is always trying to stand upon his head. He has broken himself so
him; for, says I, a sailor’s life’s the life for me, and I’m derned if
Devoted from his early manhood to the office of Missionary in the East, the similarity of his situation to that of the first preachers of the Gospel produced in him a similar resemblance to the simple sanctity of the Apostolic character. His natural vivacity won the affection, as his unspotted probity and purity of life alike commanded the reverence, of the Christian, Mohammedan and Hindu; for Sovereign princes, Hindu and Mohammedan, selected this humble pastor as the medium of political negotiation with the British Government, and the very marble which here records his virtues was raised by the liberal affection and esteem of the Rajah of Tanjore, Maha Raja Serfogee.
One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two elder sisters, she said to Elizabeth,—
Jim in Royal Robes.—They Take a Passenger.—Getting Information.—Family
the West, who would make you her slave if you passed her way.”
She was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin, and cambric, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders, had not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded her to wait till her father was at leisure to be consulted. One day’s delay, she observed, would be of small importance; and her mother was too happy to be quite so obstinate as usual. Other schemes, too, came into her head.
Language: English


there; but when they told me there was a State in this country where

Woodman.
I don’t, but ma she makes me. Confound these ole britches! I reckon I’d
Already a small city was developing it seemed. But back on the old planets, mighty works were being undertaken. They were building two thousand ships, the biggest ships that had ever been built. Millions of tons they weighed, and each ship was one vast power plant. Down through the heart of it ran a mighty cylinder of glistening metal. A tiny control room, invisible among the titanic machines, governed all its vast energies. It was a gargantuan projector of the nullifying field, a mighty ship that could hurl its energies into space to form a field of the force that could reach out across a million and a half miles. Two thousand of these vast machines were being built. Gigantic power plants they were. But these peacefully minded men designed them so that, their work done, they could be easily converted into merchant cargo ships, and the mighty generators could be used to light and heat their cities.

“If your master would marry, you might see more of him.”

two years he got drunk and fell off of the shot-tower, and spread
Mrs. Philips’s vulgarity was another, and, perhaps, a greater tax on his forbearance; and though Mrs. Philips, as well as her sister, stood in too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which Bingley’s good-humour encouraged; yet, whenever she did speak, she must be vulgar. Nor was her respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at all likely to make her more elegant. Elizabeth did all she could to shield him from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep him to herself, and to those of her family with whom he might converse without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings arising from all this took from the season of courtship much of its pleasure, it added to the hope of the future; and she looked forward with delight to the time when they should be removed from society so little pleasing to either, to all the comfort and elegance of their family party at Pemberley.{472}
“Well, maybe you’re right—yes, I judge you _are_ right.”

I’ve thought of her a many and a many a million times, and of her
 VII. HOW I REACHED HOME.

 II. WHAT WE SAW FROM THE RUINED HOUSE.
wid work, en wid de callin’ for you, en went to sleep, my heart wuz
till I was black and blue if I didn’t raise some money for him. I
aside by the fire, and hid among some almost scorching heaps of broken
velvet; and all of them fitted Dorothy exactly.
CHAPTER XLII.
to set still. This miserableness went on as much as six or seven

“Oh, the devil! we’re in a hurry, boy. But I s’pose we’ve got to. Come,
opened her basket and got out some bread. She offered a piece to the
We arrived in the afternoon at Bari, which seems very dull and poor, and took an antediluvian coach drawn by a drowsy nag, sent by the Hôtel Continental to the station. This hotel, the best one in Bari, proved anything but comfortable. A dirty, sleepy waiter showed us into a bare, cold room, and soon after an old witch, who had only one tooth in her mouth and wore enormous copper ear-rings, came to make our beds. After a spare lunch composed of a burnt chicken and a dish of macaroni, we went to visit the famous church where the relics of St. Nicholas repose. The temple swarmed[310] with pilgrims. Two nuns were on their knees before the mausoleum of the Saint, waiting their turn to creep into the narrow nook where the holy remains are laid. We saw them crawling flat on the floor, and the attendant on duty began to drag them out by their legs to give up the place to other pilgrims. Before we left the church the pater put under our noses a big book in which generous travellers, leaving various sums of money as a gift to the church, put their names down. He tried to draw our attention on the signature of a Russian merchant who had bestowed the sum of a hundred roubles, but we did not take the hint, and he had to be satisfied with less than that sum.
up. In St. Petersburg they used to say there was twenty or thirty

“But you forget, mamma,” said Elizabeth, “that we shall meet him at the assemblies, and that Mrs. Long has promised to introduce him.”

“Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the ——shire militia removed from Meryton? They must be a great loss to your family.”


head; but he would not say what they were because he knew no one could
to get him up on the truck. Then the Queen hurriedly gave her people
Dorothy at once ran back to the cottage and found the oil-can, and then
that is what he used to say, anyway.
“Ay, that is because you have the right disposition. But that gentleman,” looking at Darcy, “seemed to think the country was nothing at all.”
“I am told,” said the third man, “that it is the same at the West. And
I warn’t gwyne to die for a thousan’ year.”
“Yes, always,” she replied, without knowing what she said; for her thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared by her suddenly exclaiming, “I remember hearing you once say, Mr. Darcy, that you hardly ever forgave;—that your resentment, once created, was unappeasable. You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its being created?”
sturdy man close behind him, and the fugitive, who had turned now,


“This fine account of him,” whispered her aunt as they walked, “is not quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend.”

anything on him, you know; everything will be quieted down then, and

beam of light seemed to flicker out from it.
heap the best dressed man in that town, too—steps out of the store, and
Mrs. Bennet assured her that they never sat there after dinner; and then added,—
VIII.
the smoke; because, you see, we didn’t want nothing but a crust, and we
“Come out here, Sherburn! Come out and meet the man you’ve swindled.
“Good land, duke, lemme hug you! It’s the most dazzling idea ’at ever a
My singing mistress procured us tickets for the distribution of prizes in the St. Petersburg conservatory, where I attracted the attention of one of the professors, Mme. Everardi, who[43] gave me an appreciative glance and said, pointing me out, “Look at this young lady, she is destined for the stage.”
[175]
Deacon Lot Hovey, and Mr. Ben Rucker, and Abner Shackleford, and Levi
And the place was plum full of farmers and farmers’ wives, to dinner;
On Christmas Eve I went to bed immediately after dinner, in order to shorten the hours, and dreamt all night of bliss and joyous meeting. Early in the morning Helena came to announce that an officer had arrived from the seat of war and wished to see me. He brought awful news; Sergy wrote to me that he had just been ordered with a detachment of[89] soldiers to Kniss-Kala, a place very far away at the very bottom of the Kurdistan, where a strong epidemic of typhus-fever was raging. It was a terrible disappointment and grief. What a sad Christmas it would be for me now! The shock was almost more than I could bear; I speedily sent a telegram to Sergy beseeching him not to accept that mission. Very unsoldierlike it was of me and not sufficiently heroic; my husband certainly paid no heed to my entreaty and started off for Kniss-Kala.
back to us as soon as possible.”
the hood of the Martian giant from which this howling proceeded. I was
never a skiff come close enough for me to hail. So there I had to stick
mile er more to whah dey warn’t no houses. I’d made up my mine ’bout
Tom most lost all patience with him; and said he was just loadened down
on the still-glowing metal. At that he stood irresolute for a moment,
going on. By-and-by a proud-looking man about fifty-five—and he was a
scrambled eggs and a plate of nice white bread, and enjoyed her meal.
In writing to the Madras Government Colonel Fullerton in a very handsome manner acknowledged the value of the service of the missionary.
Scarecrow are destroyed, and the Lion is tied up in your yard. The
opinion, s’I, ’n’ if any body k’n start a better one, s’I, let him _do_
A tumult up the road, a quarrel for a place in a waggon, sent the whole
The disease in his foot, which had been for years a trouble to him, was causing him great pain, but a native doctor, in the absence of his English physician, used some poultice remedies which gave the patient relief. For this he was very grateful, and gaining a little strength he was able to say a few parting words to his friend, Mr. Holtzberg. “Remember me affectionately to all the brethren and tell them from me never to lose sight of the main object, and strictly to maintain the fundamental doctrines of Christianity. I shall now soon depart to the Lord Jesus. If He will receive me, and forgive my sins and not enter into judgment with me, but deal with me according to His tender mercy, all will be well with me, and I shall praise Him. He might reject us for our very works’ sake because sin cleaves to them all.” It was a source of thankfulness to him that in this last hour of his life he was surrounded by his beloved brethren, who he said so much comforted his[Pg 180] spirits. Again and again at his request they sang verses of his favourite hymns, one of them being,
Q. So then, if you succeed in your plan—if by means of the solicited prohibition, the legislature enable you to extort, with your 16 in merchandise, the goods and money, which, in the case of a foreign competition, you could not have procured with less than 20, what do you intend to do with the remaining part of what you shall have extorted?
The tax laid on the produce of industry would double the 32 millions: this is just; nor can it be doubted; for there is not a manufacturer, whose goods or produce have just been taxed, but will acknowledge this truth. Besides, the British Parliament avows it. What remains now, is to convince the landed proprietors, that by doubling also their 32 millions revenue, they injure no one whatever. It is needless to prove, that if they act otherwise, if they be only passive when the manufacturers are so justly active, they must be reduced to plough those lands that acknowledge them for their lords.
movement due to the greater gravitational energy of the earth—above
nigger free—me and Tom.”

TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON.
done, as I shall mention in its place. But, squeamish as I may seem, I

pitter-patter like the feet of the dog going hither and thither on the

“How’d you get your breakfast so early on the boat?”
loud—the poor girls, too; and every woman, nearly, went up to the
the Sixteen and Marry Antonette.”

animal, a thing that for any passing whim of our masters might be

perspiration, and something seemed to have irritated him.
September 12th.—Sergy has gone to Possiette, to the extreme point of Oriental Siberia on the frontier of Corea, to review the troops. The Admirals accompanied him on their cruisers.
motioning the others not to touch her.
have any brains, after all!”



Slow Navigation.—Borrowing Things.—Boarding the Wreck.—The
October 26th.—It was only in the middle of the night that we arrived at Kata-Kourgan, where Sergy’s waggon was joined to our train. I can’t find words to express my joy!

breeze up there. A couple of squirrels set on a limb and jabbered at me
It is a pitiful policy on the part of France, (as remarked very justly in all the English papers after the first of August, 1785) to deprive herself of a thousand English luxuries which she is so[335] fond of, and which she is so able to procure;—but is English policy much better, in rejecting thousands of French luxuries, which she finds so pleasing, and which she is so able to pay for?
“No! Where?”

couldn’t a been worse scared if the place had a been full of ghosts


none from home, because it’s likely pap’s been back before now, and got
“I hain’t come back—I hain’t been _gone_.”

and clutching tentacles about its body. Most of its arms were

people gazed upon it with much curiosity. The Tin Woodman had chopped a

Then I thought, as the country was so green and beautiful, I would call

aware now of my intense loneliness. From the corner I went, under cover
Well, the men gathered around and sympathized with them, and said all
“I hope you are well, Miss Bennet. That lady, I suppose, is your mother?”
kindness; so you just put twenty miles between us, that’s a good boy.

they paid for it with green pennies.
“Good-bye, sir,” says I; “I won’t let no runaway niggers get by me if I
the benches and swarm towards the ring, saying, “Knock him down! throw


“At the East, not far from here,” said one, “there is a great desert,

They agreed to say nothing of what they had learned, and went back to
“Very well; that reply will do for the present. Perhaps, by-and-by, I may observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones; but now we may be silent.”
I says:

 Smouching the Knives
In the end the Directors reversed the action of Sir Archibald Campbell which, however, they declared, “was formed from the best and most upright intentions,” and Lord Hobart expressed at the Madras Council his entire concurrence in favour of Serfogee, and in due course he was elevated to his rightful position, although not in full possession of his rights until his aged friend and faithful protector had passed away.
that there was trouble. The king says:
What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that the proposals which she had proudly spurned only four months ago would now have been gladly and gratefully received! He was as generous, she doubted not, as the most generous of his sex. But while he was mortal, there must be a triumph.
“And I shall never see Aunt Em and Uncle Henry,” said Dorothy,
 Huck Stealing Away

the Head. Here are the other things I used to deceive you.” He showed
a rattling good honest day’s work: and hungry?—oh, no, I reckon not!


“It’s _just_ as I expected. So you had it in your pocket all the time;
dominant motive became the hunger of my long and dismal fast. In the

pretended to be an Englishman and couldn’t imitate the lingo no better
along, and got down stairs all right. There warn’t a sound anywheres. I


losing our heads, and rushing off in crowds to where there wasn’t any
theater-actor—tragedy, you know; take a turn to mesmerism and
“It is from Miss Bingley,” said Jane, and then read it aloud.
Let any circumstance whatever, either well or ill judged, occur, which may determine the nation to complete to 200,000 the 50,000 sailors and landsmen that are sufficient in time of peace; 150,000 more men will be taken from the productive class, which must, of course, occasion a second vacuum, viz. the productions with which they would have enriched or amused their country. But the loss will not end here; other 300,000 men, many more perhaps, from the same class, constantly busy, during the war, in preparing the intended destructive plans, will unavoidably occasion a farther loss of four or five other twentieths in the other enjoyments of peaceable times, to which, had not other occupations interfered, they would have contributed: and if the war should last for 3, 4, or 10 years, it is[39] evident that, in the latter supposition, the nation must lose all that increase of wealth which would have been effected, had the principal, swallowed up by the war, been differently employed. This loss is considerable, immense, and never can be retrieved; for what was then omitted, will never be done; what will be effected, might equally have been so, without preventing the productions which would already have taken place.


I stared at him and made no answer.
gardens—already derelict—spread out like a huge map, and in the
all that trouble and bother to set a free nigger free! and I couldn’t


BIARRITZ
officers. But a mob without any _man_ at the head of it is _beneath_
“You bet I ain’t! I run across him in the woods about an hour or two

26th July.—It was about three o’clock in the afternoon when we arrived at Khabarovsk. A great crowd was on the quay to greet us. I was glad to find old friends and bowed and smiled from right to left, shaking hands with people as we passed. I received a whole harvest of flowers.
crowd, and worked their way just by main strength to the mourners’
 Hiding Day-times
and was awful glad when we see you coming; you may ask Jim if I
The king he visited around in the evening, and sweetened everybody up,
aboard, and she was from Cincinnati; and when they found we only wanted
around the king, to let him see they was on his side. That old
at him. No one would think of biting such a little thing, except a
He turned, stared, bawled something about “crawling out in a thing like
says:
Tom last, which was according to Tom’s orders. Now we was in the


ever understand before, until that minute and that talk, how he _could_
what it was like; but he said he had been in this country so long, and

“I can’t come back, my dear,” called Oz from the basket. “Good-bye!”

Now, if we lay it down for an indubitable maxim, that the most able Administrator of finances, cannot take from an individual, more than what he possesses, it seems to me then that it remains only to examine, whether that very individual from whom, one way or another, out of the 20 he is possessed of, 5 may be wrested,—will be less aggrieved if the 5 be taken out of his pocket, and he be sent to market with the remaining 15, than he would be, were he permitted to go with the whole 20 to market, where he would find those 15 which he used to purchase for 15, charged with the 5 which might have been taken from him at home?
loose the dogs!”
[290]
But it takes time to make a raft, even when one is as industrious and
The annual exports of England amount to about a fifth of the products of her industry, and consequently represent about a fifth of the labour of her artificers.

As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned her attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley; and the train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to made her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled in that very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection could bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring even to like Bingley’s two sisters. Her mother’s thoughts she plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to venture near her, lest she might hear too much. When they sat down to supper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find that her mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely, openly, and of nothing else but of her expectation that Jane would be soon married to Mr. Bingley. It was an animating subject, and Mrs. Bennet{126} seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the match. His being such a charming young man, and so rich, and living but three miles from them, were the first points of self-gratulation; and then it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of Jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do. It was, moreover, such a promising thing for her younger daughters, as Jane’s marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of other rich men; and, lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be able to consign her single daughters to the care of their sister, that she might not be obliged to go into company more than she liked. It was necessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on such occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs. Bennet to find comfort in staying at home at any period of her life. She concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equally fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no chance of it.
September 6th.—There came an invitation to dinner to-day from Admiral Tirtoff, which I wanted to decline because Sergy was unwell, but I had to go all the same. I started off at seven o’clock in a steam-launch, accompanied by Colonel and Mrs. Serebriakoff, Mr. Shaniavski, and one of Sergy’s aide-de-camps. Before boarding the cruiser we had to undergo an examination. On seeing our approach the officer on duty shouted out: “Who are you?” and the lieutenant who commanded our launch gave him the password: “Officer.” The cruiser was illuminated in our honour by lamps of different colours. The officers helped me along the foot-bridge, and Admiral Tirtoff advanced to meet us. He offered me his arm and took me to the brilliantly illuminated dining-room flooded with electric light and full of guests. The Admiral put me at his right hand. I was made much of; the officers were charming to me. Everyone seemed in the best of spirits and everything was unceremonious and cosy. I enjoyed myself tremendously. Here I was in the midst of life once more; formalities were quickly[395] forgotten, and my modesty was not a bit shocked by the complimentary speeches of our amiable hosts. I also was in one of my most reckless and vivacious moods, and threw all my reserves to the winds. It was delightful to be treated without any manner of deference by our hosts, and I had rather be admired than esteemed. I am not made of wood altogether! Directly after dinner the pet of the crew was presented to me: a baby-bear. The animal was very clever, he performed many tricks, and amused us with his antics; he drank champagne at a gulp, straight from the bottle, and got drunk. I was suddenly aware that it was getting late, but it was in vain that Mrs. Serebriakoff tried to hurry me home; our hosts would not let me go, and I, on my part, had no wish to leave the ship, just when the fun was at its height. It was not often I got a chance of amusing myself like that! It was past midnight when we said good-bye to the gallant mariners. The second officer escorted us back to the shore. An enormous electric search-light showed us our way. During our short crossing the officer found time to tell me that I did not look at all like a hermit, and was not made for dull existence; he pitied me that my social position hindered me from profiting of the joys of life, and advised me to shake myself up a bit. Wicked Mephistopheles!
(if there were any people inside), and after a time I desisted, and,

itself. In a barrel of odds and ends it is different; things get mixed

“What do you mean, Hill? We have heard nothing from town.”
her of her money!


So I done it. But I dasn’t go fur, or she’d a sent for me. And when it
was no red weed to be seen, and as I prowled, hesitating, on the verge
near Horsell, in order to command the sand-pits, and its arrival it was

[186]

16ᵒ.
crawling slowly and painfully across the heaped mould near it.
Mr. Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter.
this warn’t pap, but a woman dressed up in a man’s clothes. So I was
old piano, too, that had tin pans in it, I reckon, and nothing was ever


Colonel Serebriakoff, an officer attached to my husband’s personal service, and his wife accompanied us on our journey to Khabarovsk, so did Mr. Shaniawski and Mr. Koulomsine, Sergy’s private secretaries. Dr. Pokrovski, a surgeon in the Russian army, a dispenser of drugs, was necessary also on our hazardous voyage, and Mme. Beurgier, a former governess of Princess Mimi Troubetzkoy, one of my childhood’s greatest friends, made up the party in the capacity of companion. I had sore need of a friend, and it is a great comfort to have dear Mme. Beurgier with me.
confidentially, “I don’t mind my legs and arms and body being stuffed,
around and found an old tin washpan, and stopped up the holes as well
CHAPTER XVII.

[10]In the Political Arithmetic of Mr. Young, may be seen the accounts, year by year, whence I have drawn the inferences here submitted to the Reader. It is but a few days ago that I thought of comparing with my own ideas the result of the whole of those accounts.



“Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will visit them all.”

Repulse of the Martians! London in Danger!” He had to give threepence
“That is capital,” added her sister; and they both laughed heartily.
 Tail Piece



“The palace of Hyder Ali, built by himself, is very beautiful according to the style of Eastern architecture. It is entirely of hewn stone with numerous pillars. At the extremity of the pagoda stands the ancient palace of the Kings of Mysore. The former possessor of the throne, to whom Ali allows an annual income, still inhabits it. He has his servants, but is treated as a prisoner of state; Hyder himself sometimes visits him and stands in his[Pg 109] presence as a servant. Thus men of the world can dissemble. The King’s sons are all dead and the general opinion is that they were secretly dispatched.

is—and Mary, and the Widow Douglas is all told about in that book,
for a starter I would go to work and steal Jim out of slavery again;
finally spared them, on condition that the Winged Monkeys should ever
the wink of an eye. All you have to do is to knock the heels together
“Blame it, can’t you _try?_ I only _want_ you to try—you needn’t keep
“Well, hang it all, you did dream it, because there didn’t any of it
and you told me they were coming, and begged me to help you to get off.
the two sodden creatures of despair, who so far as I knew, shared the
Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was walking up and down the room in earnest meditation; his brow contracted, his air gloomy.{341} Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it. Her power was sinking; everything must sink under such a proof of family weakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace. She could neither wonder nor condemn; but the belief of his self-conquest brought nothing consolatory to her bosom, afforded no palliation of her distress. It was, on the contrary, exactly calculated to make her understand her own wishes; and never had she so honestly felt that she could have loved him, as now, when all love must be vain.

Then Mary Jane she fetched the letter her father left behind, and the
will grant you an audience, if you so desire; but each one of you must
names and done other wonderful things, like finding water and gold with

“This account then is what he has received from Mr. Darcy. I am perfectly satisfied. But what does he say of the living?”
then, before she had time to think about it, she was safe on the other


for the thick of it,” said I, “and that is all.”
I love you and you love me,
she continued, “that I am sure I could love you dearly. Won’t you let
“Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town; and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine myself one day, has deprived the British Court of its brightest ornament. Her Ladyship seemed pleased with the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to ladies. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that her charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess; and that the most elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned by her. These are the kind of little things which please her Ladyship, and it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to pay.”

Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too{23} clever to be a valuable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet. They had several children. The eldest of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, was Elizabeth’s intimate friend.
We then crossed to a place where the road turns towards Mortlake. Here
[69]

but if you will come to me tomorrow morning, I will stuff your head


we after him. We didn’t have no dog, and so we had to chase him all
The storm had left the sky clear, and over the smoke of the burning
when she was, she had a look that would make you wilt in your tracks,
watermelon patch; then the cotton fields begins, and after the fields
better do with it, because we heard them say at supper they was going
cottonwoods on it as thick as harrow-teeth.
sudden I says _pow!_ jis’ as loud as I could yell. _She never budge!_
when you have it you can command the Winged Monkeys three times.”
Reflexions on a Letter from Philadelphia, inserted in the English News-papers.
Tailpiece to Chapter V.	26

“Well, den, she ain’t got no business to talk like either one er the

made fast to a willow; then I took a bite to eat, and by-and-by laid
“Do you not feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet, to seize such an opportunity of dancing a reel?”
Ab’litionist to go and steal them.
fire, and instantly those motionless black forms of men, those guns
to a whisper. “He is more powerful than all the rest of us together. He



September 18th.—The day is gloomy, with a low, leaden sky. The rain is falling in torrents since morning. The sea begins to foam and our boat tosses, tosses! I lie in my cabin inert, suffering greatly from sea-sickness, and powerless to lift a finger. It was such a fearful night! We were nearly caught in a cyclone. The tempest raged awfully; the body of the vessel cracked in an alarming manner, and all the objects in my cabin danced a mad jig. In the middle of the night I heard shouts of voices bellowing out commands overhead. What could be the matter? I sprang out of my berth and opening the door called Sergy who occupied the cabin just opposite mine. But it was not easy to make oneself[398] heard; I made myself hoarse in vain, Sergy could not hear me. I wanted to rush to the staircase and began to dress quickly, but I was so agitated I could not get my arms into my sleeves. In that critical moment the captain, clad in a dripping yellow oilskin coat, knocked at my door; he came to comfort me, assuring me that there was nothing to be afraid of. Foreseeing a strong gale he had given the order to go out into open sea fearing to split on a rock. He said that in a few hours we might run out of bad weather. Somewhat tranquillised I lay down, to start off my sleep again, being nearly thrown out of my berth. The awful wind bent our boat on to her side, the screw was quite out of the water. We were obliged to drop anchor and to be pitilessly tossed by furious billows until morning. I thought that daylight would never come.
Its motion was so swift, complex, and perfect that at first I did not
Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs. Bennet instantly answered,—

January 21st.—The heat is intense. Towards midday we enter the Saigon River.

desert of houses had found a voice for its fear and solitude.

On the Influence of the National Prices on the Sales in Foreign Markets.

“Well, I’d been selling an article to take the tartar off the teeth—and
CERNOBBIO

off, shouting. We heard them come along towards the crick, but couldn’t
preferred a bed of dried leaves in the forest, and did not like being
“The distress of the Christian congregation and the insensibility of the heathen to the word of God often greviously afflict my soul, which is not yet experienced in the ways of truth. However, I strive, as well as I am enabled by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, to cast this burden upon Him that is mighty to help and delights to bow down to us in mercy that we may not remain and sink[Pg 60] in trouble. The words of Christ from Isaiah xlix. 4 often occur to my mind: ‘Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for naught and in vain, yet surely my judgment is with the Lord and my work with my God!’ But, indeed, the following verse ought to allay all my grief and to bind the sorrowful heart to the word of the divine promise. The unwearied patience and mercy of God is working upon my own soul also greatly comforting me, when He saith unto me, ‘Tell it once more—go announce it to both Christians and heathens, for thou also wert sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, and yet in that most corrupt condition, deserving wrath and death, a merciful God hath wrought in thee for Christ’s sake and waited for thy conversion, not a few but many years. Now learn thou also to wait patiently in hope.’ Now my heart, mind, thoughts, desires, designs, and all my will be offered up to the will of my heavenly Father. Not my will but Thine be done. Yea, let Thy Kingdom come in India also to myself and others!
December 23rd.—The squall has confined nearly all the passengers to their cabins. Although accustomed to many sails across the ocean, I was beginning to feel a slight dizziness and had to lie down. The ship’s doctor, trying to recover me from an attack of sea-sickness which had prostrated me, made me swallow a tablet of antipyrine.

in all my born days. A shirt, and a sheet, and a spoon, and six can—”
So soon as I realised that the way of escape was open, my dream of
Yet the wages of a journeyman were nevertheless rated then at 8d. per day: but let it be observed, that the number of working-days, when balanced with the holidays, sickness, and want of employment, those eight pence, distributed in the journeyman’s family, were often reduced to two; just as the sixteen pence, the present price[7] of labour, according to Mr. Young’s Estimate, commonly amount to 4d. only, although the brotherly share of each man nearly amounts to 8d. If any one should be inclined to call this, injustice, let him consider that this very multitude of reductions from 4d. to 2d. and from 8d. to 4d. from William III. to this present time, has been the only means of accumulating by degrees that immense stock of 600 millions and upwards, manifestly laid out by the State in less than a century, and of which the National Debt makes a part. It is evident that if each individual, from William III. had only spent at the rate of 5d. per day, there would be no National Debt; but as each man of the nation could, generally speaking, and upon an equal proportion, lay out only 4½d. per day, the exceeding halfpenny must have long ago swallowed up the whole principal, the produce of former reductions.
I went down to the front garden and clumb over the stile where you go
ROME

and shouted and flung themselves down on the straw, just crazy and
Mr. Shaniavski had put up with his Bokharians in a house in the Passage des Eaux, described by Zola in his novel Une page d’Amour. The small Asiatic colony consists of a Bokharian colonel, a captain, a merchant who speaks a few words of French and serves as interpreter, and four servants. The Bokharians, arrayed in rich “khalats,” walk about the streets quite indifferent to the stare of wondering Parisians. When they go out shopping, they are taken for princes, and are made to pay princely prices. One day, when visiting the Grands Magasins du Louvre, they were received at the entrance door by the directeur, surrounded by his assistants, who proposed to the princes to show them[525] through the house, expecting to fleece the Bokharians, who asked the prices of everything they saw without any views as to purchasing them. After having visited in detail the section of jewellery, tapestry and other fancy goods, they made the insignificant purchase of half a dozen crockery plates, after which the splendid directeur, and his satellites, disappeared as by magic, forsaking the stingy Bokharians.


razberries; and the green blackberries was just beginning to show. They
but Oz made no reply. They thought the Great Wizard would send for them
forefoot.
green, but pure white. The ribbon around Toto’s neck had also lost its

terrible—something’s happened to the boat, sure!”
ther’s only nine. The calf got the shirt, I reckon, but the calf never
Poor old girl, how you must feel forlorn,
letter said:


out, and somebody come along and ask what killed him, and some numskull
nightcap. Here are the costumes for the parts.”
Tom’s most well now, and got his bullet around his neck on a
of the balloon over the fire so that the hot air that arose from it
11ᵒ.

stretching wide and far.

interest of their physiology and structure is purely scientific.
2. _Here a poor prisoner, forsook by the world and friends, fretted out




villas.
had him make me a new leg out of tin. The leg worked very well, once I

king and the duke turned out by-and-by looking pretty rusty; but after
garment to the window in order to miss nothing of the growing


“Because you are wise and powerful, and no one else can help me,”
They had to wait a long time before the soldier returned. When, at
cousins and commended my wife to their care.

When my husband returned, we went to visit the famous Hindoo temple where the Tooth of Buddha is preserved, braving the scorching tropical sun, whose rays fell just over our heads, so that I didn’t see my shadow, but only the circle of my umbrella. Tradition says, there was found in Burma one of the teeth of Gautama (Buddha). An embassy from the King of Burma bore the relic to Ceylon, and over it was erected the celebrated Temple of the Tooth. Kandy is a holy city; Buddhists not merely of Ceylon, but of India and the equatorial islands, make pilgrimages to the ancient shrine, which is an object of veneration for the four hundred million of Buddhists inhabiting Asia. The Kings of[447] Siam and Burma contribute to the keeping up of the temple, in sending rich gifts to the priests every year.
“I have not a doubt of Mr. Bingley’s sincerity,” said Elizabeth warmly, “but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. Mr. Bingley’s defence of his friend was a very able one, I dare say; but since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture still to think of both gentlemen as I did before.”
begun to sass back, and the minute they was fairly at it I lit out and


with the key.
PARIS
give a glance at one another, and nodded their heads, as much as to
all the time that clown carried on so it most killed the people. The

David Garrick the younger, of Drury Lane Theatre, London,
We are once more convinced that the geographers are often[523] mistaken. The Caspian Sea, which never freezes according to them, appears to be frozen for forty miles out. It is not an agreeable prospect to have to cut through the ice, but we have a compensation—we shall not be tossed about.

brick, silently wondering, each in his own mind, if ever they would
you, they slides right in under our noses and fools us, and not only
“Fitzwilliam Darcy.”
the nigger pretty soon now, and maybe they can scare it out of him.”
we’ve served him. Shore’s you’re born, he’ll turn State’s evidence; now
“The secret of your birth! Do you mean to say—”
Thoughts on the Colonies.






him of my determination to begin a discipline. I divided the food in
around a bunch of willows, and there was the old man down the path a
“Oh, thank you! Thank you ever so much for saving my life.”

Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walk by herself. The path just admitted three. Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness, and immediately said,—

“The elevation of his feelings.”

piece of string in his mouth. It was about this time that Dorothy woke


I find it a bit dull here. There is positively nothing to do in the evening but to sit on the veranda and admire the beautiful tropical night, which falls suddenly without twilight. Everything is queer in these equatorial regions. The moon is right over our heads, the sickle pointing upwards, and the shade caused by the planet spreads right under our feet.
In all imaginable suppositions, Commerce is nothing more than the exchange of one want against another want, or of one fancy against another fancy; or, in fine, of a fancy against a want. All idea of a commerce between two nations, as between man and man, carries with it two objects different in their nature, or their form; and the relative value of these objects must essentially be previously determined by some general principle, if we mean not to transact business in the dark.
“Why, Mam, he said—”
and alone. Suddenly, like a thing falling upon me from without,
big family Bible full of pictures. One was Pilgrim’s Progress, about a

hole, and said a couple of farmers with guns must stand watch around
CHAPTER II.
wid a half a chile doan’ know enough to come in out’n de rain. Doan’
rockwork that enabled me to get to the top, and tumble into the garden
LXXXIII.	Singapore	421

that could hold up a saw-log. There was a clock on the middle of the
“How far is it to the Emerald City?” the girl asked.



But the Lion went away into the forest and found his own supper, and no

Towards the end of June we went to Paris to see the World’s Fair. We put up as usual at the Hôtel de Calais, a pleasant, quiet house. After having washed off the dust of our journey we started to visit the Exhibition. The passage of carriages was forbidden on the Pont d’Terra, and only foot-passengers provided with entrance tickets could cross that bridge. On entering the enclosure of the “Grand Fair,” we took the Decauville, a toy-train, which carried us round the whole place. Every now and then our eyes were arrested by vivid printed notices on the walls, advertisements about cocoa and soap, and placards put everywhere, warning the passengers not to thrust out their hands or heads out of the window, written in all the European languages except in German. The Parisians, as it seems, have nothing to say against the Teutonic visitors of the Exhibition being deprived of heads or hands! In all directions small two-wheeled waggonettes called “puss-puss,” circulated, pushed by yellow-faced Tonqinoise aborigines.

made a wide curve to avoid me, as though he feared I might prove a
sticking out, shod in silver shoes with pointed toes.
way, about four or five foot along the middle of the bottom log. Tom
November 3rd.—Between Ceylon and Aden the voyage is long and tedious. The Océanien makes the trip in seven days. I had a very bad headache and went on deck for a breath of fresh air. The ship’s doctor, a physician without patients just now, as all the passengers are in perfect health, appropriated the empty chair next my own and stared at me fixedly as if he wanted to know me by heart, and then made notes in his copy-book. He was writing a novel, in which I was to take the principal part, as it appeared, because I had a very strong resemblance to his first love. This doctor has kept his heart of seventeen through thrice seventeen summers. Wherever I went, there he was, and a little manœuvring was always necessary to prevent him from sitting near me and paying me compliments, whilst his bulging eyes stared at me as if he had the intention to devour me. He was ridiculous with his gallantry, having scarcely any hair on his head. He was stout, jolly-looking and effusive, and seemed to have stepped out of a comic opera.

heading for it, but heading away to the right of it. And the next time
CHAPTER XLVII
Meanwhile the anarchy and misery which increased in the unhappy kingdom of Tanjore through the incapacity and profligacy of Ameer Sing and his satellites made the position intolerable, and at last, after some delay, the Court of Directors passed a minute under the presidency of Lord Teignmouth, the new Governor-General, which practically settled the title of Serfogee as the future and only ruler of the place. The president therein expressed his entire disbelief in the pretensions of[Pg 165] the reigning Rajah and then proceeded to give his judgment upon the important and reliable interposition of Schwartz upon this delicate and complicated question. This eulogium of a venerable missionary in a purely official document deserves preservation; certainly in modern times such a testimony is rarely if ever adduced. These are the words of Lord Teignmouth:


    Young Stephen Dowling Bots;
“I bet you what you dare I can,” says he.



“But if he does it any more, I shall certainly let him know that I see what he is about. He has a very{31} satirical eye, and if I do not begin by being impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him.”
the old man, with a candle in one hand and a bundle of stuff in

[41]
[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]
“It’s something they give me for learning my lessons good.”
put her knuckles on her hips and every gentleman folded his arms, and
would block them out for him, and then he wouldn’t have nothing to do
“Thank you,” he answered. “Now, if you will help me sew the silk

drove into its mouth; weaklings elbowed out of the stream, who for the
Mme. Favre, the wife of the French General, asked me to drive with her to the parade ground, our husbands having started together some minutes before us. We went first to the railway station to see the arrival of the King and Queen from Monzo, the Royal summer residence. On stepping out of the train King Humbert, mounted on horseback, and Queen Margareta took her place in a victoria, bowing graciously on right and left. The Italians do not cheer their sovereigns as we do in Russia, they applaud and shout “bravo,” which seemed rather strange to me.
on a little farm down at the bottom of Arkansaw, and my sister Mary Ann
[421]
than a breakdown between Byfleet and Woking junction had occurred, were
Put it on the floor behind the front door. Bob, if you and Tom are
Tom see him do it, and remembered about the spoon, and says:
“Well, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does he say? Well, Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love.”
time, and ten to one he’d wake up in his right mind.
“Gone away? Why, what in the nation do you mean? _I_ hain’t been gone
“Tools?” I says.

caught her in my arms.

The next day we took the “Oleg,” a Russian boat going straight to the shores of the Bosphorus. Except ourselves there were only three passengers on board: Mme. Lebedeff, an orientalised European, wearing a scarlet fez, who was returning to Constantinople, and two inhabitants of Alexandria, father and son, whom we took for Greeks, very taciturn-looking both of them. Our crossing was not agreeable, the sea being very rough. I was roused in the night by a terrible squall, which subsided only towards morning.
right, along with her shingle nail, before noon. We was very well
His room was an attic and as he thrust his head out, up and down the

Being deprived of the bump of respect, I did exactly what my governess told me not to do, refusing to be put into harness. When the fighting-blood stirred in me and made me too horribly naughty, I was sent for punishment to bed, but I would rather be cut to pieces before I would deign to apologise to Melle. Rose. That disagreeable person was succeeded by Melle. Allamand, a French lady educated in England, the most delightful of old maids, whom I loved fondly, for she was never cross, and since she came to me, I began to understand[17] that it was possible for a governess to be nice, and that the term is not necessarily synonymous to frighten and bore.
Reflexions on a very strange Revolution in France.	270
wouldn’t budge; so he was for crawling out and setting the raft loose
At four o’clock we are at Saigon. We put up at the Hôtel Continental, the top flat of which is occupied by the “Cercle Colonial.” We dined at table d’hôte. The dining-room was thronged with officers of the Colonial Infantry, dressed all in white, who quartered in the garrison. They were very gay and talked all at once. After dinner we went to the opera. The performance was La Fille du Régiment, and the singers very good. The theatre looked very elegant, the men all in white, the ladies in low gowns. Between the acts we went to eat ices on the boulevard. Hindoos, draped in white, with the blue tattoo mark on their forehead, promenaded before us. Towards midnight we were back on board.
then I noticed how yellow were the skins of the people I met, how
The barometer continues to rise, it shows already 32 degrees over zero. Such a tedious journey, and we had a long, long way to go still! I lay motionless on my sofa—hot as a grill, and began to heave sighs hard enough to split a rock, but it did not trouble my travelling companions at all, quite on the contrary: if I had ceased to moan, they would have come to see what was the matter with me, because they had grown accustomed to my groans and complaints.

go home and crawl in a hole. If any real lynching’s going to be done, it
force out compliments; and the people all knowed everything was tiptop,
anything.



counterfeit quarter that warn’t no good because the brass showed
enough for forty pies if we’d a wanted them, and plenty left over for
Fourteenth Hypothesis.



Oh, joy! Oh, rapture! A telegram had just been brought[93] to me in which my husband announced that the preliminary discussions were settled, and that peace was definitely signed. It seemed almost too good to be true. I was happier than words can tell. This piece of good news spread through the town like wild fire. The cannons began to thunder, and the church-bells pealed merrily all day.
the Martians retreated to their original position upon Horsell Common;

another plate when I see you coming; so you mustn’t disappoint us. Come

We travelled back to Tiflis on that same day. A week later, in order to escape the intolerable heat, we set off to Borjom.
wagons and horses in the streets, and more coming all the time.
He pointed out—writing in a foolish, facetious tone—that the perfection
They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and her uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off by themselves. The one mis-sent must be first attended to; it had been written five days ago. The beginning contained an account of all their little parties and engagements, with such news as the country afforded; but the latter half, which was dated a day later, and written in evident agitation, gave more important intelligence. It was to this effect:—
I went out driving one day with a dashing young officer,[49] Count Podgoritchany, his sister Mary and my dolorous Troubadour. I was in a mood just then to do something foolish, and it struck me that it would be charming fun to take a ride astride on the horse which drove us, and thus, becoming deaf to Mary’s frantic remonstrance and casting dignity to the winds, I perched myself on our steed, who broke into a gallop, whilst my cavaliers ran by my side holding me steadily. That was certainly very unladylike and shocking of me!
CONTENTS.
_I_ hadn’t done nothing. But that’s always the way; it don’t make no
and down the scale from one note to another.
Foreign artists are greatly appreciated in America, and very highly paid. When walking through the musical section we were agreeably surprised to hear a first-class artiste play one of Chopin’s nocturnes in a masterly manner, with a faultless technique and a perfect phrasing.
“I cannot see why Mrs. Forster should not ask me as well as Lydia,” said she, “though I am not her particular friend. I have just as much right to be asked as she has, and more too, for I am two years older.”



but to you en me; en I ast ’m if dey gwyne to grab a young white
June 2nd.—The sun was not yet up when the coasts of Asia appeared on the horizon in long white lines. Towards seven o’clock in the morning we entered Krasnovodsk. Flags flutter on the quay, and a triumphal arch is erected with our initials and “Welcome” written in large letters. All the administrative officials of the town have come to present themselves to my husband, who is greeted with the greatest enthusiasm. We come on land and walk between two lines of lookers-on. Prince Toumanoff, the chief of the Transcaspian provinces, came up to me with a large bouquet, whilst a military band was playing a march.
for only just the right kind.
After my husband had thanked the authorities for their warm welcome, a “troika” (a carriage with three horses) was brought up. The horses were rather troublesome and I was quite foolishly terrified to drive in the carriage; having a nervous dread of horses, after the accident on the day of our marriage, when our horses took fright and bolted, and nearly did away with us. I entreated Sergy to proceed on foot to General Unterberger’s house (the governor of the town). We were escorted through the streets in triumph. Vladivostock had put itself into festival array; flags hung from the house-tops, in the town and from the masts in the harbour. The troops formed a wall from the pier to the governor’s house. We advanced to the sound of marches between two rows of soldiers, amidst peals of loud hurrahs. I was somewhat dazzled by all these manifestations. We marched now between rows of scholars belonging to different schools of Khabarovsk. The pupils of the young ladies’ gymnasium curtseyed to me as we passed. One of the smallest girls came up to me and presented me with an enormous bouquet, tied with a pink ribbon, whilst the head-mistress delivered a little speech to me. I stood there at a loss what to say and blushed perfectly scarlet, which was very silly of me. I could not maintain my dignity at all, and felt for the moment tongue-tied.
wants to find out something about these two, let them send up to
grey scale of the Thing was no common oxide, that the yellowish-white

small yard with a high iron fence around it, so that he could not
As the days wore on, his utter carelessness of any consideration so

She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walked up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks of inquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt as made everything worse.
When the renewal of the Charter of the East India Company was under discussion in the House of Commons, Wilberforce, the champion of liberty and progress, proposed that the religious and social improvement of the Indian people should be an accepted obligation. This was fiercely opposed, especially by a Mr. Montgomery Campbell, who had for a time held some official position in Madras. He scouted any possibility of the conversion of a Hindu, sneered at the attempt as visionary, and, while appreciating the high character of Schwartz, did not hesitate to depreciate the permanent value of his work. When the report of this attack reached him at Tanjore, Schwartz lost no time in sending to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge a powerful reply, a noble vindication of missions in general and his work in particular. The old veteran was roused with indignation and yet the spirit of his masterly defence of his Hindu converts is in every way becoming a Christian. As Dr. Buchanan rightly describes his letter, “Perhaps no Christian defence has appeared in these latter ages more characteristic of the Apostolic simplicity and primitive energy of truth than this apology of the venerable Schwartz.”

CHAPTER CXXV
July 27th.—This morning my husband went with a party of recruits to be present at a funeral service in the Christian cemetery of Nagasaki, where a great number of our sailors are buried.
“Why _that’s_ all right. Miss Hooker she tole me, _particular_, that
horse now—I wouldn’t, honest; and yet I’d a sold her for fifteen
and grease around the sawed place so the very keenest seneskal can’t
same old river again. That disturbed Jim—and me too. So the question
The scene on the screen blurred, grew gray, and faded out. Hal Jus was shifting the great electroscope tube. Again the screen glowed, and again an image appeared. It cleared quickly, then suddenly leaped into full life and color. The scene showed mighty machines working in a great pit of freshly tumbled soil. It was a land of intense shadow and where the dim red light of the distant sun did not touch, there was intense, utter blackness. There was no atmosphere here. And now, as a great freighter swung low, a machine on the ground below turned on a ray that stabbed out sharp and brilliant; a moment later the freighter tug lifted a half-million-ton piece of the planet on its attractor beams and rapidly gained headway as it shot off toward distant Venus.

Jim said he believed it was spirits; but I says:
time, and presently found myself alone. Instead of keeping close to me
Scarecrow had done.
my guests, and while you live in the Palace my people will wait upon

The last salient point in which the systems of these creatures differed

Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had the unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer.
believed in him again. But now that I was beginning to understand
As soon as we reckoned everybody was asleep that night we went down the
“‘They aren’t straight,’” answered the other.
By the time the moon rose we had come to the first halt, a Cossack settlement situated in the hollow of a valley, where we cast anchor for the night. Smoke rose over the thatched roofs of the village; church-bells were ringing for vespers. Two “atamans” (Cossack delegates) are standing on the quay, holding their huge staffs of command. A deputation of Cossacks presented “Bread and Salt” on a glass dish to my husband, and I received as a gift a wild kid. We saw two men advancing, carrying between them, across their shoulders, a long pole upon which hung an enormous sturgeon. There was scarcely room enough on board for the gigantic fish.

It was a long time before he could steady his nerves to answer my
Dorothy asked, “Where are you?”
The best place at the Exhibition is assigned to Central Asia, called “Russie des Indes,” quite near the Trocadero. This section, which is a duplicate in miniature of the Kremlin, in Moscow, is surrounded by a high crenelated wall with a row of turrets ornamented with the Russian Double Eagle. When you enter it, the Russian architecture gives place to an Arabian style. An immense panorama represents a large square in Samarkand, with a lively crowd of natives; only when seen quite close, one perceives that it is but a picture, not a reality. Our section is striking by its vivid and bright colouring. A fountain plays in the middle of an immense hall, decorated with beautiful Asiatic carpets and armour, and filled with all kinds of products of our possessions in Central Asia. The best appreciators of a remarkable collection of plants and seeds, appeared to be a legion of mice; these gnawing little animals arranged for themselves, in broad daylight, Lucullus-like repasts, without being disturbed in the least by the crowd of visitors. The grains disappeared visibly, and poison was put in every attractive place, but the cunning mice, preferring the tasty grains, carried their victory on to the battle-field.
When we had finished eating we went softly upstairs to my study, and I
I was a lonely man, and they were very kind to me. I was a lonely man
“Then send for them all to come here as soon as possible, and let each
stupid—rubbish! The risk is that we who keep wild will go


exclamations on all sides. There was a general movement backwards. I

The men stood almost as if under inspection.

Brer Phelps, his own self. S’e, what do _you_ think of it, Sister
“What think you of books?” said he, smiling.
fourteen, there ain’t no telling what she could a done by-and-by. Buck
of the time where you didn’t want them. Well, they was handsome and
controlling Martian whose delicate tentacles actuated its movements
Wilks left? It ain’t unlikely. If these men ain’t frauds, they won’t
The arrival of a second fighting-machine drove us from our peephole

third of these cloudy black kopjes had risen.

And the Lion answered, “I am a Cowardly Lion, afraid of everything. I
“Why, bless you, Saul, the poor thing’s as wet as he can be; and don’t
 The Shanty
His wife represented to him how absolutely necessary{408} such an attention would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen, on his returning to Netherfield.
right—I don’t make any moan.”
Em will surely think something dreadful has happened to me, and that
The balcony of my bedroom looks out into the park. I used to lounge there for hours in a rocking-chair after dinner. The steps of the sentinel, walking to-and-fro with his gun on his shoulder, were sharply audible. I did not move, I was so cosy here, listening to the monotonous splash of the fountain and the gentle rustling of the wind amongst the branches of the trees. The light breeze brought me the perfume of flowers; from the garden came the scent of heliotropes from a bed beneath the balcony. My thoughts flew away—far, very far, to darling St Petersburg.
happen.”
pockets. I lit no lamps, fearing some Martian might come beating that
“Get aht!” said another. “What’s cover against this ’ere ’eat? Sticks
“A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant decorums which other people may observe. If she does not object to it, why should we?”


 III. THE DAYS OF IMPRISONMENT.

“You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner.”


“So help me, I wouldn’t a be—”

noticed I had put in at all:
resulted from his influence,
navvies, and we were jolted over a hasty relaying.
at everything around me with a great deal of curiosity, for this was my


himself out so that he was just a kind of a layer, as you may say; and

“Anyone would know that,” said Dorothy.
“I don’t know. How do _they_ get them?”
darts of the sky, the shooting stars, will bring with them as they fall
“Go to those people,” said the Witch, “and tear them to pieces.”
and her eyes upon the ground. Then she looked up and said, “I do not
“Well, I’ve counted them twice, Aunty, and _I_ can’t make but nine.”



intermittent light, these monstrous beings of metal moving about in the
was a patch of silent common, smouldering in places, and with a few
standing on the cylinder and trying to scramble out of the hole again.
So I signed it, and left.
dismay. “The house must have fallen on her. Whatever shall we do?”


and yelling and laughing and carrying on, and singing out:
“Unable to utter a syllable”	457

we _can’t_ let you walk. And, besides, I’ve already told ’em to put on
“It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean he should.”
listened. But it warn’t no use; he said it wouldn’t talk. He said

“Oh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of him, this could not have happened!”
It made my eyes water a little to remember her crying there all by

once down one of the manholes, and work back to the house. It seemed to
[396]


was, what to do? I said, paddle ashore the first time a light showed,

will.”
“‘I gave you all, and you have rewarded me with confiscation, disgrace and a life of impeachment.’”
We are besieged by tiresomely polite Japanese and Chinese furnishers, tailors, shoe-makers and other purveyors with names almost impossible to pronounce for European tongues. They all bowed a great deal, and thrust their advertisements in our hands. I could not resist the temptation of purchasing a gorgeously embroidered pink satin thing with long, wide sleeves, which can serve as a wonderful tea-dress. I did not recognise myself when I passed before the mirror arrayed in that costume.
Apparently the Martians were setting fire to everything within range of
handling-machines, and the study of which has already given such an
[6]
Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above mentioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their carriage, Miss Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on Elizabet{332}h’s person, behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not join her. Her brother’s recommendation was enough to insure her favour: his judgment could not err; and he had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth, as to leave Georgiana without the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and amiable. When Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help repeating to him some part of what she had been saying to his sister.
bed; but heaps of parlors in towns has beds in them. There was a big
CHAPTER XIV.

May 27th.—At seven o’clock in the morning we are at Kermineh, where the Emir had come to welcome us. Opposite the platform was erected a large tent in which a[515] copious lunch was prepared; but I did not leave my car, feigning a bad headache. A band of native musicians came to divert me with their weird music, which made me grind my teeth. A beautiful bouquet was brought to me from the Emir, together with a rich casket containing a pair of ear-rings with diamonds as large as hazel nuts.
Providence slapping me in the face and letting me know my wickedness
It was a bit of good luck to have their new comrade join the party, for
I waked him up, and I reckoned it was going to be a grand surprise to
a renewed horror, I saw a round, black object bobbing up and down on
That we may find His comfort nigh
track. Aunt Sally was a good _deal_ uneasy; but Uncle Silas he said
“No.”
vehicles, going for the most part to Chalk Farm station, where the

Toto jumped out of Dorothy’s arms and hid under the bed, and the girl

bicycle, and busy upon a series of papers discussing the probable
“Jim!”
scampered in all directions, for Toto had awakened from his sleep, and

March 20th.—My riding habit of dark-blue cloth and a jacket made after the style of a Turkish uniform, have just been brought to me. When I appeared for the first time in[102] that costume, Hamid-Bey saluted me in military fashion because the sleeves of my habit were made with gold embroideries like those of a pasha.
anybody with you?”
heap, she got into a terrible rage, and blew three times upon her
other way you could ever think of to save your life.”

So I promised, and he says:
Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her think him less agreeable. Sir William Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a good-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to say that could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth loved absurdities, but she had known Sir William’s too long. He could tell her nothing new of the wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were worn out, like his information.


and play “The Battle of Prague” on it. The walls of all the rooms was
“He is the best landlord, and the best master,” said she, “that ever lived. Not like the wild young men now-a-days, who think of nothing but themselves. There is not one of his tenants or servants but what will give him a good name. Some people call him proud; but I am sure I never saw anything of it. To my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle away like other young men.”
A curious crowd lingered restlessly, people coming and going but the
A general View of the present State of Great Britain.	3


next he would sigh, and next he’d let on to drop a tear. It was



I didn’t know what a mouth was for. I had the fun of watching them make
moment all of them were filled with wonder. For they saw, standing in
covering to protect them from the dew, and the Tin Woodman chopped a
So the king sneaked into the wigwam and took to his bottle for comfort,
the person behind me, and turned my head towards the Thing again. For a
“Here is a great tree, standing close to the ditch. If the Tin Woodman


speak to him, but did not. I answered his greeting with a meaningless
The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too great for her to know in what manner she acceded to it. She immediately felt that whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her, must be the work of her brother, and without looking farther, it was satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his resentment had not made him think really ill of her.
So I was full of trouble, full as I could be; and didn’t know what to
was getting towards the end of it when I heard pap’s gun in the woods.
[Image unavailable.]

and gone. Well, I gets up, a-wondering, and goes down stairs—nobody
On our way back to the hotel we saw the statue of Gambetta on the square. The fancy of the sculptor has attired the great man in a fur-lined coat, which looks rather queer in this country, where everyone would prefer to be completely deprived of clothes.
a shabby village named Pikesville, and the king he went ashore and told
but afterwards, during the second day, I was able to consider our
Yet here and there some object had had the luck to escape—a white
doing just as we pleased without calling anybody master. Perhaps some
“I might as well inquire,” replied she, “why, with so evident a design of offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked me against your will, against your reason, and even against your character? Was not this some excuse for incivility, if I was uncivil? But I have other provocations. You know I have.{239} Had not my own feelings decided against you, had they been indifferent, or had they even been favourable, do you think that any consideration would tempt me to accept the man who has been the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a most beloved sister?”

“This walk is not wide enough for our party. We had better go into the avenue.”
Cairo. Jim thought it was a good idea, so we took a smoke on it and
“Yes—easy enough. Every animal is grateful for kindness and petting,



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VOICE OF THE VOID ***

them first-rate, but they couldn’t see me. Then the captain sung out:
when Dorothy had finished telling him everything that had happened, “I
“That’s what I’ve been thinking,” he said; “that’s what I’ve been
and give them a solid good cussing, and made them skip out. They
description.
Wizard Oz, who would soon send her back to her own home again.
them again he wondered greatly that they could leave the beautiful City
“Eh?” said one of the men, turning.


Original publication: London: Society of Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1921
“Kin any of you gentlemen tell me wher’ Mr. Peter Wilks lives?” they
spotted you for a boy when you was threading the needle; and I
CHAPTER IX.
July 22nd.—A Te Deum has been performed this morning on the square before the church, after which my husband reviewed the troops. Before leaving Blagovestchensk, Sergy gave a grand lunch to all the military chiefs on board.
May 29th.—Troubles have arisen again. There has been a fresh underhand musket-shot which took place in town this morning. This time the ball lodged itself in the wall of a house inhabited by one of our functionaries. A group of “imams” from different parts of Erzeroum were gathered, and the order was given to them to find out the culprit, under the threat of making the whole Mussulman quarter responsible for his misdeed, and to deliver him immediately into the hands of the Russian authorities, as also all the fire-arms that the Turkish government had dealt out to the inhabitants during the blockade of Erzeroum. The “imams”[120] listened woefully to the proclamation of that severe decree, and presented, a few hours later as culprit, the single Christian inhabitant of their quarter; it is quite evident that they accuse him wrongfully.
me in her room and shut the door very soft, and asked me if I liked

boot-heel made with big nails, to keep off the devil.
An officer who had just arrived from Erzeroum came on purpose to try to dissuade me from undertaking such a long and dangerous journey. He told me that even for him it had been awfully fatiguing; the roads were so horrible that the committee of the Red-Cross could not find it possible to send even one Sister of Mercy to Erzeroum. These descriptions of the state of the roads were certainly not encouraging, but nothing could shake my determination, I felt heroic and was prepared to brave all dangers and risk anything for Sergy’s sake, and no human powers should prevent me from starting at the first opportunity.
December 22nd.—We were obliged to have recourse to an ice-breaker, which came to our rescue. We are moving at last. The boat had to saw her way through the ice, which came breaking against her sides. We are in the open sea which is greeting us with a terrible gust of wind. We are going to have a fine dance on the water.
“What! Why, Jim is—”
monstrous long raft that was as long going by as a procession. She had
If it were acknowledged, that on all these various objects, no difference whatever can subsist between one nation and another:

“How do you know?” said the artilleryman. I explained. He thought.
the heart.”




Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, “You cannot have a right to such very strong local attachment. You cannot have been always at Longbourn.”


went by, and then dived in under the tent. I had my twenty-dollar gold

She then ran gaily off, rejoicing, as she rambled about, in the hope of being at home again in a day or two. Jane was already so much recovered as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening.{69}

“I am—I certainly am,” answered the little man sorrowfully; “but it was
Mr. Gardiner did not write again, till he had received an answer from Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to send. It was not known that Wickham had a single relation with whom he kept up any connection, and it was certain that he had no near one living. His former acquaintance had been numerous; but since he had been in the militia, it did not appear that he was on terms of particular friendship with any of them. There was no one, therefore, who could be pointed out as likely to give any news of him. And in the wretched state of his own finances, there was a very powerful motive for secrecy, in addition to his fear of discovery by Lydia’s relations; for it had just transpired that he had left gaming debts behind him to a very considerable amount. Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would be necessary to clear his expenses at Brighton. He owed a good deal{365} in the town, but his debts of honour were still more formidable. Mr. Gardiner did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the Longbourn family; Jane heard them with horror. “A gamester!” she cried. “This is wholly unexpected; I had not an idea of it.”
“And they are really to be married!” cried Elizabeth, as soon as they were by themselves. “How strange this is! and for this we are to be thankful. That they should marry, small as is their chance of happiness, and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice! Oh, Lydia!”
friends.
accounts o’ Huck; I’s a free man, en I couldn’t ever ben free ef it
brains I shall know everything.”
was not a Wizard the people were proud of him. “For,” they said, “there


Well, I went fooling along in the deep woods till I judged I warn’t far

dozen deserted boats pitched aimlessly upon the confusion of the waves.
overtook and passed the doctor between Woking and Send.

because now if I could tip her the wink she’d light out and save me,
panting, and waited further developments. The common round the
powerful as a telescope, and could see everywhere. So, as she sat in
I should have had to do all the digging myself. The curate would
me off to the left and shot by, amongst a lot of snags that fairly
you, and I ain’t going to tell on you, nuther. You just tell me your

was fretted with little golden clouds. In the road that runs from the
of it.
Room.—Huck Takes the Money.
breakfast. Well, I was dozing off again when I thinks I hears a deep
I started across to the town from a little below the ferry-landing, and

gowns, and I turned up my trouser-legs to my knees and got into it. Jim

incrustation. It had a diameter of about thirty yards. He approached
upon them as impossible or improbable. It is curious to recall some of

through the village. There were shops half opened in the main street of
says look at my hat—if you call it a hat—but the lid raises up and the

and grabbed a couple of dozen garters and house-snakes, and put them in
For a minute he scarcely realised what this meant, and, although the
nine every skift dat went ’long wuz talkin’ ’bout how yo’ pap come over
Every moment I expected the fire of some hidden battery to spring upon
“I do not know,” answered Boq gravely, “for I have never been there. It
A. Because we manufacture it, and wish to sell it dearer to the national consumers.
everywheres, feeding out of the wagon-troughs and stomping to keep off

and very gray whiskers. He had an old battered-up slouch hat on, and a
“One evening there was evidently a profound movement among the Danish troops. A stranger of note had had an audience with the King, who had shown him singular favour, and for hours, it was said, they had been closeted together. The soldiers who had gathered round may have been disappointed when they saw he was only a clergyman, a man indeed of commanding presence, of a wonderful dignity and fire, resolute and calm, with a keen eye, a bronzed and almost swarthy face seamed with deep lines of care, and a winning courtesy and lovableness of manner. But when he opened his lips and preached to them and they heard it was Ziegenbalg, the missionary from Tranquebar, there were some at least who ceased to wonder at his welcome from the King. To the camp Ziegenbalg had hurried with all speed. Letters had given no warning of his journey and he seemed to have dropped out of the clouds. He was accustomed to rapid movements, and he had no time to spare, but he got his story told to the King and was content. Some days were snatched from war for this work of peace, changes and arrangements were proposed in the management of the mission, Ziegenbalg was informed that his patent of superintendent had already been sent out to India, and for details he was referred to Copenhagen. Thither he journeyed with restless speed, and then into Germany to Francke at Halle, halting little at any place and preaching to vast crowds who filled the churches and swayed out into the street,[Pg 22] ‘very weak,’ we are told, ‘yet kindling by his presence the zeal of all the mission friends and moving his audience as he would by his glowing appeals.’”[6]
We had mountains on the Missouri shore and heavy timber on the Illinois



the cupboard. After he had eaten he would lie down on his bed of straw,

and I suppose there never will be, for they don’t belong there. We

We visited on the same day the enormous Mosque of “Amrou,” which will contain about ten thousand people. Upon the floor were stretched hundreds of small bright-red carpets upon which the followers of the Prophet bent, muttering their prayers and went on with the monotonous chanting of “La-illah, illah-llah!” There is an Arabic academy, the “Medressah School” for the education of “softas,” (theological students) attached to the mosque. This academy is a grand edifice supported by 180 columns and lighted by a thousand lamps, has accommodation for 11,000 students and 325 professors. When we entered one of the immense halls of the academy, we saw a white-bearded professor, wearing a green turban that means he is a “hadji,” and has been to Mecca, sitting on the floor and reading a lecture to a solid mass of white-robed youths, who sat cross-legged before their teacher, bowing and swaying towards him. We were told that before a student becomes an “imam” he must study for fifteen years in order to be admitted formally to the clergy.


whirled in with the pick and shovel, and in about two hours and a half

If it were acknowledged also, that all Europe, as well as each State in particular, is essentially, finally, strictly, composed only of three kinds of capitalists, or proprietors, the landed capitalist, the capitalist of industry, and the proprietor of money, considered either as a dependant or as a capitalist:

put on another plate for dinner.”


up there, and the door ain’t locked, and you—” She stopped, looking
woods far below them.
We have observed, that the exports from England to the colonies of America, and to India, amounted, in 1773, to 4,900 and some thousand pounds sterling, suppose 5 millions: now her importation of commodities from those various countries is about 5,900,000l. (see Sir Charles Whitworth); but we have also noticed, that she left yearly in North America 1,282,000l. more than she received therefrom. This matter, considered in the most favourable light, that is, as a balance of trade, ought to be added to the former; and the whole together will give us a total of 7 millions, shewing an annual benefit of 2 millions some hundred thousand pounds sterling.
perhaps, he stared silently.

whiskers is goin’ to look oncommon odd on her, maybe.”
bother us.”
right. Le’s go and do it.”

would go up to the town and fetch down my baggage. The old gentleman

he don’t want to fool away any time amongst them Shepherdsons, becuz
went to bed a little after midnight, and was awakened from lurid dreams

again a light-ray, like the beam of a warship’s searchlight swept the


Very early next morning the maid came to knock at our door begging us not to shut our windows as the cannon was going to be fired. It appears that the proprietor of the hotel was afraid our windows would fly to pieces, although the cannon had been placed at a great distance and there could be no danger whatever that such a thing should happen. Guns must surely be very rarely fired at Dieppe to procure such a panic.

she got well, en one day she was a-stannin’ aroun’, en I says to her, I
“Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again? At present I have not room to do them justice.”
With the mention of Derbyshire, there were many ideas connected. It was impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its owner. “But surely,” said she, “I may enter his county with impunity, and rob it of a few petrified spars, without his perceiving me.”
“I don’t know where he was,” says I; “where was he?”
shelter in Harrow Road. But before the dawn my courage returned, and
their heads, wearing ermine robes and satin doublets; and funny clowns
board for me. Good-bye, boy; you do as Mr. Parker told you, and you’ll
about Kansas, and how gray everything was there, and how the cyclone
At nine o’clock there was a review of all the troops quartered at Dieppe, consisting mainly of a battery of infantry, on the large square before the hotel. I threw on my morning-wrapper, and in slippers, my hair hanging loose, I made my way to the next room which was free at that moment, and the windows of which looked out into the square. I was busy critically observing the military evolutions when suddenly there was a sound of footsteps, the door opened behind me and an elegant couple was ushered into the room by the manager, who was going to let it to them. The pair surveyed me quizzically whilst I fled hastily, ashamed to be caught thus.
notice took of it, and reward. So every one of them promised, right out
But man must develop some new, some stronger weapon. The time was getting too short for more failures. For Hal Jus had announced a discovery that made men even more anxious to abandon their age-old home. The Sun was to become a nova. These flaming stars had been known and studied for ages. Dim, old stars they were that suddenly flared up for a brief period of intense activity, then quickly faded back even lower than before. It behooved man to move quickly. A mighty people that for ten billion years had slowly built up the mighty structure of their science had to move.
THE CYLINDER OPENS.

Our steamer was a veritable floating hotel, reuniting all the advantages of modern comfort. In the hold were packed 1,800 sheep, a drove of cattle, a large cage full of fowls and three pairs of splendid Russian steppers, who were to be sold at Cairo; each pair of horses cost 4000 roubles (about four hundred pounds.)
“A man who goes up in a balloon on circus day, so as to draw a crowd of

her to; then we lit the pipes, and dangled our legs in the water, and
“Oh, she is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld!{15} But there is one of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and I dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.”

and by-and-by you think to yourself, spos’n _I_ was a boy, and was away
them.”


even if he was a bad Wizard.
bigger one. He would a been worth a good deal over at the village. They

put on it and be forgot forever.
French, Dutch, and Swedish; steam launches from the Thames, yachts,
 Discovering the Camp Fire
if I would mind going over to see Lord Hilton, the lord of the manor.
“Can I have the carriage?” said Jane.




villas burning on the Woking border. There were lights in all the
that old doctor for doing Jim that good turn; and I was glad it was
down, and when it was most abreast of where I stood I heard a man say,

Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the visit.{184}


guns, growing rapidly larger as they drew nearer. One on the extreme
CHAPTER XXII.
and had a darkish-paly complexion, not a sign of red in it anywheres;

The Winkies were not a brave people, but they had to do as they were
criticism. My particular province is speculative philosophy. My
CHAPTER VII.
see?”
color and all it was just like your brains would be if—Dear, dear,
nothing left but sixteen dollars and our nigger, Jim. That warn’t
beings rushing northward, one pressing on another. A great bank of
XCVII.	Aden	442


like a sheep; no, he come ca’m and important, like the ram. When he got
(which was doing a good business), along with some other houses and
“Yes, I know; but you can’t depend on them. It’s the way they’ve acted

I was stuck on a pole in a cornfield, where I could make-believe scare
as it would keep peace in the family; and it warn’t no use to tell Jim,
August 2nd.—The rain is falling all the time, transforming the roads into liquid mud. We met with an accident this morning. The last car of our train ran off the track, and we had to stop in the middle of a field, and it was two hours before we could continue our journey. Everybody had to descend. Chinese coolies, who were working on the railway line, brought a long narrow plank on which we crossed to the other side of the road, balancing like dancers on the cord. Two engineers supported me, picking their way among the rain-pools. At last all was repaired, and our train set forward piano-pianissimo; it could beat the world’s record for its slowness, it simply crawled, and we arrived at Iman only at nightfall, and took the boat to Khabarovsk.
“I tuck out en shin down de hill, en ’spec to steal a skift ’long de
July 12th.—Towards night we dropped anchor on the coast of a Chinese village on the left bank of the river.
I stood a-looking at him; he set there a-looking at me, with his chair



Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour, reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years had been insufficient to{5} make his wife understand his character. Her mind was less difficult to develope. She was a woman of mean understanding, little information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented, she fancied herself nervous. The business of her life was to get her daughters married: its solace was visiting and news.

The fellow thought he was a lunatic at large and made an unsuccessful
Though I was still in short frocks, I was already a dreadful flirt and had all sorts of love affairs, but all the stock of my affection was exclusively bestowed upon Robert Jeffrey, a pupil of the English school in Cannstadt, a small town in the neighbourhood of Stuttgart. He was a Scotch lad of eighteen summers, blue-eyed, brown-haired and white-toothed. I was drawn to him from the beginning, for Bobbie was a real darling, and I considered him the sweetest boy in the world. I had other admirers, but Jeffrey was by far the handsomest and the dearest; I was quite silly about him and had eyes and ears only for him alone. He was my “Prince Charming;” my imagination adorned him with the attributes of all possible and impossible heroes. It was my first serious affair, the first love of my girlhood. The passion was reciprocal and Jeffrey said I was the first girl who had yet disturbed his peace. Mamma went to Paris for a few days, leaving me under the care of the Baroness Vietinghoff. She hoped that Mary, who considered herself a sort of guardian of mine, would prevent me doing anything rash while she was away. Part of her duty was to keep off boys, (other boys, not Jeffrey.) Mary promised mamma to play a mother’s part to me; she wouldn’t let me commit any eccentricity. But I did an enormous one. Jeffrey was a[23] somewhat green and inexperienced youth, too timid for my taste, and wanted a little go and rousing up. Wishing to sharpen his wits I sent him a wild letter, telling him that he was all the world to me. I did not expect that he would answer personally, that same day, my foolish billet-doux, and when Mary announced that my youthful sweetheart was waiting for me in the drawing-room, I sat down on my trunk, declaring that nothing in the world would force me to move from my place. I don’t believe I am weak in the way of shyness, but I didn’t find strength at the moment to think of facing Jeffrey. Mary went to fetch him and left the room, feeling herself an uncomfortable third. I continued to stick to my box, my chin upon my folded hands. At first we did not utter a single word, as silent as two stones. Some minutes later we were quite ourselves again, and Jeffrey from that day proved extremely teachable, and soon lost his shyness; I had trained him thoroughly.
friends to tell them of his good fortune.

And, after all, what is the good of seeking for the reason of charm?—it is there. There were better sense in the sad mechanic exercise of determining the reason of its absence where it is not. In the novels of the last hundred years there are vast numbers of young ladies with whom it might be a pleasure to fall in love; there are at least five with whom, as it seems to me, no man of taste and spirit can help doing so. Their names are, in chronological order, Elizabeth Bennet, Diana Vernon, Argemone Lavington, Beatrix Esmond, and Barbara Grant. I should have been most in love with Beatrix and Argemone; I should, I think, for mere occasional companionship, have preferred Diana and Barbara. But to live with and to marry, I do not know that any one of the four can come into competition with Elizabeth.
“No; but I don’t know everybody yet. I haven’t lived here quite two

reck’n he’s ben dead two er three days. Come in, Huck, but doan’ look
“Indeed, I could not. I was uncomfortable enough, I was very uncomfortable—I may say unhappy. And with no one to speak to of what I felt, no Jane to comfort me, and say that I had not been so very weak, and{281} vain, and nonsensical, as I knew I had! Oh, how I wanted you!”
Once I said to myself it would be a thousand times better for Jim to be
and we would put small things in uncle’s coat-pockets and he must steal
after thirty-seven years of solitary captivity._
tin plates. Tom says it wasn’t enough; but I said nobody wouldn’t ever

passengers until the seated decks were even dangerously crowded. He
“What’s _that_ got to do with it? Neither did that other fellow. But
slow business—appeared like they warn’t ever going to get started on
not know what to make of her. One shell, and they would have sent her

FRIDAY NIGHT.
perhaps, behind a line of four ripped guns and smashed gun carriages.


Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much oppressed to make any reply. Mary, however, continued to console herself with such kind of moral extractions from the evil before them.
“Oh, very!” answered Oz. He put the heart in the Woodman’s breast and
ever lived, if not braver,” said the Lion modestly.
says:
quiet and throwed the snakes clear away amongst the bushes; for I
“Why, blame it all, we’ve _got_ to do it. Don’t I tell you it’s in the
came out into the road. The two men hurried back at once to the common,
to the Lion’s surprise, he could make no impression on the tin,


uncle, Sarah Mary Williams George Elexander Peters, and if you get into

The others then joined her, and expressed their admiration of his figure; but Elizabeth heard not a word, and, wholly engrossed by her own feelings, followed them in silence. She was overpowered by shame and vexation. Her coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged thing in the world! How strange must it{310} appear to him! In what a disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man! It might seem as if she had purposely thrown herself in his way again! Oh! why did she come? or, why did he thus come a day before he was expected? Had they been only ten minutes sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his discrimination; for it was plain that he was that moment arrived, that moment alighted from his horse or his carriage. She blushed again and again over the perverseness of the meeting. And his behaviour, so strikingly altered,—what could it mean? That he should even speak to her was amazing!—but to speak with such civility, to inquire after her family! Never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified, never had he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting. What a contrast did it offer to his last address in Rosings Park, when he put his letter into her hand! She knew not what to think, or how to account for it.
“I’ll take the canoe and go and see, Jim. It mightn’t be, you know.”
could be strung out to as much as eighty year, and would be the best

wouldn’t give shucks for any other way. Now you work your mind, and
September 24th.—We cross the treacherous Japanese Sea, on which the monsoons, disagreeable north-east winds, are raging in this season. We went on deck for a breath of fresh air and had a chat with the captain. He told us of the danger we were running during our stay at Nagasaki, because of the hatred of the Japs towards Russians. Every time we left the hotel we were followed by two detectives to protect us. The captain, as it appears, always carried a loaded pistol in his pocket when he accompanied us in the streets.


So they sat down upon the bank and gazed wistfully at the Scarecrow
Now she had got a start, and she went on and told me all about the good

red, green, and yellow signal lights hanging in a framework against the
Sleeping in the Woods.—Raising the Dead.—Exploring the Island.—Finding

shoved. It was a canoe, and warn’t fastened with nothing but a rope.
we thought of the right way at last—which was to cook the ladder, too,
Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have two daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of the day before, was now high in her good graces.

who had lived so long on the dry, gray prairies.

watching for lights and watching for our raft. After a long time the
The richest shop at Khabarovsk, situated in a street called “Straight,” which isn’t straight at all, belongs to a rich Chinese merchant named Tifountai, where you can buy everything necessary and desirable, beginning with clothes down to furniture, and all sort of provisions which are of a fabulous price here, milk products especially: a pint of cream costs two roubles (four shillings.) We had to buy three cows and grow vegetables ourselves in hot-houses, and have thus vegetables all the year round.

“Help Dorothy to kill the Wicked Witch of the West,” replied the Beast.
common. There is only food for one. Which way are you going?”



In fact, let us suppose the debt arrived at a height so apparently formidable, and the price of every thing proportionably increased; would the former be less firmly established? Methinks that the very contrary is demonstrated by calculation, and that imagination cannot frame any rational objection thereto; at least I am free to confess, that all my efforts have not been able to produce any combination of probable circumstances, which might, in any supposition, justify the dread of that application of the sponge which is so often held out as a resource that sooner or later must be adopted. Setting aside the infamy of such a measure, what advantage would accrue from it? Let it be adopted this moment in London, within three days the same[24] step must inevitably be taken at Paris. A manœuvre of this kind would manifestly indicate either the most hostile intentions on the part of the English government, or the project of overturning the constitution: the latter concerns England alone; but in the former, France is deeply interested. That power would be compelled to put itself in a situation to oppose an immense and free revenue, to a revenue equally immense without appropriation. Were, on the other hand, the French to lead the way, England must inevitably follow; and the unprofitable disgrace would be the portion of either of the two nations that should have set up the precedent.


“Be done, boys! Who’s there?”
“Now there is Mr. Joker, one of our clowns,” continued the china lady,
“Where is Kansas?” asked the man, with surprise.

have no label on them; and just as we was leaving I found a tolerable


had for me down there, and there ain’t nothing better that ever I’ve

On the following day my husband was invited to lunch with the Emperor’s uncle, Prince Arissougava. In the afternoon we went to visit the Buddhist Temple of Shiba, to see the tombs of the “shioguns,” the ancient Emperors of Japan. Two bonzes (Buddhist priests), enveloped in black gauze, followed by a big dog, served as guides to us. The Temple is surrounded by a magnificent shady park of camphor and other aromatic trees. We inhaled with delight the perfume of myrtle and orange blossoms. We found our way into a courtyard open to the sky, where a fountain played over a marble basin. Beyond is a long, low building, the sides are simple wooden screens. It is the Temple. Men and women kneel and pray before the entrance of the Temple. On each side stand two monster figures, demoniac, with eyes of fury, the guardians of holy things. The custom of offerings is very peculiar in Japan; pilgrims cast their offerings in a box destined for the purpose, placed before the threshold, consisting of sheets of gilt paper or small coloured incensed tapers. The very poorest throw only a handful of rice into the box. I saw piles of straw sandals thrown at the feet of a huge marble Buddha, seated cross-legged on a bronze pedestal, and was told that it was the modest offering of riksha-men, begging Buddha to grant them strong legs. At the door of the Temple we slipped off our shoes and put on a pair of sandals, for in Japan one may not enter the House of God with shoes on. A white-robed priest with a shaven head appeared and motioned us, with a bow, to enter. The screens slide open and an immense hall is before us, full of unfamiliar sweet smell of Japanese incense, produced by strings of[354] incensed paper which pilgrims burn before their idols. We pass through a great red gateway of the sacred enclosure and enter the mortuary shrines of Setsugu, one of the Shioguns, full of bronze lanterns, which are offerings to the dead from their royal relatives.

because he reckoned they warn’t high enough yet to do any harm; but he
Ever since the English have acquired the immense landed revenue which they possess in the East-Indies, it is probable they do not carry there so much money; yet some must be sent there. The above five articles are the only ones I know of, which may render necessary an annual importation of money. The first of those articles is absolutely independent of the caprice of any one; it is always subservient to the quantity of effects to be put into circulation, as well as to their price; and can at no time deprive the other parts of Europe of their share in the mines of America. The third and fourth are in a manner included in the first; nor can they, when viewed[102] separately, be very considerable: The second alone is truly prodigious, but is likewise subservient to the demands of that very silver when wrought, that is to say, converted into some articles of luxury: But it is necessary to observe, in regard to this, that great care is taken to find out purchasers for that metal thus improved by the hands of the workman, not only in England, but wherever people can possibly be found willing to take from her, that part of the precious balance, which she had taken upon herself, only in hopes of getting rid of it.

diamonds; and to the Scarecrow they gave a gold-headed walking stick,

the boys did. We hadn’t robbed nobody, hadn’t killed any people, but
I had tried them lots of times myself, and they wouldn’t sting me.
thing is for you to treat him _kind_, and not be saying things to make
chairs and some in their rooms, and it got to be pretty dull. Buck and
order to quit Constantinople; a second despatch followed saying: “if Turkey did not consent to sign the conditions that Russia exacted, war would be declared in the lapse of two days.” And Turkey did not consent.
She sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without daring to lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them to the face of her sister as the servant was approaching the door. Jane looked a little paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had expected. On the gentlemen’s appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any symptom of resentment, or any unnecessary complaisance.


Low over the sunlit surface of a great planet they were swinging; below them there rapidly unrolled a terrain of mighty forests of green trees, vast green meadows of gently rolling land, and all bathed in the blinding glory of a blazing white sun. What a scene for eyes that had been starved of light for countless years! What a land of hope and promise and pleasure it seemed to these small gentle men. For generations the only plants they had seen were the poor small things raised artificially in the museums. Here they saw magnificent trees that towered two-hundred feet into the air, in wondrous profusion of leafy green.
“Cler out from here, you hussy, er I’ll take a skillet to ye!”

When they got there they swarmed into the graveyard and washed over it


walked up to it and knocked at the door. It was opened by the farmer’s
several such wanderers as myself had already discovered this on the
co-operation—grim chance had taken no heed of that. Had I foreseen, I
the law does: The law takes a man worth six thousand dollars and
“I am surprised to hear you say,” urged this clever Hindu, “that if we forsake Paganism our souls will be happy and that if we do not God will punish us. What is the soul? A breath which when it has left the body is blown away with other winds. You may perceive this by holding the hand to a dying person’s mouth to feel[Pg 53] whether there is yet breath. If there be, life is still in him. Thus breath and the soul are one and the same thing. Who then can say that wind shall be punished? What is God? Can He be seen? He is the universe. I die—that means nothing more than that my body is resolved into its original elements—water, fire, earth, air. But the existence of such a spirit within me as you speak of, I believe not. Where is it when I sleep, when I see no one, or though one touch me I do not feel it?”
more than ever to get back to Kansas.
Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her Derbyshire friend, that had attended her from that part of the world. His name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece; and the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. Gardiner had formed, of their being followed by a letter from him, had ended in nothing. Elizabeth had received none since her return, that could come from Pemberley.
away at my best one day, for I was anxious to get the new house and my



Tom, I reck’n, but she wouldn’t be wuth half de trouble she’d coss.”
The Martians had been repulsed; they were not invulnerable. They had



After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she was tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and look into the park. The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent had made a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to the verdure of the early trees. She was{244} on the point of continuing her walk, when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which edged the park: he was moving that way; and fearful of its being Mr. Darcy, she was directly retreating. But the person who advanced was now near enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness, pronounced her name. She had turned away; but on hearing herself called, though in a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, she moved again towards the gate. He had by that time reached it also; and, holding out a letter, which she instinctively took, said, with a look of haughty composure, “I have been walking in the grove some time, in the hope of meeting you. Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?” and then, with a slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of sight.
The railway between Khabarovsk and Vladivostock is opened. Vladivostock can be reached now in four days.
“Hearing herself called.”
altogether strange. I remember, clearly and coldly and vividly, all
life of our Queen?”
 Another little Job
To the benighted, dispenser of Light,
to chip in and change the general tune.
could go after even a turnip-cart but he must have the swords and guns
red weed, transfixed by a stick that kept it in place. It was the

green banks, and murmuring in a voice very grateful to a little girl
“Well, you wouldn’t a ben here ’f it hadn’t a ben for Jim. You’d a ben

to Louisville on business. But the rest was on hand, and so they all
“Just to amuse myself, and keep the good people busy, I ordered them to
The more the time drew near for my arrival at Tashkend, the more nervous I became. My impatience increased from minute to minute. One can well imagine my amazement when, stopping at the station nearest to Tashkend, I saw my husband on the platform. He had left his bed to come and meet me. Sergy met me open-armed, whilst my heart beat so violently that I feared he would hear it. He had altered a good deal, and I was awfully shocked by the drawn look of his features. There was a large lump in my throat and I could not speak for the risk of tears, but I made a strong effort, and, trying to conceal my anxiety, I forced a poor smile, and did my utmost to look composed and cheerful.

There was an awful storm last night; the wind shook our house to its very foundation, it seemed as though it must be caught up and hurled headlong. I’ve never seen such dazzling flashes of lightning before, nor heard such formidable thunderbolts reverberating loudly with an echo in the mountains. I was in a terrible fright all the time lest the flag-staff, put on the top of our roof, would be struck by lightning. The rain came in through the ceilings; I can well imagine what was taking place in the other houses in Erzeroum which had no clay roofs like ours.
Martians had taken away the excavating-machine, and, save for a

“For the liveliness of your mind I did.”
THE DEATH OF THE CURATE.

The steam hung upon the water for many minutes, hiding the third


In the depths of space they were re-integrated, and now they slowly proceeded to the blazing star before them, then hovered near one of the circling planets. In a moment they were discovered, and literally thousands of the glowing creatures darted up from the green, brightly lighted world below. These creatures had learned that these ships were hostile and as they drew near, they were already changing to that fatal violet, streaked with red. Great flaming streamers of force reached out to the ships, but in that instant the ships suddenly seemed to shimmer, as an object seen through heated air, and around them there was a strange, pale radiance, a radiance that seemed to have substance. It seemed to flow, to move, yet always remained as a strange, half-visible, milky shroud, that surrounded the ships. And then the streamers of glowing death reached out—touched it—and disappeared! The creature leaped back, as though in pain, writhing away. The usual color of the creature was suffused by a pale, but growing green—then as the red was more and more overcome by the rising green, the glowing shape grew misty—then like a puff of vapor before a breeze it was gone—the great Atomic Giant had been mortally wounded and before their eyes, had died. Instantaneous dissolution had taken place.
September 21st.—The crossing from Fusan to Nagasaki is not a very long one. At seven o’clock in the evening we moored to the quay of that lovely Japanese town.


SINGAPORE
“It is your turn to say something now, Mr. Darcy. I talked about the dance, and you ought to make some kind of remark on the size of the room, or the number of couples.”
George didn’t leave nothing. And that letter was all they could get him
was, without any more pride, or rightness, or feeling, than to stoop to
There was great rejoicing among the yellow Winkies, for they had been

Objections of another Kind against paying off the national Debt.	51
We gave a grand dinner that same day for about one hundred guests. An amusing incident occurred during this meal. Among the guests there were some important natives who had come from the end of the country. One of these men, who had never tasted European cooking, took a pot of mustard for a separate dish, and swallowed a whole spoonful of it. He naturally gasped, choked, whilst tears ran in rivulets down his cheeks. His neighbour at table, who had not noticed the proceeding with the mustard, asked him the cause of his grief. The native, heaving a deep sigh, answered that he had just called to mind his deceased father, and that[502] to-day was the anniversary of his death; he had been drowned in the Amou-Daria, whilst sailing on the river in a small boat. Meanwhile his left hand neighbour, a compatriot of his, had followed his example, having also regaled himself with mustard, and with the same consequences, of course. The son of the drowned man was wickedly rejoiced at his blunder, and asked in his most velvety tone, “Why does my brother cry?” “Because I regret that thou did’st not disappear beyond the mysterious regions of the Amou-Daria together with thy father!” was the cunning reply. Everybody laughed when the interpreter translated this dialogue between the two natives.
folks were taking down their shutters and people were opening their

“Wants it to set in. What did you _reckon_ he wanted with it?”
says I, what’s the use you learning to do right when it’s troublesome
for a third time, and his face leaped upon me. I sprang to my feet. It

sheep-signal.”
“On the 21st March I had a fever, which continued till the 10th April. As I fell away so much the doctor was alarmed, but God helped me graciously and soon restored me my bodily health. I must also confess to His praise that this sickness has been of great service to me. On the 22nd March we had for the first time Divine service on board our ship, which afforded us great pleasure. On the 29th we passed the tropic of Cancer and on the 18th April we crossed the line for the first time. There[Pg 42] was great joy on board that we had not been detained longer. On the 22nd we were in the bight of Ascension. The 30th God visibly preserved a youth from death, who had entered on board to learn navigation. A thick cable fell down from above, exactly on the spot where he was standing but before it reached him he perceived it and narrowly escaped. Towards evening a ship was seen. We rejoiced at first, hoping for an opportunity of sending letters, but our joy had nearly been changed to fear, as our people began to think that they might be enemies and made preparations for defence. Early next morning we looked out for her but in vain. On the 5th May we passed the tropic of Capricorn and thus left the torrid zone. As soon as the trade wind ceased we were favoured with a delightful breeze from E.N.E. If we attend to the different changes of wind, we may observe agreeable traces of the admirable wisdom of God. On the 7th we saw a French vessel and on our captain firing a signal gun, to desire them to wait, they did so and we came up with her towards evening. The captains conversed with each other on their observations and ours agreed pretty well with theirs. It was a great advantage that we could observe so well in our ship for even in hazy weather the sun appeared a little about noon. The chief mate requested us to communicate the observations contained in our diaries, particularly with regard to the variation of the compass. We did so and he gratefully acknowledged it by giving us a fine large Cheshire cheese. The 11th May we had a very high wind, and the next day a calm. While we spoke of it in the evening and sighed to God that He would have pity on us, as before, suddenly there arose a very favourable breeze. Thus God fulfilled us what He had promised—‘Before they call I will answer and while they are yet speaking I will hear.’ So that we could praise God with joyful hearts. On the 17th May we celebrated the Feast of Pentecost[Pg 43] and heartily besought God that by His Spirit, whom Jesus has obtained, He would fit us for the important office to which He has called us. The 12th May our dear brother Hüttemann was seized with alarming sickness but God most graciously blessed the use of the medicines out of the travelling chest which you gave us, so that he was fully restored to us in a few days. On the 23rd we had an unusually brisk gale, the vessel inclined so much that it shipped water which we had not hitherto seen. However, it passed over without damage. On the 27th we had a complete calm so that the captain and the chief mate went out in a boat to shoot birds, but on the following night arose a real storm, which, as it came unexpectedly, tore all the sails. When we came upon deck in the morning they all hung in rags, and we had only one small sail hoisted. We did not, however, yield to anxious or desponding thoughts. So faithful is God! In need He refresheth and comforteth abundantly. The 30th May we had very pleasant weather, which was a great relief after the storm. On the 31st we saw a Dutch ship. We all wished it might approach us but were disappointed as it passed us at a considerable distance, but in the afternoon our joy was greater, as we caught sight of the Cape. The mountains presented themselves at a distance like clouds, but as we came nearer we could see them distinctly. We praised God heartily, the more so as we had on this very day been powerfully impressed in meditating on the words (1 Cor. xv. 58): ‘Therefore, my blessed brethren, be ye steadfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour shall not be in vain in the Lord.’”
“And now,” said Dorothy, “how am I to get back to Kansas?”
While writing these farewell lines to his friend, Schwartz enclosed another letter to his wife, whom he had possibly never seen, but he feels that after spending years of intimate friendship with her husband in India he need make no apology for writing this letter to her. Here also he gives judicious counsel and says some things about the education of children which can never grow old or out of date. He also laments the decline of loyalty to Scriptural teaching which characterizes the theological literature of his day. In both these respects this letter would be quite as appropriate if written in our own times. We have progressed and travelled far, and in many respects India and England are so different that Schwartz would rub his eyes were he to re-visit these lands to-day, but the problems and the perils of the Church are, though under a different guise, still the same to face and to solve if we can in our own times. He is sending his blessing to the circle of his friend’s family at home and writes:

The quantity of money required for circulation, depends neither on the speculations of a Minister of finances, nor on the blind cupidity of trade, which, luckily, is always counteracted by the clear-sighted cupidity of every trader: it depends on the quantity of articles to be circulated, on their price, and on the method adopted for circulation:—it is evident that less cash is required in England than in France to circulate the same mass of revenue, trade, and transactions of all kinds; the reasons are obvious: but the sum wanted for the circulation being once found, every addition thereto is soon, notwithstanding all ministerial machinations, transferred to some hundred leagues distance, if that surplus should be wanted there: now, when this necessary sum for circulation is once ascertained, we shall see how useless it is to despoil, how absurd it is to suppose that they do despoil the rest of Europe of her money, in order to keep up that circulation.
And it didn’t. He told me what it was, and I see in a minute it was
“No, I didn’t. What tow-head? I hain’t see no tow-head.”
carry you to your forest. Then, having used up the powers of the Golden
monster’s back. Then, with one blow of his heavy paw, all armed with

eager, “Where’s the raft?—got her in a good place?”
tuk me en showed me dis place, whah de dogs can’t track me on accounts

“All young ladies accomplished! My dear Charles, what do you mean?”


So him and the new dummy started off; and the king he laughs, and

snug wigwam to get under in blazing weather and rainy, and to keep the
crossroads and Horsell, and ran along this to the crossroads.
spread through the clearness of the planet’s atmosphere and obscured
preacher, over the people’s heads, and says, in a kind of a coarse

This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet: she would have been glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter had meant to encourage him by protesting against his proposals, but she dared not believe it, and could not help saying so.
engines—going northward along the Great Northern Railway. My brother
telling but I might come to be a murderer myself yet, and then how






Some will say, perhaps, “this reasoning is frivolous, and founded on the absurd supposition of a general combination, a kind of universal conspiracy, in order to raise the price of every thing proportionably to the taxes.” I know that such a combination, such a conspiracy is impossible; I know that there is not in France a single edict, nor any particular act of parliament in England, to enforce, or even to permit it; but I am sensible that such an act, and such an edict, would be perfectly useless, when I see, that in either of those countries there is not a rational being, capable of reflexion, who will not say, Taxes occasion a dreadful advance in the prices of every thing: it is true that the order is sometimes inverted, and then the cry is—How cruel it is that the price of every article is increased, whilst the taxes diminish our means of purchase!—But if every article[154] rises in a due proportion, we must conclude that there is no alteration in the state of the balance; for if every individual in a nation buys up, every one sells also, one his labour, another his wares, a third his corn; and if every thing grows dearer, except the article you have to sell, you must own yourself completely in the wrong: luckily the landed proprietors are as little in the wrong as they possibly can be; for as often as they renew a lease, they increase their rental, just as if they had got possession of my little secret, or as if there were corporations also in agriculture.—The agents of industry are still less liable to be in the wrong, for all their operations are founded on the following rule:—For purchase so much,—for freight so much,—so much for taxes,—to these add my commission or profit—The balance is so much, which I must be paid, as I shall settle with the members of my corporation. Besides, the commercial part of the nation is too well persuaded how necessary it is to secure a favourable general balance, to be mistaken in the means of equipoising their private ones.

simply go round the world.”
won’t hurt you.”
the men jumped off of their horses and grabbed the hurt one and started
over everybody; and next he went a-charging up on to the platform, and

ST. PETERSBURG
and says:
instance of it. And they train them, and pet them, and learn them
Martians until I reached Wellington Street, and there I saw the red
“He’s alive, thank God! And that’s enough!” and she snatched a kiss of


He set there a-mumbling and a-growling a minute, and then he says:
My birthday was a great day for festivities. I received lots of lovely presents and sweets. On the eve of my birthday I went to bed with expectations of a pleasant awaking, and the first thing when I woke up in the morning was to put my hand under my pillow and pull out the presents, laid there by my parents during my sleep.
in the excavation, and on account of the strange creatures that were

“Yes; and I told him we should not be able to keep our engagement. That is all settled.”
Jim snoring; so we pitched it in, and it didn’t wake him. Then we

“Never, sir.”
Quickly, one after the other, one, two, three, four of the armoured

the storm let up for good and all; and the first cabin-light that

anyway, so he won’t be uneasy about her?”
suspicion that I done it. They’ve got a good thing here, and they ain’t
“You are a bad, undutiful child!” exclaimed Frau Weidemann, “go away, go away at once!”
During night the wind arose. I was wakened by the horrid rolling of the ship. Piercing whistles were blown and the sailors climbed hurriedly up the masts in pitch darkness, trying to catch the end of the sails which the storm was tearing into pieces.

Now the scene on Hal Jus's screen became misty—the ship was being sent into space. It would be close to an hour before the scene reappeared. Now they shifted the adjustment to watch the sending of the armada of space.
to clutch the bit of the horse.
“We!” exclaimed the girl. “Are you going with me?”
jeweller’s window had been broken open in one place, but apparently the
jews-harp’s plenty good enough for a rat. All animals like music—in a
“Well,” I says, “when I see the king in that doggery yesterday I says

The door opposite the President opened wide and the procession began. First of all the “Alguazil” (herald) entered the ring, mounted on a beautiful bay horse adorned with a red velvet saddle. He himself was clad as if he had just stepped out of a “Velasquez” painting. He wore a black velvet suit and a large black hat ornamented with scarlet plumes. After having pranced round the ring he stopped beneath the President’s box, and, taking off his plumed hat, begged to know if the performance might begin. Assent being given, the huge golden key of the door, behind which the six bulls who were to be killed that day were shut up, was thrown down and gracefully caught by the “Alguazil” in his hat, after which he pranced to fetch his “Quadrilla.” The gates on the opposite side of the arena were flung open, and a team of six superb grey mules, who were intended to drag out the dead bulls and horses, rushed in, decorated with yellow and scarlet ribbons, with pyramids of plumes and bells upon their heads, harnessed into shafts at the end of which a long iron hook was dragging. After having pranced noisily round the arena, the mules disappeared by the same door. Then the “Quadrilla” appeared on the ring and a roar of applause went up. First came Legartijo and Frascuello, the two most celebrated Matadors of Spain, who were to act that day, clad in spangled, coloured jackets,[259] tight-fitting knee breeches, white stockings and leather slippers, wearing like “Figaro” a black wig with a short pig-tail and a three-cornered hat. Behind came the “Picadores” mounted on their poor decrepit horses. They were dressed in leather suits, their legs covered with armour to save them from the horns of the bull, and wore broad black sombreros. The Picadores blindfold their miserable steeds, tying a cloth round their right eye, and take them into the ring to be gored by an infuriated bull. The horses are slashed and spurred forward to a certain death on the pointed horns of the maddened formidable animal. At each “Corrida” there are about a dozen horses killed. Sometimes, when all the horses are exterminated, the insatiable audience claims new victims, shouting “Mas caballos!” (Bring on other horses!) The Picadores were followed by the “Capadores,” the men who wave their scarlet cloaks in front of the bull to excite him, or to distract his attention as he rushes wildly after some one. They were dressed in beautiful costumes of varied colours with gold embroideries. Last came the Banderillos, holding a dart a couple of feet long and gaily decorated with ribbons in each hand. After waiting for the bull to charge, they rush right up to him and plant the dart into his shoulder, deftly jumping aside. The butcher, with his merciful knife, completed the “Quadrilla.”
I have perhaps already said enough to animate the greater part of those, who are concerned in[94] the public funds of every enlightened nation, against every other fear but that of a reimbursement; but, as it may be believed, with regard to the public funds in England, that I have reasoned on the supposition, generally admitted, of that balance in their favour, of which the English are so jealous, I would wish doubly to strengthen the mind of the parties concerned, by proving to them that their fortune rests on a basis much more solid than that of a pretended favour, which the private interest of every merchant, vigilantly repels, whilst the fancy of the body at large happily confines them to believe in the idol, and to invoke it.


in de ole tumble-down cooper-shop on de bank to wait for everybody to

Be Thou my friend,



[1]


the ground was carpeted with them. There were big yellow and white and
September 30th.—We took passage to-day on the Melbourne one of the finest steamers of the Méssageries Maritimes. We slipped down the Woosung on board the Chenan a small steamboat which transported the passengers from Shanghai to the big ocean vessels, which could not enter the mouth of the Woosung.
9thly,
His thoughts again turn to the brevity of life, and he naturally questions himself as to how much longer he will be able to go on with the work he loves. These young souls in his care, whom he is trying to nurture as a wise and tender shepherd, will they remain faithful? He listens to the noise of war and strife, and prays for the time when peace shall come to India and Christianity will have many loyal witnesses, and the people will depart from darkness and see the light of life.
pull the raft after me, if you will only hold fast to the tip of my
My condition was so alarming that my husband decided to beg for a leave of absence as soon as he could, in order to take me abroad for a short time. Meanwhile a suspension of arms had been agreed upon, and our troops remained in inaction before the fortress of Kars. Profiting by that short calm, Sergy had obtained a leave of absence on the plea of urgent private affairs. It was a very great surprise to me, almost too good to be true. Happy days were yet in store for me!
convinced a pirate he would say to him, “Don’t you thank me, don’t you
“Maybe we went by Cairo in the fog that night.”
knew it was wrong for the Wildcat to try to kill such a pretty,
“Why not?”


of sliding out when I ran across you on the trail this side of town,
in the floor and climbed down the ladder into the small, dark hole.
previous day. At that discovery I despaired for the first time. I took
[Pg 95]

no houses but an old log hut in a place where the timber was so thick
There was a bell beside the gate, and Dorothy pushed the button and
any books at all?—Baron Trenck, nor Casanova, nor Benvenuto Chelleeny,
liked dead people, en done all I could for ’em. You go en git in de

December 30th.—The hurricane is pitiless, the anchor rolls out with a rattle and roar of cable; our steamer leans first on one side then on the other, and piercing whistles are heard on the upper deck all the time. The captain shouts order to tack. We change direction and turn back, and thus all the nightmare night was lost in vain. The portholes were closed and I was almost faint with the want of air. Staggering under the rolling of the sea, I crept into the saloon and stretched myself on the sofa. We enter the mouth of the Voosung, but the pilot refuses to lead us further because of the fog. We have to cast anchor until to-morrow.
it was awful. Hines he hurt my wrist dreadful pulling and tugging so,
the money ’ll be found when they come to screw on the lid. Then the
June 9th.—This morning we have visited the mill of Kireh-Bulak, the prettiest spot in the neighbourhood, situated in a narrow pass about eight miles from town. We brought our luncheon with us, hard boiled eggs, biscuits and salt in an envelope, and ate it with great appetite in this nice, cool resting-place. Large trees grow all around and a rapid torrent falls from high cliffs in a roaring cascade white with foam; the noise of the mill at work sounded close by.
12, 13 & 14 NORRIS STREET, HAYMARKET
lay off the Blackwater until five in the afternoon, picking up
[519]
old life of hope and tender helpfulness that had ceased for ever.
shut of the king and the duke, but I says:
this was a whole population in movement. It is hard to imagine that
so we throwed the rest away. We didn’t cook none of the pies in the
“Really, Mr. Collins,” cried Elizabeth, with some warmth, “you puzzle me exceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in the form of encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as may convince you of its being one.”
Once back in Moscow, we resumed our usual mode of life. My husband is working very hard, and I see him only during our meals. Our doctor finds repose and change of air necessary for us both, and sends us to make a cure in the sanatorium of the famous Wunderfrau Ottilie Hohenmeister, at Peissenberg, in the Bavarian mountains. Our journey occupied three days. I grew rather excited as we neared our destination, and when the train steamed into the station of Peissenberg, I felt downcast and nervous at the thought that we should have to undergo a serious cure here. We drove in a carriage sent by Frau Hohenmeister to her sanatorium—beautifully situated on the slope of a hill—and followed her head-manager into a parlour where a fire was burning brightly. After having put our names down in the register-book, we climbed to the top-floor by a creaking staircase of seventy steep steps which led to our apartment, consisting of two rooms high up in the attic. Our turret bedroom was close under the roof, and our eyes were above the tree-tops. It had a window in its sloping ceiling through which stars might be studied at night. And we are first-class boarders at the sanatorium! How are the second-class tenants lodged, I wonder? In return we have a beautiful view from our sitting-room window, looking on to the vast forest and on snowy hill-tops in the background.
tight as they could foot it. I thought I was a goner, for whenever
banks, flowing sluggishly down the slope of the land and driving
“Why, Tom, that’ll make trouble next morning; because, of course, she

“No, dey don’t.”
to getting lynched. But before night they changed around and judged it
YOKOHAMA
“It is just, O God!” he would say, over and over again. “It is just. On
Arkansaw lunkheads couldn’t come up to Shakespeare; what they wanted
The man sung out:


about a quarter of a mile below a little steam sawmill that was on the




“I must go instantly to my mother,” she cried. “I would not on any account trifle with her affectionate solicitude, or allow her to hear it from anyone but myself. He is gone to my father already. Oh, Lizzy, to know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear family! how shall I bear so much happiness?”
The men ripped around awhile, and then rode away. As soon as they was
nature of this dexterous workman dawned upon me. With that realisation
“You need not be frightened. I never heard any harm of her; and I dare say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world. She is a very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley. I think I have heard you say that you know them.”
The Post	359



wanted to begin next Sunday; but all the boys said it would be wicked
“I am anxious to get back to my aunt and uncle, for I am sure they will
By Byfleet station we emerged from the pine trees, and found the
[Pg iii]
Mrs. Philips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest, from their recent absence, were particularly welcome; and she was eagerly expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, which, as their own carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothing about, if she had not happened to see Mr. Jones’s shopboy in the street, who had told her that they were not to send any more draughts to Netherfield, because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her civility was claimed towards Mr. Collins by Jane’s introduction of him. She received him with her very best politeness, which he returned with as much more, apologizing for his intrusion, without any previous acquaintance with her, which he could not help flattering himself, however, might be justified by his relationship to the young ladies who introduced him to her notice. Mrs. Philips was quite awed by such an excess of good breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon put an end to by exclamations and inquiries about the other, of whom, however, she could only tell her nieces what they already knew, that Mr. Denny had brought him from London, and that he was to have a lieutenant’s {94}commission in the ——shire. She had been watching him the last hour, she said, as he walked up and down the street,—and had Mr. Wickham appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the occupation; but unluckily no one passed the windows now except a few of the officers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become “stupid, disagreeable fellows.” Some of them were to dine with the Philipses the next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr. Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn would come in the evening. This was agreed to; and Mrs. Philips protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect of such delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr. Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured, with unwearying civility, that they were perfectly needless.
then the air quivered again with the distant thud of their guns. But


Heat-Ray; and here and there were things that people had dropped—a

There is no doubt that at this time Schwartz was feeling the effect of his long life of incessant work, and in his letters to his friends he asks their prayers that more strength may be given him. He tells that while at present in no position of pain, his weakness is great and that speaking or walking so fatigue him that he can hardly stand. He has spent so many years in the work, under a trying climate, without any furlough, that it is no wonder that he begins to fail under the burden of a labour he has borne so long. Not that he complained; Schwartz was one of those men who consider themselves last and scorn to make much of either their physical pains or their difficult circumstances. He dismisses the question of his illness with almost an apology for referring to it.
over yonder-way, and turn out west when you git there, and about a

the sky in all directions. The sun had baked the plowed land into a
The Magic Art of the Great Humbug
you hear _me_. I’m for putting him out of his troubles.”
The admirals and the commander of the Nakhimoff came to ask me to fix a day for the ball that they wanted to give at the marine club in my honour. In order to make it more attractive to me the marine officers have decided to open it by a concert. I was received like a queen at the ball. Admiral Engelm gave me his arm, leading me across the brilliantly illuminated ball-room. I was loaded with two enormous bouquets, rather heavy to carry. When I entered the crowded hall all eyes were turned on me, and I struggled with an overwhelming inclination towards instant flight. As soon as we got to our places in the first row, the concert began. It lasted about two hours, after which I mounted on an estrade, and glued to my chair, decided to remain as looker-on at the ball, when I saw Admiral Engelm coming up to me as a spokesman from the marine officers, to ask if I might accord them[366] a dance, but I declined the invitation, with thanks, and passed my time in looking at the dancers, eating bonbons. It was near daylight when we returned home.

big old-fashioned double log-house before I noticed it. I was going to
“I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, for my part, except the shops and public places. The country is a vast deal pleasanter, is not it, Mr. Bingley?”
o’ that, now! You bet _I’d_ wait, if it was seven year.”
suited me. So then I took the bearings of a woody island that was down
you will not be harmed.”
“If that is so,” said the child joyfully, “I will ask them to carry me

miscellany of conveyances and horseflesh. The respectable inhabitants


was clearing up again now.

I kept quiet, with my ears cocked, about fifteen minutes, I reckon. I
fetched me so low when I was so high? _I_ did myself. I don’t blame
novelty, the excuse for walking together and enjoying a trivial


chin off, den _whah_ is de glory? No, sah, I doan’ want no sich
across the Midland counties.
Heading to Chapter XXII.	154

stupidly in one spot, just within the doorway, to wait till morning. It
by a hickry-bark ladder? Why, it’s perfectly ridiculous.”
June 5th.—The train crosses fresh green valleys; the soil is rich and easy to irrigate. The burning sun gives two harvests a year. It is chiefly cotton-shrubs which are cultivated here. Turcomen, wearing enormous fur caps, are working in the fields. We see a group of wandering Kirghees sitting on the ground before their tents. The men of this tribe breed cattle and horses, and fabricate a fermented drink made of mare’s milk, called koumiss.
prettiest kind of girls, with the tears running down their cheeks,
“I shall be very fit to see Jane—which is all I want.”
Caused this monument to be erected Ann. Dom., 1807.
like a gigantic fisherman’s basket, and puffs of green smoke squirted
the Castle, where Dorothy washed her face and combed her hair, and the
across the Wey, at the meadows towards Chertsey, but everything over

sun-bonnet, for I didn’t want no blinders on then. When I was about the

too narrow. The door was thick, solid oak slabs. Pap was pretty careful
rather, I had kept a lifelong habit of mind. He repeated his words,
well as before.
unloads the pan—something might happen, I don’t know what. And above
and I left my baggage on the wharf-boat and went looking around the

Elizabeth coloured, and said, “A little.”

Then thro’ all life, and what is after living,

[249]
April 4th.—Our Tartar servant Housnadine has arrived from Kars. He has made that journey in sixteen days, being upset several times. Housnadine has brought me different indispensable articles. Until now my wardrobe was in a shocking condition; a small portmanteau contained all my belongings.

“There’s a cyclone coming, Em,” he called to his wife. “I’ll go look
“How much longer,” he writes, “God may permit me to occupy my station is known to Him alone. My times are in His hands. He has heard my unworthy prayer that I may not become quite useless in old age.... A few months ago I seemed standing on the banks of eternity, being suddenly seized with a painful oppression on my chest. I consider it as a summons from my Lord to hold myself in readiness at whatsoever hour He may come.... I look upon this sudden illness as a kind monitor to teach me that my gracious Lord will[Pg 173] soon call me away. May I be able to say, ‘Come, Lord Jesus!’ You see then that I shall soon quit this world. A blessed eternity is now the daily subject of my meditations. How awful is this change! Blessed be God Who hath sent us a Redeemer, who has borne our sins and purchased eternal happiness for all who, being sensible of their sins, ‘flee to Him for refuge.’ If we are reconciled to God by that blessed Redeemer we have no reason to be afraid of dying and quitting this world. Our whole life ought to be a preparation for death. May God give us grace to die to sin and the evil of the world, and to live to His glory, that when He calls us away, we may be prepared for that great change! To look up to the glorious state of the blessed in heaven is, and will be, a strong preservative of a true Christian.”
“I began to be afraid you would never come back again. People did say, you meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas; but, however, I hope it is not true. A great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood since you went away. Miss Lucas is married and settled: and one of my own daughters. I suppose you have heard of it; indeed, you must have seen it in the papers. It was in the ‘Times’ and the ‘Courier,’ I know; though it was not put in as it ought to be. It was only said, ‘Lately, George Wickham, Esq., to Miss Lydia Bennet,’ without there being a syllable said of her father, or the place where she lived, or anything. It was my brother Gardiner’s drawing up, too, and I wonder how he came to make such an awkward business of it. Did you see it?”
Towards night it begun to darken up and look like rain; the heat
night.
cockchafer came droning over the hedge and past us. High in the west
[284]

Secondly, In order that industry may be said to have lost that third, the increase of revenue, yielded by the land to its proprietor, must have been cast into some national vortex, or sent into some foreign one, or concealed in the earth by the suspicious proprietor; for if the surplus of the landed revenue has occasioned a greater demand for and consumption of the products of industry, and more culture of the land, industry, by raising the price of her goods on the very first increase of the demand, has obtained in the first year, her first share in that accession of wealth; and she could not miss the second, so soon as a larger sum of savings bestowed upon the lands, had brought about what they never fail to produce, I mean, more productions, and soon after a greater demand for goods, and soon after again more goods to answer the additional demands.
to touch her, when she warn’t noticing, she done the same; she couldn’t
Both of them spoke up again, and says:
“Why will you think so? It must be his own doing; he is his own master. But you do not know all. I will read you the passage which particularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from you. ‘Mr. Darcy is impatient to see his sister; and to confess the truth, we are scarcely less eager to meet her again. I really do not think Georgiana Darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments; and the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into something still more interesting from the hope we dare to entertain of her being hereafter our sister. I do not know whether I ever before mentioned to you my feelings on this subject, but I will not leave the country without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them{151} unreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already; he will have frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing; her relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister’s partiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most capable of engaging any woman’s heart. With all these circumstances to favour an attachment, and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness of so many?’ What think you of this sentence, my dear Lizzy?” said Jane, as she finished it. “Is it not clear enough? Does it not expressly declare that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister; that she is perfectly convinced of her brother’s indifference; and that if she suspects the nature of my feelings for him she means (most kindly!) to put me on my guard. Can there be any other opinion on the subject?”

unable to find a place to pass the night.”
mighty sick once, and some of them catched a bird, and his old granny
further, but uncocked my gun and went sneaking back on my tiptoes as

the lovinger they got, and went off a-snoring in each other’s arms.



reluctantly before the wind, and very slowly it combined with the mist
flashed into fire, and only one or two of the men who were already

Oh, how hot it is in Cairo! It never rains here; sometimes clouds are to be seen on the horizon, but over the town the sky is permanently of azure blue. In the daytime we are bothered by a swarm of flies, and are devoured at night by greedy mosquitoes—a veritable Egyptian plague!
ulla, ulla.” It was now dusk, and after I had routed out some biscuits
of the engines from the junction, mingled with their shouts of “Men


“Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla,” cried the voice, coming, as it seemed to me,

“His misfortunes!” repeated Darcy, contemptuously,—“yes, his misfortunes have been great indeed.”
distant firing in the south. He fancied he saw a column of smoke rising


had learned something of my story from me during the days of my lapse.


of calling me, so I could go on sleeping; and see him how glad he was
her bath. The Witch was too much afraid of the dark to dare go in
I think they perceived that nothing was to be done for the present, and
turn. The duke he never let on he suspicioned what was up, but just
CXXV.	Back to Tashkend	535
And how far a body can hear on the water such nights! I heard people

Of course there warn’t nothing to be said but the one thing; so I says:
big as a man, being six foot two inches long, and weighed over two
notice off, Tom shoved a piece of candlestick into the middle of a

roll in like a wave.

or four black government waggons, with crosses in white circles, and an
“They don’t, don’t they? You better bet they do with _these_ mumps.
“What makes you a coward?” asked Dorothy, looking at the great beast in
comes of my being such a fool as to not remember that wherever you
hands were so clumsy and the nuts were so small that he dropped almost


Dorothy caught Toto at last and started to follow her aunt. When she

in the bushes and listening, distracted by apprehension. We talked in

He was full of speculation that night about the condition of Mars, and
missionarying line. He said it warn’t no use talking, heathens don’t

of the tree. I ain’t a-going to tell _all_ that happened—it would make
May 26.—We started for Tashkend to-day. I will return to St. Petersburg in September to confer about the publishing of my “Memories,” which I issue for the benefit of the gymnasium of young ladies at Tashkend.

different.
single leaves like puffs of flame. Hats and dresses caught fire. Then


“I want him to send me back to Kansas, and the Scarecrow wants him to
those who have been under the shadow, who have gone down at last to




May 11th.—This morning a Turkish woman, holding a small boy dressed in the uniform of a pasha by the hand, has come with a petition to my husband. She began to relate different exploits of her ancestors, and concluded her long narrative by requesting Sergy to procure her means to return to Constantinople, her native town. Sergy tried to explain to her that the services rendered by her forefathers had nothing to do with the Russian government, but she continued to beg, and having received the sum that she requested, she whispered something to her little son, who came up to our interpreter and announced to him that he too, wanted a bakshish.
“Did I give you the letter?”
howling adventures amongst the Injuns, over in the Territory, for a
Release date: June 1, 1998 [eBook #1342]
“I mean every word I _say_, Aunt Sally, and if somebody don’t go,
and wind had changed her, too. They had taken the sparkle from her eyes
Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowing what she felt, Elizabeth, on finishing this letter, instantly seized the other, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first.
Weybridge, and all the district were pouring along the roads
opened, though poor Henderson had sent a messenger on a bicycle to the

“It was an old fellow—a stranger—and he sold out his chance in him for



“Well, I must go to Oz and get my heart,” said the Woodman. So he
in the gloaming. . . .
“I see a light a-comin’ roun’ de p’int bymeby, so I wade’ in en shove’
At eight o’clock the following morning we were awakened by Varallo, who rapped sharply at our door and said that it was time to get up. I dressed quickly, and on entering our sitting-room I saw that Varallo had arranged it according to his idea of a lady’s requirements. To complete all he was holding my hat at the moment and insisted on brushing it with the blacking brush!

each other again inside of two weeks—here in this house—and _prove_ how
all very still and solemn, only the girls and the beats holding
liked all that family, dead ones and all, and warn’t going to let
and the owner and the mate and the pilot and watchman and head
haste, the less speed.”
at all, and, seeing this, the Scarecrow did not fear that so helpless a
waterline.


this land, and when you can tell me she is dead I will send you back to

behind her every time—so she was always a-whirling around sudden, and
more logs and fastened them together with wooden pins, they were ready
Again the scene went blank. Now there formed on it a view of the starry heavens with glowing pinpoint stars. Suddenly this began to expand; star after star was forced from the field as the growing picture centered on one that burned bright in the center of the field. Mighty Betelguese glowed in the center of the field. It was a blurred image, like a tiny disc, but tremendous as was the power of the instrument, it could not have enlarged the image to that extent. The disc-like appearance was due to the tremendous brightness of the star spreading a bit on the sensitive vision receiver cell.
“If we walk far enough,” said Dorothy, “I am sure we shall sometime

LVIII.	Promotion of my Husband to the Post of Governor-General
high, capable of the speed of an express train, and able to shoot out a

So she called the Winkies to help her, and they walked all that day and
June 28th.—We are in the tropics. The air is like fire and the temperature of the water is very high. The stewardess advised me to lie down on the floor under the open porthole over which she spread a sheet. I had a nice little nap, thanks to this improvised punkah.

Beloved and Honoured by Europeans,
[2]
of quicksilver, and set my teeth in. It was “baker’s bread”—what the
developments of moral ideas as civilisation progressed.
king he read it out loud and cried over it. It give the dwelling-house
Smuggling is but a very poor corrective, a partial corrective, of the iniquity ever attendant on Monopoly;—a feeble compensation for the restrictions and prohibitions obtained in its favour: Smuggling, duly considered in this light, is but too just; and it is shocking to be obliged to punish so barbarously the unhappy men who gain a living by it. But will not this necessity be removed, together with smuggling itself, at the very moment that to those absurd regulations which encourage that practice, shall be substituted a system of bartering, equally advantageous to the nations which now find a benefit in smuggling?—a system, which would mutually furnish to all parties interested, all the means of introducing and procuring, in the best condition, at the cheapest rate, with the least risk, and with the greatest advantage to the Treasury, every article which before was introduced and procured at a greater risk, almost always dearer, of the worst quality, and to the detriment of the public revenue.
fallen there—number two. But one’s enough, surely. This lot’ll cost the
was going on. There was another Munchkin with him, and the first thing
village, fired simultaneously. The sudden near concussion, the last


fingers worked like she wanted to scratch him; and she says:
[4]Ibid., p. 37.
“I _told_ you we’d be too soon; they haven’t come—the door is locked.
three or four dozen more a-coming; and then you would see all the
The Scarecrow and the Woodman now began to fasten the mice to the
have at least expected it in locomotion. And in this connection it is
would all come handy by-and-by, I judged.
“Because I ask it, and you alone can grant my request,” answered the
had failed to secure its footing. In one place the woodmen had been at
tough job. Sometimes, do what we could, we couldn’t keep her from
chestnuts, and some men and women hurrying in the distance towards
I have.”
as houses in town. There warn’t no bed in the parlor, nor a sign of a
Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the library.
In the South one man all by himself, has stopped a stage full of men in


told me how to get back to Kansas.”
the issue of _Nature_ dated August 2. I am inclined to think that this
“La! my dear,” said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, “it is not Lady Catherine. The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson, who lives with them. The other is Miss De Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a little creature. Who would have thought she could be so thin and small!”
We took the train, which brought us in twenty minutes to Batavia. Whilst we crossed a beautiful cocoa and palm-wood, Mr. Bakounine said that he would have exchanged willingly one single birch-tree of far-away Russia for all the palms in the world. How I understand him! I also would have gladly exchanged all this luxurious tropical vegetation and blue sky for the grey skies of dear old Petersburg.
days at the Yellow Castle, where they found everything they needed to



yonder, with guns!
woodboats; for I couldn’t rest easy till I could see the ferry-boat

know, we don’t want to—”
“It’s a lie!”—and the duke went for him. The king sings out:
A necessary Principle of Trade, considered both as direct, and in Competition.
then I perceived the resemblance of its grey-brown, shiny, leathery

“Well, it ain’t _your_ fault if you haven’t, Silas; you’d a done it if
“Do let us have a little music,” cried Miss Bingley, tired of a conversation in which she had no share. “Louisa, you will not mind my waking Mr. Hurst.”
more honor in getting him out through a lot of difficulties and
At that moment several mice were seen running up as fast as their
2ᵒ.
his birthright of the earth, and it is his against all comers; it would
“It is difficult, indeed—it is distressing. One does not know what to think.”
on to know me, and they took him to the same cabin, and put his own
“all London was electrified by the news from Woking.” As a matter of

May 30th.—The Persian Consul presented Sergy with the portrait of the Shah and a piece of poetry which states that this portrait is given to the Russian governor of Erzeroum in token of gratitude for his kindness to the Persian inhabitants.


On his quitting the room, she sat down, unable to support herself, and looking so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to leave her, or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration, “Let me call your maid. Is there nothing you could take to give you present relief? A glass of wine; shall I get you one? You are very ill.”
the general opinion. Both _The Times_ and the _Daily Telegraph_, for
“Quick, Dorothy!” she screamed. “Run for the cellar!”
out my br—helped to lay out the late Peter Wilks for burying?”
where it came upon water some chemical action occurred, and the surface
His shoulders were hunched, so that his head was hidden from me.
I listened—I was not deaf—but certainly the pit was still. I heard a
8ᵒ.
myself up as much as I could, and as noiselessly as possible in the
of arms.

take these fellows to the tavern and affront them with t’other couple,

Before they went to see Glinda, however, they were taken to a room of
so Jim said I better go along with them in the canoe and get some.
“Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we have thought him,” said her sister. “My dear father, I congratulate you.”
above the seething and roar of the Martian’s collapse.
them that way on a piece of paper. “Come, ain’t that what you saw?”

I took a great liking to a young compatriot of mine, Mary Vietinghoff, who lived abroad with her mother, by reason of her delicate health. She was one year younger that I, but for good senses she was ten years my senior. I used also to see a great deal of the Rydes. Mrs. Ryde was the widow of a Scotch curate and the mother of twelve children. I liked the Ryde family tutti quanti, especially Ettie, a girl of my own age, a most jolly lassie. Her brother, Willie, a youngster of fourteen, took a fancy to me. This shrewd young Scot glided one day on tiptoe behind me and stroked my cheek, exclaiming: “How smooth it is.” He wanted to repeat this manipulation with his lips, but received a smart slap across the face in recompense; a very rude demonstration, indeed, but I was an awfully quick-tempered young lady and hated to be touched. The Rydes were astonished at what they termed my “colossal good English,” which I had got from my childhood. To complete my education, Willie offered to teach me some of his best slang.

blim-blammin’ all de time? No—’deed he wouldn’t. A wise man ’ud take en
“When I said that he improved on acquaintance, I did not mean that either his mind or manners were in a state of improvement; but that, from knowing him better, his disposition was better understood.”
16th June.—The morning is grey and foggy. The siren had been croaking at regular intervals all day. It is Sunday to-day. On the upper-deck the emigrants sang prayers, after which the first-class passengers tossed coins to their offspring. Down poured a shower of small silver and copper, and little boys and girls scrambled to pick it up.
I hesitated for some time, and then, in a gust of desperate resolution,

first time that I begun to worry about the men—I reckon I hadn’t had
CHAPTER XLII.

fur as I can make out.”

XVII.

there was a strip of light green silk, then a strip of dark green and

“Well, go on, _go_ on! What did they do? How’d they act?”
shame to deprive the people of so wonderful a ruler.”
“What other things?”

failed to unscrew the top, as it afforded no grip to them. The case
my mind. The mood that had sustained me passed. The wailing took
“No’m. In Hookerville, seven mile below. I’ve walked all the way and
curious to remark that even on this earth Nature has never hit upon the

“Undoubtedly,” replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed, “there is meanness in all the arts which ladies sometimes condescend to employ for captivation. Whatever bears affinity to cunning is despicable.”
“I was a-listenin’ to all de talk, en I slips into de river en was
“I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole morning to answering it, as I foresee that a little writing will not comprise what I have to tell you. I must confess myself surprised by your application; I did not expect it from you. Don’t think me angry, however, for I only mean to let you know, that I had not imagined such inquiries to be necessary on your side. If you do not choose to understand me, forgive my impertinence. Your uncle is as much surprised as I am; and nothing but the belief of your being a party concerned would have allowed him to act as he has done. But if you are really innocent and ignorant, I must be more explicit. On the very day of my coming home from Longbourn, your uncle had a most unexpected visitor. Mr. Darcy called, and was shut up with him several hours. It was all over before I arrived; so my curiosity was not so dreadfully racked as yours seems to have been. He came to tell Mr. Gardiner that he had found out where your sister and Mr. Wickham were, and that he had seen and talked with them both—Wickham repeatedly, Lydia once. From what I can collect, he left Derbyshire only one day after ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting for them. The motive professed was his conviction of its being owing to himself that Wickham’s worthlessness had not been so well known as to make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or confide in him. He generously imputed the whole to his mistaken pride, and confessed that he had before thought it beneath him to lay his private actions open to{395} the world. His character was to speak for itself. He called it, therefore, his duty to step forward, and endeavour to remedy an evil which had been brought on by himself. If he had another motive, I am sure it would never disgrace him. He had been some days in town before he was able to discover them; but he had something to direct his search, which was more than we had; and the consciousness of this was another reason for his resolving to follow us. There is a lady, it seems, a Mrs. Younge, who was some time ago governess to Miss Darcy, and was dismissed from her charge on some cause of disapprobation, though he did not say what. She then took a large house in Edward Street, and has since maintained herself by letting lodgings. This Mrs. Younge was, he knew, intimately acquainted with Wickham; and he went to her for intelligence of him, as soon as he got to town. But it was two or three days before he could get from her what he wanted. She would not betray her trust, I suppose, without bribery and corruption, for she really did know where her friend was to be found. Wickham, indeed, had gone to her on their first arrival in London; and had she been able to receive them into her house, they would have taken up their abode with her. At length, however, our kind friend procured the wished-for direction. They were in —— Street. He saw Wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. His first object with her, he acknowledged, had been to persuade her to quit her present disgraceful situation, and return to her friends as soon as they could be prevailed on to receive her, offering his assistance as far as it would go. But he found Lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where she was. She cared for none of her friends; she wanted no help of his; she would not hear of leaving Wickham.{396} She was sure they should be married some time or other, and it did not much signify when. Since such were her feelings, it only remained, he thought, to secure and expedite a marriage, which, in his very first conversation with Wickham, he easily learnt had never been his design. He confessed himself obliged to leave the regiment on account of some debts of honour which were very pressing; and scrupled not to lay all the ill consequences of Lydia’s flight on her own folly alone. He meant to resign his commission immediately; and as to his future situation, he could conjecture very little about it. He must go somewhere, but he did not know where, and he knew he should have nothing to live on. Mr. Darcy asked why he did not marry your sister at once. Though Mr. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich, he would have been able to do something for him, and his situation must have been benefited by marriage. But he found, in reply to this question, that Wickham still cherished the hope of more effectually making his fortune by marriage, in some other country. Under such circumstances, however, he was not likely to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief. They met several times, for there was much to be discussed. Wickham, of course, wanted more than he could get; but at length was reduced to be reasonable. Everything being settled between them, Mr. Darcy’s next step was to make your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in Gracechurch Street the evening before I came home. But Mr. Gardiner could not be seen; and Mr. Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your father was still with him, but would quit town the next morning. He did not judge your father to be a person whom he could so properly consult as your uncle, and therefore readily postponed seeing him till after the {397}departure of the former. He did not leave his name, and till the next day it was only known that a gentleman had called on business. On Saturday he came again. Your father was gone, your uncle at home, and, as I said before, they had a great deal of talk together. They met again on Sunday, and then I saw him too. It was not all settled before Monday: as soon as it was, the express was sent off to Longbourn. But our visitor was very obstinate. I fancy, Lizzy, that obstinacy is the real defect of his character, after all. He has been accused of many faults at different times; but this is the true one. Nothing was to be done that he did not do himself; though I am sure (and I do not speak it to be thanked, therefore say nothing about it) your uncle would most readily have settled the whole. They battled it together for a long time, which was more than either the gentleman or lady concerned in it deserved. But at last your uncle was forced to yield, and instead of being allowed to be of use to his niece, was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it, which went sorely against the grain; and I really believe your letter this morning gave him great pleasure, because it required an explanation that would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where it was due. But, Lizzy, this must go no further than yourself, or Jane at most. You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done for the young people. His debts are to be paid, amounting, I believe, to considerably more than a thousand pounds, another thousand in addition to her own settled upon her, and his commission purchased. The reason why all this was to be done by him alone, was such as I have given above. It was owing to him, to his reserve and want of proper consideration, that Wickham’s character had been so{398} misunderstood, and consequently that he had been received and noticed as he was. Perhaps there was some truth in this; though I doubt whether his reserve, or anybody’s reserve can be answerable for the event. But in spite of all this fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that your uncle would never have yielded, if we had not given him credit for another interest in the affair. When all this was resolved on, he returned again to his friends, who were still staying at Pemberley; but it was agreed that he should be in London once more when the wedding took place, and all money matters were then to receive the last finish. I believe I have now told you everything. It is a relation which you tell me is to give you great surprise; I hope at least it will not afford you any displeasure. Lydia came to us, and Wickham had constant admission to the house. He was exactly what he had been when I knew him in Hertfordshire; but I would not tell you how little I was satisfied with her behaviour while she stayed with us, if I had not perceived, by Jane’s letter last Wednesday, that her conduct on coming home was exactly of a piece with it, and therefore what I now tell you can give you no fresh pain. I talked to her repeatedly in the most serious manner, representing to her the wickedness of what she had done, and all the unhappiness she had brought on her family. If she heard me, it was by good luck, for I am sure she did not listen. I was sometimes quite provoked; but then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and Jane, and for their sakes had patience with her. Mr. Darcy was punctual in his return, and, as Lydia informed you, attended the wedding. He dined with us the next day, and was to leave town again on Wednesday or Thursday. Will you be very angry with me, my dear{399} Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying (what I was never bold enough to say before) how much I like him? His behaviour to us has, in every respect, been as pleasing as when we were in Derbyshire. His understanding and opinions all please me; he wants nothing but a little more liveliness, and that, if he marry prudently, his wife may teach him. I thought him very sly; he hardly ever mentioned your name. But slyness seems the fashion. Pray forgive me, if I have been very presuming, or at least do not punish me so far as to exclude me from P. I shall never be quite happy till I have been all round the park. A low phaeton with a nice little pair of ponies would be the very thing. But I must write no more. The children have been wanting me this half hour.

moment that circular cavity seemed perfectly black. I had the sunset in
whoop, en didn’t I whoop, tell we got mix’ up in de islands en one un
That man is ignorant of his own value, who, pen in hand, weighs, calculates, measures time, distances, expenditure, obstacles, facilities, occurrences; and whose signature, on account of the supposed exactness of his combinations, will[260] soon after produce, at two or three hundred leagues distance, and in fifty places on the road, the same effect which would have resulted from the real possession of the object of which this signature is the pledge. If he shares with all those whom he makes easy, re-animates, or puts in action, the benefit which they derive from the speed, as well as from the supposed certainty of his operations, undoubtedly no one will dispute his title to the reward; and yet we shall see presently, that this medal is not without its reverse, supposing an advance in prices to be an inconvenience.
a later hour.

that had a good thing, according to my notion. Then the Reverend Hobson
facility.
July 4th.—There has been a conflict between a band of Kurds and Turks about twenty miles from Erzeroum; about a dozen Kurds were wounded and the rest of them made prisoners. Temir-Aga, who captured these highwaymen, brought them over to my husband this morning. I saw them advancing slowly towards our house, between a body-guard of Turkish soldiers, with their hands fastened behind their backs, having awfully ferocious expressions.
an old long-tailed blue jeans coat with slick brass buttons flung over

Tifountai, the rich Chinese merchant, introduced his new wife to me. He had brought her recently from Shanghai. She advanced slowly towards me on her deformed little feet, supported by her husband, gorgeously dressed in brocade silks and covered with jewels. She had a quantity of paint put on her face, which bore an expression of idleness and ennui.
had written with some little vehemence against the telepathic theory.
if I can, because the doctor maybe hasn’t let up as much as he lets on

“She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind. Why does she not come in?”
earth been given over to them?”
seemed to hesitate whether to apologise, met my eyes, and went on:
sawdust, and it give us a most amazing stomach-ache. We reckoned we was

“Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that you insist upon her marrying him.”
the other animals in the forest naturally expect me to be brave, for
Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter, and was counting the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. The promised letter of thanks from Mr. Collins arrived on Tuesday, addressed to their father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a twelve-month’s abode in the family might have prompted. After discharging his conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them, with many rapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained the affection of their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained that it was merely with the view of enjoying her society that he had been so ready to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at Longbourn, whither he hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight; for Lady Catherine, he added, so heartily approved his marriage, that she wished it to take place as soon as possible, which he trusted would be an unanswerable argument with his amiable Charlotte to name an early day for making him the happiest of men.
ourselves at the place near Shepperton Lock where the Wey and Thames

When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners were pronounced to be very bad indeed,—a mixture of pride and impertinence: she had no conversation, no style, no taste, no beauty. Mrs. Hurst thought the same, and added,—
But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed;{291} and their raptures continued, with little intermission, to the very day of Lydia’s leaving home.
“My aunt,” she continued, “is going to-morrow into that part of the town, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street.”

the distance carefully in his mind.
was restless, and after supper prowled out again aimlessly. He returned


“Don’t say yes’m—say Aunt Sally. Where’d she get aground?”
rot for all me—I’ll never vote agin as long as I live. And to see the
“And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting! I might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little endeavour at civility, I am thus rejected. But it is of small importance.”
couple of the hounds bulging in from under Jim’s bed; and they kept on
CIX.	Canton	465
Kensington laboratories have disinclined analysts for further
I says:

Gold, attracted by the first homage paid to it, came in plenty, and fell in value by the establishment of credit; it afterwards took another course, and went, no doubt, somewhere else to supply the want of credit, and pave the way to it. From that[262] moment very little money came to Grenada, and no one ever wished for more; but then the price of commodities was advanced, and the readiness with which goods, to the amount of several thousand pounds sterling, were delivered to such a planter as, six months before, would not have presumed to demand the sixth part of them, did not permit him to start any objection against the prices set on the goods he stood in need of, when he thought himself indemnified for the excess in those prices, by that at which his were rated, and by the time granted him to make good his payments. The Grenadians abused this credit, as they did in Scotland, and unfortunately at the same period. But this is not the matter in point; the present object is, that the establishment of credit in Grenada enhanced the price of every thing there, and that the encouragement and activity resulting from that increase doubled, in the space of six years, the real quantity of the products in that colony, whilst credit had, in the end, increased its nominal value hardly one tenth. In 1764 the exports of Grenada amounted to 206,889l.; in 1770, they were at 433,421l.; two years after, they rose as high as 492,974l.: it may be added, that in England, thanks to the extension of that miracle wrought by credit, the benefit[263] arising from those new products, and the necessity of furnishing the balance thereof in merchandise, propagated, if I may be allowed the expression, from county to county, the necessary means of consuming, that is to say, of realising, that augmentation of wealth, whose price was constantly kept up by the additional consumption of all kinds which followed it: such is the usual chain.
nothing, and I didn’t want to be hung if I could get away. So I never

“They are the Kalidahs!” said the Cowardly Lion, beginning to tremble.
their intellects, enlarged their powers, and hardened their hearts. And

“We rested in the evening at Tripatore, a large heathen place, distinguished by two celebrated idol temples, which are situated on an eminence. Mr. Schwartz embraced the opportunity of entering into a conversation with a number of Brahmins and other heathen. He addressed them in a most eloquent and impressive manner, powerfully contrasting the follies and corruptions of heathenism and the state of awful blindness and delusion under which its professors laboured, with the light and purity of the Christian religion and its perfect accordance with the dictates of sound and enlightened reason, and I observe with wonder and delight the eagerness and attention with which the heathen population listened to his instructive discourses. But to attract and keep up such attention, one must really possess the talents and influence of Mr. Schwartz—his intimate acquaintance with the native language, his prudence, experience, and commanding authority. For a considerable time he continued his conversation in a standing position, and though I did not sufficiently understand the Malabar dialect, in which he addressed the numerous assembly, I could still perceive from their lips, their gestures, and the whole of their outward deportment, how deeply interested they felt. Indeed, when certain questions were proposed and certain answers given I repeatedly heard them exclaim, ‘Surely this is true, this is right, thus it should be!’

Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend. He bore it with noble indifference; and she would have imagined that Bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes likewise turned towards Mr. Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing alarm.
We walked to the military club, where apartments were prepared for us. To-morrow we leave for Khabarovsk. At night the town and the ships in the harbour were beautifully illuminated.
three of them contrived to eat a meal on one of the seats forward.
Jim he spoke to the duke, and said he hoped it wouldn’t take but a few
wishes upon us.”

Town.—Old Boggs.—Dead.


had moved out of them. The bank was caved away under one corner of some
Illinois bank—about a quarter of a mile. I went out in the woods and
“Why, Robinson, hain’t you heard the news? This is Harvey Wilks.”
[399]
legs against the tree and pushed with all his might, and slowly the big


In spite of the swaying of the house and the wailing of the wind,
Next she stood upon her right foot and said:
opened up, slow and solemn, and begun to talk; and straight off the
we make him a pen out of an old pewter spoon or a piece of an old iron
it was.
him over and over again, and then turned him over to the old man, and
Bill says:
“Why, Tom, we can pull a feather out of a goose and make him a better

one.”

the old lantern on, because we must always light the lantern whenever

Heading to Chapter XLVI.	334
little boys says:
thoughtfully, “for you must sleep, and eat and drink. However, you have
be mixed up in no such business as that, I says to myself.
the sawdust. Then I fixed the piece of log back into its place, and put
we couldn’t hardly see anything, it was so dark; but Jim was there,

curate several times, and at last felt my way to the door of the
July 18th.—At dawn my maid came to wake me. She told me that a Chinese General, the Governor of the town before which we were anchored, was standing on the quay, sword in hand, waiting to be presented to me. But our interview didn’t take place. We sent a rocket by way of compliment to the warrior of the Celestial Empire, and glided past him. After dinner, we came alongside a large Cossack village where we were to halt. A number of girls with their school-mistress and a platoon of Cossacks were standing on the quay. The chief of the platoon sent up a loud cheer for me, and his men threw up their caps in the air and shouted themselves hoarse.

rat what the authorities thinks about it nuther.”
BOOK I
square green bottle, the contents of which he poured into a green-gold
mad. But she counted and counted till she got that addled she’d start
7ᵒ.
close to the left-hand bank. I begun to suspicion something. So did
Dorothy blew the little whistle she had always carried about her neck
“That is all very proper and civil, I am sure,” said Mrs. Bennet, “and I dare say she is a very agreeable woman. It is a pity that great ladies in general are not more like her. Does she live near you, sir?”
farms. I shot this fellow and took him into camp.
looked so ugly that its foe turned up his nose in disgust. Its legs
in time, all the same, if he’s missed anything by it—which I hope he
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Thoughts on the mechanism of societies
Money is not laid under ground in a country, where the smallest sum, as it were, equally with the largest, may be placed most securely, till the[127] very moment, when, led by fancy or want, one may think well to withdraw it, and which, from the time when it has been placed, to that of recalling it, produces nevertheless a sure interest, which never was delayed a single minute; an interest, which is a matter neither of reproach nor of shame.
again. This time he said the hair-ball was all right. He said it would
dominant colour, is of a vivid blood-red tint. At any rate, the seeds
“I frequently sat with him in a room adorned with marble pillars, opening into the garden, which though not large, as it could not be in the fort, was neatly laid out with trees which were grafted and bore two kinds of fruit, rows of cypresses, fountains, etc. Observing a number of youths carrying earth in the garden, I inquired respecting them and was told that Hyder had established a battalion of boys, all of whom were orphans and whom he had taken under his protection, boarding and clothing them and furnishing them with wooden guns for the purpose of their exercise. This care of poor[Pg 113] orphans really pleased me and I wish our Government would in this particular imitate the example and improve upon it, particularly as to religious instruction, so as it becomes Britons and as God will certainly require it at our hands, who hath armed us with power, that we should use it chiefly for His service and glory and not merely for our own. On the last evening, when I took my leave of Hyder, he requested me to speak Persian before him, as I had done with some of his attendants. Of this language he understood a little, but he does not speak it. I did so and explained the motives of my journey to him. ‘You may perhaps wonder,’ said I, ‘what could have induced me, a priest, who has nothing to do with political concerns, to come to you, and that on an errand which does not properly belong to my sacerdotal functions. But as I was plainly told that the sole object of my journey was the preservation and confirmation of peace, and having witnessed more than once the misery and horrors attending on war, I thought within my own mind how happy I should esteem myself if I could be of service in cementing a durable friendship between the two Governments, and thus securing the blessings of peace to this devoted country and its inhabitants. This I considered as a commission in no wise inconsistent with my office as a missionary of religion of peace.’ He said with great cordiality, ‘Very well, very well! I am of the same opinion with you, and my only wish is that the English would live in peace with me. If they offer me the hand of peace and concord I shall not withdraw mine provided ——.’”
the farther they advanced, and in the afternoon they suddenly came upon

Second, and Richard Third, and forty more; besides all them Saxon
inactivity during those two weary days.
How I was fast, and oh, so wild?

Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his friend.
shake. And I’ve pegged along ever since, dry as a powder-horn. Where’s
anything; the officers were mysterious as well as busy. I found people

“They have both,” said she, “been deceived, I dare say, in some way or other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhaps misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for us to conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them, without actual blame on either side.”
good-bye she clapped the heels of her shoes together three times,
By-and-by I was close enough to have a look, and there laid a man on
remember now, he _did_ die. Mortification set in, and they had to
He run off f’m down South, som’ers.”
Moscow is now the rallying place of the anarchists. A band of malefactors had just been caught setting themselves upon undermining one of the theatres which was being built in the enclosure of the future French Exhibition on the[148] “Khodinka Field,” a few paces from the Imperial pavilion which will be inaugurated in the month of May. By a lucky chance a factory where imitation oranges stuffed with dynamite were being made, was also discovered. The terrorists disguised as errand boys were to throw this murderous fruit into the midst of assemblages in order to produce a panic. I am greatly alarmed by all this!

[Image unavailable.]
“Because you wear silver shoes and have killed the Wicked Witch.
“I laid out a hunk of it,” I says, “on a piece of a corn-pone.”
in and slept like dead people.
 The Duke looks under the Bed
All this time Dorothy and her companions had been walking through the
the rapid flight of the Monkeys, but was glad the journey was over. The
glittering Martians went to and fro, calmly and methodically spreading
February 14th.—In the afternoon we all went to draw the lottery. A jolly French colonel took upon himself to be auctioneer at the tombola. He presided with extraordinary gravity, hammer in hand, and kept the whole company alive by puffing his wares unblushingly. The programmes of our concert, painted by one of the Australian lady-passengers, were sold by auction, 12 francs each; the bids rose finally to 40 francs. Our concert yielded about 1,500 francs. The evening wound up with a ball. Between the dances tea and all sorts of refreshments were being carried round by sailors. I had no notion of the hour and found it was three o’clock when I got to bed.
there. They were hamstringing mankind. They seemed in no hurry to
vivid green light. Everything in the kitchen leaped out, clearly
as a dozen people got out their bottles and treated him.
it—won’t you?”
mackerel sky—rows and rows of faint down-plumes of cloud, just tinted
it. Come right in.”


Elizabeth coloured and laughed as she replied, “Yes, you know enough of my frankness to believe me capable of that. After abusing you so abominably to your face, I could have no scruple in abusing you to all your relations.”
With the dawn of the sixteenth century we meet the awakening of that spirit of discovery which was to affect so deeply the missionary enterprise of the world. Vasco da Gama had already visited India in May, 1498, and henceforward from Portugal, the faithful son of the Romish Church, sailed ships of exploration and adventure to establish trading colonies, upon the decks of which were hundreds of friars. Churches, monasteries, and colleges sprang up wherever they landed, and Goa, raised to the dignity of a bishopric, became the flourishing centre of Church and Empire. One of the most significant events of this age, however, was the meeting together on the Feast of the Assumption, in the year 1534, of Ignatius Loyola and six friends to establish the Society of Jesus. One of them was a young man who had been reared amid Protestant influences and was related on his mother’s side to the Kings of Navarre. This was Francis Xavier, whose name and character is a glowing point in the history of that time. Shorn of the legends which his Church has woven about his career, the great missionary cannot fail to command the attention and admiration of the historian, and, as his first sphere was India, he deserves a special reference in the early history of Christian missions there. At first his royal patron, John III of Portugal, hesitated whether he[Pg 13] should not keep Xavier at home, but eventually he was sent with the new Viceroy and a suite of notables in a well-equipped fleet of seven vessels to Goa on the 7th April, 1541. The young monk, burning with missionary zeal, looked across the waters with a beating heart. He did not lack authority, temporal and spiritual, for he went out as Papal Nuncio to the new world, with full powers to propagate the faith of the Church of Rome in all the East, was recommended to the care of David, King of Ethiopia, and all the princes and governors were urged to pay him respect and service. But his heart’s desire was not dependent upon these. He came as one ready to suffer and bear trials, and to the end of his life these were bravely borne. The inner spirit and purpose of the man is best revealed in his letters, and when he arrived at Goa, and saw what awaited him, he wrote thus home to his friends:
We spent our evening in a music-hall. The performance was very bad indeed. First came a French “chanteuse” in a short skirt and still shorter bodice, who rattled away indecent songs, then came the so-called tenor, who cooed a sentimental romance both out of tune and time, then a “basso profundo,” who bellowed Mephistopheles’ Serenade, made his appearance. The whole performance was accompanied by dead silence. The Dutch, in general, are a reserved people. All the faces are grave. I never saw a Dutchman smile. We were obliged to return on foot to the hotel and would have given anything for a carriage, but none was to be had and all the trams were overcrowded. So we walked, trying to find our way, which was not an easy thing to do, stopping at every corner to read the name of the street under a lamp-post.

continue the part a little longer.”
In London, also, on Saturday night there was a thunderstorm, and my
January 9th.—We will make a flying visit to Canton to-day, going up the Si-Kiang, or Pearl River, in a large English steamer bearing the Chinese name of Fat-Chan. The Si-Kiang is so broad that one can’t see across from bank to bank. The crossing takes only eight hours, and is comfortably made in large floating palaces, plying between Hong-Kong and the towns of the inner country. Except ourselves there are only two first-class passengers. I caught sight in the saloon of stacks of rifles, swords and revolvers, with printed instructions to the passengers to use them if necessary, the river-steamers having been known to be attacked by pirates, who rove in junks about the river and assail passing ships. Last year a band of pirates boarded the Fat-Chan as passengers. As soon as Hong-Kong was out of view, the brigands, after having bound with cords the captain and his crew, cut the throats of all the passengers and threw their bodies overboard. Soldiers now accompany every steamer, and the third-class passengers are[464] locked up for the night in the hold behind an iron rail, at the entrance to which stand sentinels. We have three hundred Chinamen as third-class passengers, and it did not make me feel safe at all. The captain took us down into the hold after tiffin to show us the human ant’s nest. We saw the Chinese passengers heaped up pell-mell, men, women and children. The men were smoking opium or playing dice, and looked quite peaceful.

“In conversation with the ladies”	198


kept our ruinous refuge quivering. It piped and whistled as it worked.
“Perhaps this gentleman can tell me what was tattooed on his breast?”
the parson prays, but it don’t work for me, and I reckon it don’t work
At the review we had seats in the Queen’s stand. Queen Margareta sat a few paces from us, looking splendid in a beautiful gown embroidered with golden flowers. The King soon appeared, followed by his suit, my husband in the number. The throng was so great that the policemen had to use main force to procure free passage to the King. A crowd of lookers-on stood behind the double range of soldiers shouting bravo and clapping their hands to the King. In an open space of ground both infantry and cavalry were assembled. After all the regiments had defiled before the King, we went to the Continental where the representatives of the different nations were invited to a banquet given to them by the government. They came out afterwards into the courtyard to have their group taken. The photographer grouped the party according to his idea. Sergy and General Freemantle in the centre, while the others clustered round them. Many failures issued, as all these warriors, feeling themselves returned to boyhood, wouldn’t sit still and laughed when they had to keep serious. The patience of the photographer was something wonderful. I looked at that comic scene out of the gallery facing the courtyard. Captain Sawyer came up to me and said that he had fixed me all the time whilst they were being photographed in order to have a pleasant expression and to look nice.

There are, no doubt, some other circumstances, which may also justify premiums on exportation; for instance, the wheat intended for exportation, is an indispensable article amongst the necessaries of life: it constitutes one third, sometimes the half of a nation’s riches; it is essential that it be not in such quantity as to fall in price, because the disparagement of its value would discourage the cultivator; yet it is advantageous that there should be, upon a medium, a little more than is wanted, in order to keep it at the medium price it ought to fetch, that one may have it in his power to purchase that which another wants to sell. The first thing therefore to be examined is, whether the medium price, at which it must be kept, in order to equipoise the quantity of national industry which it must represent, be not so considerable,
CHAPTER LVIII.
a-trembling, because I’d got to decide, forever, betwixt two things,

headlong from this unendurable stillness towards Kilburn. I hid from


the other kind. I’d see him standing my watch on top of his’n, ’stead
While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether she most feared or wished for the appearance of Mr. Darcy, by the feelings which prevailed on his entering the room; and then, though but a moment before she had believed her wishes to predominate, she began to regret that he came.
The men had been anesthetized before the process began, and now they lay in deep sleep. The automatic controls were running the ship, taking complete charge of it.
VI.
To crown the whole, I shall even suppose, that thence also should result, to a very insignificant individual of America, a little sprig of that European shrub called Bay-tree:—What would that signify to all the Ministers, all the People, and all the Princes in Europe?—Will America consume less European goods, or will she produce less gold and silver, for having produced an idea?
straightened himself up like a liberty-pole, and the lightning begun to

but it didn’t do no good.
showed—up on a hillside. It was a village. I closed in above the shore
the morning breeze. The nursery grounds were everywhere crimson with

“Yes, sir; but I do not know when that will be. I do not know who is good enough for him.”
enough—hadn’t the spunk of a rabbit. I see I was weakening; so I just

“You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy were sisters; consequently that she is aunt to the present Mr. Darcy.”
That all the sweetness I may know,
for it. Well, he took in nine dollars and a half, and said he’d done a


 “Who Nailed Him?”
peculiar conditions of the possible fight with some acuteness. I
on a frosty starlight night. In a telescope it seems far profounder.

“If you were to give me forty such men I never could be so happy as you. Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can have your happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have very good luck, I may meet with another Mr. Collins in time.”

trouble you send word to Mrs. Judith Loftus, which is me, and I’ll do
the southwest, due, I believe, to guns being fired haphazard before the
“’Tis too much!” she added, “by far too much. I do not deserve it. Oh, why is not everybody as happy?”
CXXI.	St. Petersburg	505
the Wizard, “although he does not like to have people ask to see him.

could not do very well as a wood-chopper. So I went to a tinsmith and
see to hide the bag was in the coffin. The lid was shoved along about a
the truth, and you want to brace up, Miss Mary, because it’s a bad
The immediate effect of a tax, is to raise the price of the object on which it is laid, by at least[209] the whole amount of the tax: nothing can be more just; but it is at the same time a consideration which ought to keep pace with the one I have already offered, on the very positive object of all kinds of taxation, namely, to secure the sum at which the product of the impost is valued, whatever that sum may be.
troubles we was going to get into with quarrelsome people and all kinds

In Meryton they parted: the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one of the officers’ wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing over puddles, with impatient activity, and finding herself at last within view of the house, with weary ancles, dirty stockings, and a face glowing with the warmth of exercise.{43}
being thrown up to check the advance Londonward.” That was how the
dumped it in, and down it sunk, out of sight. You could easy see that

undisturbed spaces, houses with their blinds trimly drawn and doors


saying there was devils a-hold of him. He wore out by-and-by, and laid
But Dorothy, knowing her to be a witch, had expected her to disappear
brought with them as provisions from Mars. These creatures, to judge
Sixthly, If it be true, that money ought to be the only aim of commerce and exportation, all[308] the favourite ideas on the pretended balance, being entirely destroyed by facts, even at the time when the world was more fully persuaded of the truth of those ideas, and of the wisdom of the measures which were to have perpetuated that balance, it would be necessary henceforth to resolve to hide money under ground, as fast as it comes in.—Would it not be better to question the principle itself, and seek for fresh information on the utility as well as the object of exportation?


They walked towards the Lucases’, because Kitty wished to call upon Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern, when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone. Now was the moment for her resolution to be executed; and while her courage was high, she immediately said,—

down the hill the sheets of the flooded river, red-tinged with the

was a small dim P, and a B (which is an initial he dropped when he was
The Guardian of the Gate
with her mouth open and her hands up; and as for me, I wished I was in
untiring as the Tin Woodman, and when night came the work was not done.
we made a layer of dirt about five or six inches deep with a frame

intensified our distress and danger that I had, much as I loathed doing

“Old man,” said the young one, “I reckon we might double-team it
not pass it without seeing it. He said he’d be mighty sure to see it,

“Yes. Plentiful hope—for all this destruction!”
Before them was a great stretch of country having a floor as smooth and
“Oh, no,” returned the soldier; “I have never seen him. But I spoke to
her.

Well, that night we had _our_ show; but there warn’t only about twelve

ain’t got no money for to buy the outfit, and I reckon I couldn’t get

“Good gracious! Mr. Darcy!—and so it does, I vow. Well, any friend of Mr. Bingley’s will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else I must say that I hate the very sight of him.”
sustained watch upon this part of the planet, and to anticipate the
Let my religious hours alone,
congregation over in England would be in a sweat about him, so he must
“For,” he said, “if I should get caught in the rain, and rust again, I
Oh, this is the boss dodge, ther’ ain’t no mistake ’bout it. Let ’em


I found a little crowd of perhaps twenty people surrounding the huge


CHAPTER XX
was blackened as far as one could see, and still giving off vertical

burgundy, tinned soups and salmon, and two tins of biscuits.
I was there. She got mad then, but I didn’t mean no harm. All I wanted
“Send me back to Kansas, where my Aunt Em and Uncle Henry are,” she
LXXVIII.	Shanghai	401
“Don’t speak of it, I beg of you,” replied the Woodman. “I have no
deep dent in the bank that I knowed about; I had to part the willow
We arrived at Manheim at three o’clock in the morning and drove to the “Deutscher Hof.” The entrance door was locked, and our driver had to ring vigorously several times before a dishevelled, drowsy waiter let us in. On the following day we travelled up the Rhine on our way to Holland on the “Elizabeth,” a small merchant steamer, the only one starting that day for Coblentz. As there was no private cabin on the boat, we had to remain on deck all day. The “Elizabeth” was a shabby little vessel, very unclean, the uncovered deck was piled with boxes and barrels. Towards evening we approached Eltville, a small place where our boat moored for the night. We slept at a small hotel and had to be up at dawn, as the “Elizabeth” continued her way early in the morning. We got up long before light, and at four o’clock were already on board. The banks of the Rhine became more and more picturesque. The Rheinland seemed to be saturated with the life of the past. We saw ruined old castles perched high on the cliffs; one feels that they must have been the stage where many dramas of human life have been enacted. Here is the legend “Lorelei Felsen,” so romantic and so mysterious. At every stoppage our boat took a cargo, which made us miss the Coblentz boat and we had to proceed further on by rail. Our road ran side by side with the river. The train was rapidly gaining headway, and at the second station we had overtaken the “Elizabeth” which had left Coblentz half-an-hour before us. We made a short halt at Bonn in order to pay a visit to Bonnegasse, the street in which Beethoven was born. The house No. 515 is commemorated by a tablet with his name and date of birth. At the last German station I saw, to my great fright, that we were descending straight to the Rhine, with no vestige of a bridge over it. When we arrived at the very edge of the river our train divided in two parts. Three cars, ours in the number, were placed on a large ferry and worked across the water by a wheel and a rope, to be hooked after to a Dutch train. It was a curious experience floating on a wide river without oars or any visible means of transport.
“Just let the auction go right along, and don’t worry. Nobody don’t
Such is, in fine, the question which I thought the fastidious details I have entered into, ought to preface, and might render of more easy solution. But I request the reader to examine previously,
That’s all he said, and that’s all I said. It warn’t no use to say any
tragedians. But a big, fine looking man jumps up on a bench and shouts:
to sleep wid me.”

wished we was already there.
“Oh, yes; there are thousands,” she replied.
“And of this place,” thought she, “I might have been mistress! With these rooms I might have now been familiarly acquainted! Instead of viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. But, no,” recollecting herself, “that could never be; my uncle and aunt would have been lost to me; I should not have been allowed to invite them.”
church towers inland, and advancing with a leisurely parody of a human

through the air. If a door banged, Aunt Sally she jumped and said
Si la différence des prix est quelque chose ou rien; & s’il a fallu en France au-delà de 66 millions tournois, une fois trouvés, pour assurer, à jamais, l’intérêt à 5 p. cent d’un emprunt national de 1500 millions.


“If you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall know what to think.”

for me to set on, and give me the paddle; and as I shoved off, he says:





“I am more likely to want time than courage, Elizabeth. But it ought to be done; and if you will give me a sheet of paper it shall be done directly.”
A Singhalese boy brought in my coffee very early in the morning, and tried to explain to me that the train for Kandy left at 8 o’clock. It took some time for both of us to make ourselves understood, for I addressed the boy in English and he replied in Malay language; however, with a good deal of pantomime, we got along somehow.

In November my father came to pass the winter with my aunt Galitzine in Moscow. He had been ailing for some years, and I was painfully struck to see the change that had come over him. His illness took a dangerous turn, and soon after his arrival he departed this life. Father’s death gave me a great shock. It was weeks before I got over it. I wouldn’t see anyone, or take interest in anything. My health broke down completely and the doctors ordered me away from Moscow for some time. We decided to make a tour in Sweden and Denmark. So, at the end of June we started off to Stockholm, taking from St. Petersburg the Finnish boat “Döbbeln.” The captain, a consummate patriot, had with extreme suddenness forgotten every word of Russian, and we had to talk German to him, though we knew, of course, that he spoke and understood Russian perfectly well. That detestable[269] man made disparaging remarks about Russia to our fellow-passengers, foreigners for the most part, and prided himself that his steamer was named “Döbbeln” after a famous Finnish hero, who had distinguished himself in the war of Sweden against Russia. When we approached Kronstadt, I heard him say that this fortress had only two strong forts, and that the rest of them were good-for-nothing, and could be easily blown to pieces by one bomb. My patriotic pride was awfully wounded, and I did all in my power to resist the temptation to give the captain a bit of my mind.
never said nothing, never let on; kept it to myself; it’s the best way;

watermelon, or a mushmelon, or a punkin, or some new corn, or things of
smoke clung so closely to the ground, even before its precipitation,
on Friday night you had taken a pair of compasses and drawn a circle
the wigwam and talk low and confidential two or three hours at a time.
this store for the next fortnight. Bottled beer stood under a shelf,
In the little town of Sonnenburg, in the Electorate of Brandenburg, as it was then called, was born on the 8th October, 1726, a little boy, Christian Frederick Schwartz. Little is known of his home and parents; his father, however, seems to have occupied a respectable position in life, and, what is of much more consequence, he was a devout and godly man. His mother, like so many of the mothers of missionaries, was a woman of consistent piety, and her child was from the very threshold of life dedicated by her to God and His service. She was not spared to see her son grow up—even in his boyhood he was motherless—but before she passed away she solemnly left him to the care of his father and the pastor of their church, to be trained up like Samuel as a servant of God, and as her natural and devout ambition was that he might one day become a minister she made them promise that they would in every possible way encourage and help her boy to that end. There is no evidence to show that these guardians were in any way unfaithful to this solemn charge. At the early age of eight years we find the boy a scholar in the principal Grammar School of his native place, and in Herr Helm, the rector, he had a guide and adviser who trained his pupils well. His boys were not only given a good education, with a special eye to the classics, but they were taught to pray and commit all their needs to the care of their Heavenly Father. The boy Schwartz was evidently[Pg 29] of a thoughtful disposition. Like Henry Martyn he was wont to steal away from the playground to read a book; probably his love of retirement at this period was also due to a lack of the physical robustness of the average school boy. From his earliest years he had a sensitive soul which felt instinctively any act of wrong-doing, however simple it might appear, and he could never rest until in the solitude of his room or in a walk in the woods he had poured forth his confession to God and regained the peace of forgiveness. He seems to have been singularly fortunate in having a wise and sympathetic teacher in Herr Helm, and the boy was ripening under his training when a change came, a new headmaster being appointed, who perhaps did his part well as an educationalist, but lacked the moral and religious tone of his predecessor. None are so quick to catch the change of temperature in moral training as boys, and the young Schwartz seems to have soon abandoned many of his religious habits and grown cold and indifferent towards higher things. In the ordinary course, however, he was confirmed with other scholars according to Lutheran usage at the school, but it is recorded that his preparation for this solemn occasion was hardly more than superficial and that the clergyman who performed this office scarcely impressed this candidate, at any rate, with the necessity of a real consecration of his heart and life to God. He partook of Holy Communion with some little religious emotion but this soon passed away.
_again_, say it _again!_
CHAP.
[Image unavailable.]
CHAPTER XXXVIII.

By this time I was beginning to take his measure. The tremendous
6thly,
“To assure you in the most animated language”	132
“May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth, when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the course of this morning?”
me carry you back to Kansas, and stand you on Aunt Em’s mantel? I could
struggle, but the red weed rotted like a thing already dead. The fronds


nothing but a lot of skins, sewn together, with slats to keep their
We had to pass through the vestibule of the modern Hôtel Diomède to enter the domains of the past, and on our way back we had dinner there. I was glad to be out of the circle of the dead centuries and back into the world of living men. I had just read a French novel written by Georges de Peyrebrune in which the author described the wonderful beauty of Signorina Sofia Prospezi the daughter of the proprietor of Hôtel Diomède, and wanted to see if the reputation of her beauty was not exaggerated. It appeared to be quite true. Signorina Prospezi was beyond question endowed with great beauty: she was tall, slender, with a pure oval face, finely chiselled features and luminous velvety, brown eyes, shaded by curling black lashes. I asked her to give me her photograph, and she begged for mine in return. Her father was wonderfully amiable and attentive towards us. Instead of regaling us with diluted wine, which was usually served to his customers, he ordered the oldest and best wine in his cellars to be brought to us. Our host evidently meant to be complimentary, and said that he thought me very much like his wife—who appeared to be a compatriot of ours—when she was young and beautiful.
off of the leavings, whilst the others was helping the niggers clean up

After a great deal of hard work, for the Lion was heavy, they managed

knee breeches with pink and yellow and blue stripes down them, and
quickly in the sun. That is the end of her. But the silver shoes are


[420]

Yes, and ain’t privileged to sing the song yet. Say, where _is_ that
with two circus men hanging on to his bridle trying to hold him, and

piece just drawing a bead on a bird with his gun. So he hadn’t seen
the opening again.
had his pockets bulging, or something muffled up under his coat—and I
August 9th.—At ten o’clock in the morning on the centre-deck, before the image of St. Nicholas, the patron of the mariners, the sailors gathered for prayers, and sang hymns in chorus. After lunch a sailor photographed our group surrounded by all the ship’s officers, after which the officers invited me to take part in a game consisting in throwing rope-rings on to ciphers drawn in chalk on the deck’s floor, I proved very clumsy, making my first ring fly overboard.
S’il n’y a pas sans qu’on l’imagine, dans le Systême de Finance de l’Angleterre, quelquesunes[405] des imperfections si bien observées, si justement, si amèrement critiquées dans celui de la France; & si un remboursement national n’est pas le plus facile de tous les jeux avec lesquels un Ministre de Finance peut amuser la Société, sans la servir.
matter with them,—that is, nothing only everything was cooked by
out of your own head. Now look at just that one thing of the lantern.
together; so all you have to do is to catch them and sell them to the
I heard answering shouts from the people in the water about me. I could
CHAPTER L.

is impossible to stop them. There is no safety from the Black Smoke but
[Image unavailable.]
So I quit.
you?”



for what the rise might fetch along. Well, all at once here comes a
another. So what we want to do is to be prepared; then we’re all
The heroic statue of Ferdinand de Lesseps, who has given to the world the Suez Canal, standing for ever at the gateway he opened to the East, was plainly visible before we caught the first glimpse of land. We dropped anchor at a small distance from Suez, having to wait for the canal to be free. Our binoculars showed us a row of white houses with trees and a railway-line. That was the town of Suez. I stood on deck watching the animation on the canal. Hundreds of small boats hovered near, filled with eager vendors of curios and ostrich feathers. A great homeward-bound troop-ship filled with French soldiers, who were returning from the expedition to Madagascar, had just arrived. The climate didn’t agree with the soldiers, they were all in a wretched condition, knocked up with malarial fever. Here is a sanitary “sampan,” carrying a flag with the inscription, Santé, coming alongside our rope-ladder. The pilot allowed us at last to enter the Suez Canal, which is considerably narrower than the Thames. It’s queer to know that but for the narrow passage in which the vessel moves, you are on dry land. Our way is marked out with floating red barrels. The moving sands of the Sahara border the banks of the canal; the sky above the yellow sand looked extremely blue. From time to time tall palms with bushy tops appear. All around is an immense stillness. There is a caravan of camels marching slowly with rhythmical gait, on the sands of the desert, conveyed by Arabs in billowy white bournouses. On the opposite shore a flock of large white birds with long red legs stand contemplative each on a single leg. A crowd of half-naked little Arabs are running along the edge of the bank. They follow us laughing and begging as gaily as if begging were a game, catching the pennies thrown by the passengers.
brother saw a closed carriage turning into the lane.
it out:
like that for ever so long, and looking better and peacefuller all the
“Dear Sir,
Sometimes a stack of people would come there, horseback, from ten or
This maxim, I set forth of the correspondence required between the prices, together with the inconvenience of having them too much out of proportion with those of other nations, militates, it is true, against that monstrous system of prohibitions, corporations, &c. which is the only burden entailed upon us by our forefathers, the only burden which the present legislatures can transmit to posterity; but although it might be an absurdity to suppose a reform as sudden as it would be advantageous, yet would it be less absurd to suppose that, the evil being once found out, the remedy will constantly be rejected? Would it be less absurd to suppose, that the[257] manufacturers, better acquainted with their real interests, will persist in endeavouring to aggravate the evil, instead of complying with the only means of retrieving it? Would it be less absurd to suppose, that each of them will never perceive that he pays for the privilege of ransoming in his branch of industry, by the disadvantage of being himself ransomed on a thousand other objects? Russia, 30 years ago, was perhaps more distant from her present state, than the unmasking of monopoly, and the knowledge of its effects, will be from its extirpation.
course we allowed to have to steal it back. I’m for knocking off and
“Geewhillikins,” I says, “but what does the rest of it mean?”
her eye lit on me—I got up and took a walk.
generate an intense heat in a chamber of practically absolute

“Mr. Archibald Nichols, I presume?”
“Now hustle back, right off, and fetch the duke up here, and the new



On the other hand, experience has just taught us, that as soon as those very colonies, for which it is pretended so much blood has been spilt, and so much money wasted, are in a situation[375] to stand up in their own defence, there is no depending upon them, but inasmuch as they are on the footing of allies; and interest alone fixes the duration of every alliance.



looked back. The soldier had left him, and he was still standing by his

trembled violently; I could scarcely stand upright. I opened the door
“Exceed their income! My dear Mr. Bennet,” cried his wife, “what are you talking of? Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and very likely more.” Then addressing her daughter, “Oh, my dear, dear Jane, I am so happy! I am sure I shan’t get a wink of sleep all night. I knew how it would be. I always said it must be so, at last. I was sure you could not be so beautiful for nothing! I remember, as soon as ever I saw him, when he first came into Hertfordshire last year, I thought how likely it was that you should come together. Oh, he is the handsomest young man that ever was seen!”
back, and says:
then we up-steam again, and whizzed along after them till we was nearly
The news that the Martians were now in possession of the whole of
able to contribute to the discussion of the many debatable questions
Elizabeth replied very concisely that she was.
Sixthly, They do not pretend, with the Europeans, that the increase in the national prices, can in any thing affect their exportation; but they have found, that being obliged to sell dearer, it was their duty to offer very frankly to pay also dearer for whatever they wanted in return.
afterwards, neither. I didn’t do him no more mean tricks, and I
The police had been informed that a quantity of dynamite has just been transported to one of Moscow’s railway stations. But, when they wanted to confiscate it, the cunning anarchists disguised as policemen, took possession in full daylight of the murderous baggage under the very nose of the real police agents who arrived at the station a few minutes later and found all the dynamite gone.
gone up to Louisville; and another one was a big rough husky that come
to everyone. I have heard that Glinda is a beautiful woman, who knows
at home that had characters; and he was bright and not leather-headed;
lay you’ll be the Methusalem-numskull of creation before ever I ask

Chapter XXIV
can’t he?”

“Why, because it _is_ the mumps. That’s what it starts with.”

destroyer was stayed. All the gaunt wrecks, the blackened skeletons of
any place in the world in three steps, and each step will be made in
[381]
warn’t afraid they’d steal some o’ the family! I was just to that pass
spec he’ll go ’way, en den agin he spec he’ll stay. De bes’ way is to
for my heart.”
“Don’t gap and stretch like that, Huckleberry—why don’t you try to
eleven, as nothing seemed happening, I walked back, full of such
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The War of the Worlds
She was merry, she was very, very wild,
rested for the remainder of the daylight in a shrubbery, being, in my

Fourteenthly, But if the circumstance which drove France to the necessity of acquiring a greater balance in real cash, stood at a very small[283] distance from another circumstance by which England was compelled to procure one still more considerable, for a general re-coining of her guineas; and if France and England have done each other no material injury in this kind of competition, (this is proved by the fact, since both nations have equally and certainly, ever since, procured the annual balance which they wanted); may it not be fairly concluded, that England has been no loser, by a revolution in the price of wheat, which enriched France by tertiating her revenue, and forced her to receive annually, in cash, a balance far greater than she did previous to that revolution?
changes of the day. I recalled my mental states from the midnight
Yea thro’ life, death, thro’ sorrow and thro’ sinning
“And I shall get my brains,” added the Scarecrow joyfully.
“Don’t you do it. I don’t hear the dogs and horses yet; you’ve got time
and I couldn’t make out the words any more; but I could hear the
wrongfully out’n a high place.”

It was growing dark when we weighed anchor at Kasakevitchi, a Cossack settlement, where a Te Deum was sung in the village chapel for our safe journey. Log-fires burnt along the shore, and the Cossacks cheered us enthusiastically.
that he shall treat you all with kindness.”
For a time he sat in blank silence.
himself Richard III.; and the way they laid on and pranced around the

passed a man in dirty black, with a thick stick in one hand and a small
“Does he never go out?” asked the Scarecrow.
piece it out from memory. I’ll just walk up and down a minute, and see
solemn talk where he left off. In a minute or two here comes this
with more gaudier chances than a prisoner ever had in the world to make
_writing_ at all. Now, here’s some letters from—”
of the thunder; and sure as you are born I did clip it along!
“What did you speculate in, Jim?”

That man who gives up his land for the annual quit-rent of a quarter of wheat, and two shillings when the wheat was at four shillings only, supposed he had entitled himself and his heirs to an income of a quarter and a half of wheat; yet his representatives enjoy, at this day, only one quarter, and the 18th or 20th part of another.—Will these insist, that the meaning of the landlord having been to secure, and that of the tenant to grant, such a portion of the landed revenue, as might be at all times equal to a quarter and a half of wheat, it is unjust to act in direct opposition to the intention of the contracting parties? This objection would appear very forcible, and yet would go no further than to prove, that, when a proprietor gives up his land for an annual consideration, he ought to stipulate that it should be paid in kind, if he means to keep up to the same income; if not, the landlord must be referred to the terms of his contract.
forty dollars, becuz he’s got to go up the river and can’t wait. Think

fruits. Banks of gorgeous flowers were on every hand, and birds with
It is a source of regret that this Indian prince, with all his sincere affection for Schwartz and gratitude for his kindness to himself personally, should not have become a Christian. His attachment to the memory of the venerable missionary, his support and appreciation of the Christian work among his people after the death of Schwartz, is certainly much to his credit so long as it[Pg 186] lasted, when we remember that he lived and died a Hindu surrounded by his Brahmins who would scarcely regard his sympathies in the direction of Christianity with any approval. Still, it is disappointing to record that up to the time of his sudden death in 1834 he never renounced his idolatries, and had not apparently received into the darkness of his heathen head the Light of the world.



How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more reasonable, her expressions more moderate! It would have spared her from explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give; but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some confusion, of her attachment to Mr. Darcy.

 A Crack in the Dining-room Door
so. He was often moaning and mourning that way nights, when he judged I
Peter Wilks’s brother! You’re a fraud, that’s what you are!”
woods across the line were but the scarred and blackened ruins of
tongs. And if she turned over and found one in bed she would scramble
side. The man came a-pawing along in the dark, and when Packard got to

could help her get to Kansas again, so she bravely resolved not to turn
_that_—you hear?” Then he says to the duke, “We got to jest swaller it
In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could have little to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walked on in quest of the only face whose features would be known to her. At last it arrested her—and she beheld a striking resemblance of Mr. Darcy, with such a smile over the face, as she remembered to have sometimes seen, when he looked at her. She stood several minutes before the picture, in earnest contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the gallery. Mrs. Reynolds informed them, that it had been taken in his father’s lifetime.

So I said it wouldn’t be no use to try to play it any longer, and I
Since they had no extensive muscular mechanism to recuperate, that

eyes. We can’t have any weak or silly. Life is real again, and the
me. Then she got to talking about her husband, and about her relations
walked around. As for the Scarecrow, having no brains, he walked
a-booming down the river.
Indeed, a jolly little clown came walking toward them, and Dorothy

So the king let go of me, and begun to cuss that town and everybody in

explained the Signs of the Zodiac to her, and pointed out Mars, a


it again when he came out. He fetched uncle a key about the time we got
“Another time, Lizzy,” said her mother, “I would not dance with him, if I were you.”


beautiful country, with green meadows dotted with bright flowers and
bipeds with flimsy, silicious skeletons (almost like those of the
To remedy the evil in such circumstances, how many expedients are tried, which only serve to increase it! How many avowed depredations upon pretended usurers, before the Sovereign boldly ventures to partake with them in the public execration by ordering a re-coinage, which, under the same denomination, will give but a part of the weight, or of the quality of the former coin! Yet this cannot be avoided. But by ascertaining, as we have done before, a two-fold increase in the revenue, and supposing one million and a half to have been sufficient to the circulation of the first revenue; if the Prince with his 1,500,000l. instead of a coinage of three millions, should have struck only 2,400,000l.—after some fluctuation, the balance will be restored between the price or nominal value of the negociable articles, and the quantity of money in circulation;—but what had been sold for 5 heretofore, will then go for 4; the prices will have fallen one fifth, and the circulation will be clogged:—But above all, it should be observed, that no one will be the poorer, notwithstanding the diminution of the nominal value.
From this position a shrubbery hid the greater portion of Putney, but
Spoilt by the comforts of my travels in Turkestan, I felt very uncomfortable in a train full of passengers. We were crowded together like herrings in a barrel. I squeezed myself into my place in the corner of the carriage, pressing close my elbows. My fellow-passengers were going straight to Berlin and I couldn’t stretch my legs the whole night to get the cramp out of them. We looked at one another with no great love in our eyes. I was placed by the side of a well preserved lady of about fifty years of age, trying to pass off for thirty, who had still the remains of what she had been in her young days and did not like to part with them. I caught her practising her fascinations in the mirror. She was accompanied by her daughter, a grown-up girl of about eighteen, clad in a short frock, with her hair down her back in a plait. When I heard them say “I reckon,” I knew they were Americans. My neighbour opened her basket and offered a part of her supper to me. She was most communicative respecting her own concerns, and chatted away like a magpie. She told me that they were going to do Paris, and spoke all the time of her conquests, stating to me that she had got all the men at her feet. I scarcely listened to her prattle, but she chatted on, accustomed to do without answers. Opposite me, sat a full contrast to that chatter-box, a placid materfamilias endowed with three babies aged respectively five, four and two, who kept singing praises to the many charms and wondrous perfection of her offsprings. The children were petted and fondled by their mother, who crammed them all the way with bonbons and[533] cake in profusion. Her little girl hugging in her arms an immense doll, began quarreling with her brother, an ugly and anything but well-behaved brat, with nose and mouth blackened with chocolate; they kicked and screamed until they were both black in the face. I only just stopped short of throwing my book at their heads. The baby, the pet of the family, was cutting a tooth and kept roaring the whole night.
“You are the artilleryman who came into my garden.”
that before?”
“Allein zu dir, Herr Jesu Christ,”
collar; and to Dorothy they presented a beautiful bracelet studded with
obey you?”
“My dearest child,” she cried, “I can think of nothing else. Ten thousand a year, and very likely more! ’Tis as good as a lord! And a special licence—you must and shall be married by a special licence. But, my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of, that I may have it to-morrow.”

Well, by-and-by the king he gets up and comes forward a little, and
thing or another in a bundle, and took the canoe and cleared for shore.
She used to sit by him and softly stroke his cheek.
“How do you feel?” she asked.

drip) till I got a good piece below the house and then dumped him into
If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the younger Miss Bennets would have been in a pitiable state at this time; for, from the day of the invitation to the day of the ball, there was such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Meryton once. No aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after; the very shoe-roses for Netherfield were got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have found some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than a dance on Tuesday could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday endurable to Kitty and Lydia.{113}
“Good luck!” he said. “We are lucky ones! Fancy _you_!” He put out a
XIII.
again, and will betray the helish design. They will sneak down from
As the voices filled the chamber he caught the sound of other music beyond the river and passed heavenward. Old before his time, for he was scarcely thirty-six, Ziegenbalg[Pg 24] had put into those years a consecrated labour which was evidenced by the four hundred converts and catechumens who followed their stricken shepherd to his rest. He was buried in the Jerusalem Church he had built, and the remains of his colleague, Gründler, are also within those walls. On the other side of the way is the old Danish Government Church of Zion, built in the early days of the mission. In the vestry is suspended a curious representation of the Last Supper carved in high relief and painted, the Latin inscription underneath being:—

over and over, and at last we made up our minds they was going to break
At last we reached the convict settlement where Mr. Kopanski resides, superintending the work on the railway-line of the convicts sentenced to hard labour. At the present moment he has under his command three thousand convicts, and one thousand soldiers to guard them.

He studied a while, and then he says:
“The first wish of my heart,” said she to herself, “is never more to be in company with either of them. Their society can afford no pleasure that will atone for such wretchedness as this! Let me never see either one or the other again!”
planet Mars is in conjunction, but with every return to opposition I,
CHAPTER LV.

“It is not a great way,” answered the farmer’s wife. “Take the road to
of Londoners did not hear of the Martians until the panic of Monday
meal sifted out and made a little track all the way to the lake. I

movement was an agony, blundered painfully ahead under the surface as
I found Trouville a most amusing place: no chance of being dull here! It was the height of the season, and the place was full of people who had come to see the races at Dauville, a pretty Norman coast town on the other side of the river La Touque, possessing a splendid hippodrome, where during one week important races take place. Crowds of people came by special trains from Paris, and omnibuses kept constantly arriving with passengers. Our hotel was crammed to the garrets, and it was difficult to get a seat at any of the tables during our meals. Our landlady, a moustached virago, was almost out of her wits to satisfy all the demands.

“_Ain’t_ you a sweet-scented dandy, though? A bed; and bedclothes; and

parrots was a cat made of crockery, and a crockery dog by the other;
a chance to talk us over.”
anything but a soft name for stealing, and no decent body would do it.
“Well, then, what does the rest of ’em do?”

for parish points. Grotesque and foolish as this will seem to the sober

things that was valuable, not on account of being any account, because
A boy, speaking a few words of Russian, brought in tea with excellent cream and cakes. At Nagasaki the close neighbourhood of Russia is felt, a great number of natives speak our language.
State of the Balance between England and Holland.
Then he looks on around the same way to me, and says:

When I was past my twelfth year I grew very fond of reading the books of the “Bibliothèque Rose.” I pitied mamma because she read deadly uninteresting English Tauchnitz novels, when there existed such enrapturing books as Les petites filles modéles, les malheurs de Sophie, etc. But this childish literature did not hinder me from flirtation. I used to long for adventures; and here I was having one, notwithstanding that I had only just grown out of pinafores. My parents took me sometimes to the Italian opera and I conceived a romantic admiration for the tenor of the troop, who was, as I thought adorable beyond words. I raved about him. When out walking with my governess, I dragged her in the direction I knew the tenor would take, in the hope of meeting him. I began to knit a prosaic cache-nez for the object of my dreams, which mamma confiscated, happily, in time.


For two days the rain never ceased pouring; there are mud-pools of water everywhere. When the sun had sufficiently dried the streets, we went for a drive through the town, escorted by a platoon of Cossacks. We drove through wide, tree-shaded streets. The flat-topped houses, generally not more than a storey high, are covered with verdure. It is dangerous to build high edifices in the country because of the frequent earthquakes. We were in the hottest part of the day and saw but few people in the streets. From noon to four o’clock the inhabitants of Tashkend take their siesta. When the heat decreases, the native quarters begin to fill with life and local colour. We drove along arcaded streets like narrow corridors towards the bazaar, passing by numerous “tschai-khans” (tea-houses), and were saluted on our passage by profound salaams; the natives pass their hands over their faces and beards, a gesture which signifies that their sentiments towards us are as clear as a well-washed face. Steady-handed barbers are shaving customers on the threshold of their shops. Vociferating sellers sit on low tables behind piles of fruit and vegetables. Imperturbable and passive Sartes, sitting cross-legged on rugs, smoke their kalyans and[498] appear to be plunged in profound meditation. Here is a group of “douvanas” (Mecca pilgrims) wearing sharp-pointed caps; they are listening to a “maddah” (street story-teller). The Sarte women leave their houses hidden beneath their “farandja,” a dark mantle which covers them from head to foot, and makes them look like guys. They follow more strictly than any other daughters of the Orient the principles of the Mussulman religion, and cover their faces with black horse-hair nets. I have seen veiled Turkish women at Constantinople, but in such a transparent manner, that they differed but little from our European ladies wearing slight veils over their hats. At Cairo the veils are thicker, but for that, the Egyptian women leave their eyes uncovered. The Mussulman women in India go out in the streets unveiled, just the same as our Kirghis women. The natives are very fond of music; in every tent of the nomad tribes, in every “khaoul” (house) one can see a two-stringed instrument called “doutarra,” a sort of guitar. The Sarte makes even of his “arba,” a massive cart, an instrument of barbaric music, putting a stick into the wheels, so that the stick catching the spokes, reproduces the sound of the drum, which resounds through the streets of Tashkend, to the accompaniment of the monotonous singing of the proprietor of the “arba,” a wailing, winding chant which, as it had no end, may well have had no beginning. The Sarte sings always in a high-pitched voice, for to sing in a basso voice is considered unbecoming. The “arba” is put upon two enormous wooden wheels and driven by one horse, on whose back sits astride the carter, his legs stretched on the shafts. The Sartes never grease their “arbas,” and the noise produced by these screeching wheels compose a terrible discord, accompanied by the piercing cry of the camels, and the howling of vagrant dogs.
a-going to leave till they’ve played this family and this town for all
XCIV.	Our way Back to Khabarovsk via Odessa	438
She then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as far as they concerned George Wickham. What a stroke was this for poor Jane, who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind as was here collected in one individual! Nor was Darcy’s vindication, though grateful to her feelings, capable of consoling her for such discovery. Most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, and seek to clear one, without involving the other.
office, and we waited a while longer, but Sid didn’t come; so the old

St. Mary’s Church, Fort St. George	”	”	96
over it all; when I realised that the shadow had been rolled back, and
“Well, it ain’t no use to send things by _him_ no more, he ain’t
Language: English
in the nigger’s cabin to get him. I am to be off a piece and blow a tin
twisted its neck until it died. And then another crow flew at him, and
the Spotted Dog, for I knew the landlord had a horse and dog cart. I
reck’n. Mos’ likely dey has rackety times in de nussery. En I reck’n de
hooks. I tried for the hooks three or four times, but somehow I

and laid down for a nap before breakfast.
We got to Hampton Court without misadventure, our minds full of strange

and him a stranger and so far from his people. How would you like to be
Straightway a great flock of wild crows came flying toward her, enough
The authorities had reason to suppose, from the size of the cylinders,
Early next morning I opened the shutters and was fascinated by the splendid panorama of the bay of Naples and Vesuvius with its cone rising against the azure sky. How glorious it all was!
“Well,” said the lieutenant, “I suppose it’s my business to see it too.

“Not yet,” replied Jane. “But now that my dear uncle is come, I hope everything will be well.”
for them, and let them lean on them and cry, and told the king all
but if it is your wish to return to Kansas, I hope you will find a
Again a head shot swiftly out, and the great Lion went rolling down the
bend stern first. First I didn’t know where I was; I thought I was
am ashamed to say that I cannot keep my promises.”
gentlemen; that’s what I think about him.”
“What is that?” asked Dorothy; “the Munchkin farmer who made you?”
Though we led a quiet life, I had plenty of occupation. I took singing lessons of Mme. Kogan, a delightful teacher, and had some lessons on the cithern, which didn’t hold me for long. My participation in the Tableau in which I appeared with a mandoline, suggested to me the idea to study that instrument. Signorina Ciarloni, a soloist on the harp at the Imperial Opera, who played also the mandoline, was invited to give me lessons. Mr. P⸺, one of the most assiduous frequenters of our “At Homes,” a snobbish young man bursting with conceit and thinking a lot of his appearance, proposed to accompany me on the guitar, but our duets came to nothing, for it appeared that my partner could only play Bohemian songs, throwing himself into a sentimental attitude and studying his own reflection, with complacent eyes, in the mirror on the wall beside me, which reflected his proceedings.
it would take three days to fix it. If I’d a called it a bolthead it
“I don’t know.”

“I know it,” said the Lion, hanging his head in shame. “I’ve always
Elizabeth could not but look surprised.
The Wicked Witch was both surprised and worried when she saw the mark
Still the old heart searchings kept him very humble; his letters, with scarcely an exception, indicate this increasing sense of need of watchfulness and a quiet walking with God. He reminds a friend that what we want is not so much urgent petition to God in difficulty and peril but a steadfast resting upon Him, in personal and unbroken converse. He quotes how a friend once asked Francke of the Orphan House at Halle how he kept his peace of mind. The reply was “By stirring up my mind a hundred times a day! Wherever I am, whatever I do, I say ‘Blessed Jesus, have I truly a share in Thy redemption? Are my sins forgiven? Am I guided by Thy Spirit? Thine I am. Wash me again and again. Strengthen me.’ By this constant converse with Jesus I have enjoyed serenity of mind and a settled peace in my heart.”
and not eating anything. And by-and-by the old man says:

“He then asked some questions respecting the King of England and expressed a wish to visit our country. I took occasion in reply to say something concerning the religion which is there taught and how much it contributes to the welfare both of princes and people, adding, ‘This is our wish, that you and your subjects may embrace it, to your present and future happiness.’ The King looked at me and smiled. His chief Brahmin often interposed and told him what he had seen among the Papists at Pondicherry, to which he replied that we were very different from the Papists. He then desired me to speak to the Brahmin in Persian, which I did and addressed a[Pg 93] short admonition to him, but he professed to have forgotten his Persian.”

Until about midday the Pool of London was an astonishing scene.

thinking she might steal them. But the child was so proud of her pretty
While I was in love I was the happiest man on earth; but no one can


The duke says, the same way:

THE HEAT-RAY IN THE CHOBHAM ROAD.
On our return to Paris we were not yet too tired to go to the “Musée Grévin,” where we made a long halt before a group of wax figures representing the Coronation of our Emperor. All the personages were unrecognisable, the cadets of the “Corps de Pages” were arrayed in costumes dating from the time of Louis XV. Another group also represented a Russian scene, the capture of a band of anarchists at work in a secret printing office, in which it was the police agents who looked like villains, and the[170] anarchists like innocent victims. It interested me greatly to listen to the opinions of the passers-by upon this group, they made such funny comments! Not wanting to disclose my nationality, the idea came to me to give myself out for an Englishwoman, and I asked Sergy, who didn’t speak English fluently, to answer only in the negative or the affirmative to all I should say, and catching his eye I passed the signal, making him understand when he was to say “yes” or “no.” He acted his part fairly well, and two French ladies were taken in. They endeavoured to make me understand the meaning of the criminal printing office, and one of them said to me in the very worst English, “This scene takes place in Russia, here is the Russian God,” (pointing out to an Ikon of St. Nicholas hung in one corner of the printing office). Then, this well-informed person, wanting to flatter my national pride, added, that this Museum could not be compared to Madame Tussaud’s wax-work-figures in London.

About this time he received tidings of serious reverses which had befallen his home at Sonnenburg. A disastrous fire which had broken out in the little town had burnt down his father’s house and in his letter of the 8th October, 1753, he expresses his desire to help all he can. Although so far away he is anxious to sustain his father in these new difficulties.

says:
to Toto. Toto only wagged his tail; for, strange to say, he could not

“Ah, Jane, I take your place now, and you must go lower, because I am a married woman.”
Before I examine in what mode the taxes operate, I shall suppose, for the satisfaction of the sensible and benevolent mind, that this formidable burden falls only on the consumer of such objects as are taxed. The only plausible aim of a reimbursement, is a diminution of the taxes which lie so heavy on that consumer; but the misfortune is, that the only means of refunding, is to devise new taxes, or increase the former ones. Besides, if this increase[52] be trifling, the reimbursement cannot be effected in less than a century. I freely confess, that in this case, the proprietors of the public funds would be less aggrieved, having then sufficient time to think on the less disadvantageous modes of replacing their stock; yet, I repeat it, not less than a century would suffice to discharge that very debt; and the public being a little more burdened annually, than they would have been had not the project of paying off the debt been started, would have no other compensation for the additional burden, than the distant prospect of a general release in a hundred years.—If the intention is, to bring about that release within a period which, to the fiftieth part of the present generation, gives the hope of enjoying the effect of it, I agree, that by means of one million of additional taxes, and some financiering tricks, the whole debt may be liquidated within the space of 40 or 50 years; and then, that part of the present generation which may exist at that most gracious period, will, perhaps, bless the hand by which it shall have been relieved. But would that same hand be, till then, entitled to the like blessings from the unfortunate who should be reimbursed, and from those at whose expence this operation would be effected?
Oh, Ettie, you were an awful flirt,
I lead a regular life: music and books fill up my time. In the evening I played duets with Mr. Shaniavski, who is an accomplished musician. A young officer of the garrison, playing the violin, comes frequently to make up a trio. Our performance lasted sometimes till after midnight, and Sergy assured me that my partners, thoroughly tired out, were visibly growing thinner and thinner, and became real spectres at the end of the performance. Mr. Shaniavski offered to teach me Italian and Spanish; he is a fine linguist, speaking fluently several languages. I need music and work to drive away my blue devils, and have decided to keep friends with Mr. Shaniavski without paying attention to evil tongues. People are so interested in what I do, that a hundred-eyed Argus would not be enough to look after me. Wicked things will be said of me, I am sure, but the calumnies of the world do not trouble me a bit. What are they really worth?
halted, and the scouts who were watching them report that they remained
“Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My mind was more agreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the very great pleasure which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow.”
pointed caps. And, strangest of all, these people were all made of
crowd. Along the road people were standing in the roadway, curious,
of the safety of London and the ability of the authorities to cope with
and bade them good-bye. The Winkies were sorry to have them go, and

Then we talked about the money. It was a pretty good raise—twenty



SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING
his pole in the middle of the water, looking very lonely and sad.

awluz yo’ fren’.”
“_Work?_ Why, cert’nly it would work, like rats a-fighting. But it’s
dodge, the fourth shell.
“Oh, Mr. Bennet, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar. You must come and make Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will not have him; and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and not have her.{141}”
July 1st.—This morning we came into the narrow channels of the fortified Perim Islands, a bare rock with a few houses on it, without any traces of vegetation. And to think that it was political conditions which forced unfortunate British officers to pass a part of their lives in such an infernal hole!
quarter of a mile out you’ll come to the tavern; tell ’em to dart you
After quoting from his Greek Testament those wonderful verses in St. John’s Gospel, chapter xvii. 3, 11, 14, 18, 21, he urges again the blessing of unity, writing: “Let us, therefore, according to that heavenly pattern and divine admonition, strive to be one, one in doctrine, one in adhering to Christ, one in loving Him, one in despising and renouncing the world, one in loving one another, and one in bearing the cross. As God has made us equal in the share of the most glorious benefits of the Gospel, one baptism, one hope, one glorious Redeemer, so He has thereby designed us to be the same in brotherly love. And as without joint prayer that brotherly love cannot be kept in proper vigour, let us endeavour to keep up that holy exercise.”
Summer passed quickly. Autumn came on. The dead leaves fell silently and covered the alleys of our park with a yellow carpet. In November, snow fell in abundance and the trees bent under the heavy flakes. The trains are obliged to stop for several days, the line being encumbered with snow.
TANJORE

and run round and round the cabin, hollering “Take him off! take him
of his prison and set him free. They went in together to the castle,
I couldn’t look her in the face; and she set down on the bed and talked


meeting with no response, they both concluded the man or men inside
that dripped down upon the overturned seats on the summit of Primrose
spinning-stick in her hand; and behind her comes her little white
In less than two weeks the great ships were ready, and were resting on the surface of the great world out there across space, ready for the attack. The last mighty form had but just floated, light as a feather, from the huge receiving station, and now they lay in a row. So vast they were that they seemed unreal, figments of some strange dream. Mighty cigar-shaped hulls of four-foot armor plate, half sunken in slight depressions they lay now, their terrific weight making the soil flow like some semi-liquid mass. Nestled between two of the gargantuan ships there rested the control ship. Now, one by one the fleet of the mighty bulks rose gently, gracefully into the air, formed in a perfect cone, with the control ship, scarcely visible in this congregation of giants, following behind the leading ship.
“I cannot tell,” answered the soldier, “for nobody has ever crossed the

If it were acknowledged, that riches and ease, like the light, stand in want of no assistance whatever, to propagate themselves equally in every direction, as general interest requires; that the private interest of one man, or of a body of men, is always sufficiently opposed, protected, balanced, by the interest of another man, or of another body of men, wherever administration confines its attention to the maintenance of strict justice and good order; and that from this equilibrium in which they mutually keep, or soon replace one another, there results, for both, the greatest advantage they can hope for, and for the State the highest prosperity it can attain:
aside and crawled through dewy nettles and brambles into the broad
you will itch all over in upwards of a thousand places. Pretty soon Jim

They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman’s conduct; but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern, and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen to go away just as they were all getting so intimate together. After lamenting it, however, at some length, she had the consolation of thinking that Mr. Bingley would be soon down again, and soon dining at Longbourn; and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration, that, though he had been invited only to a family dinner, she would take care to have two full courses.{154}
were so frightened that they ran back as fast as they could.

“But if that is the case, you must write to your mother to beg that you may stay a little longer. Mrs. Collins will be very glad of your company, I am sure.”
curiosity, he is most terrible, and few have ever dared ask to see his
attracted by the stories they had heard, were walking over the Horsell
“An easy distance do you call it? It is nearly fifty miles.”


the ashy incrustation that covered the meteorite, was falling off the

“I wish it may.”

over the water, was a kind of dull line—that was the woods on t’other
It is Sunday to-day. After breakfast we were carried in palanquins to St. John’s Cathedral, where English ladies sang prayers in chorus.
for legs. They didn’t have no backs. The preachers had high platforms

up his camp fire all the better for the dark, if he’s got one.”
housework. So the old woman went to the Wicked Witch of the East, and
nothing precipitately. And I noted that now there was no question that


“‘Now I’ll make the eyes,’” said the farmer. So he painted my right

Secondly, By reason of some other premiums on exportation, granted to various branches of the national industry, which, on that very account, are grown not only much dearer within the nation, but have also enhanced the price of all other corresponding commodities, by withdrawing from them, hands which would have increased their quantity:
“I reckon _I_ knowed that,” Tom says, “but you bet he’ll have one
“Yes, that is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed on any other man it would have been nothing; but his perfect indifference and your pointed dislike make it so delightfully absurd! Much as I abominate writing, I would not give up Mr. Collins’s correspondence for any consideration. Nay, when I read a letter of his, I cannot help giving him the preference even over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and hypocrisy of my son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine about this report? Did she call to refuse her consent?”
began to return from all over the South-Western “lung”—Barnes,
cankering disease, due, it is believed, to the action of certain
narrowly missed being pitched onto the top of the screw. I turned, and
“But they _will_—and inside of two weeks—and I _know_ it!” says I.
“Here they are! They’ve broke for the river! After ’em, boys, and turn
and, crouching and making use of every chance of cover, I made a run
Boggs rode up before the biggest store in town, and bent his head down
Scarecrow in the middle and sent him tumbling, over and over, down the


With overwhelming force came the thought of myself, of my wife, and the
all over trembly and feverish to be so close to freedom. Well, I can

up? No—drownded him in a butt of mamsey, like a cat. S’pose people left
At Folkestone we took the express to London; the train rushed across the pleasant English landscape. All around lay pasture of green velvet with flocks of sheep grazing on the meadows. Soon tall chimneys rose against the sky. Here was London! its suburbs look like one immense building with an endless line of similar houses with boxes of red geraniums on the window-sills, surmounted by numerous chimney-pots smoking in the misty air.
You’s gwyne to marry de po’ one fust en de rich one by en by. You wants

never gwyne to fogive hisself as long’s he live!’ Oh, she was plumb
carry with them.


“I think you are a very bad man,” said Dorothy.
meadows that stretched towards Chertsey, and striding hurriedly towards
And the touch of that vapour, the inhaling of its pungent wisps, was

haven’t seen them—” (he counted on his fingers) “five days. Then I saw


On Wednesday the three fugitives—they had passed the night in a field

“This is bad,” said the Tin Woodman, “for if we cannot get to the land
The Winkies lifted him tenderly in their arms, and carried him back to


It will be seen how frequently and with what success Schwartz placed himself at the disposal of the Government, but he was scrupulously careful to keep clear of any money consideration. He knew only too well that a missionary, undertaking by request the performance of delicate political duties, might easily be suspected of seeking his own advantage, especially in an age and place where bribes, in some sort or another, were rather the rule than the exception. But he could always plead his disinterested aims.
isn’t!”

When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Bennet was most pressingly civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn; and addressed herself particularly to Mr. Bingley, to assure him how happy he would make them, by eating a family dinner with them at any time, without the ceremony of a formal invitation. Bingley was all grateful pleasure; and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on her after his return from London, whither he was obliged to go the next day for a short time.
May 21st.—The benediction of the common tomb of the soldiers of the regiment of Bakou, killed during the assault of the fort Azizie, took place this morning. A year has glided away, the fate of Erzeroum has changed, and this same regiment of Bakou holds garrison now in this fort.
dinner, because that would bring bad luck. The same if you shook the
CHAPTER XVIII.

and floored, and sometimes the table was set there in the middle of the


kind of wondering, and says:
when the balloon brought me here, and I am a very old man now. But my
“_Noth’n!_”
November 14th.—The Amou-Daria is very low at this season. The big river in several places forms wide sandbanks, and this time I was not a bit afraid to cross the bridge.
A young officer appeared at last on my horizon, with whom I almost convinced myself that I was in love. He carried my photograph in a locket on his watch-chain, and brought me flowers and bonbons, and spoilt my appetite, making me eat lots of sweets before dinner. One day I scratched my finger with a pin; it was nothing but a simple scratch, but a drop of blood appeared and my chivalrous admirer tore his handkerchief instantly to pieces and bound up my wound. He preserved that rag, stained with my precious blood, as a sweet remembrance. Very touching indeed!
him “Your Majesty,” and waited on him first at meals, and didn’t set



heart disease.”
he being so unexpected; but right away after I see I warn’t scared of
her; so I set to work harder than ever. But the girl lived with an old
MR. BENNET was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley. He had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring his wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was paid she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the following manner. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, he suddenly addressed her with,—
Kingston and the trees give cover, earthworks are being thrown up and
Sergy received one day a curious letter from Hackenberg, a small town in Prussia, from an individual named Wilhelm Doukhow, who informed Sergy that his grandfather had entered the Russian military service in 1812, during the retreat of Napoleon, and had disappeared without vestige. Having learnt by the papers that the family name of the newly appointed General-Governor of the Amour provinces was Doukhovskoy, he begged my husband to inform him if he was not a descendant of his ancestor.
in London do not read Sunday papers.
with smashed hardware; the end of the kitchen towards the house was
puff of flame suddenly and violently squirted out of the planet, “as
The north and south winds met where the house stood, and made it the
Island, about two mile and a half down stream, heavy timbered and
                                          UNKNOWN FRIEND
The smell of earth reached us already, as well as the perfume of amber and tropical flowers. We are in Cochin-China, in fairy-like decorations. I thought myself in dreamland and had to pinch myself to be sure I was awake.
Solomon slide. I told about Louis Sixteenth that got his head cut off
network were standing about the station. One grey-headed old gentleman
to get into new trouble. But he at once unlocked their spectacles,

Well, _I_ never see anything like that old blister for clean
“How very ill Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. Darcy,” she cried: “I never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she is since the winter. She is grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and I were agreeing that we should not have known her again.”
Ther’s a spoon gone; and _that_ ain’t all. There was ten, and now
“You’re s’rp—Why, what do you reckon I am? I’ve a good notion to take

drifted—a demented man. I found myself in a house of kindly people, who
cornfield.”
“I mean that no man in his proper senses would marry Lydia on so slight a temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty after I am gone.{373}”
As soon as he had spoken, the Tin Woodman began to chop, and in a short
“Well, it does beat—”
Elizabeth particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the latter the preservation of her favourite daughter from irremediable infamy, was hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill applied.

They struck eastward through Hadley, and there on either side of the
“If you please, let me explain. Nobody can read my hand but my brother
His sisters were very anxious for his having an estate of his own; but though he was now established only as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by no means unwilling to preside at his table; nor was Mrs. Hurst, who had married a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to consider his house as her home when it suited her. Mr. Bingley had not been of age two years when he was tempted, by an accidental recommendation, to look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it, for half an hour; was pleased with the situation and the principal rooms, satisfied with what the owner said in its praise, and took it immediately.
And I succumbed to his conviction.

in a left-hand bend.
concluded to drop crabapples and p’simmons. We warn’t feeling just
too good a start; they got to the woodpile that was in front of my
see. They tiptoed away; so I seen, easy enough, that they’d shoved in
closing the trap door so that no more accidents could happen.
If the want of objects, capable of exercising advantageously the industry of a numerous and active people, should compel government, on account of some difficulties unconquerable by art and nature, to apply that industry to some other object, on which it would be impossible to support abroad the competition of another nation, that is, to offer equally with the[184] latter an even quantity of labour of one sort, for an even quantity of labour of a different one, there is no doubt but, in such a case, a certain premium, to maintain the competition with the country most partially favoured by art and nature, would prove, of all institutions, the most judicious and the most humane; it would be a kind of indirect tax in favour of laborious indigence; a tax, much more eligible than many others, which, though destined to the relief of wretchedness, often increase it, by checking the efforts of industry, by even providing a resource for idleness, and sometimes an alluring, a comfortable prospect for debauchery.
“Oh, yes! of that kind of love which I suppose him to have felt. Poor Jane! I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not get over it immediately. It had better have happened to you, Lizzy; you would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you think she would be prevailed on to go back with us? Change of scene might be of service—and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as anything.”

As soon as my husband arrived, the train steamed away amidst loud cheers.
BISHOP HEBER PREACHED HIS LAST SERMON FROM THE STEPS
“My dearest sister, now be, be serious. I want to talk very seriously. Let me know everything that I am to know without delay. Will you tell me how long you have loved him?”


to be blinded by the glare of the Emerald City, so she said nothing.
days’ journeyings. Her great idea was to return to Stanmore. Things had
the very—why, goodness sakes, you can guess what kind of a fluster _I_

“You did.”

best of him and tied him he’d a killed us both. And what _for?_ Jist
idiots don’t require documents—leastways I’ve heard there’s such down
Mars is older than our earth, with scarcely a quarter of the
I took the canoe out from the shore a little piece, and took a look;
to the horse. When I looked back again the second hill had hidden the
We put up at the “Hôtel des Bergues.” From the great bay windows of our sitting-room we could see far out over Lake Leman and the distant chain of mountains cut sharply against the deep blue sky. After having taken off the dust of the road, we went for a drive through the town, though I was awfully tired and felt the jolting of the omnibus still. Our driver having guessed our nationality, drove us straight to the Russian church. A party of English tourists were doing it with red Baedeckers in their hands. A guide, who was giving explanations to them, found it necessary to explain to us, pointing out the image of Alexander Nevski, one of our most venerated saints, that he had been “Un grand personnage de la Russie” (a notable Russian personage).
enormous impetus to terrestrial invention. As it dawned upon me first,
The Discovery of Oz, the Terrible
XXI.	Boulogne-sur-mer	159

The King Went for Him.—A Royal Row.—Powerful Mellow.
His mind has been dwelling upon the exhortation of St. Paul that we “be strong in the Lord.” He knows what it is to meet with powers of darkness and enemies which are for ever attacking him without and within. But he takes heart and admonishes his friend to be faithful.

sheep-signal; and here was Aunty pegging away at the questions, and me




but we wouldn’t have to light it for up-stream boats unless we see we
Monkey seized Toto and flew after them, although the dog tried hard to





“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Who are you, and why do you seek me?”


filthy as my own; he looked, indeed, as though he had been dragged
rested on it and disgorged a mass of sovereigns that seemed to break up
I learned from the papers that during the festivals there occurred a terrible accident at Moscow, which claimed some thousand victims, and darkened the Coronation of Nicolas II. On the 19th May, a colossal festival was organised for the populace on the Khodinka-Field. Long tables with all sorts of refreshment were laid on the brink of an enormous ditch. Towards two o’clock in the afternoon about 6000 persons hurried to the spot where free dinners were distributed. Tumultuous crowds continued to arrive unceasingly. The first arrivals couldn’t resist the great pressure of the oncomers, and fell headlong into the ditch. The catastrophe took place in twenty times less than it takes to describe it.

were lifted out and deposited upon a level surface of earth behind it.
Then the mice were unharnessed from the truck and scampered away
the smoke a-rolling, and everything they’re told to do they up and do
This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on his diffidence, and the little value he put on his own good qualities.
along and listened to all the old gentleman said, and was listening to
great body of machinery on a tripod stand.





right foot.

daughter has proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though, at the same time, for the consolation of yourself and Mrs. Bennet, I am inclined to think that her own disposition must be naturally bad, or she could not be guilty of such an enormity, at so early an age. Howsoever that may be, you are grievously to be pitied;{364} in which opinion I am not only joined by Mrs. Collins, but likewise by Lady Catherine and her daughter, to whom I have related the affair. They agree with me in apprehending that this false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of all the others: for who, as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly says, will connect themselves with such a family? And this consideration leads me, moreover, to reflect, with augmented satisfaction, on a certain event of last November; for had it been otherwise, I must have been involved in all your sorrow and disgrace. Let me advise you, then, my dear sir, to console yourself as much as possible, to throw off your unworthy child from your affection for ever, and leave her to reap the fruits of her own heinous offence.
another, another coming round from broadside to end on, steamships
this domicile we found a store of food—two loaves of bread in a pan, an
Many weapons were tried, many expeditions of two or three ships made the trip, and attempted to destroy the creatures. Some succeeded moderately well, others met with ghastly failure.
he wrote home; so Harvey ’ll know where to look for friends when he
He hesitated.
cloud with rows of glow-worms around it; but all of a sudden she bulged

time ’s coming when you’re going to feel sick whenever you think of

secrets, he must have his throat cut, and then have his carcass burnt
“No, you ain’t the only person that’s had a secret of his birth.” And,


gaunt, staring figures of despair. And for the food! Across the
hurry up and give them one they’d get into trouble sure.

minute he judged he was about free. It was according to the old saying,

a knife or dropping aitches, you’d better chuck ’em away. They ain’t no
“The sojers’ll stop ’em,” said a woman beside me, doubtfully. A

him into the earth, you know. And then she says:
At last we are completely tranquillised. My husband has received orders to clear away all the mines from the Japanese Sea.
I shall venture to throw out some thoughts on these different objects, after I have examined whether the necessity of a balance of trade, constantly favourable, be not as doubtful as that of a reimbursement, and a bankruptcy; and whether that balance is really such as many people imagine it.
Elizabeth was so much caught by what passed, as to leave her very little attention for her book; and, soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and his eldest sister, to observe the game.
SIR WILLIAM stayed only a week at Hunsford; but his visit was long enough to convince him of his daughter’s being most comfortably settled, and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not often met with. While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted his mornings to driving him out in his gig, and showing him the country: but when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments, and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her cousin by the alteration; for the chief of the time between breakfast and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden, or in reading and writing, and looking out of window in his own book room, which fronted the road.{210} The room in which the ladies sat was backwards. Elizabeth at first had rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer the dining parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a pleasanter aspect: but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent reason for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been much less in his own apartment had they sat in one equally lively; and she gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement.


“Not a bit of it, my dear; I’m just a common man.”
“I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have done, for your long, kind, satisfactory detail of particulars; but, to say the truth, I was too cross to write. You supposed more than really existed. But now suppose as much as you choose; give a loose to your fancy, indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the subject will afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you cannot greatly err. You must write again very soon, and praise him a great deal more than you did in your last. I thank you again and again, for not going to the Lakes. How could I be so{470} silly as to wish it! Your idea of the ponies is delightful. We will go round the park every day. I am the happiest creature in the world. Perhaps other people have said so before, but no one with such justice. I am happier even than Jane; she only smiles, I laugh. Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that can be spared from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas. Yours,” etc.


I waked up I thought somebody had me by the neck. So the sleep didn’t
invaders without all this inconvenience.
“Well, then, what possessed you to go down there this time of night?”



pit dropped sheerly from my feet, but a little way along the rubbish
coiling and pouring upward in a huge and ebony cumulus cloud, a gaseous
Witch earnestly for her kindness; and Dorothy exclaimed:
The average man’s a coward. In the North he lets anybody walk over him

I see I had spoke too sudden and said too much, and was in a close
to eat, and both of them was kind as they could be, Tom says:
bark; so I knowed the river had begun to rise. I reckoned I would have
Our excursion to the Glaciers was arranged for eight o’clock, and the conveyance that we had ordered the day before stood at the door of our hotel, a mountain chariot with horses jingling with bells. We set off in the gayest of spirits. Our driver cracked his whip, and away rolled the carriage. Soon we were hurrying along the valley road, and passed meadows strewn with wild flowers. We took three hours to mount to the Hotel Eiger. On our way we met peasant girls with loaded baskets on their heads. On the slopes villagers in large straw hats were cutting down the grass, and women in bright-coloured skirts were working in the potato-fields. Here comes a procession of carts laden with blocks of ice procured from the Glaciers, dragged by patient sad-eyed oxen. In the distance the echo of an alpine horn and the cries of some peasants resounded. We overtook a peasant woman jolted like a basket on the back of her mule. After a mile or two the road began to mount, and our tender-hearted driver climbed down from the seat and walked at the horses’ heads, driving off the troublesome flies which stuck to his steeds. We crossed a tidy little village consisting of but one straggling street. The roofs of the houses are covered with lathings, with big stones laid over them, in order that the[180] wind should not scatter them about. Behind the rusty gates flaxen-haired children stared at us. On the front of a tavern we saw the picture of a bear with the pleasant inscription, “Lait Frais,” written underneath. Close by, on the front of an hostelry, we read, “Les voyageurs qui descendent chez nous seront contents”—(The tourists who put up at our house will be contented.) A year ago there was fearful damage done in the valley we were driving through, a huge block of rock fell down from the cliffs and hurled itself into the valley, destroying a house which was taken clear away. We had to pass that square stone that looked like a monument in the middle of the road. We wanted to stop before a wicket with a finger-post pointing to it with the inscription “La Chute Noire, 25 centimes par personne” but our driver said it was not worth while as we could see this same Chine at free cost a few paces off.
go.”
fooled that town a heap worse than ourn done. I don’t say that ourn is
 “Hump Yourself”
I, the old man will be glad when he sees this—she’s worth ten dollars.
XI.	Marriage	69
mind I wouldn’t ever go anear that house again, because I reckoned I


But before they heard again from Mr. Gardiner, a letter arrived for their father, from a different quarter, from Mr. Collins; which, as Jane had received directions to open all that came for him in his absence, she accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his letters always were, looked over her, and read it likewise. It was as follows:—
I didn’t rightly know what to say, because I didn’t know whether the
“Because,” answered the Princess, also stopping, a safe distance away,

should be lost.”

My husband works very hard from morning till night; he rarely had a moment he could call his own, and hadn’t a second for me, except at meal-times, and then there was always somebody present.


this awful mess wouldn’t ever happened.
Melle. Nadine had another admirer in the person of Doctor Bianchi, a forty-year old cherub, who worshipped the very ground that she trod on, and cooed his romance into her ears like a real troubadour. But he is far from being the ideal Lohengrin, with his bald head and prominent abdomen. He wouldn’t have been my hero even with more hair on his head, being rather a fool and very ignorant, especially of geography. To him Russia represented only snow, bears, and tallow candles. “May I ask you if you are English?” he inquired when being presented to me.—“Russian?” he exclaimed in blank astonishment. “Oh! I can’t believe it, you look quite European.” Stupid fellow! I detested him after that, for I am exceedingly tenacious in questions of patriotic pride. Doctor Bianchi had made several times the offer of his hand and heart to Melle. Nadine, but she refused him flatly over and over again. She treats him very harshly and hates the very sight of him. When Doctor Bianchi enters one door she goes out by the other. But the long-suffering physician makes an ass of himself and continues to persecute his lady-love with his tenacious wooing and poor Melle. Nadine doesn’t know how to get rid of him. As for me I would have known how to knock the calf-love out of him soon enough. What awful idiots men make themselves when they are in love.
comfortable. Pretty soon she says,


their seats, and fumbling with their buttons. I warn’t easy myself, but

And somebody trotting along with the gang would answer back and say:


 Irrigation
with his hand and knocked it across the house. He says:
impact had caused a flash of fire. Henderson and Ogilvy were not there.
night. At first I could distinguish no people at all, though I peered
On the very last day of the regiment’s remaining in Meryton, he dined, with others of the officers, at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth disposed to part from him in good-humour, that, on his making some inquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at Hunsford, she mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam’s and Mr. Darcy’s having both spent three weeks at Rosings, and asked him if he were acquainted with the former.
teeth.
The Peru comes to anchor at Yokohama Beach. What joy to touch land after 18 days at sea!
_Sunday Sun_ put it, and a clever and remarkably prompt “handbook”
“Well, it beats _me_”—and snaked a lot of old letters out of his
in under it, with folks around.
the—the—gentlemen, if you’ll only pull ahead, and let me heave you the
and smiling a little. I put down the needle and thread, and let on to
“And what did she say?”
that the country about London must inevitably be the scene of a
were invisible to me.

gone far indeed with our neighbour. Its physical condition is still
“Indeed I have, sir,” was her answer. “She is a great deal too ill to be moved. Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her. We must trespass a little longer on your kindness.”
gives notice to the governor of the castle. When Louis XVI. was going
much, anyway. Bob’s been carved up some with a bowie, and Tom’s been
After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords, exclaiming, “Is not this nice? is not this an agreeable surprise?”
down into the village and could see three or four lights twinkling,
At seven in the morning our troops left Alexandropol. The heart-breaking hour had come, the sad word “farewell” was to be said. I cried out, “Good-bye my all, good-bye!” and pressed my wet cheek to Sergy’s tear-stained one, like my own. After a short prayer, we held each other in a close embrace; I couldn’t believe that he was really going. At last I mastered myself with an effort, and disengaged my clinging arms with a last kiss. It was the worst moment I had ever had in my life. There was an instant of unconsciousness, and when I recovered myself he was gone! I hadn’t the strength to accompany Sergy to the front door, and flinging myself upon my bed, face downwards, I sobbed as I had never sobbed before. Oh! now I was alone, alone, alone! Suddenly I sprang up and stretched out my hands to the blank distance, cried aloud: “Come back, Sergy, come back, my sweetheart, I cannot let you go!” But he was already gone past recall. I shall certainly never forget that day. It seemed as if my life had ended. Oh, my God, if I could only die!
He took the hint and soon began with, “This seems a very comfortable house. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr. Collins first came to Hunsford.”

was most out, and her old gray head was resting on her hand, and she
two or three times like a person that’s got a dry throat, and then
was mighty still in there, and everybody bending a little forwards and
“I think you said she was a widow, sir? has she any family?”
have never seen him.”
picked up the leg sulkily and led her cow away, the poor animal limping
refugees were exchanging news with the people on the omnibuses. One was

My sudden and unexpected appearance at Tashkend created quite a commotion in the town. My mother was very much impressed by all our surroundings. To amuse her we arranged, every night, card-parties. There appeared to be a great number of whist-players in Tashkend; partners were never wanting. Mother’s partners presented her with a green cloth with all their autographs embroidered on it. They tried to entice me into their play, but I was no card-player, and at my first essay, my face openly expressed: “I am bored to death.” I thrust furtive glances at the clock all the time, watching for the hands to show the hour of my deliverance. I did not repeat my experiment.
and went to getting his Romeo and Juliet by heart. When he had got it

But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer{70} the first object; Miss Bingley’s eyes were instantly turned towards Darcy, and she had something to say to him before he had advanced many steps. He addressed himself directly to Miss Bennet with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst also made her a slight bow, and said he was “very glad;” but diffuseness and warmth remained for Bingley’s salutation. He was full of joy and attention. The first half hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest she should suffer from the change of room; and she removed, at his desire, to the other side of the fireplace, that she might be farther from the door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone else. Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great delight.





heard anybody say it was any way to keep off bad luck when you’d killed



CHAPTER XXXIV.

“Blamed if I would, Jim.”
“This division is inseparable from the greatest possible quantity of productions and consumptions, which cannot be effected but by the greatest number of productors and consumers, who will always be found and attracted where the laws shall be as little prohibitory as possible.
northards, along the fence, at midnight exact, with a false key, and go
A. We shall carry on a smuggling trade in their country, and they will pay dearer for our goods; they cannot do without them.


My parents with some friends came to visit us the next day. I put on for that occasion a dressing-gown with a long train and felt very proud to be called Madame and said “my husband” on every available opportunity.
chile dat he ’uz gwyne to chop in two?”
I grabbed a plank that touched me while I was “treading water,” and

those who live in the North and the South, are good witches. I know
It is all so natural and their experiences and difficulties were in their nature by no means confined to their day and generation, and their sincerity was manifest even when they did not carry it to the extent of believing in Christ.
write. You think you’re better’n your father, now, don’t you, because
understand.”
This question, truly important, requires some details on the different causes productive of the alteration in the prices.
So we set in, like we done before with the duke, and tried to comfort
arms growing out of its body, and it also had five long, slim legs.
off with a knife, but set the plug in between their teeth, and gnaw

CHAPTER XL.
_tell_ you dey warn’t no time los’. Sich another hurryin’ up guns en
last. The shadings have not been done in a haphazard fashion, or by
disturbed. The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman stood up in a corner and
road of yellow brick. It was almost dark under the trees, for the
hands is my best holt—for cancer and paralysis, and sich things; and I

save myself even the trouble of killing myself. I marched on recklessly

“He had a dream,” I says, “and it shot him.”
about the fields and lands on empty stomachs, they’ll come and be
I saw no visitors and went nowhere, working hard at my book till late in the night, keeping awake with black coffee. At the end of the week I found solitude intolerable and began to feel awfully dull. Every day was the same, the hours seemed years. It was so hard to be alone here! I had seldom experienced much of my own society and was sick of my own company. Sergy being absent, the world seemed one great blank. I never had him out of my thoughts for one minute. Sometimes I had the impulse to take the first train and fly back to Tashkend.
before last”—he stopped and spoke impressively—“it was just a matter of
and by-and-by a flash showed us a black thing ahead, floating, and we
the hands would grow larger.


invariably closed, between the South-Eastern and the South-Western

well. Why didn’t you come out and say so? Do you want to spread it all
would a done just as well.
likely be asleep, and they can slip around through the woods and hunt
work on Saturday; trees, felled and freshly trimmed, lay in a clearing,
heads in every kind of night disarray appeared. Enquiries were being
But our honeymoon was short, alas; the clouds came on all but too soon. We had been married about twenty days, and my cup of happiness was full, when matters took a turn for the bad. There came a telegram calling my husband back to Tiflis on account of the preparations for war with[72] Turkey. This unexpected turn of events fairly stunned me. What awaited us, I wondered?
I judged we had got everything fixed about right now. So I says:
“Your humility, Mr. Bingley,” said Elizabeth, “must disarm reproof.”
January 9th.—The weather is horrible. A snow-storm arose. The wind whistles and howls in the plain; flakes of snow adhere to the glass and it is impossible to see anything outside.

“_Whose_ pew?”
and fast from terror. But being only tin, the Woodman was not at all

in birds, stood those other two Martians that I had seen overnight,
“And then I should get no brains,” said the Scarecrow.
and none could live to cross it.”
“Complied with! I am only ashamed of his asking so little.”


My younger brother was in London when the Martians fell at Woking. He
fine sight; I never see anything so lovely. And then one by one they
He was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone should be forwarded at the sole expense of his brother-in-law; and he was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his assistance, and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could.
shingle-nails that Tom said would be handy for a prisoner to scrabble
so ignorant, and so kind of low-down and ornery.
shadow: greyish billowy movements, one above another, and then two
horse coming. We was crossing the road. Buck says:
said, “Follow me and I will show you your room.”
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
He was young, just turned nineteen,
Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mrs. Bennet and the children. But in what proportions it should be divided amongst the latter depended on the will of the parents. This was one point, with regard to Lydia at least, which was now to be settled, and Mr. Bennet could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him. In terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother, though expressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his perfect approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the engagements that had been made for him. He had never before supposed that, could Wickham be prevailed on to marry his daughter, it would be done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present{379} arrangement. He would scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser, by the hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket allowance, and the continual presents in money which passed to her through her mother’s hands, Lydia’s expenses had been very little within that sum.

13thly,

“They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want papa to take us all there for the summer! It would be such a delicious scheme, and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all. Mamma would like to go, too, of all things! Only think what a miserable summer else we shall have!”

ruins—I found about me the landscape, weird and lurid, of another
In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and Jane to make her resigned. As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia, that she considered it as the death-warrant of all possibility of common sense for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her, were it known, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her go. She represented to him all the improprieties of Lydia’s general behaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of such a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of her being yet more imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the temptations must be greater than at home. He heard her attentively, and then said,—


would put in the day, lazying around, listening to the stillness. Once
of pine needles and turf,” he said, and then grew serious over “poor

opposite slope of Maybury Hill. At first I took it for the wet roof of

When I returned to the common the sun was setting. Scattered groups
up prompt now—don’t stop to study over it. Which end gets up first?”
goodness he’d been robbed last night and put ashore off of a steamboat


Bell, and Dr. Robinson, and their wives, and the widow Bartley.
The man on the floor would shrivel up and say, “Oh, please don’t, Bill;
and blow and thunder and lighten like everything; so the king told us
“Well, it’s all terrible sad; but we’ve all got to go, one time or
two great beasts with bodies like bears and heads like tigers.
all asleep. And we had to steal candles, and the sheet, and the shirt,
great claws grabbed the Scarecrow by the arm and carried him up into
The Hôtel de Londres being quite full, we were led into a large saloon, which was hastily converted into a bedroom. It was all windows on one side, and seemed horribly uncomfortable. Looking about me with dissatisfied eyes, my face began to lengthen. I suppose it was very silly, but I felt so tired and out of sorts that I could have cried.
18th June.—Again the whole night the syren never ceased blowing. At dawn I was wakened by a formidable noise. I heard footsteps of men running down the deck and the captain’s voice roaring out orders to the crew. It appeared that we were in imminent danger, having nearly run into an iceberg three times the size of our ship. If our captain had[319] not been on the bridge at that moment, we should all have perished.
them. They gained on the boys, but it didn’t do no good, the boys had
For three days the Heralds in heraldic costumes rode about the town announcing by sound of trumpet that the ceremony of the Coronation would take place on the 15th May.


learned now that we cannot regard this planet as being fenced in and a
ever git into such a scrape?”
VIII.	In First Touch with Tanjore	90
[xvi]


at the many forms the Great Wizard could take upon himself, and the
Science of Phrenology” at such and such a place, on the blank day of
But Elizabeth had now recollected herself; and, making a strong effort for it, was able to assure her, with tolerable firmness, that the prospect of their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she wished her all imaginable happiness.
They told who they were, and the girl soldier went into the Castle.
to get down and look under the bed. Then I was glad I hadn’t found the

Toto looked up into her face with his little black eyes and wagged his
to-morrow—I want it.”
I judged I’d get the doctor’s yarn to Aunt Sally somehow or other as
heavy firing that had broken out while we were driving down Maybury
In a moment he was out of sight.




him up and set him upon his feet again, while he joined her in laughing


of the Great Oz.


[344]
I readily acknowledge, that at that period a grievous war broke out, which did not conclude till 60 millions, nominally 100, had been added to the old debt, or, to come more directly to the point, till the nation had been loaded, or, if you please, crushed under the enormous weight of three additional millions interest to be paid annually. But in what manner will those three millions, so heavy, so dreadful, affect the interested parties? In my judgement, it will be the same with this additional burden, as it has been with the six millions which the said parties were wont to pay before the last war. It certainly must have been felt at first by every body, except the trading part of the nation, whose first operation ever was to add to the price of the taxed commodities, both the amount of the tax, and the benefit of the advance to the consumer. (and this is strictly consonant with Justice.) Now these consumers are of two sorts, viz. the proprietor of lands, and the proprietor of money: the latter must also be considered under a two-fold point of view, as a capitalist for himself, or as a dependant who receives the money from either of the two proprietors. The proprietor of money, from the nature of this instrument of trade, is a being merely passive;[64] twenty shillings, which he is paid for interest, can currently enable him to purchase such articles only as currently sell for 20 shillings. If the taxes had increased, by one tenth, the price of all the commodities which he used to consume before the war of 1755, it is clear, therefore, that in 1763 he had lost one tenth of all his possible enjoyments: I say possible; for the monied man, I speak in general, saves enough, annually, to strike an advantageous balance against the inconveniences inseparable from his capital; I mean that progressive and unavoidable depreciation of money, so long as there will be mines opened, and taxes to discharge. But he can effect it with the greater ease, as his stock often returns 5 per cent. whilst the capital of the landed proprietor brings him in hardly four, and often less.
“To make herself agreeable to all”
Chapter VI
On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out of her power, by running away.
honor; but he said as this was the last day of the camp-meeting he

would slide off in the water. The ridge our cavern was in was full of
this death was incomprehensible. All I knew was that these things that
drink without hurt the water from which it had been strained. The

in my mouth and I went overboard backwards; for I forgot he was old
“What in the nation can he _do_ with it?”
But, seeing they were bigger than the Lion, and remembering that there
CHAPTER XLIV
8thly,
stealing a poor old woman’s nigger that hadn’t ever done me no harm,
creetur’s up to _this_ time; as long as I couldn’t seem to get any
prison they dote on it. Specially, painful music; and you can’t get no
He gave a cry of terror, sprang sideways, and rushed on before I could
 Climbing up the Bank

Towards eight o’clock in the morning we saw a dark outline on the horizon, and made such a fuss over the first lump of sand, as if we were discovering the North Pole. The Island of Goto, precipitous and craggy, was the first sight of Japan; as it fades into greyness behind, there rises far away the high, jagged coast-line of Japan, with mountains in the far distance. Above the eternal snow-line appeared the cone of the sacred mountain Fuji-Yama, with its crown of snow. The peak was visible for a few moments only, retiring again behind the clouds. The Fuji-Yama is an ancient extinct volcano which sprang up in the year 862 before Christ. At the present moment there are four active volcanoes in Japan, which are the cause of frequent earthquakes in this country.
not succeeding.
“If I,” said Mr. Collins, “were so fortunate as to be able to sing, I should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with an air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly compatible with the profession of a clergyman. I do not mean, however, to assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our time to music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to. The rector of a parish has much to do. In the first place, he must make such an agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and not offensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the time that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the care and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making as comfortable as possible. And I do not think it of light importance that he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards everybody, especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment. I cannot acquit him of that duty; nor could I think well{129} of the man who should omit an occasion of testifying his respect towards anybody connected with the family.” And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, he concluded his speech, which had been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room. Many stared—many smiled; but no one looked more amused than Mr. Bennet himself, while his wife seriously commended Mr. Collins for having spoken so sensibly, and observed, in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that he was a remarkably clever, good kind of young man.
seen a light now away down to the right, on shore. So I said I would go

table-cloth after sundown. And he said if a man owned a beehive and
grateful to you, and shall never forget your kindness.”


“So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George Wickham? Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousand questions; and I find that the young man forgot to tell you, among his other communications, that he was the son of old Wickham, the late Mr. Darcy’s steward. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to give implicit confidence to all his assertions; for, as to Mr. Darcy’s using him ill, it is perfectly false: for, on the contrary, he has been always remarkably kind to him, though George Wickham has treated Mr. Darcy in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, but I know very well that Mr. Darcy is not in the least to{121} blame; that he cannot bear to hear George Wickham mentioned; and that though my brother thought he could not well avoid including him in his invitation to the officers, he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself out of the way. His coming into the country at all is a most insolent thing, indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you, Miss Eliza, for this discovery of your favourite’s guilt; but really, considering his descent, one could not expect much better.”

“All right; I wash _my_ hands of the matter. But I warn you all that a
your head in.” I done it, but I judged they would take it off.


the head of the island, and then started across. I took off the
From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and were indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went along, and how often especially Miss De Bourgh drove by in her phaeton, which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it happened almost every day. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and had a few minutes’ conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely ever prevailed on to get out.
“I know very well, madam,” said he, “that when persons sit down to a card table they must take their chance of these things,—and happily I am not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object. There are, undoubtedly, many who could not say the same; but, thanks to Lady Catherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding little matters.”
On our way back to the hotel, we crossed a long covered wooden bridge which contains about three hundred pictures by old Swiss masters. We got back to the hotel just in time for lunch. I generally avoid being on show at tables-d’hôtes and was very displeased with Sergy for insisting on my going down. My eyes wandered rapidly about the table and it did not improve my appetite, for everybody was so unattractive! Just opposite me sat a fat bejewelled matron, who had made her appearance on this planet some seventy years ago at least, and who at a prehistorical period could have been rather nice; but she did look such a guy now, dressed ridiculously for her age and outrageously painted, with black circles about her eyes which made them look like goggles, and a permanent blush palpably not due to nature. Her old face and youthful clothes presented an alarming contrast, but she[174] considered herself still irresistible and affected little moues and attitudes that sat incongruously upon her elderly looks. She rolled her eyes like a love-smitten cat, showing off her rings and bracelets, and coquetted with her neighbours showing her false teeth in a hideous grimace. This old crony was a laughing-stock to everybody; she saw these mocking glances, but being completely satisfied with herself, she evidently attributed them to envy. She stared about her with a long-handled lorgnette and turned it rudely on me, eyeing me disagreeably. I returned her stare with a look of defiance. Already put into a nervous state by the cross-fire of masculine and feminine glances, I could not eat my lunch, and as soon as the horrid table-d’hôte was at an end, I hurried up into my room and indulged in a good cry. By dinner-time I was still in the same mood and would not go down, declaring that I had no appetite. I was much too disfigured by weeping to dine even at a separate table.
The eyes looked at her thoughtfully for a full minute. Then said the
to the mill, and then struck up through the bush to where my canoe was
had brought with them certain fresh appliances that stood in an orderly


right and left at the niggers and everybody else, as fast as her tongue
get ’em to send for you;” which made them all laugh, and they said it
We put up at the Grand Hôtel, just opposite the Royal Palace. After having taken a little rest we went for a stroll in the town and crossed in a small steamer to Djurgarden, a beautiful park on the other side of the bay, where we had dinner at a small restaurant. A waiter, napkin upon arm, came up to us, but as we couldn’t speak a word of Swedish, we found it difficult to make him understand what we wanted, and had to converse by gestures to illustrate our meaning. But our attempts to describe a chicken being useless, the idea came to me to cry out cou-ca-ri-cou, and I came out of the[270] difficulty. We ended our evening at “Tivoli,” a fashionable music-hall, where we met several fellow-passengers of our boat. The performance took place in the open. The actresses who sang and danced were more or less bad, very short-petticoated and very generously décolleté.
corn-pone that was in Jim’s pan, and we went along with Nat to see how
with brains. I cannot tell you how to use them, however; you must find
trying to think what I better do, and I run across a boy walking, and
people so much that you think you _are_ braver than any other
“Because that isn’t the way we Lions do these things,” he replied. Then
and shinning through the dark for the lean-to. I couldn’t hardly get my
be a coward.”
start. But take it all around, I was feeling ruther comfortable on
across. The knees of its foremost legs bent at the farther bank, and in

were all afraid of her.
brass didn’t show, because it was so slick it felt greasy, and so that
of the forest, and the Lion whispered to them that it was in this part


“What was your idea for asking _me?_” he says.


together were rows of emeralds, set closely, and glittering in the

clogged up the air, and altogether he shed seventeen suits. And, then,
For that moment I touched an emotion beyond the common range of men,
dinner, didn’t you see a nigger man go in there with some vittles?”
had the handling of Louis XVI., there wouldn’t a been no ‘Son of Saint
It was early on the fifteenth day that I heard a curious, familiar


The Tin Woodman came to her and said:




 Still and Sunday-like
man that won the suit—which he would naturally do, of course. Anybody
him.
that Oz had by accident caught on fire and was burning up; but when he
Dorothy.
To be, or not to be; that is the bare bodkin
from Weybridge—had driven him to the very verge of his reason.
Jim never asked no questions, he never said a word; but the way he
enter the scheme of their life. And speaking of the differences between
hole; him and his raft was just a speck on the water away off yonder.

Just then another groan reached their ears, and the sound seemed to
CHAPTER XXXVI.
islan’ a man begin to come aft wid de lantern, I see it warn’t no use
We have seen, that the annual and general exportation of European goods to America and India amounted to about 15 millions sterling.—If 5 millions of English exports return no more than 2 millions some hundred thousand pounds annual benefit to England, that England, who sets[385] the highest price on her goods of all kinds, the general exportation of 15 millions, to which England contributes only one third, cannot, of course, afford to the whole of Europe, a profit of above 6 millions and some hundred thousand pounds;—but it seems that a benefit of 6 millions and some hundred thousand pounds is dearly bought at the rate of 25 millions laid out annually by Europe, both in paying the interest of their respective national debts, and for the support of the European navies designed to preserve, protect, and secure such a benefit.
and heard the clatter of hoofs and the gride of wheels. I saw a lad


would want to fetch a couple of kags of toothpicks along, for if that
behind. I half turned, keeping my eyes fixed upon the cylinder still,
Oh, what agonies I endured during the hours of fighting! I fancied the raging battle going on in which Sergy might at any moment be killed. One whole night I sat at the window-seat waiting nervously for news; the stillness was broken only by the measured tramp of the sentinel who paced to and fro under my window, and also by the mewing of marauding cats on the terrace roofs. At dawn I received a reassuring telegram from Sergy.
it a hundred times, and I wish to goodness I’d just let it alone, dad
She lifted me from the pole in the cornfield and brought me to the

at the corner of the road to Pyrford, where a knot of people stood with

12thly,
“I do, I do like him,” she replied, with tears in her eyes; “I love him. Indeed he has no improper pride. He is perfectly amiable. You do not know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in such terms.”
“I see your design, Bingley,” said his friend. “You dislike an argument, and want to silence this.”
journey of four thousand mile, but it’s a trial that’s sweetened and
Oz had said; and Dorothy was surprised to find that the Great Wizard
VII.
I took a good gap and a stretch, and was just going to unhitch and
“But you will know it, when I have told you what happened the very next day.”
such plantation; so he allowed he would advertise Jim in the St. Louis
Q. Of how many orders of men is the class of national consumers composed?


open country where there is plenty of sunshine. But now and then there
the Stork again and do her some kindness in return.”

hid. But we didn’t wait. We started through the woods on a run. The
Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his countenance. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eye towards Mr. Darcy with a{57} very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake of saying something that might turn her mother’s thoughts, now asked her if Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since her coming away.
her eyes and wave her ears whilst the pigs was milking her, and look as
was only one danger—that my joints would rust; but I kept an oil-can in
Mr. and Mrs. Bennet	5
“Piling up the fire”	69
Reflexions on the foregoing System.
sight—a dwindling multitude of perhaps a hundred people or more


lane that ran down from the College Arms. I say splashed, for the storm
“_Them_ letters. I be bound, if I have to take aholt of you I’ll—”
“I want him to give me some brains,” said the Scarecrow eagerly.
whether you wanted to or not.”


would not rest him to lie down, and he could not close his eyes; so he
back again and had a good old time; and towards daylight he crawled out

“Then, if you don’t mind, I’ll go with you,” said the Lion, “for my
“I’ve hunted high and I’ve hunted low, and it does beat all what _has_

this runaway nigger’s breakfast-time? It’s because they’re hungry;
harmless creature.
had flowed for immemorial years. The fever of war that would presently
the woods.
boxes of seegars. We hadn’t ever been this rich before in neither of

countless drawings that have been made from it; and beyond that the
In order to come as close to the point as it is necessary, on a matter, besides, of which it is equally useless and impossible to obtain an exact knowledge, here follow some facts, the essential results of which by no means depend on more or less exaggeration in the exposition either of the sale, or of the credit.
September 11th.—We have visited the young ladies’ gymnasium this afternoon. The pupils presented me with a richly embroidered table-cloth of their own work.
“Neither did I preach,” rejoined Schwartz, “at that time. Mr. Campbell says I preached for two hours. I did not so much as converse with any man. This poor story, totally misrepresented, is alleged by Mr. M. Campbell to prove the profligacy of Christians, whom he called with a sneer, ‘virtuous and enlightened people.’ If he has no better proof, his conclusion is built upon a bad foundation and I shall not admire his logic; truth is against him.
He remained standing at the edge of the pit that the Thing had made for

voice—“Ellen!” And the child suddenly darted away from my brother,
reason or other.
found me a strange enough figure, naked, save for my water-soaked
heard them on the water, so we got a canoe and took out after them and
everything in that blessed town, and all about the Wilkses; and about
made a noise. We scrouched down and laid still. Miss Watson’s big

want to.
Well, I says to myself at last, I’m a-going to chance it; I’ll up and


 ! ! ! !

sorts of other things, and a lot of books, and a spyglass, and three

the Houses of Parliament rose against one of the most peaceful skies it
“Why, yes, dat’s so; I—I’d done forgot it. A harem’s a bo’d’n-house, I
against the wall. He was the softest, glidingest, stealthiest man I

most to death.
lived in the forest near Gayelette’s palace, and the old fellow loved a
them that they were no longer slaves.
I crouched, watching this fighting-machine closely, satisfying myself

courageous I have grown.”

one seems to have troubled to look for the fallen mass that night.
spinning slowly. In another moment the colossal mechanism went striding
He had many inquiries to make of the missionary. Evidently he had noticed or been told something of the worship in the Roman Catholic churches, for he asked how it was that some European Christians worshipped God with images and others without them. The answer was explicit, pointing out that the worship of images was expressly forbidden by the word of God and that this corrupt practice was because the Holy Scriptures had been disregarded and taken away from the people. In answer to questions as to the Christian religion, Schwartz with the King’s permission very slowly and distinctly instructed him in the word of God and warmly condemned the use of idols, which, he said, the Europeans also worshipped before Christianity came. The King laughed at this and said, “He speaks plain!” Then followed the story of how man has fallen and deliverance has come through the death of Christ, finishing up his discourse with that matchless parable of the Prodigal Son.

me—explanations, I mean, of how I forgot to mention about Sid being
Captain Andreieff, the commander of the “Mandchour,” a gunboat put at our disposal as far as Vladivostock, came to call upon us; we kept him for luncheon. It was awfully hot during the meal and a boy pulled a “punkah,” a gigantic linen fan running the whole length of the dining-room, hanging from the ceiling and moved by a cord.
During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet’s consent should be asked in the course of the evening: Elizabeth reserved to herself the application for her mother’s. She could not determine how her mother would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man; but whether she were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear the first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her disapprobation.
he said it warn’t much use, he couldn’t be much comforted; said if we


and back, and back, because the river’s always gnawing at it.
with; so he took it and prized out one of the staples. The chain fell
“Bingley.”

I made it out. It was that dull kind of a regular sound that comes from
“By the living jingo, here’s the bag of gold on his breast!”
second with a stick, and Jim grabbed pap’s whisky-jug and begun to pour
a body gwyne to hit um wid a rock? How could a body do it in de night?
“Give me the reins,” she said, and laid the whip along the pony’s side.
When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which Elizabeth had already asked were of course repeated by the others, and they soon found that Jane had no intelligence to give. The sanguine hope of good, however, which the benevolence of her heart suggested, had not yet deserted her; she still expected that it would all end well, and that every morning would bring some letter, either from Lydia or her father, to explain their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce the marriage.

We remained at Weybridge until midday, and at that hour we found



dog-fennel and jimpson weeds under the window-hole—then we could tote
very distinctly: the black and silent observatory, the shadowed lantern
New York is full of Russian anarchists. Quite recently a Russian general, Seliverstoff, has been assassinated by one of them. They managed to lay hands on his murderer, whose beard and moustaches are kept by Mr. Olarowski. Oh, the horror!
waited.
Gravity increases four times if the distance is halved. As the matter inside becomes denser and denser, the star contracts, till finally its density reaches a tremendous figure.

closely and powerfully together when traversed by a current of
restaurants. If it’s amusement you’re after, I reckon the game is up.
little ripply, cool breeze begun to blow, and that was as good as




Mr. Komorski showed us a great deal of hospitality. He has contrived to give our apartment quite an air of cosiness. On my dressing-table I saw a bottle of scent bearing the name of “Bouquet d’Amour” quite a fitting denomination, for we are now in the provinces of the “Amour.”

of the Martians in action as I did. I take no credit to myself for an

she druther die first.
think her a witch, and she knew very well she was only an ordinary

wagon coming, and sure enough it was Tom Sawyer, and I stopped and

The internal anatomy, I may remark here, as dissection has since shown,
that I can never do.”


June 23rd.—At ten o’clock in the morning we enter the Bosporus and anchor in the Golden Horn. Sergy with all his companions and almost all the passengers had landed in order to stroll about Constantinople. I was tired of sight-seeing and lessons of history, and was the only one of our party who remained on board. At eight o’clock in the evening the Orel weighed anchor. To-day is Saturday, and our ship’s priest performed vespers on the lower deck.
still did not know; nor did I know, though I was beginning to guess,
“Did anybody send ’em word?”
may. Look at these blistered hands!”
“Honest injun, now, hain’t you been telling me a lot of lies?”
as a child might do. Once I had turned, I did not dare to look back.

“I reached that place,” he writes, “at seven and at eight Mr. Schwartz arrived, whom I had so earnestly desired to see. He was not able to quit his palanquin without difficulty; and I soon perceived that, since I saw him at Tanjore a year and a half ago, his energy and strength had become much impaired. It went to my very heart, as I reflected with sorrow that we were not likely to retain this dear brother long amongst us. He himself observed, ‘I am getting nearer the grave,[Pg 143] travelling no longer does for me, my heavenly Father will not I trust permit me to lie long sick and incapable of work, but take me soon to Himself, if it be His will.’ He complained of a severe cold that affected his teeth, the loss of which would much grieve him, as it would hinder his speaking.”

The genuine Thomas legend, however, has probably no reference to the Apostle but to a Bishop of Edessa of that name, who in the year a.d. 345 landed at Malabar with a company of presbyters, youths and maidens gathered from Jerusalem, Baghdad and Nineveh, and he it was who probably founded Kranganur. He is known as Thomas Cananaus.
Emerald City is?”
They were all astonished; and Mr. Bennet, who could by no means wish for so speedy a return, immediately said,—
had left them two days before—packed some provisions, put his revolver
Fac, Amor, aeternum sim maneamque tuus.”
going to let them come to no harm. There’s Hobson, the Babtis’
disappointed, I didn’t know why. But at last, just as I was sailing by,

till dawn. A man who was there told me. And as the day came they became

“Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion.”
VI.	A Glimpse of the Man Himself	68
Declaration.” There was some that they called crayons, which one of the
“Oh, I’m not afraid,” replied the Scarecrow. “He can’t hurt the straw.
PARIS
[Pg 182]
and ninth days—threats, entreaties, mingled with a torrent of half-sane
keep from knocking the islands out of the river; and so I judged the
After a time we drew near the road, and as we did so we heard the
the wall I could see the top of a tree touched with gold and the warm
be able, perhaps, to kill and eat him; and in any case, it would be
“I do not at all know; but I heard nothing of his going away when I was at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favour of the ——shire will not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood.”
_could_ think of so many of them, and so sudden and so pat, was what I
was done by a runaway nigger named Jim.”



tight place right at the outstart. But the king he only looked
Pyrford—to their original pit on Horsell Common. Over that, above the
over the country till we tired him out. We never got him till dark;


closer to one another, for the stillness of the empty room was more
All the streets and lanes was just mud; they warn’t nothing else _but_

green gleams and shifting rusty black shadows, strangely trying to the

because the witches went for him mostly in the dark, and it was good to
ELIZABETH had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter from Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had been renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; but on the third her repining was over, and her sister justified, by the receipt of two letters from her at once, on one of which was marked that it had been mis-sent elsewhere. Elizabeth was not surprised at it, as Jane had written the direction remarkably ill.
The effect would have been the same, if, instead of the distemper just supposed, the general enthusiasm on the discovery of a gold or silver mine, had induced the Sovereign to add to the circulation three times the quantity of specie which had hitherto been sufficient.
came—fear.
ground, and you’d have to raise it up and look under to see the hole.
Mr. Necker has but two reasons to suppose that there exists in the French circulation a sum of 2,200,000,000 livres tournois. The first is the indubitable fact, that since, and including the general re-coining of the French specie in 1726 to 1783, there have been struck, in the different mints of that kingdom, 2,500,000,000 of the same specie (the only one that is current in that[302] country:) and, in the next place, the very questionable fact, that France has preserved the whole, except 3 or 400 millions tournois, which may have passed into foreign hands, from the quantity of French specie which must have been carried abroad, to answer her commercial and political purposes.

The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely,
books, and would I slip out quiet and go there and fetch it to her, and

to push the raft through the water.
whimpered a little, but none of the others was frightened, and they
Seventhly, They do not entertain the least doubt on what seems to be unknown in Europe, namely, that the real benefit of a voyage can be found only in the price which the returns will[175] meet with, when arrived in the country where the voyage is to terminate.
“Oh, you did, did you? Strike a light there, somebody. What did you say
they get here?”
“Nothing, child, nothing. I did not wink at you.” She then sat still five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty,—
The President’s wife met us at the entrance door and led us into her private apartments, furnished in Turkish style with low sofas all round the walls, on which sat, cross-legged, five Bayadères dressed in green and pink robes; their faces were painted white and red, and their nails dyed with henna juice. After a slight collation, which consisted of coffee and different sorts of preserves served in silver vases, the Bayadères began to dance, clinking castanettes. Four music-girls sat on the floor and played the daira, a sort of cithern. Brandy and champagne was offered to the Bayadères to put them into still more depraved spirits, and they began to dance unlike anything I had ever seen. The master of the house who sat in the next room with a score of male friends left his door ajar, and the sight of these men inflamed the dancing-girls still more, and they took such liberties that I didn’t dare to raise my eyes from the carpet. When the Bayadères approached Helena, making indecent gestures, my poor old nurse pushed them back, her eyes flashing indignantly. Her speechless horror amused me enormously, and it was a mercy that from the place where I sat I hadn’t Mme. Gilbert to exchange glances with, or I couldn’t have remained serious. Our hostess seemed astonished at Helena’s repulse and asked why she did it, and if it was contrary to her religion? Anyone who reads this will suppose that I am describing a house of ill fame, but, on the contrary, it is one of the most respectable houses in Erzeroum, and all these enormities are of the exigencies of harem life. The little son of our hostess, aged twelve, an awfully vicious brat, was[113] incapable of concealing the ardour with which he was gazing upon the contortions of the Bayadères; he hardly heard when he was spoken to.
weeks. It’s a considerable ways to the upper end of the town. You
says “Bang!” staggered backwards, says “Bang!” again, and fell down
Sept. 12th.—We are at our journey’s end. Our next station will be Khabarovsk. We advance very slowly in order not to arrive at Khabarovsk before the appointed hour—nine o’clock in the morning.
the parlyment; and if everybody don’t go just so he whacks their heads
raft, and pulled off his boots and rolled up his britches, and let his
the auctioneer, and chipping in a little Scripture now and then, or a
weak, and those who go weak with a lot of complicated thinking, always
The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling her story gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a reproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regained her composure, and calmly replied,—


on a little low stool in front of me, holding both of my hands, and
“Caroline Bingley.”

September 3rd.—General Kopanski gave a grand dinner to-day in our honour. During the repast a military band played selections from “Faust.” The music led me to a far-away place; I had closed my eyes and saw St. Petersburg in vision. I kept back my tears with difficulty.
and went a-floating down, stern first, about two mile, and
“There’s hosts of people driving into Kingston in traps and carts and
above, while with another arm it periodically opened a door and removed
find out what was going on. Jim liked that notion; but he said I must
As to the inference that might be drawn from the apparent exportation of 105 millions of money, during the same period, according to the above statement, it is also necessary to make an observation on this matter.
October 17th.—I am off to Tashkend to-day, with Maria Michaelovna and my maid Mina. All the cars of our train are occupied by the members of the medical expedition sent to Tashkend to fight against the plague. It consists of forty doctors and ten sisters of mercy. The rain is coming down in torrents, but when I felt happy I was not in the least aware that the sun was not shining, and I am so happy now to rejoin Sergy! Our train is an express and rushes past nearly all the stations. We hadn’t time for dinner and snatched a sandwich at a railway buffet, that had probably been waiting more than a week for travellers to arrive.
The growing crowd, he said, was becoming a serious impediment to their
reaction upon the nervous system sap our strength and colour our minds.



Ten billion years had wrought strange changes in the human race. For ten thousand thousand millenniums they had lived on the planets of the solar system, but now the mighty sun was dying. There had been no decadence in this race, through all their history had come a constant fight with a persistent enemy, Nature. But it was a kindly enemy, for the contest had constantly developed man to meet the new emergencies.
what I can to get you out of it. Keep the river road all the way, and
never knowed how clothes could change a body before. Why, before, he

heave a brickbat in a mud-puddle, and he says:
go to the land of the Winkies, seek out the Wicked Witch, and destroy
“Till I _ask_ you! Well, I never see the beat of it in my born days! I

Dorothy ate a hearty supper and was waited upon by the rich Munchkin
Were you to say, Is it worth while to commit an injustice in order to grow rich, when we can consume but so little, and when the means are so numerous of pilfering so lawfully all that is wanted for consumption? I could then understand you;—but since you are in possession of 500 properties without having been guilty of injustice, it is something to reflect that they are really to you, the source of numberless enjoyments which you have it in your power to render worthy of a rational being: and, as the continuance of those enjoyments depends entirely on the health and bodily strength of so many others who are to contribute thereto, it is something to be conscious[369] that we find our own pleasures in the interest of others; it is something to reflect, that these pleasures are a very gentle mean, devised most probably by an universal Watchfulness, to induce you to provide men destitute of every thing, with that modicum of goods which was not granted to them, and which, nevertheless, being necessary for their sustenance, is sufficient to their moderation, and prevents their feeling the privation of all the rest: it is something to reflect, that you feed in fact 50, 100, 500 perhaps of your brethren, amongst whom there are 10, 15, 30, as well fed as yourself, since they live on what comes from your table. As to the others, whose faces you will never see, since some of them are at Pekin, in Arabia, at Constantinople, and others in France, Russia, &c. be assured that, with much less meat than you, but more bread, potatoes, or rice, and a few glasses of an acid liquor, the idea of which, whilst I venture to speak of it, is enough to crisp all your nerves, they are as contented, as happy as you, because they consume, without any reflection, without any solicitude for the morrow, all they want, in order to view that morrow with the same tranquillity.—Would it not be unjust in that Being, who weigheth the mountains in a balance, if there were, amongst men,[370] one condition more unfortunate than another? Would he not be unjust, if amongst men, there were one condition more blessed than another? I suppose, indeed, that there exists a Being, who weigheth the mountains in a balance, as others have supposed that there is a future life, where happiness is more visibly equal; and I have hitherto ventured upon so many suppositions!—yet I would beg leave to offer one more, relating though indirectly perhaps to the object now under consideration; but this shall be the last: I will ask (upon the supposition that there really exists a Being, not only Estimator, Moderator, but Creator also of all that thinks, wishes, and can be happy) ... yes, I presume to ask, whether the created being, capable of conceiving the idea of giving immortality to the creature capable of wishing for it, of fostering the hopes, and feeling the value of it, would not be greater than the Creator himself, if the Creator had not conceived such an idea?—I freely confess, that I should think myself better than the Creator, had the Creator conceived such an idea without putting it in execution.
As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as had marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as she threw a retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full of contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those feelings which would now have promoted its continuance, and would formerly have rejoiced in its termination.
“Not the slightest. I can remember no symptom of affection on either side; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you must be aware that ours is not a family on which it could be thrown away. When first he entered the corps, she was ready enough to admire him; but so we all were. Every girl in or near Meryton was out of her senses about him for the first two months: but he never distinguished her by any particular attention; and, consequently, after a moderate period of extravagant and wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others of the regiment, who treated her with more distinction, again became her favourites.”
 
I reckoned she’d let me go now, and as a generl thing she would; but I
heard a silvery tinkle sound within. Then the big gate swung slowly
Bob and Tom, some of you, and fetch the guns. George Jackson, is there

CHAPTER LXXXIII

answered Glinda, smiling.
July 24th, 25th.—The weather is very fine, the sea—a polished mirror. A favourable wind sends us forward, all the sails are up, and the Orel is running at the rate of fifteen miles an hour.

By-and-by it was getting-up time. So I come down the ladder and started
cave here, and keep them till they’re ransomed.”
“Missus, dey’s a sheet gone.”

unfamiliar; Wimbledon particularly had suffered. Walton, by virtue of
By doubling, therefore, the price of labour in agriculture and industry, the labouring people of both, will, under the numbers 18 or 20, have what they had before under those of 9 or 10; and these two great engines of national wealth will no ways be clogged.
in a strange atmosphere, the evident heaviness and painfulness of
“Bilgewater, I am the late Dauphin!”
and the law had bound me out to a mean old farmer in the country thirty

“And why is that?” asked the Scarecrow.
to throw anything in the way of a fair, open, out-and-out investigation
The observations I have made in several parts of France, from documents, it is true, no ways comparable to those of Mr. Young, could not justify my allowing so large a revenue to each individual in that kingdom. Yet France and England are the two richest and most flourishing countries in Europe.
Will it be said, that, on the first moment, the fall of prices would affect the intellects of those who can only see, but never compare? that the people, for instance, would lament their being reduced to 10, from the 12 they had been accustomed[255] for some days to receive, although they should pay only 5 for what cost them 6 before? In this case, keep up the prices, but without exception, and export on the true principles of exportation: take for your guide the example set up by my countryman, the American of Philadelphia, in selling dearer because you are compelled to do so; propose to buy dearer also, and this will be only an act of justice; you will see hereafter that you would at last be just, in spite of yourselves; be so intentionally: you cannot come down to the price of your purchasers; raise their prices to a level with your own, they will observe that even the first profit is not the lot of the first bidder, if every one doing justice to himself bids in proportion: mean while, the eagerness for labour goes on increasing, and by little and little the benefit extends to the lowest wretch that dwells in the community; he finds more work to do, and a greater reward for it.

Hundreds of observers saw the flame that night and the night after





straggling street of comfortable white and red houses, interspersed
heart in him and was a good man the first time I see him. Then they all
After this single instance of luxury, by which 25 men are fed during six months at the expence[362] of another, by daily reducing his revenue from 80 to 55, I think that, without being an enthusiast or a declaimer, it would be difficult, even for a good man in the right sense of the word, to withstand the pleasure (although perhaps rather of the mischievous kind) of observing that little more is wanted beyond two such fancies as we have stated, to bring the Proprietor, reduced in the origin from 240 shillings to 80, and then from 80 to 55—to bring him, I say, exactly to the level of the cultivator, whom he has brought down to 9d. or 10d. and of the mechanic on whom he has bestowed 11 or 12d.; however, I am willing to allow him 24 for his real, personal, and daily consumption. Twenty-four pence! will it be said, What signifies being so rich, to consume so little! Yes, twenty-four pence; and this is by much too much, if we deduct, as we ought, from the price of each article supposed to be consumed by the rich, the sum that remains in the hands of the pilferers of all kinds, who stand, unknown to him, between him and that article.—How! what say you then to that plate of green-peas which costs 6, 8, or 10 guineas!—But, my good friend the consumer of green peas, if you knew how many pilferers it conceals, of whom you have not the least idea! if you knew how many wants it has supplied[363] to some, how many indulgences of luxury it has procured to others, before it found its way to the table of an Epicure, or of an ostentatious man!—Let us try to enumerate them: workers of mines and quarries, masons, carpenters, glaziers, colliers, lock-smiths, English and French sailors for the common-spice trade; Dutch seamen, for the more precious kinds; ships of war of the three Powers, indispensable for the protection of the merchantmen employed on those objects; wood-fellers in Sweden, sail-cloth weavers in Russia, ship-builders, pilots, admirals of the three nations, husbandmen busied in the four parts of the world in procuring food for themselves, in order to prepare food for all those wood-fellers, glaziers, admirals, &c. exclusive of the Dutch gardener, and the French cook who alone can worthily crown the mighty operation.—Imagination loses itself in that single plate of green peas. How many reductions from 16 pence to 8, and from 8 to 4, have been required to produce it! It is inconceivable that it should not sell for more than 6 or 8 guineas;—but if each of those pilferers above mentioned takes back the small portion by which he has increased the intrinsic value of the article.... O ye, who must have swallowed up 500 properties, in order to eat, without being guilty of extravagance, that[364] plate of green peas, and who flatter yourselves with the idea of having consumed on that day fifty or sixty crowns worth, learn and reflect henceforward, without remorse and without vanity, that you have not spent above half one penny, the real value of any other dish of greens which you might have substituted to the peas you have consumed.
reckoned he was gone he come back and put his head in again, and told
This roused a general astonishment; and he had the{79} pleasure of being eagerly questioned by his wife and five daughters at once.
pap’s whisky.
next time you tramp take shoes and socks with you. The river road’s a
First, Whether the land proprietor, who is obliged to give at a fixed period three millions in taxes for his land, windows, domestics, and other objects more recently taxed, would think himself more injured if those three millions were divided and laid upon some objects of his[235] consumption, while he should observe that by this new order of things he would gain the convenience, not only of paying these three millions by different and remote installments, but also of making use of the money previous to such payment,—without injury to the trader, to whom the interest would be one way or other repaid,—while on the other hand, a part of the money, laid out upon his land, would furnish new resources for augmenting the produce of the taxes, by increasing his faculties of consumption:
partly explained by the nature of the remains of the victims they had
can get the Scarecrow’s clothes.”

pore and needy, sunk in shame! (_a-a-men!_) come, all that’s worn and


“Oh, you don’t understand, Jim; a coat of arms is very different.”


every other man still wore his dirty rags. Their faces seemed all with
“All right, we’ll get you some.”
regarded. Farmers were out to defend their cattle-sheds, granaries, and
The view became wider, the figure of the machines smaller. Then, as Hal Jus increased the observation distance, the entire planet came into view, as much of the planet Mars as was left. The great excavations were extended over all the surface. They were paring it down from all sides lest they disturb the balance of the planet.
the steam, with the fire behind them going to and fro.

 “They got him out and emptied Him”
very well. You want to set on your bed nights before you go to sleep,
“Dearest Jane! who could have done less for her? But make a virtue of it by all means. My good qualities are under your protection, and you are to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to me to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as often as may be; and I shall begin directly, by asking you what made you so unwilling to come to the point at last?{468} What made you so shy of me, when you first called, and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when you called, did you look as if you did not care about me?”


“Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst the less polished societies of the world: every savage can dance.”

He jumped up yelling, and the first thing the light showed was the
go, too, and see if he couldn’t strike something. We was out of coffee,
XV.	The Home Going	172
ran and disappeared. The thought that had flashed into my mind grew

beautiful places, and then Kansas would have no people at all. It is

pony as provisions, and would give nothing in exchange for it but the
to ’sturb a body, en rustle roun’ over ’im, en bite his feet, when he’s
pictures had been aggravating me and I had soured on her a little. I


They walked along as fast as they could, Dorothy only stopping once to
“Removed!” cried Bingley. “It must not be thought of. My sister, I am sure, will not hear of her removal.”

the pole I shall be greatly obliged to you.”

But it didn’t budge. So I hollered again, and then Jim says:
I did wish the fool would think to beat a tin pan, and beat it all the
her knee was gashed and bled down her rusty brown dress, and a smashed
there, and other people came. I clambered into the pit and fancied I

struggled to my feet, and, standing over him, laid my hand on his
was a lie, and He knowed it. You can’t pray a lie—I found that out.
cage that hunched upon its back. Then something—something struggling
He went frequently to the river where the Brahmins used to assemble the people and read to them the history of Ram. On his way he met one of the Court officials, called the King’s Ahlikar, whose duty it was to go about the place and among the crowds and then to make a report to his Royal master of anything which he saw of an extraordinary nature.
THE ROYAL NONESUCH!!!

whoops was warnings that would come to us every now and then, and if we
“Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday?” said she.


“I advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty,” said Mrs.{461} Bennet, “to walk to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Mr. Darcy has never seen the view.”
“No,” says the king.


done some thinking. I was pretty near certain I’d seen smoke over
in my face, and kept still, watching with all their might. I could see
Witch, “so you cannot miss it. When you get to Oz do not be afraid of
“It is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it.”

“_What_ raft, Jim?”
ran, for I perceived that in a moment everyone upon this side of the
“Here he comes! Stick your head down lower—there, that’ll do; you can’t

had been happening, but I couldn’t tell.
troubled by the scent of the flowers.
come to, and run—and it warn’t a good place.”
you can read it along the road to Mr. Lothrop’s, if you want to. Do you
They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch her mother’s tea.
usual Sunday-night promenaders, albeit they talked in groups, and along
like nothing; and Tom superintended. He could out-superintend any boy I

I recognised him at the same moment.
“We never had any governess.”

It consists, in fine, in the demonstration which will become daily more palpable, that labour[111] alone is the source of that wealth; that the more the sum of this labour shall augment, the greater will be the increase of riches; but that this same labour will not reach its last degree of activity in England, till it is nearly in the same state in Siberia; and that there is no great harm in an English mechanic creating a cultivator in Siberia, or even in France, provided a Siberian or French mechanic, create a cultivator or mechanic in England.
I was feeling better then, but I wished I was out of there, anyway. I
growing bigger and bigger at the wonderful sights she saw.
when he saw Henderson, the London journalist, in his garden, he called
“May I take the liberty of asking your Ladyship whether you left Mr. and Mrs. Collins well?”
“Colonel Forster did own that he had often suspected some partiality, especially on Lydia’s side, but nothing to give him any alarm. I am so grieved for him. His behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost. He was coming to us, in order to assure us of his concern, before he had any idea of their not being gone to Scotland: when that apprehension first got abroad, it hastened his journey.”


destroy the Martians during the day.

“What whole thing?”
order to telegraph the news to London. The newspaper articles had
around; everything as still as a mouse. Just the same outside. Thinks
tell the neighbours. He would overtake them, he said, at about half
November 12th.—The night has been abominable, the sirocco was blowing very hard all day.
“Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement.”
“If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy,” cried a young Lucas, who came with his sisters, “I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a pack of foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine every day.”
To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.{301}
hot. The river was very wide, and was walled with solid timber on both
but anybody could buy private beforehand if they wanted to.
And in the forenoon we took it down to the woods, but it wouldn’t go
Language: English



The old gentleman owned a lot of farms and over a hundred niggers.

like all git-out.”

“What do we want of a saw?”
flattened out, and patted his straw into shape again.
“And she let you go again?” asked the man, in wonder.
log, and the king told him everything, just like the young fellow had

“I didn’t bite him,” said the Lion, as he rubbed his nose with his paw
of the overturned dog cart and the silhouette of the wheel still


they don’t breed any of that _kind_.”
stream in patches. The sun was just setting, and the Clock Tower and
and like as not you’ve got the other things there, too. How’d it get
The town of Vladivostock, built in a semi-circle, is bordered by a chain of mountains. We are entering the port. Salvoes of artillery are fired from the men-of-war; military bands played on these cruisers until we were out of hearing distance. The Japanese men-of-war saluted us, while a band played our anthem. We stopped the engines to drift by them slowly. We pass now between the Russian and Japanese fleets, ranged at the entrance of the port. The citadel furnished with 190 guns, saluted us with 21 cannon-shots; the Mandchour responded with deafening discharges. On all the cruisers the men stood in rows along the yards. We cross the “Bosphorus,” and drop anchor in the “Golden Horn,” recalling Constantinople’s “Golden Horn.” Admiral Engelm, the chief of the port arrived on board in a steam-launch, accompanied by a numerous suite. We saw another canoe approaching, carrying Admiral Tirtoff the chief of the Russian fleet cruising at Vladivostock, with a Japanese Admiral. As soon as the welcomes were over, we got into a steam-launch with the General-Governor’s flag hoisted on it, which took us to the shore.
beast in all the forest would have had a good word to say to me.”
May 1st.—Our policemaster Kamsarakan organises all sorts of amusements for me; to-day, for instance, in honour of the 1st of May, he arranged a picnic out on the side of the Tap-Dagh. The Cossacks made a great fire and we roasted potatoes and boiled water for our tea, after which we sat down on carpets and did full justice to the contents of our luncheon baskets. Crowds of people from the surrounding villages had gathered around, and a mob of Armenian peasants organised a village-dance. We followed their example, trying our feet in a waltz on the uneven ground, the train of my long habit being very much in my way. A functionary of the intendance, an enormous giant, looked so comic waltzing with a tiny officer, who was scarcely up to his shoulder; it seemed all the time as if he wanted to swallow up his undersized partner, or to jump over his head. A group of Armenian urchins, armed with sticks instead of guns, appeared under the command of a little chief, wearing a Russian cap on his head and paper epaulettes; they looked like small lead-warriors taken out of a toy box. These boys executed all sorts of military evolutions, mimicking the training of our soldiers.
soul out about it, and wouldn’t count them again not to save her life;
back alleys and everywheres in the dark, and then fetch him here in the

their backs to me. They said nothing to me as I passed. I do not know
left leg.
_ploughed_ through shrieking people, and a dozen stalwart men fought to

it was high ground, so I didn’t go. No high ground about Cairo, Jim
for him any more. I thought it all out, and reckoned I would belong to
“Jim!”
“Why, me and Sid, and—and—and _the guns;_ that’s what I mean.”

night the strangeness of things about me, and my physical wretchedness,
ON HORSELL COMMON.

AT THE WINDOW.
Je supposerai encore qu’il en résultât qu’on n’a jamais travaillé plus solidement à diminuer les revenus du Prince, que lorsqu’on s’est flatté de les augmenter; qu’est-ce que cela fait au Prince, pourvu qu’il ne soit plus possible de se[410] méprendre sur les vrais moyens de l’enrichir? N’est-ce pas de l’avenir sur tout, qu’un grand Prince doit s’occuper?
gone.”
raise themselves on these hands, but of course, with the increased
frock that night, and put it on, and shoved it under the front door,
must hop out of the wigwam, and carry on a little, and fetch a howl or
it all away from Judge Thatcher and drunk it up.
confusion of ants in a nest against which his foot has kicked. When,
slanting and barred the face of the sun. The steamboat throbbed on its
to—goodness alive, AUNT POLLY!”

The truce which followed the visit of Schwartz to Hyder Ali was short lived. While the missionary, not without many misgivings, had returned to complete his church and care for his flock, the storm clouds were already on the horizon. His health he finds is not quite so good, the arduous travelling and exposure, in addition to constant preaching work, has begun to tell on him. He complains in some of his letters of pains in his shoulder and side. He is thankful that he can still go out as usual. “For though I was not confined,” he writes, “my right arm gave me so much pain that I was unfit to write, nay to hold a book with it. But now it is much better by the mercy of God. He is the author and preserver of our lives.”
own togs.”
to be satisfied, and feel right and kind towards the others.
furze bush became with one dull thud a mass of flames. And far away
The climate here is perfect, one doesn’t suffer at all from the heat, in summer and winter the temperature is nearly always the same. I was very much astonished, however, to see ladies enveloped in furs in July.
way, sometimes another. But there’s always somebody spying around that
They got along quite well at first, but when they reached the middle of

took what there was left, because the farm didn’t belong to us, and
All the servants in the house are convicts, who fulfil their duty perfectly well, nevertheless these surroundings made me feel so nervous and miserable, that I did not want to be present at dinner and went to bed immediately after our arrival, under the pretext of a bad headache. Oh! how horrid it was to hear the sounds of a gay waltz played by an orchestra of convicts during the repast! I buried my head in my pillow and had a good cry. I hated our host ferociously at that moment.
you warn’t in no hurry, I’d—”


Two gardeners stopped their work to ask Schwartz this question: “We have not yet obeyed our own Shasters, how should we now keep the true law? When we leave you, we forget what we have heard.” He told them to pray. “But how shall we pray?” This was his advice, a bit of wisdom for all time. “Act like starving beggars. Do not they know how to set forth their hunger and distress? Set before God your ignorance, obduracy and misery, and beseech Him to open your eyes and discern Him and His true word. This you may do, even in the midst of your labours. But come also and allow yourselves to be instructed. Try this for ten days, it will assuredly be better with you if you follow this advice. Consider that in a few days, perhaps, you may be happy or miserable for ever, give therefore all diligence and seek your everlasting salvation.”

We struck it mighty lucky; there was going to be a circus there that
again.
occupied in this way, one of the dismounted hussars came running up. He
CHAPTER XXVIII
chinks and putting the candle out. I got under the table and raised the


caked over and its outline softened by a thick scaly dun-coloured



The attempt to reach Tippoo in accordance with Lord Macartney’s wishes was frustrated by the turning back of Schwartz for some unknown reason, whether it was because, unlike his father, Tippoo, in his desire to insult an Englishman, did not hesitate to show disrespect to this aged missionary, or because he did not mean to confer until the district of Mangalore was in his possession. Schwartz said that he would have been very glad to have helped to make peace but he was thankful he was spared the strain for he was far from well, and when a further request was made he felt justified in declining it. Though he could not go himself he prayed earnestly that the commissioners might be guided aright in their interview with this violent man. He also sees behind all this what a tragedy of misery, sin and cruelty is going on.
XCV.	Port Saïd	440
ain’t no worse; for luck’s against us, and it never rains but it pours,
On the day that my husband and his companions had gone to Nikko, we ladies went out shopping. We stared into the shop windows, being in search of curios, and bought right and left with reckless extravagance. The merchants greeted us with a number of quick, jerky little bows. We returned laden with parcels, and the result of our struggle in the curio shops were strewn all over our saloon. Sergy, on returning from Nikko, had to pay great quantities of bills. The merchants, having received their money, bowed so low that it seemed as though they were crawling on all fours.
“I can’t go on! I can’t go on!”




me proof that the Wicked Witch is dead, and that moment I will give you
chillen runnin’ roun’ de house, en it’s diffunt. _He_ as soon chop a
so we made the canoe fast and set in her to wait for daylight.
bones of the horse scattered and gnawed. For a time I stood regarding
accounts of taking all this trouble for that gang, for not many would a
in the dead water under a tow-head; and then cut young cottonwoods and
These canisters smashed on striking the ground—they did not explode—and
those witless souls that suffer our dominion.

past five, I went home, had some tea, and walked up to the station to
“Borrow a shirt, too.”

“What you ask,” said Elizabeth, “is no sacrifice on my side; and Mr. Darcy had much better finish his letter.”
won’t let me.”
Darcy has always seemed to me by far the best and most interesting of Miss Austen’s heroes; the only possible competitor being Henry Tilney, whose part is so slight and simple that it hardly enters into comparison. It has sometimes, I believe, been urged that his pride is unnatural at first in its expression and later in its yielding, while his falling in love at all is not extremely probable. Here again I cannot go with the objectors. Darcy’s own account of the way in which his pride had been pampered, is perfectly rational and sufficient; and nothing could be, psychologically speaking, a causa verior for its sudden restoration to healthy conditions than the shock of Elizabeth’s scornful refusal acting on a nature{xxi} ex hypothesi generous. Nothing in even our author is finer and more delicately touched than the change of his demeanour at the sudden meeting in the grounds of Pemberley. Had he been a bad prig or a bad coxcomb, he might have been still smarting under his rejection, or suspicious that the girl had come husband-hunting. His being neither is exactly consistent with the probable feelings of a man spoilt in the common sense, but not really injured in disposition, and thoroughly in love. As for his being in love, Elizabeth has given as just an exposition of the causes of that phenomenon as Darcy has of the conditions of his unregenerate state, only she has of course not counted in what was due to her own personal charm.
upon—it was a burrow scarcely ten yards long, which he designed to
town with a torchlight procession and a brass-band, and then he would
card game and several others we played extremely interesting.
“Did you ever see the king?”

known it. But how can I help it?”

something’s up? Let them find it out for themselves—it’s their
too.”
looking up at the sky; and then he begins to rip and rave and grit his
_with_ you. That’s the whole yarn—what’s yourn?
North-Western special trains were loading up, instead of coming down
Here and there was a burning bush or tree. Beyond was a fringe of

milkmaid had a nick in her left elbow.

The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration of Mrs. Forster, the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcely to be described. Wholly inattentive to her sister’s feelings, Lydia flew about the house in restless ecstasy, calling for everyone’s congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever; whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repining at her fate in terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish.

pretty soon he says:
“Why, Mars Tom, I hain’t got no coat o’ arm; I hain’t got nuffn but
Schwartz was now at what he had called the destined end of his travels and the appointed beginning of his life work. He saw at once that a knowledge of Tamil was the first necessity of his work, and, therefore, with a native catechist who could also speak German, he laboured hard to qualify himself. So successful was he that in less than four months after his arrival in India he was able to preach his first sermon in Tamil from Matthew xi. 25-30, with its true missionary appeal. “Come unto me, all ye that labour end are heavy laden, and I will give you rest,” in the New Jerusalem Church where Ziegenbalg used to preach. It was his first word for his Master and Lord, possibly uttered with much humility and some misgivings of his own fitness but full of the abundant grace which is ready to fulfil the promise to every creature. Of this discourse some brief outlines are preserved. It was a very earnest appeal to these people, facing him for the first time with their dark faces[Pg 47] and hearts full of shadows from superstition and ignorance. He began at once by pointing out the one and only hope for humanity and begged them to take advantage of the gracious offer of salvation. This was the key note of his life work, and it has been well pointed out that in an age when theological controversies and contention were the characteristic of the Church, it is a cheering fact that the faith of Schwartz preserved its simplicity, and that he preached the great essential verities of the Evangel of God to a sinful world.
noting each strange detail of their form, the curate reminded me of his


But they ducked their heads, and put their fingers in their mouths, and
slid into the river and had a swim, so as to freshen up and cool off;
old curled-up boots and shoes, and pieces of bottles, and rags, and
 Aunt Sally talks to Huck
if I _never_ got to glory. It must take ’em a week.”

“The hind end, mum.”
so I also will go with her to the Land of the South.”


“Stop and think.”

When I came down to dinner that day I saw poor Danys, her eyes all swollen, her nose red, huddled up in a chair—a picture of misery. “We don’t go for our walk to-morrow!” she said sobbing loudly.

between the kitchen and the scullery. But the pantry was empty; every
drive at us, and I got my share, and we dodged out of the path and let
end! The great and terrible day of the Lord! When men shall call upon
million dogs, er devils, er some’n, I wisht I may die right heah in
“Well,” he says, “if they’d a ben some, I reckon I’d a got one.”

When sitting after dinner on our terrace, we hear the drums beating for the evening retreat. At nine o’clock punctual, three rockets are fired; a military band begins to play and march, and the musicians walk all round the Public Gardens; on returning to the music-kiosque they sing the Lord’s Prayer and our anthem. One night a retreat on the water was organised. The musicians were placed in a large barge towed by a steamer. The Amour, lighted by the full moon, and the barge decorated with different-coloured lanterns, gliding smoothly on the water, producing a fairy-like scene.
At last it was discovered. Another of the test trips was made. Three small ships went, and one sender, that they might return.
afraid of the Kalidahs.”

another mile to a lonesome place, and then he got ashore and says:
But it passed and spared me, and left the night about me suddenly dark

warn’t going to let Jim find out it was all my fault, not if I could
that’ll help them think so—so don’t you lose no time, Jim, but just
it’s fitten that his funeral orgies sh’d be public.”


done it. I wished the widow knowed about it. I judged she would be
The Lion thought for a moment.
[276]

advance again, spreading out as they did so in a thin irregular


“Glinda might,” he suggested.
And there had been no crash, no answering explosion. The silence was
MAP OF INDIA


The St. George’s Hill men, however, were better led or of a better
to ask how is your uncles this morning your face would tell something.
runnin’ down. My, but I _wuz_ mad! I was a-gwyne for de chile, but jis’

“But there seems indelicacy in directing his attentions towards her so soon after this event.”
it be that ’d stand in his way at sech a time? And what kind o’ uncles
metallic ringing, like the movements of keys on a split-ring. Then a
out of their mouths they can’t, words being too weak and cold, and all
made a very passable meal upon what we had brought with us. Patrols of
“The shades of night were coming on and Mr. Schwartz was preparing to retire to a resting place but the people wished to detain him still longer.
would sneak out and go for the woods till the weather moderated. She
plan that ain’t no more trouble than that? It’s as mild as goose-milk.


got him back, safe and sound, and he’s in that cabin again, on bread
that you appeared to me as a great Head?”
L’Auteur devenu plus hardi, parce que personne ne le contredit lorsqu’il est seul (& en vérité il est seul bien souvent), entreprend de réconcilier le genre humain avec les taxes, au moyen d’une première décomposition de l’impôt; il abandonne à la vérité une de ses parties comme onéreuse, (il est fâcheux réellement qu’elle soit indispensable, heureusement c’est la moindre;) mais il défend hautement l’autre partie, comme une ressource très-précieuse pour cette portion du peuple qui mérite le plus de captiver l’intérêt du Gouvernement.
I.
Heading to Chapter XIV.	84
It took them sixty-three hours to completely establish that mighty energy field. Naturally the star, which made no use of Atomic energy, was quite unaffected. But when, at the end of three weeks, the energy field had slowly dissipated itself into space, there were no more of the Atomic Giants.
the river to see Mr.’—Mr.—what _is_ the name of that rich family your

again, though, and Jim was going to call me; but he changed his mind,
If it were acknowledged, that with the fullest persuasion that money ought to be the sole aim of trade, it has only proved, hitherto, the means of supporting it:
by scattering dust on the place, which covered up the smoothness and
“Isn’t it a beauty?” he asked.
my shoe from me.”

her, she was sure, to make him draw her chariot whenever she wished to
“Ziz-zy, zuz-zy, zik!”
When he was gone, they were certain at least of{360} receiving constant information of what was going on; and their uncle promised, at parting, to prevail on Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn as soon as he could, to the great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the only security for her husband’s not being killed in a duel.
“Come in,” said Oz.



deer for you. You can roast it by the fire, since your tastes are so
it’s all working, perhaps I will. Get caught, I mean. And the great
LXXXVI.	Suez	428

There was much excitement on my father’s birthday. The house was full of guests, and an orchestra came down from town. At dinner when papa’s health was drunk, two large cannons, placed at the principal entrance, were fired, which made me crawl on my hands and knees, shamefully, under the table. We had in the evening grand illuminations in the park, with fireworks which did not enrapture me, for at every burst of rockets I had to put my hands over my ears.
peephole, to find that the new-comers had been reinforced by the
[226]
“I hain’t no idea. Who _is_ it?”
The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but Sir William’s allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his eyes were directed, with a very serious expression, towards Bingley and Jane, who were dancing together. Recovering himself, however, shortly, he turned to his partner, and said,—
thought, and pretty soon he says:

twice; I’m not an ornamental soldier, and at the best and worst,

Thanks to the Exhibition in Copenhagen, all the hotels and boarding-houses were full, and it was with great difficulty that we succeeded in finding a shelter in a private house. By a winding staircase we were ushered into a dark, low room, looking into a grim back-yard, and scantily furnished with two beds, a few cane, inhospitable-looking chairs and a sofa losing its horse-hair through wide gaping wounds. Feeling very tired and sleepy, I lay down to rest a bit, but sprang up hastily, for the bed was abominable, the mattress as hard as stone and the pillows so thin that they could easily be folded in two. To crown all, behind the wall our landlady’s children were shrieking with all their might. It was impossible to go to sleep, and we decided to go and take the train to Tivoli and explore the Exhibition, with its chief attraction, an enormous elevator representing a huge bottle of beer with a magnificent bird’s-eye view of Copenhagen. We had dinner in a restaurant on board a ship of the middle-ages, and were brought in a barge with a three-storied poop to this curious establishment. The waiters were dressed in the costume of sailors belonging to that long past epoch, wearing broad-brimmed Rembrandt hats.

you could see everything and every face in that big crowd, and the
been always well and safe at Stanmore. They would find George at
seem so good to be free again and all by ourselves on the big river,
December 25th.—To-day is Christmas day. Two French tradesmen, Kahn by name, to whom Sergy gave permission to sail with us as far as Shanghai, have sent me a large box filled with fruit. The barometer begins to rise and shows one degree above zero.

“We have not quite determined how far it shall carry us,” said Mrs. Gardiner; “but perhaps, to the Lakes.”
LXI.	Niagara Falls	329

I went into the wigwam; Jim warn’t there. I looked all around; he


the Scarecrow bent them carefully until they were quite free from rust

“Yes,” replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, “but that was only when I first knew her; for it is many months since I have considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance.”
under the bed when you are up to anything private. They sets down then,
[Pg 68]

the better part of a day. I went into the scullery, removed the door,


thick woods. I made a kind of a tent out of my blankets to put my
The English ships, employed eighty years ago in carrying on the national trade, presented only a sum of 289,318 tons burden; the number of tons is now rated at 775,078. This increase of 485,760, together with the expence attending the fitting out, going and coming, produce a stock of 5,000,000, which must be doubled, by compensating the voyages of six and eight months, by those which require two or three years: here, therefore, appears an eighth clear saving of—10,000,000.

also very thirsty, and bitterly regretful I had drunk no more water. It
felt his heart rattling around in his breast.
ELIZABETH was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane, while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village, when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a visitor. As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely to be Lady Catherine; and under that apprehension was putting{222} away her half-finished letter, that she might escape all impertinent questions, when the door opened, and to her very great surprise Mr. Darcy, and Mr. Darcy only, entered the room.
She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure.
slept there. The old lady took care of the room herself, though there
listen to her. If anybody can persuade him, she can.”
opened.

The cleverness of our horses bewildered me, one false step would have thrown us headlong into the gap. We could ride no further and had to dismount at the foot of the glacier where we took a special glacier guide to take us up, and sent our horses to wait for us on the highway. Here the snow mountains rose close on us. Green pasturages had disappeared and all appearance of summer gradually faded into a perfect winter; the snow began to fall in masses, all presented a Lapland scene, nothing but snow and ice. The guide after having provided us with alpenstocks and blue spectacles, made us pass through a damp cavern the soil of which was mouldy with dew and drippings from the roof.
Silas and Aunt Sally found out how good he helped the doctor nurse Tom,
of thought and action, and our danger and isolation only accentuated

death—it’s just death. And it’s the man that keeps on thinking comes



“How delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!”
about these things. They always dig out with a case-knife—and not


dreams and no proud lusts; and a man who hasn’t one or the other—Lord!
grindstone, s’I; want to tell _me_’t any cretur ’t’s in his right mind
dasn’t scratch it; and then my ear begun to itch; and next my back,
[23]
“Your surprise could not be greater than mine in being noticed by you. My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary politeness, and I confess that I did not expect to receive more than my due.”
So they got some paper and a pen, and the king he set down and twisted
my cousin and my wife—my wife white and tearless. She gave a faint cry.

handsome lot of quality, I tell you.

his old form, and his joints worked as well as ever. To be sure, there
use of it in the political cartoon. And, all unsuspected, those

Here the scenery changed from the strange and unfamiliar to the

Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw back the praise on her sister’s warm affection.


was a tattered woman in a heap on a doorstep; the hand that hung over
The “Palais des Machines,” a monstrous gallery full of machines, with glass walls and roof, was very fatiguing to go through. Sergy took great interest in all sorts of engines, and our guide bothered me with his technical explanations of which I understood nothing. On the top galleries a moving electric bridge, full of people, advanced towards us from the opposite side of the gallery, moving very slowly in order to permit the visitors to see all the machines at work. We were dying of thirst, and entered the English Dairy to drink a glass of milk, after which we visited the Cow-House, exhibiting superb animals, who stood in comfortable stalls with new clean straw under their feet. Whilst I petted a beautiful fat cow named “Every Inch a Queen,” a milkmaid appeared with a stool and a pail and began to extract what the cow chose to give her.
province of houses, dim and blue through the haze of the smoke and

Mr. Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject; and, affectionately taking her hand, said, in reply,—

So, drat him, we went along, but I didn’t like it much. When we got in
what’s in the confounded thing, you know!”
Londoner’s mind, and startling intelligence so much a matter of course


“You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate.”


“I reckon the world _is_ coming to an end. I _never_ see the beat of it
Chapter I.
you like it or not,” and he walked boldly forward.
“I hope Mr. Bingley will like it”	6




packed, and no boards. Well, next I took an old sack and put a lot of
his name and sorrows on the dungeon walls with, and dropped one of them
Here is a picture of an ideal missionary’s day. It is the steady, persistent, loved and reverent talk of one whose very life is the service of his God. What fresh interest there is in these simple records of his journal and how little he thought that thousands would find, in the years he would never see, inspiration and help by their perusal!
“he never failed to inform them”
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
smite with such power that even the mightiest guns could not stand
CHAPTER LXXV
A world of unanswerable arguments start up at once, tending to demonstrate the superiority of civilization over the wild state of nature. Yet, methinks, a savage may overturn them all by these few words: I know nothing of what you say, and I am not inquisitive.—I readily confess at least, that I do not see what reply can be made to such an answer, more than I did with regard to the four questions put in the Upper House to the manufacturer of whom I have spoken; yet this manufacturer was not stronger in argument on all that was foreign to the essential point of the four[309] questions, than I might be to convince my savage of that delight, which a man fully persuaded of the excellence of his own conceits, and of the happiness there is in making them known to all the world, feels, without allay, without interruption, in staining some reams of paper, scribbling sometimes an hypothesis, sometimes a comedy, a romance, a ballad, &c.; for it is very true, that the work I now lay before the public, has, in the space of 12 or 15 years, undergone all those metamorphoses in my hands, and that during that time my heart rankled with the ambition of being read in antichambers, given for premiums in colleges, tolerated in nunneries, mentioned in the boudoirs of the fair, noticed in the memory of Ministers, revolved in the hearts of Sovereigns, and every day sung about the streets and in cottages, through which all princes must sometimes pass, if they wish to discover some decisive difference between the interesting illusions of humanity and the deep speculations of politics. Yet with all that stock of words, if not of reasons, that I must have acquired beforehand, to justify, in some measure, the extravagance of such an ambition, I own that I should be confounded by the answer of my savage.—But this could not be the case, if a civilised man, after having convinced me, that the advantage[310] of commerce between man and man, as well as between nation and nation, consists in supplying each other’s wants, when it is possible to effect it by an exchange of surplusses, would next undertake to prove to me, that the advantage of a State, which is nothing else but a nation, an aggregation of men, consists in keeping as much as possible of that money which they have in too great abundance, though the inevitable consequence would be, that they would procure to themselves so much less of some article in which they might be deficient, but which it would at the same time be very convenient to them to possess.—It is hard that the compendium of prohibitions, restrictions, &c. so much commended, and which have kept so many great men so long on the watch, dwindles finally into the assertion of the two contradictory propositions which I have just now dated.
can prove it. But up till then I won’t say nothing more, but go to the

in advance of the tidings of their approach; as sudden, dreadful, and
him how unregular it would be, and set down and told him all about our
as for the niggers that wrote it, I ’low I’d take ’n’ lash ’m t’ll—”


It wouldn’t do any good to land yonder where the light is—it’s only a
Sergy came to meet me as it had been arranged and brought me back to Moscow.
“You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!—always wanting me to play and sing before anybody and everybody! If my vanity had taken a musical turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I would really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of hearing the very best performers.” On Miss Lucas’s persevering, however, she added, “Very well; if it must be so, it must.” And gravely glancing at Mr. Darcy, “There is a very fine old saying, which everybody here is of course familiar with—‘Keep your breath to cool your porridge,’—and I shall keep mine to swell my song.”
got to sleep with the hogs in the tanyard. I never see such a son. I
The window had been burst in by a mass of garden mould, which flowed
A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either side calm and concise—and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte and her sister, just returned from their walk. The tête-à-tête surprised them. Mr.{225} Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intruding on Miss Bennet, and, after sitting a few minutes longer, without saying much to anybody, went away.

Title: The War of the Worlds
given some of them a nasty turn. He came down the road towards them,

them was no higher than Dorothy’s knee.
[Image unavailable.]

Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply; and, at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. Darcy was really the object of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her estimation of him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that his affection was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many months’ suspense, and enumerating with energy all his good qualities, she did conquer her father’s incredulity, and reconcile him to the match.
well born and rich and grand as the tribe of Grangerfords. The


girl coming on the run, and two men with her. Boggs and the men turned

that cried and stumbled, their dainty clothes smothered in dust, their

Cap, I shall give it to the King of the Monkeys, that he and his band
you no back intrust, nuther.”
One morning I happened to turn over the salt-cellar at breakfast. I
Our Ambassador invited us to his beautiful house close to Tokio, to show us geishas, whose dancing was held to have no equal in Japan. We drove in rikshas through a lovely avenue of cherry trees. When we arrived at the Ambassador’s residence we were shown into a large hall hung with many rows of weapons of every description, rifles, revolvers, yataghans, etc., etc. Against the walls stood suits of armour. After having admired the beautiful collection, we entered another hall where four geishas awaited us. They were bare-legged, bare-armed, and with very much painted faces, dressed in bright-coloured kimonos. These little bits of womanhood looked as if they wanted to play at dolls; the eldest of the geishas was barely fifteen. Three musician-girls, arrayed in dark-blue kimonos, were seated cross-legged on the matting. They began to sing melodies resembling the mewing of enamoured cats on the roofs, to the accompaniment of the samissen, a kind of guitar of three strings. The dancing-girls had no more space than an ordinary square rug to dance upon. They were sitting in a circle; one of them rose, and saluting us to the ground, crossed her arms across her chest and began to act a mimic of a blind girl. Her performance could scarcely be called a dance, groping about the matting with her eyes closed. I found her companion’s dances rather disappointing also. Their arms twisted and they glided without their body making any movement; a few shuffling steps to-and-fro, a wave of shapely olive bangled arms, all to the nasal twangling of a hideous accompaniment. I began to yawn behind my hand and looked longingly at the clock, and did all I could to keep awake. I should have dropped off to sleep certainly[353] if tea and cakes hadn’t come to my rescue. The geishas gathered in a group round us and sat at our feet. They looked at Mrs. Serebriakoff and me as at some object of extraordinary interest. Opening wide their little eyes they examined and tried on bracelets and rings, uttering funny little cries. It was nearly daylight when we returned to Tokio.
the sky tells of the gathering storm. Yonder, I take it are the
[430]
that, Huckleberry—set up straight;” and pretty soon she would say,

Den I went into de yuther room, en ’uz gone ’bout ten minutes; en when
their rooms in high spirits. Even Dorothy had hope that “The Great and
A row of all the letters of the alphabet are printed very large and black on the wooden wall of the dock. When stepping from the ship we were taken to the stall bearing our own letter “D.” The “D’s” men were busy with our luggage, also dumped down under the letter “D.”



HUCKLEBERRY FINN

Further Considerations on the Necessity of a Correspondence between the Prices of Agriculture and those of Industry.	248
know. They gripped us all, and marched us right along, straight for the
The second case is more universally acknowledged to be false, since there is not a single country in Europe where the price of every thing has not, upon a medium, increased at least 10 per cent. from 1754 to 1770;—which proves the truth of the third case:—thus it happens that foreigners have paid the old taxes of England, without suspecting it; as England does not, in the least, suspect that those taxes are no longer paid either in England or elsewhere, although their produce returns nevertheless to the public creditor.
tracks three times and crossed my breast every time; and then I tied up


wilderness! Look upon it and live!” And people would shout out,

Figure.
reached solid ground. But here the country seemed wilder than ever, and
“Tools for what?”
course, become a mere selfish intelligence, without any of the
“No you wont, you’ll start _now;_ and don’t you lose any time about it,
was the ignorantest kind of words and pictures made with charcoal.
when I drove to Leatherhead—or they had hidden.
“Heaven knows!” said I.
began playing at “touch” in and out of the group of bystanders.

They carried the sleeping girl to a pretty spot beside the river, far
would suppose that all these characters were trying to talk alike and
excited. Everybody that seen the shooting was telling how it happened,
Sawyer first captain and Jo Harper second captain of the Gang, and so
In another minute Mr. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what passed, took leave and rode on with his friend.


day long with a harp and sing, forever and ever. So I didn’t think much
had just made a journey. Three or four soldiers stood on the lawn of
sheet. We stayed in the wigwam and let the raft take care of itself.

Some way farther, in a grassy place, was a group of mushrooms which

won’t want.”


and blackened area, now cooling and ashen, and a number of scattered
“Lizzy,” said her father, “I have given him my consent. He is the kind of man, indeed, to whom I{463} should never dare refuse anything, which he condescended to ask. I now give it to you, if you are resolved on having him. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know your disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband, unless you looked up to him as a superior. Your lively talents would place you in the greatest danger in an unequal marriage. You could scarcely escape discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing you unable to respect your partner in life. You know not what you are about.”
shows, nor nowheres.”
Thick, woolly hair covered every part of it, and a more

But if the Reader, in spite of the different positions into which he has been attracted, has not observed the least alteration in the compass; if he has not been moved by the arguments with which he has been lured before he came to that part of the work—let him throw the piece into the fire; for the Author, of whom I do not pretend to imitate the circumspection, or adopt the fears, or justify the temerity, or share in the guilt, aims at nothing less than to induce all Europe (all Europe!) to investigate,

“The trees seem to have made up their minds to fight us, and stop our

Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to unite civility and truth in a few short sentences.
September 7th.—Early in the morning Sergy visited the prisons, and at eight o’clock we proceeded on our journey. The road had recently been laid out specially to transport provisions from the boat to Mr. Komorski’s abode. After a drive of two hours we arrived at a spot where a copious lunch awaited us in a pavilion set up near the railway-line. We suddenly came upon a gang of chained convicts breaking stones on the road, who worked under the eager eyes of guards with ever-ready revolvers. Whistles were heard giving the signal to these wretched men to take off their caps at our approach. I was told that work was assigned to them for twelve hours of labour. Their food is good, the daily rations consisting of a plate of soup with 250 grams of meat and a kilogram of bread. In a group of convicts we saw the son of a General we had known at St. Petersburg. That unfortunate[372] young man had belonged to one of the brilliant Guard regiments, and had been sent to the galleys and put to hard labour for life, for having shot one of his comrades, (Cherchez la femme!) His pale, haggard face was so painful to behold.
hand on them if you wanted to; but not the snakes and turtles—they
lay off and work his brains an hour or two and see if he couldn’t put
and tried in vain to divert his attention to his examination notes. He
immediately beneath my peephole, the place was deserted by them. Except
mightier they are the more sane and wary should we be. One of them was
Exportations and Importations considered as a Game. Such a Game is as rational as any other, to whosoever will not content himself with playing at Cards, or with his own Thoughts.

Is Mary Jane the oldest? How old is the others?”

“Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in every fatigue, I am sure, but I did not think it{358} right for either of them. Kitty is slight and delicate, and Mary studies so much that her hours of repose should not be broken in on. My aunt Philips came to Longbourn on Tuesday, after my father went away; and was so good as to stay till Thursday with me. She was of great use and comfort to us all, and Lady Lucas has been very kind: she walked here on Wednesday morning to condole with us, and offered her services, or any of her daughters, if they could be of use to us.”
sleeping in a bed pulled on me pretty tight mostly, but before the cold

with masses of black and red smoke.
out from the joints of the limbs as the monster swept by me. And in an
Parting with Mary Jane.—Mumps.—The Opposition Line.



field to my left. It was the third falling star!
“I say no more than the truth, and what everybody will say that knows him,” replied the other. Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far; and she listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added, “I have never had a cross word from him in my life, and I have known him ever since he was four years old.”
In the first place, the book (it may be barely necessary to remind the reader) was in its first shape written very early, somewhere about 1796, when Miss Austen was barely twenty-one; though it was revised and finished at Chawton some fifteen years later, and was not published till 1813, only four years before her death. I do not know whether, in{xi} this combination of the fresh and vigorous projection of youth, and the critical revision of middle life, there may be traced the distinct superiority in point of construction, which, as it seems to me, it possesses over all the others. The plot, though not elaborate, is almost regular enough for Fielding; hardly a character, hardly an incident could be retrenched without loss to the story. The elopement of Lydia and Wickham is not, like that of Crawford and Mrs. Rushworth, a coup de théâtre; it connects itself in the strictest way with the course of the story earlier, and brings about the denouement with complete propriety. All the minor passages—the loves of Jane and Bingley, the advent of Mr. Collins, the visit to Hunsford, the Derbyshire tour—fit in after the same unostentatious, but masterly fashion. There is no attempt at the hide-and-seek, in-and-out business, which in the transactions between Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax contributes no doubt a good deal to the intrigue of Emma, but contributes it in a fashion which I do not think the best feature of that otherwise admirable book. Although Miss Austen always liked something of the misunderstanding kind, which afforded her opportunities for the display of the peculiar and incomparable talent to be noticed presently, she has been satisfied here with the perfectly natural occasions provided by the false account of Darcy’s conduct given by Wickham, and by the awkwardness (arising with equal naturalness) from the gradual transformation of Elizabeth’s own feelings from positive aversion to actual love. I do not know whether the all-grasping hand of the playwright has ever been laid upon Pride and Prejudice; and I dare say that,{xii} if it were, the situations would prove not startling or garish enough for the footlights, the character-scheme too subtle and delicate for pit and gallery. But if the attempt were made, it would certainly not be hampered by any of those loosenesses of construction, which, sometimes disguised by the conveniences of which the novelist can avail himself, appear at once on the stage.
12th June.—At six o’clock in the morning the steamer gave a long whistle, announcing that the moment for starting had come. I dressed rapidly, and hurried on deck. The ship was all alive and full of the bustle of departure. Good-byes were said in haste, people clung, wept and kissed. The gangway is lifted up, and we begin slowly to move away. I watched the harbour of Havre grow smaller and smaller, until it faded away in the horizon. Swinging in a deck-chair I began to examine our travelling companions in whose company we are going to live for ten days. More than half the first-class passengers on our ship were Americans coming[317] home; a great many seemed to know each other. I studied the passenger list, and saw that there were two Russians among them: an artillery Colonel, who is sent on business to America, and an old man, aged eighty-one, going to America to take part in a Volapuk Congress. We were taking a great number of emigrants for America. They thronged the foredeck, and crouched on the deck with their heads supported on bundles. Women stood in groups with children in their arms, or clinging to their hands and skirts. Things didn’t go well with the emigrants in their old country. They crossed the ocean in search of luck and fortune on the other side of the water, but what was the life to which they were going forth on the steamer, taking them to an unknown fate in an unknown land?
no longer; he went away to be gone a couple of days, and so I took my
country and set down in the midst of a strange land.
against the trunk of a pine tree. At last, after nightfall, the
will start in and cave along and cave along till it all caves into the
done, but she never got the chance. It was a picture of a young woman


VIII.	The Crimea	52

joy got the first jolt. A couple of nigger traders come along, and the

On the next day Sergy sent a telegram to Vladivostock to the agent of the Volunteer Fleet with inquiries about the fate of the Nijni-Novgorod and received on the same night a reassuring answer that the boat was safe and sound, and had just left Colombo.

“This isn’t a war,” said the artilleryman. “It never was a war, any

[455]
better put in her time being grateful we was alive and well and she had
obliged to go out into the courtyard and hold it in the sun till it

I coveted. Here I found some young onions, a couple of gladiolus bulbs,
He scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before he went away an engagement was formed, chiefly through his own and Mrs. Bennet’s means, for his coming next morning to shoot with her husband.{425}
In regard to industry, can it be feared that the South Americans, even supposing them independent, should be tempted to import rough materials[389] from Europe, in order to have them wrought by American hands, which are so naturally and so profitably employed in the production of American articles? Is it even to be feared that they should aim at a competition with the Europeans in the exportation of American articles, when they are in need of ship-timber, or rather when in this, much more than in any other respects, there is no European work, which, if done in America, would not cost three times as much as when imported from Europe?—All European prejudices, relative to commerce, are founded on the following principle, which may be looked upon as the quintessence of the Navigation-Act:—To do every thing ourselves, in order that no one’s assistance may be wanted,—that no one may do without our assistance,—and that no assistance be given, but at the prices prescribed by the Lords of the Seas.—The Navigation-Act was, without doubt, the last effort of the human mind about the middle of the 17th century[11].
The last miles leading to the boat were as bad as bad could be. We were tumbled about like nuts in a bag. We reached towards four p.m. the Third Post on the banks of the “Soungatcha,” with aching bones and stiffened limbs. There were our fellow-travellers on the quay awaiting us, and whom should I see among them but Mr. Li, the attaché of the Chinese Embassy at St. Petersburg, my summer cavalier of Music Halls. I must say I was surprised! And I thought I should never see him again. The world’s small! Mr. Li passed through Vladivostock on his way to China, on a holiday. When we met our companions on Lake Khanka, he decided to come all this long way to see us. He will return to Lake Khanka to-morrow morning. The director of the Navigation Company on the Amour-river was also on the quay to meet us. He presented my husband “Bread and Salt” on a beautiful silver dish, and I received an enormous bouquet.

Jim says:
Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to cry.


were packing, river-side loafers energetically helping, children
straight east, toward the rising sun; and they started off in the right
but Jim wouldn’t let me. He said it was death. He said his father laid
on the railway, near the arch, and several of the houses along the
material and strange shelter places. And scattered about it, some in
on the road beyond the curvature of the ground, and he saw nothing of
which the Martians (intentionally or accidentally) brought with them
really be very unhappy unless you give me the sort of courage that
[329]

from the face of Him that sitteth upon the throne!”

beetle that was crawling along the road, and killed the poor little


FELLOW OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY.
had got to go over me, and I wanted it to have plenty of room. I could
now, you ain’t a ghost?”
“No, sah, thanks to goodness I hain’t, Mars Tom.”
CHAPTER XIX.
The door had been forced; it was unfast and was opening slowly as I
“Well,” I says, “if it’s in the regulations, and he’s got to have it,
MORE than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park, unexpectedly meet Mr. Darcy. She felt all the perverseness of the mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought; and, to prevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him, at first, that it was a favourite haunt of hers. How it could occur a second time, therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and even the third. It seemed like wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance; for on these occasions it was not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away, but he actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her. He never said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talking or of listening much; but it struck her in the course of their{229} third encounter that he was asking some odd unconnected questions—about her pleasure in being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and her opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins’s happiness; and that in speaking of Rosings, and her not perfectly understanding the house, he seemed to expect that whenever she came into Kent again she would be staying there too. His words seemed to imply it. Could he have Colonel Fitzwilliam in his thoughts? She supposed, if he meant anything, he must mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter. It distressed her a little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in the pales opposite the Parsonage.
In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who had been too busily engaged in their separate apartments to make their appearance before. One came from her books, and the other from her toilette. The faces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no change was visible in either, except that the loss of her{354} favourite sister, or the anger which she had herself incurred in the business, had given something more of fretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty. As for Mary, she was mistress enough of herself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance of grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table,—

frail. But there are none in the forest so bright as these.”


Neither was the landed proprietor without his resource: he gradually raised the price of his goods, and would have increased it to the level of the whole amount of the produce of industry;[65] (and this would have been strictly consonant with justice.) But nature very often anticipates the execution of that very equitable measure, by another operation which is as infallibly the consequence of peace, as taxes are the effect of war, ever since the abolishing of personal service. The 10, 15, 20 millions, which government had borrowed during the war, were nothing more than a part of the capitals which in happier times might have been laid out in the improvement of cultivation and industry. Peace brought them back to their destination; an increase in the quantity of the produce of lands was the consequence; and an equal increase in the demands of the productions of industry, occasioned by the former, kept up the price of every thing, by facilitating to the one, the means of purchasing what the other wanted to dispose of, and by presenting an increase of resources to that increase of population, which as certainly results from peace and plenty, as mortality does from war and scarcity.

The head was not much larger than ours, but the high, straight forehead seemed much larger on the small man. The brain was deeply creased, the convolutions so complex that, without increasing the size greatly, the surface had been multiplied many times. And it is the surface area that counts. Their large eyes seemed to hold a gentle benignity that would so transcend us as to leave us contented to watch only; still, there was in them a fire of ambition, of hope and of adventure. But we can no more hope to understand their personality than a child of a few days can understand us.


found out the nigger was gone; they found out he hadn’t ben seen sence
It’s awful, stupid balderdash,
’bout it.”
“This is all true,” said Dorothy, “and I am glad I was of use to these
“Oh! He’s a curious animal and seems remarkably small, now that I look
his arm, thinking, and wrinkling up his forehead. At last he says:

“Mr. Darcy is all politeness,” said Elizabeth, smiling.
“Well,” he says, “it does surprise me so. I can’t make it out, somehow.

[Image unavailable.]



acting ever _I_ see before. This is the speech—I learned it, easy
Scarecrow said, “Oh, my!”
the Martians will just be a godsend to these. Nice roomy cages,
“Here comes old Boggs!—in from the country for his little old monthly

“Oh, you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To be sure that did seem as if he admired her—indeed, I rather believe he did—I heard something about it—but I hardly know what—something about Mr. Robinson.”

wondering whether day had come or the world gone mad. Then he jumped
wouldn’t mind being searched for arms, because he didn’t mean no harm
love who has not a heart, and so I am resolved to ask Oz to give me
loafers were watching a curious brown scum that came drifting down the
Henderson stood up with his spade in his hand.
common that any disturbance was perceptible. There were half a dozen


He had hid under the dead horse for a long time, peeping out furtively
more than anything else—waving towards me and touching and examining



few days ago I was talking with an old couple that lives next door in

brains, but it doesn’t know much. Experience is the only thing that
felt the first inkling of a thing that presently grew quite clear in my
behind. Then the Lion said:
That was the story they told my brother in fragments when presently


Weary as he was, he had to brace up his energies to face new and serious difficulties, one being the unsettled and unsatisfactory arrangement as regards Serfogee. In reply to many pathetic appeals beseeching his old friend’s protection, Schwartz prevailed upon the Board of Directors at Madras to send some soldiers to bring away this unhappy young prince and also the two Royal widows, and the whole matter was laid before Lord Cornwallis, who at that time was finishing up an arduous but successful campaign against Tippoo Sultan. But unfortunately in the confusion and disagreement of the ruling powers of that day, the pressing needs of his case got shelved and indefinitely postponed. Ameer Sing, with all his wrong-doing and shameless incompetency, was allowed to continue on the throne of Tanjore for four years more. By this time a state of anarchy existed.

about.”

better man than some of them. Brains are the only things worth having
“Yes.”
“On the contrary, _I_ did.”
before my blank astonishment would let me struggle up the bank to a
Everyone was shouting. The whole steamer from end to end rang with

have everything square and above-board; and told me to come with a
and says:
“I have heard from authority, which I thought as good,{403} that it was left you conditionally only, and at the will of the present patron.”
“I reckon I would, but I don’t know. Why, yonder he is, now. I know him

such as greengrocers use. He was driving from the direction of
“Entering the palace one evening I observed in the audience chamber a number of people sitting in an arch. By their dress I perceived they were collectors of districts and in their countenances the marks of anxious fear were visible. I was informed by Hyder’s Persian secretary that they were come to submit their accounts. They appeared[Pg 110] to me like criminals expecting death. Very few were able to render them to Hyder’s satisfaction and in consequence dreadful punishments were daily inflicted. I hardly know whether to mention how one of these unhappy men was treated. The poor criminal was tied to a post, two men approached with whips and flogged him in the most cruel manner, the pointed nails lacerating his flesh. The cries of the wretched victim were most heart piercing.
It consists in a population necessary (which doth really exist, and could not be dispensed with) to find, without any other inconvenience but a momentary sensation, the 100,000 seamen of the royal navy, the 70,000 national soldiers, and the 3 or 400,000 artificers, and other persons employed in every way, who, by the last[110] war, were for some years taken away, from their daily and useful occupations, some monuments of which would probably have been transmitted to posterity, in order to their being employed in all the accidental operations that were requisite to carry on those destructive plans, which have left nothing but a sad remembrance behind: A remembrance, nevertheless, of which the most allowable pride should allay the bitterness.
My first act before I went into the pantry was to fasten the door


Three days later we left for Tokio, where my husband went to pay his respects to the Emperor of Japan. We called for rikshas and drove off full gallop to the railway station. In the waiting-room we saw a placard stuck up on one side of the wall, bearing the inscription in English “First-Class,” and on the opposite wall was written “Second-Class,” without any partition at all. All the passengers were Japs, sitting shoeless on their heels on the sofas in monkey-poses.
But the next day I went exploring around down through the island. I was
“But how about my courage?” asked the Lion anxiously.
Sawyer couldn’t get up no better plan than what I had. Then I says:
symbolism. My folly came to me with glaring exaggeration. I seemed a


a-running, and says:


It is interesting to note that this excellent arrangement continued for about a hundred years after the death of Ziegenbalg, a testimony to his wise administration. In addition to this meeting Schwartz held what they called a “colloquium biblicum,” reading together those striking verses in the tenth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles where St. Peter declares the great missionary mandate that “God is no respecter of persons but in every nation he that feareth Him and worketh righteousness is accepted with Him.” There was something very Apostolic about the visit of Schwartz and his companion to this mission station, the gatherings together for prayer and exposition of the Scriptures, the gracious influence which broke down all barriers and cheered every heart in mutual love, then finally the solemn covenant before God to bear one another’s burdens and preach the Gospel to the heathen around. Schwartz with his hands outstretched gave them his blessing: “Now the Lord has heard what we have spoken before Him. May He give us life, strength, and prosperity!”
Meanwhile, to help the work at Tanjore, Schwartz made himself proficient in the Mahratta language and wrote a dialogue in that tongue on the Christian faith which was fruitful of good results. He resolved to stay at Tanjore and found much cause for encouragement in his converse with the Brahmins, many of whom admitted that nothing but fear of consequences prevented them from being Christians. The poor puppet of a King, however, was rapidly going downhill, drink and sensuality had done their work, and his authority was counting for little in any quarter. A small church was being built in the fort and Schwartz preached the opening sermon after the General of the English troops had laid the foundation stone. The Madras Government were anxious to make Schwartz a handsome present of money for his work among the soldiers and other services, but he refused it, asking only for some bricks and lime to help to build his church.

“It’s me.”


Look here”—to the artilleryman—“we’re detailed here clearing people out
I am having a very dull time, and my spirits are down to zero. I do want Sergy so badly, so very badly! Oh! if I had only not come to that horrid Cernobbio! I am spending my days stretched in an easy-chair, yawning over a book. Melle. Nadine’s room is next to mine, and I can hear her singing or chatting with her intimate friend, Baroness B⸺ a tall, rather ungainly girl, with red hands and very bad manners. Her mother is a very troublesome, bad-tempered old lady, embellished by a horrid black wig. She is vulgarity itself, and resembles a cook trying to play the lady. That detestable woman generally makes her appearance with a horrid pug-dog tucked under one arm, which snarls at you, and flies out of her arms trying to bite your toes.
[431]

wood, in which were gathered hundreds of beasts of every variety. There
they were, so far as looks go, many years older.
everybody. I _couldn’t_ understand it no way at all. It was outrageous,
being brung up to it.
I so far forgot my personal safety and my scalded hands as to clamber

Therefore, if the balance due to the Dutch is thought burdensome, only in the supposition that it serves to pay burdensome interests, it cannot be looked upon in the same light, when the matter rests upon a debt, by which the borrower clears a benefit superior to the interest that he has to pay.—I shall present this question under another point of view.

Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose affection had brought her into public at an early age. She had high animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the attentions of the officers, to whom her uncle’s good{59} dinners and her own easy manners recommended her, had increased into assurance. She was very equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball, and abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be the most shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. His answer to this sudden attack was delightful to her mother’s ear.

plantation, and where the people’s all so kind and good. Jim’s the
“What an excellent father you have, girls,” said she, when the door was shut. “I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness; or me either, for that matter. At our time of life, it is not so pleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every day; but for your sakes we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you are the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next ball.”


and ever so much.”
steal his children—children that belonged to a man I didn’t even know;
With the many stations in operation, the work went along smoothly and within two hours all were there. The twenty thousand ships had automatically assumed the formation of a mighty cone; the three dimensional equivalent of the flying wedge of their remote ancestors.
At the end of the week mamma rejoined us and carried me off.
I beg permission to add a word more on this fatal reimbursement.
stood arrested by the sudden stir of battle, near us and yet invisible
“During the illness none of the Roman Catholics had inquired after him, but as soon as he was dead they came to bury him. The helper said nothing against it, but as a near relative desired leave to follow the corpse. Some of the Romish said, ‘You shall not join the funeral procession because you are a heretic.’ The helper said, ‘When your Catechist comes I will ask him, and if he be against it I will go away.’ The Romish Catechist arrived and the helper inquired whether he might not be permitted to follow the corpse of his near relative? ‘What,’ answered the former, ‘do you take so great a liberty as to go with us?’ He drew his slipper from his foot and beat the helper, on which about twenty Papists assaulted him and beat him so long that he swooned. Then they dragged him by the hair through the streets and left him prostrate in the house of a heathen.
Jim says:

by-and-by I found him roosting on the bitts, forward, with his head
I don’t know how long I was asleep, but all of a sudden there was an

After dinner we took the train back, and were shown into[448] a compartment occupied by a honeymooning Anglo-Indian couple of planters, whose wedding day was only twenty days old. They didn’t seem pleased to be disturbed, especially the young bride, who vented her ill-humour upon her husband, and was decidedly inclined to be disagreeable to him. The evil temper of his consort forced the young planter to take refuge in the corridor.
So I told you I was expecting trouble myself, and would scatter out

know _how_ she was ever going to be happy there, knowing the mother and
boot—his sock was blood-stained—shook out a pebble, and hobbled on
the hard, yellow road-bed. The sun shone bright and the birds sang
August 14th.—We had very rough weather in the night and were dancing all the time on formidable waves; our boat was creaking in every joint. I heard the sailors running on the upper-deck and the watch-officer shouting orders in a voice of thunder. What did all this uproar mean? In a terrible fright I jumped out of bed and dressing speedily hurried on deck. It was our boat changing its course and going out into the open sea instead of following the shore to avoid the breakers. The captain came to tell me that I had nothing to be afraid of and could go to sleep in security. He promised for to-morrow a sea as calm as a lake.


sea that their tripod supports were almost entirely submerged. Thus
could do something for her, but I couldn’t, only to swear that I
ladies among the others.
One day as he sat under a shady tree reading an English tract on the parable of the Prodigal Son an old Hindu, who had often refused to listen to his Christian sermons, now came with others and begged to know what he was reading. Schwartz told him that it was a narrative of the truly paternal conduct of God towards us and of our refusal to render due obedience to His kind and gentle government, thus abusing His mercies and bringing upon ourselves distress and misery. Notwithstanding this, there was, he went on to say, a way opened by which we might return to our justly offended Maker and become partakers of His grace and benediction. The old man being pleased with this parable, he proceeded to relate to him that of the Sower, telling him why the seed did not everywhere bring forth good fruit. He comprehended this also perfectly and asked whether God is not omnipresent. “Yes,” replied the missionary, “He sees everything that[Pg 70] passes on earth whether it is good or evil but His omnipresence is formidable to the wicked.” The Hindu then said, “In my heart inwardly I worship God.” “If that is the case,” answered Schwartz, “your outward conduct must prove the reverence you profess to entertain in your heart towards the Almighty. What would you think of a man who reproached and even struck you, while he contended that he had cordial love for you in his heart?” The Hindu confessed that he could not value such love. “Neither,” Schwartz concluded, “can God accept the homage which you profess to feel inwardly for Him, while in your words and conduct you deny and dishonour Him.”
does; but I’ve told him a many a time ’t I wouldn’t trade places with
Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but said nothing.

to crowd through the brush and get up the crick a little ways; then you
“You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure,—therefore you need not conceal your age.”
He got out two or three curtain-calico suits, which he said was
at times. I had strange and hideous dreams whenever I slept. It sounds
Then suddenly the white flashes of the Heat-Ray came leaping towards





next, and so I wanted to be handy with it and rattle it off like I was
“Hold on a minute. I’ll put you up a snack to eat. You might want it.”

I heard a carriage stop before our hotel, and thinking that it was my husband who was returning home, I went out on the balcony and saw Legartijo, the hero of the day, stepping out of a smart phaeton. A rich marquis had begged, as an honour, to drive him up to his hotel in his four-in-hand. Behind the phaeton came the Picadores on their poor nags, who had been spared to-day, to be disembowelled to-morrow perhaps. There was great animation in the street, carriages drove by containing gaily dressed ladies, wrapped in soft lace mantillas, returning from the bull-fight. Newspaper boys were shouting the triumph of Legartijo, and announced the issue of the bull-fight. It appears that after our departure two Banderillos had been severely wounded.






“That will be a hard climb,” said the Scarecrow, “but we must get over
Still and Sunday—like.—Mistaken Identity.—Up a Stump.—In a Dilemma.
over it. Then he says:

“Go on,” I said.
To please Him here,
to cross the tree. And the Lion said to Dorothy:


just the spot the screen had hidden, a little old man, with a bald head
were irrevocably doomed, dying and rotting even as they went to and

“I didn’t mean nothing, m’am. I didn’t mean no harm. I—I—thought you’d
doctor; and Jim, in _her_ calico dress, with his hands tied behind him;
breaking. My new clothes was all greased up and clayey, and I was
shore—I knowed enough for that. But by-and-by along comes another one,

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN ***
On the other hand, to write in French, and endeavour to introduce into France, a pamphlet in which the author does not profess himself an admirer of a reimbursement, the possibility of which, now clearly demonstrated, has excited there a general enthusiasm, a kind of rapture the more excusable, as the most evident disorder in all parts of the finances, during the space of 80 years, did not permit even the humane[85] and sensible mind to form a single wish for that very measure of which the execution is so certain, and the advantages pretended to be so positive.... It is suing with impudence for the good graces of a nation, to which I have, as it were, been turned over by the cession made to it of the country where my fortune lies: it is ridiculously flattering myself that I shall justify by a trait of unbridled licence, the title of Englishman, conferred on me by the treaty of peace.
money I had, and I hadn’t had nothing to eat since yesterday. He never
I had the road all to myself, and I fairly flew—leastways, I had it all
back to Kansas at once.”
remained. The detachment of the plaster had left a vertical slit open

My husband has promulgated a new regulation. The soldiers who were sent here to serve terms of three years, have the right—after having ended their terms, to remain at Khabarovsk for another three years engaged in diverse works—to be sent, after the lapse of this time, to Russia, on account of the Government. By these means the convicts and Chinese servants can easily be supplanted.
So he dozed off pretty soon. By-and-by I got the old split-bottom chair
candle outside after that.

They said he was floating on his back in the water. They took him and





“But perhaps you would like to read it”	370
dialect; the extremest form of the backwoods Southwestern dialect; the
All this was true of Schwartz. He faced the difficulty of language, seeing that unless he could speak to the people in their own tongue it was of no use his coming so far to be a missionary in India. It will be seen that he found that from the native children there was much to be learnt in this direction, and his easy access to their hearts, for he was particularly fond of young people, was very useful as an open door to future usefulness. Not only did he exercise his gift as a linguist in gaining a knowledge of the native languages, but he learnt Portuguese, because amongst his hearers were many of that nationality. It was also his aim to know not only[Pg 49] the language but the people themselves, to know how they lived, what were their difficulties, and as regards their present religion how they stood in respect to Christianity. He began his work with an unshaken confidence in his right and authority to be where he was and do the will of his God according to his abilities. On this point, from the very beginning, he never had a shadow of doubt. Very humbly and sincerely he wrote: “It is a sweet comfort to my heart that I am enabled to say, ‘It is thou, O my God, who hast conducted me to these parts, I have not run hither of my own accord but would rather have declined the call, if Thine unseen hand had not retained me. O therefore help and bestow upon me all necessary wisdom, grace, and strength for this office!’
of the Golden Cap to no purpose,” she said, “for the Winged Monkeys
In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for half an hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself of the opportunity of making any inquiries which Jane was equally eager to satisfy. After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued the subject by saying, “But tell me all and everything about it which I have not already heard. Give me further particulars. What did Colonel Forster say? Had they no{355} apprehension of anything before the elopement took place? They must have seen them together for ever.”
“No, indeed, I felt nothing but surprise.”

In the midst of this continuous and absorbing work, Schwartz was not unmindful of his own spiritual needs. Happily he was constitutionally free from that introspective self-condemnation which made so melancholy the experience of others in his day. Probably his theological standpoint was very much the same as that of Henry Martyn, but Schwartz was less of a mystic than he and possessed a calm and restfulness of spirit which his great successor in the field did not always enjoy. But no man knew better the value of that intimate and Divine communion which we know as “the practice of the presence of God.” In the simplicity of his faith there was peace, not arising from any self-complacency, but because his soul, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, was so abundantly filled. This is his meditation on the joy which a Christian should enjoy and its Divine source: “This true union and communion with Jesus is the source of joy—the only source. From hence will follow a willingness to love, serve, and obey, and glorify Him as long as we live. Is it possible that we, who have found pardon, peace, and a lively hope of a glorious eternity in Jesus; that we, who have been made happy in Him, should not wish and endeavour to live to His glory?
with heaps of sawdust by the sawing-machine and its engine. Hard by was
see what would happen.

On the next day, when Serge Michailovitch came to bid us good-bye, he seemed quite altered; he was changed altogether, exceedingly cool and formal in his manner to me, his greeting was gravely courteous, that was all. What was this sudden change in him, in voice and eyes? His entirely incomprehensible attitude made me horribly unhappy; had he changed his mind at the last moment? All through his visit he maintained his air of frigid reserve; he was so cold that he froze me. An icy feeling crept over me and I suddenly had the sensation of being a great way off from him. I could not help feeling hurt and wounded and struggled hard to keep the tears from my eyes; not for worlds would I have appeared disappointed. Serge Michailovitch went away saying good-bye frigidly, and we parted upon very cold terms. When he had gone, I missed him more than I could have imagined possible; his face haunted my dreams and my waking, and I thought of him the first thing in the morning, the last thing at night. I see now that I didn’t know what love meant until I met Serge Michailovitch. How I longed for his first letter, but the days slipped away without a word or sign from him. I was so horribly disappointed and tortured with doubt. Had he forgotten then all about me? I began to feel extremely uncomfortable, seeing him slipping away from me and wished I had not let him go.


Lafe Buckner, then I’ll loan you one or two ton of it, and won’t charge
This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned, as she considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least. All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. She would not even wish for any renewal of his attentions. His character sunk on every review of it; and, as a punishment for him, as well as a possible advantage to Jane, she seriously hoped he might really soon marry Mr. Darcy’s sister, as, by Wickham’s account, she would make him abundantly regret what he had thrown away.
with fire. It reminded me, more than anything else, of the Potteries at
him and sassed him, and he sassed back, and said he’d attend to them
altogether, as was proved even that night at Street Cobham and Ditton.

“Good gracious! anybody hurt?”
reads it and puts it in his pocket, and says:
His readiness to answer questions and the pleasant welcome he gave to all inquirers attracted to his side many who had been set thinking by his words. It is remarkable how the fit word was given him.
In May the French Exhibition on the Khodinka Field was inaugurated under the presidence of M. Ditz-Monin, a Senator of the French Republic. There were many interesting things to be seen at the Exhibition. The sections of jewellery and costumes were admirable; beautiful costumes were exhibited by Redfern and Paquin, but the prices were exorbitant: a splendid ball-dress cost neither more nor less than 10,000 francs.
“A guard! Well, that _is_ good. So somebody’s got to set up all night

down, and he says, kind of gentle:
too stupid and ugly to mate with one so beautiful and wise. At last,

“If they come after me,” he said; “Lord, if they come after me!” and
and make them happy all over, like a dog fight—unless it might be
our sheets to make Jim a rope ladder, we’re going to get into trouble
There was a great crowd walking about the Exhibition, a constant going to-and-fro of people who had come from all[528] quarters of the globe. The human whirlpool made me quite giddy. Several bands play in different parts of the grounds near the “Pont Alexandre III.,” which illustrates in stone and bronze the famous Russian Czar. We listened to the music of an American orchestra led by Sousa, the king of marches, in like manner as Strauss and Waldteufel had been the kings of the waltz in times of yore.

ever see; and there warn’t no more smile to him than there is to a ham.



A few miles from Tashkend there is a Leper Settlement.[517] When my husband visited it, he saw only ten lepers. He made inquiries, and was told that all the rest were begging in the streets of Tashkend. Sergy ordered them to be packed off immediately to their own dwelling. A collection, for the benefit of these poor wretches, is now in the press. I take part in it, and publish our crossing of the Pacific Ocean from San Francisco to Yokohama.
difference was. He said if I’d a wanted it to hide a knife in, and
chance, and directly banged away at a rat; but she missed him wide, and

the howl, or getting dynamite on the chance of busting them up, we’ve
Notwithstanding all the precautions taken by the Author not to frighten his readers, there remains such a leap for him to clear, that he is seen, as it were on his knees, begging he may be permitted[vii] to try twenty times, if he cannot clear it in ten: in other words, he earnestly wishes that his work may not receive its final judgement before it has been perused to the end; and in fact, it is not impossible but that a detached proposition, the absurdity of which is striking when considered singly, may be found conclusive when successively brought near to all those that are to follow it.
elaborate measures were being taken for the protection of the people in

“If I only had a heart, I should love them,” added the Tin Woodman.
XLII.	Madrid	255

had expended their last money in securing a passage, but the captain
I wait a visit, Lord, from Thee.
front room. When at last we crept across the sodden rooms and looked
instant it was gone.


What seems to be in France no more than a fortunate prejudice, is every where an irrefragable truth: in every country the strength, power, and riches of the Prince, are but the sum of the force, power, riches, energy, honour and susceptibility, which actually exist in the mass of his subjects.—But if the Sovereign be the most powerful man in his kingdom, only because all its strength centers in him; if in this age, the most complaisant, the meanest Minister should not dare even to insinuate a contrary idea before the Prince the most jealous of his authority; how can he presume to think, or to hope, that it will be in his power to persuade the Prince, that he, the Minister, is the best informed man in the Empire, before he has collected all the[242] information that can be got on every object that does not call for an immediate execution?—And how can he pretend to have collected every such information, when in addition to his own ideas, he goes only by those of the few dependents who surround him, dependents as much on their guard before him, as he himself is circumspect before the Sovereign, when the Sovereign, before he asks his advice, has the misfortune to let a single word escape that betrays even the appearance of an opinion on the object under deliberation?
No whooping-cough did rack his frame,



The day of the “Selamlic,” the birthday of Mahomed, when the Sultan leaves his palace in great pomp and goes to the neighbouring “Hamidieh Mosque” to public prayers, fell that year on a Friday, the Mahomedan Sabbath. Thanks to Mme. Lebedeff, we had the opportunity to see the ceremonial[296] of the “Selamlic,” and the Sultan’s State visit to the mosque. She had got cards of admission for us to the terrace of one of the wings of the palace, where places were reserved for the members of the diplomatic corps with their wives and daughters. Mme. Lebedeff came to fetch Zoe and me in her phaeton, in a grand toilet, with a Turkish Order glittering on her breast, which made her look very pompous and very patronising. Great animation reigned in the town; people crowded in the streets so that our carriage could scarcely move. The windows and house-tops were full of spectators, and the native women seemed to be all out of doors, walking about in groups, wrapped up in long white veils which covered them from head to foot. In a narrow street we had got into the stream of carriages, and nearly ran into a cab. In a moment I was out of the phaeton, just when a platoon of soldiers was advancing on me. Seeing my critical position, a young Turk, who occupied the cab we got into, asked me to get into his carriage, but Mme. Lebedeff drew me back hastily. At length, after many struggles, we arrived at our destination and mounted on the terrace, where Constantinople’s high society had gathered in a brilliant throng around us. On the square under our feet were guards of honour and massed troops: twelve battalions, fifteen squadrons and eight military bands, were ranged. We found ourselves just over the bayonets of a regiment of Tunis Zouaves, very good-looking, dark-skinned men. The Muezzin in the minaret began to call to prayers, and there soon appeared a smart coach containing the recluses of the Sultan’s harem, preceded by the Grand-master of the eunuchs, and two negro and two white footmen. The numerous sons of the Sultan, armed with spears, came behind cantering on magnificent steeds. An infinite number of Pashas, Beys and Effendies brought up the rear, with a great number of German officers, who had come to Constantinople to teach the military art to the Turkish army; and then, to the desperate and wild sounds of the Turkish bands, the Sultan appeared, reclining in a victoria with a coachman in Albanian costume. The Padishah was acclaimed with enthusiasm by the populace, and the troops saluted him putting their hand on the breast and forehead. As soon as the Sultan had entered the Mosque, religious chants were heard. On Friday the service lasts twenty minutes usually, but this time it was prolonged more than an hour through the reading aloud of the Prophet’s biography. The Sultan returned to the palace mounted on a fine long-tailed Arab; the horse’s trappings and saddle were covered with precious stones. The Sultan stood at his window whilst the troops defiled before him. After the review paper-bags full of sweets were distributed to the soldiers. I had, as it appeared,[297] conquered the heart of one of the Zouave soldiers, standing just under me, who stared at me with persistence when his officer was away. I looked down upon him and nodded to him to throw me a bonbon and he replied, by gesture, that he was afraid of his officer, who was now watching our little manœuvre. Just then bonbons and cool drinks were being handed on trays to the guests on the terrace, and this time it was my warrior who asked me to throw him a bonbon. An over ripened lady, meagre as a gutter-cat, who stood by me, understood the signal as being addressed to her, and thrusting a coquettish glance at the Zouave, she threw him a chocolate, which he kicked away contemptuously with his boot. As I couldn’t help smiling, the affronted lady looked daggers at me, but I didn’t mind it a bit and recompensed my bronze-faced admirer by throwing to him a sugar-candy. He stooped down and picked it up, then he raised his hand high, so that I could see that he had the candy in it, and looking up with a smile, he kissed the bonbon and threw it into the pocket of his vest. When the Zouave regiment was leaving the place, and marched away, my soldier took a last look at me and went off, every now and then pausing to look back, and almost broke his neck with efforts to catch a last glimpse of me.
“Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?”
chemists’ shops, of the liquors the wine merchants stored; I recalled
that time everything we had in the world was on our raft, and she was
feet, but I had not the courage to shout or to go to them. I let myself
“Dat’s good! But he’ll be pooty lonesome—dey ain’ no kings here, is
“Why, in our pew.”
The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants, and all the articles of plate which Mr. Collins had promised; and, as he had likewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by her Ladyship’s desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnish nothing greater. He carved and ate and praised with delighted alacrity; and every dish was commended first by him, and then by Sir William, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son-in-law said, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear. But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and gave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved a novelty to them. The party did not supply much conversation. Elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated between Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh—the former of whom was engaged in listening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her all the dinnertime. Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how little Miss de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish and fearing she was indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question, and the gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.
him, and Aunt Sally come in to see if he was comfortable and had plenty
watched the Martians, and went very quietly downstairs.
Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not return it.

January 28th.—It is dreadfully hot. The tropical rain, which falls from time to time, does not refresh the air. Sergy intended to make an excursion to Bankok, but the signals of tempest are hoisted in the port, and I am wickedly pleased, for Sergy will remain at home.

The removal of Schwartz from his earthly sphere of labour was the heaviest blow which Christian missions had yet received. His name is one of the very first to be written in the bede roll of great Indian missionaries. The Church thanks God for their glorious service, and for the splendid spirit with which they did their Master’s will. But in the days when Schwartz closed his great career the missionary cause was still in its infancy, the pioneer example as regards our own country was the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, who had so nobly stood as foster parent to the Danish missionaries in Southern India, and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, who took over the work. But a crisis was rapidly approaching, for the enthusiasm which made Germany hitherto the fount and origin of missionary enterprise was cooling under the spell of a materialistic wave, a change which Schwartz did not fail to feel even at his distance from Europe, and lamented over. He had left behind him some faithful colleagues, in whose hands the work would be safe, but he foresaw difficulties which would arise when in their turn—and they were not young men—the responsibility of pastoral oversight and leading would fall into other hands.
When I looked again, the busy handling-machine had already put together
With a renewal of tenderness, however, they repaired to her room on leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee. She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her asleep, and when it appeared to her rather right than pleasant that she should go down stairs herself. On entering the drawing-room, she found the whole party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting them to be playing high, she declined it, and making her sister the excuse, said she would amuse herself, for the short time she could stay below, with a book. Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment.

when the king got done capering and capered off behind the scenes, they

 In Trouble

Si tout ce qui avoit paru à l’Auteur fondé en raison & en justice, ne se trouve pas finalement, en dépit de la conjuration générale de tous les Peuples & de tous les Ministres, conforme aux faits les plus douteux;—& s’il ne résulte pas de la réunion des faits & des raisons, que l’assertion de l’Auteur la plus intéressante pour l’humanité, c’est-à-dire pour tous les Princes comme pour tous les Peuples, est de la vérité la plus incontestable, & la plus facile à mettre à la portée de tous les intéressés.

“You mean to frighten me, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this state to hear me. But I will not be alarmed, though your sister does play so well. There is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at the will of others. My courage always rises with every attempt to intimidate me.”


“Now de duke, he’s a tolerble likely man in some ways.”
said his father and brothers ought to waited for their relations—the

and shining to catch their little season-ticket train, for fear they’d
to fool folks, and when a chap had pulled a skiff out most to it they’d
of him. I’m unfavorable to killin’ a man as long as you can git aroun’
“My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard so much?” said her aunt. “A place, too, with which so many of your acquaintance are connected. Wickham passed all his youth there, you know.”

The captain is awfully nice to me, and performs an endless series of little attentions, looking to my comfort. He has, as it appears, the intention to fatten me up like the cattle destined for the slaughter-house, but sea-sickness takes away all my appetite.
XXIX.	Milan	192
waked up the sun was away up over my head! I shot out and went for the
“That would be a good scheme,” said Elizabeth, “if you were sure that they would not offer to send her home.{40}”
and she would jump right out of her stockings. It was very curious. But
plans to destroy these strangers had failed; but she was a powerful
Well, as I was saying, we waited that morning till everybody was

“And is Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother?” said Mr. Gardiner.


never see a thing work more satisfactory. He said it showed it was done
In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet’s visit, and sat about ten minutes with him in his library. He had entertained hopes of being admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had heard much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat more fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining, from an upper window, that he wore a blue coat and rode a black horse.
the dog cart, and then caught the reins and jumped up into the driver’s
nigger was set back considerable, because he reckoned it was all done
every day of his life he put on a clean shirt and a full suit from head

trousers and socks, scalded, and my face and shoulders blackened by the

Harry out o’ both o’ ye!”
courage. But as long as the Witch lives, you must remain a coward.”
lady says:
CHAPTER XXX

ferry, and traded fish and game for whisky, and fetched it home and got

murderers, to be in such a fix. I says to myself, there ain’t no

line of fire inland was marching steadily across a late field of hay.
told him to sell out as quick as he wanted to, they would be ready.
I came down and went into the dining room. There were the mutton and
if I can call it back from recollection’s vaults.”
At this point this fragment from the pen of Mr. Chambers comes to an abrupt close, but enough has been written to throw an interesting side light on the character and work of Mr. Schwartz at this period. The building referred to was duly completed as Christ’s Church, capable of holding from fifteen hundred to two thousand persons, with mission house and school adjoining, to complete which he gladly devoted the whole of his salary of £100, given to him by the government at Madras as chaplain to the garrison. Its dedication was on 18th May, 1766, a very impressive scene, when Schwartz, overflowing with thankfulness, in company with his good friends Col. and Mrs. Wood, acknowledged in prayer the goodness of God in bringing all this to pass. Some of the expressions of his earnest petition are still preserved. After the description from the memory of Mr. Chambers it is not difficult to imagine Schwartz standing reverently in this house of God for the first time, a crowd of Europeans and natives, especially the soldiers of the garrison, filling every seat. His prayer was:—
“The fifth cylinder,” I whispered, “the fifth shot from Mars, has
CHAPTER X.

or not. Hain’t you got no principle at all?”
and missionaryin’ around.”
But if it be true, that the combined interest of the three orders be centered within the three points I have stated, namely, the greatest possible quantity and variety of the best productions of the earth, the greatest quantity and variety of the best products of industry, and the greatest as well as most unconfined consumption of both at an equitable price; it is equally true, that it must be a matter of perfect indifference to agriculture, in what part of the world, and by whom her productions are consumed, provided they be paid to her in any products whatever, at her option equivalent to those she has parted with. It is no less true, that it is a matter of perfect indifference to industry, in what part of the world, and by whom, her products are consumed, provided she be paid for them in any products whatever, at her option, equivalent[326] to those she gives. It is equally true, that the money-proprietor must view, with the same indifference, his property giving life to this or that branch of industry or agriculture, provided, that in the hour of need or fancy, he finds at hand, on the most equitable terms, the greatest quantity and variety of the best products of agriculture and industry, which the interest of his money, or the amount of the salaries he enjoys, gives him a right to expect.
live!”
little village, and buy ten or fifteen cents’ worth of meal or bacon or
with abundant shady trees. Now I stood on a mound of smashed brickwork,

UNDER FOOT.
No one doubts, in England, but that the system of French taxation is a very bad one; nothing so self-evident as the reasons adduced in proof; every thinking man in France approves of those reasons:—but does it clearly appear, that in England some parts of that system are not adopted?—Is it not true, on the contrary, that it has prevailed, for a long time, in one point truly essential, in regard to which they have but diminished its inconveniencies, without thinking perhaps of the injustice, which is as inseparable from it, as it is from those wherein it appears more evidently?—The advantage of taxing the consumption is generally acknowledged; it is as generally believed that the way of bringing this system to perfection is by taxing, above all, the consumption of the rich:—yet, were it to happen that[93] the poor should be more injured, and that for a longer time, by a natural effect of the very operation devised for their release, than he could be aggrieved if nothing should escape the tax....
into frantic illuminations; they knew of it in Dublin, Edinburgh,

“You judge very properly,” said Mr. Bennet; “and it is happy for you that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May I ask whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment, or are the result of previous study?”
“With respect to my present circumstances I feel constrained to bless God for the manifold mercies showered down in the past year upon me, the least of His servants, through Christ’s atonement and intercessions. He has supported me day by day in the most gracious manner, He has instructed and reproved me by His Spirit, He has never left me without consolation—there my soul does magnify the Lord and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour. Indeed, I have the greatest cause for gratitude, for the Lord has regarded the low estate of His servant, my joy is not extravagant but calm and abiding, and my great aim is to know that I am the Lord’s through Christ, that I have found grace in His sight, that His peace rests upon me, that I can confidently approach Him in prayer and have a certain hope of Eternal life; so that even days of sickness cannot deprive me of these consolations.
“Oh, no!” said Elizabeth. “In essentials, I believe, he is very much what he ever was.”

We came back to Alexandropol before my husband’s holidays expired. To his great disappointment, and to my immense delight, General Komaroff had already taken possession of Kars, which was thought to be impregnable.
down stairs. I groped along up to my cubby, and hid it there till I
Ninthly, If the nullity of the burden depended on the equality with which it should be divided, and if this equality should depend on an addition to the supposed burden, might it not be expected (not from the tricks of customary seduction, or from the shorter method of authority, but from all the means calculated to enforce conviction) that the nation would find herself less aggrieved by an additional tax, which would tend to equalise the weight, than she could be by an increase of taxes laid for the purpose of effecting a reimbursement, which, upon a second thought, no one can wish for?

[Image unavailable.]
I was sorry to hear Jim say that, it was such a lowering of him. My

the upper berth, cornered, and sorry I come. Then they stood there,
couldn’t read, and she couldn’t write, nuther, before she died. None of



running northward trains from St. Albans to relieve the congestion of
way of trouble without waking you up, if they hadn’t already waked you
An insane resolve possessed me. I would die and end it. And I would
“I know little of the game at present,” said he, “but I shall be glad to improve myself; for in my situation of life——” Mrs. Philips was very thankful for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason.

As my brother’s party went on towards the crossroads to the south of

“Well, then, what makes you talk so wild?”

“If my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it.”

has attempted to explain. It may be the gases of the firing caused the
course, but I noticed floating down the stream a number of red masses,
entirely dependent both these things were upon flowing water for their
says:
glad she was to have her little girl at home again.
Everybody went on shore, but we decided to pass the night on board and start in the morning to Cairo. We passed a very bad night, the Egyptian sun having turned our cabin into an oven and we could not open the porthole through the close proximity of the cruiser “Nakhimoff,” alongside which we were anchored. At six o’clock we took a carriage to drive us to the railway station through the broad streets of Alexandria. The inhabitants we met on our way were for the most part negroes of different shades, and blue-robed, dark-skinned Fellahs. The native women, black-shrouded and veiled, wear a piece of black lustring wrapped round their bodies, making of them formless lumps, and giving them a ghastly aspect; a black veil is suspended on a metal cylinder, which is placed between the eyes with texts out of the Koran inscribed inside.

“Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when he went to town last November he really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of my being indifferent would have prevented his coming down again?{430}”
Pretty soon I wanted to smoke, and asked the widow to let me. But she
and said so—said “How _do_ you get biscuits to brown so nice?” and

cabinets and drawing-room tables, but our lives are much pleasanter
“No’m, I’m honest about it; I won’t ever do it again—till you ask me.”


“You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because you are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking openly. Seriously, I would have you be on your guard. Do not involve yourself, or endeavour to involve him, in an affection which the want of fortune would make so very imprudent. I have nothing to say against him: he is a most interesting young man; and if he had the fortune he ought to have, I should think you could not do better. But as it is—you must not let your fancy run away with you. You{182} have sense, and we all expect you to use it. Your father would depend on your resolution and good conduct, I am sure. You must not disappoint your father.”
project that suited exactly; so at last the duke said he reckoned he’d
He never said nothing. But he sighed, and pretty soon he stopped
his feelings invited me up to take a turn with him that night in a
top of Putney Hill to Wimbledon was a number of poor vestiges of the
My brother turned down towards Victoria, and met a number of such
a gust of firing. Close on the heels of that came a violent rattling


right along; the parson he had to stand there, over the coffin, and




Well, the second night a fog begun to come on, and we made for a
“It ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his reason. But your arts and allurements may, in a moment of infatuation, have made him forget what he owes to himself and to all his family. You may have drawn him in.”
stepped gingerly among them, passed in front of them, and so came
“Enough of this, age comes upon me, I have no reason therefore to wonder at weakness. If the mind be sound all is well, the rest we shall quit when we enter into the grave. That will cure all our bodily indispositions.... Our time is short. Within some days I have sojourned in this country thirty-four years. The end of my journey is, even according to the course of nature, near. May I not flag! May my last days be my best!”

and went to sleep, and never waked up till about an hour ago; then we
barking furiously.



When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them a good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford again next year; and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to courtesy and hold out her hand to both.{267}

yawned. “And where are you going?”
A moderate incline runs towards the foot of Maybury Hill, and down this
Elizabeth’s collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his emotion; and as Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not approach nearer to Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time, though not enough to be able to speak any more. Her brother, whose eye she feared to meet, scarcely recollected her interest in the affair; and the very circumstance which had been designed to turn his thoughts from Elizabeth, seemed to have fixed them on her more and more cheerfully.
there.”
destroying Berlin or Paris, or it might be they had gone northward.
“Missus,” comes a young yaller wench, “dey’s a brass cannelstick

spreading slowly from this little seed bed of the solar system
To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had been asked without the least suspicion, she was not distressed by his repeating it. Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her feelings appear what they were not. It was necessary to laugh when she would rather have cried. Her father had most cruelly mortified her by what he said of Mr. Darcy’s indifference; and she could do nothing but wonder at such a want of penetration, or fear that, perhaps, instead of his seeing too little, she might have fancied too much.{448}

we got to save _him_, hain’t we? Of course. Well, then, we won’t blow


the road. But once in the stream he seemed to lose volition, to become
“You are too hasty, sir,” she cried. “You forget that{136} I have made no answer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my thanks for the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the honour of your proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than decline them.”
[v]


thick woods. The road was still paved with yellow brick, but these were
and I standing pretty meek and sweaty alongside. The old gentleman
glittering so darkly in the early night, would explode into a
“They say,” said he, “that there’s another of those blessed things
and Levi Bell, the lawyer; and Dr. Robinson, and their wives, and the
Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match: but she said less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness; nor could Elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable. Kitty and Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Mr. Collins was only a clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news to spread at Meryton.
people said. They judged it was him, anyway; said this drownded man was
Seventeenthly, Were one to reflect, that this increase in the prices, in regard to the productions of the earth, is always followed by a similar increase with respect to the products of industry, which thereby receives the same encouragement; if, after examination, no one can harbour any doubt of the fact; would it be an easy matter, even with the help of the sacred maxim,[285] to persuade any nation, whose prices have been doubled, to reduce the nominal of her revenue from 20 to 18, in order to get the advantage in the competition with another nation who, by some disagreeable circumstances, should have been obliged to raise her products from 20 to 22, as England is compelled to do? Would not one, on the contrary, conjecture that every wise nation will follow the advice of the American of Philadelphia, i. e. that she will not hesitate to raise equally her own products from 20 to 22, certain, as she will be by this means, to give fresh encouragement both to her agriculture and her industry, and not to hurt in the least the interest of the nation whom those disagreeable circumstances should have compelled that rise from 20 to 22; compelled, I say, without procuring for her that encouragement which cannot spring from such a rise, but in as much as it is not necessitated by taxes?


green, shining walls of the Emerald City before them. She wondered at
northern hills were shrouded in darkness; the fires near Kensington

Tom looks at me very grave, and says:
Mr. Bennet made no answer; and each of them, deep in thought, continued silent till they reached the house. Their father then went to the library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfast-room.

The train ran into a station illuminated by electricity; it was Kobe at last! The Russian Consul’s interpreter came to meet us at the railway station, but we didn’t hear the words through the noise of the gale. The only thing we made out was that we couldn’t start for Nagasaki to-morrow on account of the weather. We’ll have to wait here until the sea gets calmer. A French ship which had left Kobe in the morning had to return, being unable to continue her voyage.
very painful to the eye. One’s gaze went with infinite relief from the
“I’ll give you something better—I’ll give you a cowhide.”
shouting his words out with all his might; and every now and then he
silent, and I would tell her that Sid was all right, and would be home

absolutely stationary for the next half hour. The Martian who had been
The moment of our departure for Khabarovsk approached. It was decided at first that Sergy would go alone. He promised to come back to St. Petersburg in six months’ time. I dreaded the moment of his departure, and the moment was not far off. No! I could not bear to part with Sergy. I always yielded to impulse under any circumstances. I told him that nothing should induce me to stay away, and that I would follow him a second time to the end of the world. But Sergy absolutely refused to hear of it. His opposition made me only the more distinctly determined to have my own way. I simply didn’t know what “No” meant, and Sergy consented after a good deal of coaxing to take me with him.
their hands on their thighs to watch him mark the places on the ground
texas and he crawled back to get on the raft and found her gone, he




“Would you know the boy again if you was to see him, Hines?”
“It ain’t no use talkin’; bein’ brothers to a rich dead man and
screaking; or jumbled up voices, it was so still, and sounds come so
Shoes came off; and before she could reach it, the Witch had snatched
“Without once opening his lips”

The picture gallery, and two or three of the principal bed-rooms, were all that remained to be shown. In the former were many good paintings: but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been already visible below, she had willingly turned to look at some drawings of Miss Darcy’s, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, and also more intelligible.
We all got in a big room in the hotel, and lit up some candles, and

steps on the stairs, and blowed out our light and hid; and here comes
“No—why should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain my affections, because I had no money, what occasion could there be for making love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was equally poor?”

“Are any of your people tinsmiths?”
that? _No_. And ther’ ain’t no sense in _this_, nuther. Is it
Some way towards Walham Green the streets became clear of powder, and I

Thinks I, that’s mighty curious; he said that yesterday. He oughter

When we got home the house was all dark and still; so we went on down

escape. But they could find no way to get out of the castle, for it was
[Pg 52]
wheel, or has preferred other expedients to its development. And not
July 15th.—We approach Sumatra. The bay is strewn with treacherous coral-shelves. This morning, whilst I was dressing, the alarm bell sounded. I heard voices shouting “Help, help, man overboard!” It was a manœuvre of false alarm, which nearly came to end by a veritable catastrophe. Whilst dropping a life-boat one of the sailors fell himself into the sea, but help, fortunately, came in time.
was a fix, I tell you! I had a couple of patients with the chills, and
of the minds upon Mars. Their world is far gone in its cooling and this

emotional states or a sort of stupid receptivity. But in the night my
By the Illustrious Kean!
was raised above the stalks of corn by means of the pole stuck up its
I was often sent down to the drawing-room to be admired by the afternoon callers, and mamma ordered me to let myself be kissed by unkissable grown-ups, who paid me those compliments shown to children, who are precious to their parents, and which made me intolerably conceited. I stood in great danger of being completely spoilt, and mamma, who was afraid that I received a good deal more flattery than she thought good for me, ordered me to answer what I was told: “Comme Vava[1] est jolie!”—“Vava n’est pas jolie, elle est seulement gentille.” But, nevertheless, I knew that I was pretty, my glass told me so.


“But perhaps you would like to read it”
“Yes. My great-grandfather, eldest son of the Duke of Bridgewater, fled
come; for he _couldn’t_ come and me miss him. Sally, it’s terrible—just
Small.
Dorothy stood up and found she was in her stocking-feet. For the Silver


I set aside the outcry against the interest yearly paid to foreigners, as the produce of the sums vested by them in the funds, because I think ruin impossible, where the money borrowed at 4 or 5, is laid out at an interest of 6, 7, or even 10 per cent. I likewise overlook the declamatory complaints on the fate of the handicraft and husbandman; because the laws of Lycurgus should be revived, or the government must confine itself to protect those two classes of men against every sort of private vexation, and to secure to them the trifling salary to which they are every where and forever doomed. In spite of avarice the salary must be raised, if the prices of every necessary should increase; and were these to fall in their value, mutiny itself could not prevent a diminution of wages.
But I will not weary the reader with a description of that long morning
Bless you, child, when you set out to thread a needle don’t hold the
Guardian of the Gates they had met before.
“Not at all,” was her answer; “but, depend upon it, he means to be severe on us, and our surest way of disappointing him will be to ask nothing about it.”
“Cler the track, thar. I’m on the waw-path, and the price uv coffins is
August 28th.—A telegraphic message has just arrived announcing the surrender of Batoum. The official orders of the giving up of that town to the Turks will come to-morrow. Now we shall be able to get away soon; I am wildly, madly happy!
brother stood up and yelled at the next driver, and a man on a black
But be indulgent, damsel sweet,


“My dear Mr. Bennet,” said his lady to him one day, “have you heard that Netherfield Park is let at last?{2}”
them so they clean forgot they ever had a trouble in the world; and
underneath. So he walked forward to the tree, but just as he came under
cardboard. My brother shouted involuntarily. A boiling tumult of steam
between Horsell, Ottershaw, and Woking, rose early with the idea of

with it all could do him any good; though he said it often made him
before, but kind of ornery, and humble, and to blame, somehow—though

it would a been a miserable business to have any unfriendliness on the
The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently characteristic. Bingley had never met with pleasanter people or prettier girls in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentive to him; there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt acquainted with all the room; and as to Miss Bennet, he could not conceive an angel more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a collection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom he had felt the smallest interest, and from none received either attention or pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty; but she smiled too much.
of Boggs. One of them says:
I saw an abandoned boat, very small and remote, drifting down-stream;
You know what I mean—I don’t know the words to put it in.
CHAPTER XXIX.
The Tin Woodman appeared to think deeply for a moment. Then he said:
intellectual side of man already admits that life is an incessant

 “Oh! Lordy, Lordy!”
me so, her own self.”
their walls stood, sometimes to the second story, with smashed windows
Tom he took a look back over his shoulder, and says, “Too late—he’s out



Everything was all right now. The girls wouldn’t say nothing because

JESSE PAGE, F.R.G.S.

“I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins, and could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I come prepared to admire them. At present I will not say more, but, perhaps, when we are better acquainted——”

a good drink of the cool, clear water, she set about making ready for
Before returning to Russia we made a trip to Italy and travelled as far as Naples in the company of the Italian Consul of Manchester, Signor Raphaello Giordano, middle-aged and perfectly gentleman-like. He promised to be our cicerone in Naples, where we arrived at night, rather disconcerted by the hubbub of the clamorous Neapolitans. When we found ourselves on the crowded platform, noisy fachini (porters) besieged us and snatched away our bags. Signor Giordano had to desert us on the quay, whilst we went to get our luggage through the Customs promising to be back soon. In his absence a young man began to hang about in front of us, staring at me all the time with frankest impertinence. He came close to me and managed to whisper in my ear: “What hotel are you going to? Do stop at the hotel where I am staying.” Impudent fellow! I was greatly astonished at his audacity. Fortunately Signor Giordano strolled in at the right moment and rescued me. Both men were standing nervously facing each other and Giordano exclaimed in arrogant tones, his eyes blazing with wrath: “What right have you to speak to that young lady?” “And you, how do you dare to speak to me?” was the impertinent answer. A squabble sprang up between them; it was so hateful to have a scandal! Giordano went to seek a policeman and we remained alone, dreading to move in fear of losing sight of our protector, and our boxes were so long in coming. At last we decided to be bold and wait no longer. We hailed a carriage and rode off to Victoria Hotel, recommended by Giordano, and were very glad when he made his appearance an hour after.

a dainty blue color, and beyond them were fields of grain and
said I didn’t; so I told him just how to find the raft, and then he

“Well,” said the woman, after thinking it over and taking another peep
them?—that’s the thing _I_ want to get at. Now, what do you _reckon_ it
CHAPTER XXVII

We arrived at Venice in the night. That aquatic town seemed very beautiful to me with its magnificent palaces reflected in the water, and poetic gondolas, but I found Venice less interesting when seen in disenchanting day; the beautiful palaces appeared ancient and decayed, and the poetic gondolas, resembling coffins, gave rise to lugubrious thoughts. How insufferably dull it would be to dwell here! To live a day, buried in that monotonous silence, is quite enough, I thought.
country. This made her angrier than before, and she blew her silver

head. He grabbed his gun and rode straight to the place where we was
away all the uncomfortableness and we felt mighty good over it, because
Next Sunday we all went to church, about three mile, everybody

the other, and says:

_h-whack!_—bum! bum! bumble-umble-um-bum-bum-bum-bum—and the thunder
his hand and his white hair a-flying in the wind; and ’stead of jumping
squeaky little voice:
“_You_ give him a chaw, did you? So did your sister’s cat’s
saying anything but that. But that was enough. It made me feel so mean
anything to do—everybody was stumped, and set still. I was most ready
“Oh, yes; I am anxious,” returned the Scarecrow. “It is such an
The balloon was by this time tugging hard at the rope that held it to
The woman kept looking at me pretty curious, and I didn’t feel a bit
“For the land’s sake, what _is_ the matter with the child? He’s got the
We was all glad as we could be, but Tom was the gladdest of all because

But perhaps you or I would not have termed that action explosive. That little projectile contained several pounds of half-destroyed matter. It had been used as a fuel in an industrial plant, till it had been about half annihilated, and now it was in that curious, borderline condition, when it had a tremendous tendency to absorb energy and become matter again, and an equally tremendous tendency to release its energy and become free energy as light or heat. The conditions determined one or the other, and the new Minus Force shells were used under conditions of space that made them exert a tremendous tendency to become matter. Billions of billions of ergs of energy they could absorb, and would absorb. They drew it from all the surrounding ether so rapidly that it had the effect on all surrounding substance or sources of energy of being in contact with something at a temperature far below absolute zero. The result was obvious. When it was set off, all light, heat, or any other energy within a region of ten miles or so, was instantly drawn to it, until it had been satisfied. It was an energy vacuum shell.
the right to command them once more.”
So she didn’t lose no time, but asked him; and hugged him and kissed
“There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as to give me no hope from law. A man of honour could not have doubted the intention, but Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it—or to treat it as a merely conditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claim to it by extravagance, imprudence, in short, anything or nothing. Certain it is that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I was of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really done anything to deserve to lose it. I have a warm unguarded temper, and I may perhaps have sometimes spoken my opinion of him, and to him, too freely. I can recall nothing worse. But the fact is, that we are very different sort of men, and that he hates me.”
Theatres_,


could have one or two of the chains took off, because they was rotten
“Good heaven! can it be really so? Yet now I must believe you,” cried Jane. “My dear, dear Lizzy, I would, I do congratulate you; but are you certain—forgive the question—are you quite certain that you can be happy with him?”

“Clah to goodness I hain’t no notion, Miss’ Sally. She wuz on de
Grief.
“Her not objecting does not justify him. It only shows her being deficient in something herself—sense or feeling.{193}”
shaded his mouth with his hands, and stretched his neck out towards the
peering through the hedge, came a sound like the distant concussion of

You nearly fainted, my hearty,
who was to blame for it? Why, _me_. I couldn’t get that out of my

people, but I was not too terrified for thought. The terrible Heat-Ray
Now the Scarecrow, who had expected to see the great Head Dorothy had

 Solid Comfort
Neither could I see the nearer fire, though the reflections of it

“Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Collins, and Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy.”



The Emir has sent a delegation to my husband with numerous rich presents. The delegates wore beautiful khalats and white turbans made of very thin stuff, twisted round their shaved heads. These turbans cost scores of pounds;[520] it was India which supplied them, but now they are fabricated in Moscow much cheaper. After the deputies had been presented to Sergy, they were ushered into my sitting-room. The most talkative of the party was Astanakul-Divan-Begui, the first minister of the Emir; his companions sat down on the edge of their chairs, smoothing their knees with their hands, scarcely lifting their eyes from the carpet, and would only say “yes” and “no.” After a copious “dastarkhan,” (lunch) served in the winter-garden, the deputies presented us with numerous gifts sent by their Sovereign, which lay piled about the long terrace. Six Bokharian attendants stood like ancient slaves before this amassed wealth: superb carpets, muskets, pistols, daggers set with precious stones, gilt caskets with splendid jewellery, a dream from the “Thousand and One Arabian Nights.”
gigantic blood drops—possessed with two ideas: to get more food, and to
white and pale, and her sister-in-law sat weeping, too wretched even to
I cannot but regret, now that I am concluding my story, how little I am
so lovely as to hear the young ladies sing “The Last Link is Broken”


The irritation against the anarchists is growing from day to day; there are often scuffles in the streets. A masculine-looking girl, with short hair and glasses, was taken for a socialist by the wild mob, which stamped upon her reducing her nearly to the condition of a pancake. She had to be sent to the hospital with a bloody nose and black eyes. About the same time a French manicurist bought a paper from a news boy, in which the Emperor’s funeral was described. Finding that the vendor had charged too high a price for his paper, the Frenchman asked him, in very bad Russian, why “he took so dear for such stuff,” meaning the sheet of paper, but unfortunately he was understood in quite a different manner, and knocked down and beaten so severely that he died the next day.



So, while they were walking through the forest, the Tin Woodman told
around on his heels and walked off.
and was all safe, and Jim was a free man, and we done it all by
again; but when she thought it all over she was glad she had not gone
Scarecrow; for when he found himself alone in his room he stood
surprise by finding the gold, and made a rush for the coffin, he lets
to make sure they kept in good working order. The Lion would have
a group of three charred bodies close together, struck dead by the

at last asked the green girl to take another message to Oz, saying if

at once stiffen, and we can only stand straight and look pretty. Of
and after that he polished off with a kind of a general cuss all round,
So we set there watching, and by-and-by he stirs a bit, and opened his

woods daytimes, and balls at the house nights. These people was mostly
woman. “She has held all the Munchkins in bondage for many years,

that he might rust, and so dried his tears on Dorothy’s apron.
“Well,” she says, “I’ll run down to breakfast now, and then I’ll start
Dorothy looked inside the Golden Cap and saw some words written upon
went on into the forest.
like he was dead, he looked considerable more than that.
I judged he didn’t know nothing about what he had been doing, so I
off for spare rooms, and she said she had one spare room, which would
Shooting’s good, but there’s quieter ways if the thing’s _got_ to be
CXX.	Tashkend	495



him, the ammunition blew up, there was fire all about him, and he found
Q. Can you buy it cheaper, without wronging the man who might sell it dearer?

too, on my side began to move towards the pit.
then tell him about his being free, and take him back up home on a
“He is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming man. He cannot know what Mr. Darcy is.”
battery—No. 12, of the Horse Artillery. My plan was to return at once


the Golden Cap; but if she could only get hold of the Silver Shoes,
took out of her room if they was in Uncle Harvey’s way, but he said
“That’s it.”
scratched against the tin it made a cold shiver run down my back. What
The War of the Worlds
wanted to, _I_ believe. Now, whilst I think of it, we got to hunt up
fancied a faint shriek had reached me. I had a momentary impulse to go





ST. PETERSBURG
for spiders little Thomas Franklin Benjamin Jefferson Elexander Phelps

parts of Lambeth flooded and red. The red creeper swarmed up the trees
“She could not help it, for she is melted,” explained the Scarecrow.

folks and knowed better than him; so he was satisfied, and said he
mind to harness him like a horse, and make him work.”

don’t tell no way.”
obituaries and accidents and cases of patient suffering in it out of
it in. Then Ben Rogers says:
holiday, then and ever after, and spent the time in feasting and

and rags for my burns, and I also took a hat and a flannel shirt that I
Now, my sweet girl, this poetry I must end,
June 4th.—The night was so fresh that I had to take out my warm blanket. Early in the morning we arrived at Merv. Repetition of yesterday’s greetings with the offering of “Bread and Salt” on a silver dish besides. A few minutes from Merv is Mourgab, a beautiful estate belonging to the Emperor, extending to the very frontier of Persia. At the station of Amou-Daria a wagon was put at the rear of the train, an observation car; all the back was in glass to view the country. We had to cross the Amou-Daria, one of the greatest rivers of the world, on a temporary slender wooden bridge, which swung and quivered under us. An iron bridge about three kilometres long, is in construction, a masterpiece of engineering skill, which will cost a large sum to build. I was awfully uneasy whilst we traversed the bridge, and turned to my husband with a frightened face, but Sergy who had strong nerves, was looking provokingly calm, and laughed at my fears, and nothing was so aggravating as calmness for me at that moment. At the other side of the river we came into a land of beauty and fertility, and rolled through maize and tobacco plantations. I looked around with admiring eyes. Here again was life! The bushes were full of warbling birds.
“And do not you think him a very handsome gentleman, ma’am?”
shoot them in the back, in the dark—and it’s just what they _would_ do.
In fact, if I return to Great-Britain⸺


afeard; bekase I knowed ole missus en de widder wuz goin’ to start to
My father, Prince Theodore Galitzine, married my mother being a widower with five children, three of whom died before my birth. My earliest vivid recollections begin when I was two years old. I distinctly remember feeling a terrible pain in parting with my wet-nurse, to whom I was passionately attached. I got hold of her skirt and wouldn’t let her go, weeping wildly. It was my first bitter affliction. I could not put up with the new nurse, whom I hated from the depths of my little heart, and I would not call her otherwise than Wild Cat, with baby petulance, having already at that early age pronounced likes and dislikes. We were in perpetual state of warfare. When I was about three years old that nurse was succeeded by a pretty Belgian girl named Melle. Henriette. The tutor of my two step-brothers, Mr. Liziar, made love to her and finished by marrying her some time after. He seemed somewhat half-witted; by night he went to chime the bells at the belfry of our village church in Dolgik, a fine estate belonging to my father, in the government of Kharkoff, and also amused himself by breaking, in the conservatory, the panes of glass with big stones. One day he frightened his sweetheart nearly to death by throwing a snake under her feet. After all these pranks it is no way astonishing that Mr. Liziar finished his days in a lunatic asylum. The tutor who succeeded him, asked my parents to bring his wife with him. He hastened to pocket the hundred roubles taken beforehand on account of his salary, and departed suddenly to Kharkoff to fetch her. Meanwhile my father received a letter from this tutor’s legitimate wife dated from St. Petersburg, in which she entreated papa to send her the half of her husband’s monthly salary, telling him he spent all his money on his mistress, whilst his wife and children had not a morsel of bread to put into their mouths. Of course, this too Don Juanesque tutor was instantly dismissed.

This ended the saying of the charm, and they heard a great chattering


seen no house out in the country before that was so nice and had so


afterwards learned was Stent, the Astronomer Royal, with several

shape again, and solder him together where he is broken?”
I turned and looked down the slope of the hill to where, enhaloed now
one. I remember how I sat on the table there in the blackness, with
An English liner, which had entered the harbour at night, warned us that a north-east wind was blowing hard out at sea. We have to wait again until to-morrow.
it, and was all tired out, too, and I see plain enough he’d been worked
A printed placard, hanging up outside the bureau, announced that a big English steamer, the Empress of China belonging to the Canadian Line, starts to-morrow for Vancouver via Shanghai. The idea came to us to continue our voyage on that boat for a change, but we were told that there was no place on board.
stretched his neck out about a minute, listening. Then he says:

The Navigation Act was, if you will have it so, the last effort of the human mind, at a time when every notion relative to commerce, was nearly confined to England alone; but I question much whether the Opposition the most warm in invoking that tutelary God, against the Minister who dares to offer the least encroachment upon its worship, would not be very much pleased to see it destroyed before they themselves should come into office: it is an old idol, to which incense is offered through mere policy, and for which a veneration is kept up in the minds of the people, for the sole purpose of making it subservient to the downfall of the man who might be courageous enough to attempt its destruction. I shall pass over in silence the obstacles which that famous Act daily opposes to regulations as well adapted to the present state of things, as those it contains were to the circumstances that gave it birth; but, to the intoxication produced by its success, I shall be bold enough to impute one of the most mistaken notions on the true aim of national commerce: it is a very fatal error, to imagine that money ought to be the object of those operations of which it is only the means. This chimera, it is true, has never been realised; the wisdom of private cupidities has always triumphed over the folly of general cupidity:[328] nothing more clear than the exactness with which the treasures of America have been shared amongst all the nations of Europe, each in proportion to her agriculture and her industry, that is, according to her wants: at least it appears to me, that the two balances of England and France, which I have produced, are incontrovertible proofs of what I here advance, though they have been imagined and received as proofs of the very contrary; nevertheless, the prejudice concerning these two formidable balances still subsists, and it is this prejudice which daily gives life to new prohibitions, and new restrictions: there is not perhaps in all Europe, a single modern regulation of that kind which does not owe its establishment to this prejudice, and to the power it derives from the veneration paid to it in the place where it was first conceived. The nation who takes the lead in point of commercial knowledge, is every where carefully watched. On the least of her operations, other nations make use of the light she has held forth; her principles are studied, her maxims adopted, her examples followed; every where they are on their guard against her pretensions, pretensions openly avowed, prosecuted without mystery, and crowned, as it is supposed, with success; and when they see, that within the[329] course of a twelvemonth, she has really received more gold and silver than she was wont to receive in three years; when they see the intoxication of her inhabitants on the arrival of those treasures which obey her call from all parts of Europe; when they hear the complaints of her news-paper writers against the untractableness of the Americans, in not suffering themselves to be entirely stripped of their specie; when they attend to her invectives on the combinations of the American merchants to prevent those of England from taking away that trifling sum in specie which the United States want, to give more consistency to their paper-money;—then, indeed, then it is possible to forget every thing else; it is possible not to remark, that, with the same excess of avowed cupidity, England, nevertheless, has not received, in the course of a whole century, (a period sufficient to determine an experiment) England, I say, during a whole century, has disdained to receive her dividend of the treasures imported into Europe; the paper-money circulating in England stands evidently in lieu of a great part of the sum it represents, and which it was at her own option to procure. It is also very pardonable not to reflect then, that it is impossible for England to keep long in her hands without hurting herself, more than any other nation,[330] any money above what is necessary for her. No one takes the trouble of arguing long on causes, when the effect is instantaneously and powerfully felt: Not Europe alone, but the United States of America, are stript of their money by England; England therefore wants not any longer to import foreign goods, or when she advances the price of her own merchandise, she refuses paying dearer for that of other nations. The other nations do not hesitate—English goods are instantly prohibited.
“This is the second time you have called us,” said the Monkey King,
“Sarah Williams.”
machines, guns, cities, all the order and organisation. All that will
“Oh, yes.”
read like this:
“You must walk. It is a long journey, through a country that is
GENEVA
“A _dozen_ says you!—_forty_ couldn’t a done every thing that’s been

“If I become a Christian,” asked one of the natives standing by, “how shall I be maintained?” A justifiable question in India where the profession of the[Pg 54] faith meant so much loss. Schwartz replied, “Work and pray,” handing to the man the open Gospel of St. Matthew in Tamil, and the words upon which his eyes lighted were from the sixth chapter and verses thirty-one to thirty-three: “Take no thought, saying, what shall we eat and what shall we drink, or wherewithal shall we be clothed? For after all these things do the Gentiles seek, for your Heavenly Father knoweth that you have need of all these things. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness and all these things shall be added unto you.”

“Is he a good man?” inquired the girl anxiously.
At first the little creatures, many though they were, could hardly stir

In the sudden thud, hiss, and glare of the igniting trees, the

The next morning Dorothy kissed the pretty green girl good-bye, and
sickle-shaped curve that vanished into mist at last towards the Naze.
stars—I’ve seen none these five or six days, but I’ve no doubt they’re

reached out his hand, and says:

good breakfast.”
Feathers.
worse, and after a long time he went out of his head, and wouldn’t let
a livin’. _They_ ain’t a-goin to suffer. Why, jest think—there’s
order, at the pit, simply to be swept out of existence. Then the

The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be safe for her—that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm where she felt herself to be right.



such a sweat about a Testament. So I give it a shake, and out drops a
“It would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression; but their colour and shape, and the eyelashes, so remarkably fine, might be copied.”

“Why,” said he, “a magician could call up a lot of genies, and they
Mr. Wickham’s society was of material service in dispelling the gloom which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbourn family. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now added that of general unreserve. The whole of what Elizabeth had already heard, his claims on Mr. Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him, was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody was pleased to think how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy before they had known anything of the matter.
{v}
By the end of April mamma came to take me home. I reluctantly left St. Petersburg and took a long farewell of my freedom.
monosyllables. Had it not been for my promise to the innkeeper, she
disgusting.
said to be kindly hearted.”


“How unfortunate that you should have used such very strong expressions in speaking of Wickham to Mr. Darcy, for now they do appear wholly undeserved.”

getting out of danger Londonward. People were hiding in trenches and
He walked from Westminster to his apartments near Regent’s Park, about
did not clearly know at that time. There was very little excitement in
I made fast and laid down under Jim’s nose on the raft, and began to
and nobody ever denied that she was of the first aristocracy in our

other kind out of a jews-harp. It always interests them; they come out
was a mighty good nigger, Jim was.
Kobzeff, one of the most important anarchists, a very stylish young man who hadn’t at all the dynamite-look on his face, gained admittance under a false name into the most fashionable drawing-rooms of St. Petersburg. He went afterwards to Moscow and even forced his way into Prince Dolgorouki’s palace on pretext that he was an engineer who had found out a new system of gas-light for the town.

“Because you hain’t got but one _on_. Just _listen_ at the man! _I_
October 4th.—This morning we accompanied Kontski to a music-shop, where he went to choose a piano for his forthcoming concert. There was only a cracked old “Pleyel” for the choice. The old mæstro kept his promise and played most enchantingly some selections of “Faust” of his own transposition. I cannot understand how he could manage[408] to get such lovely notes out of such a decrepit old instrument; by his magic touch he persuaded it to give forth delicious music. I could have listened all day long.
“He came down to see the place”	2
matter if you smashed to smithereens at the end of the run, after a
May 27th.—The snow in the mountains transforms itself when thawing into big clouds, and it pours with rain nearly every day. The top of the “Palantek” is a capital weather-prophet; when there are no clouds on the summit, even if the sky is heavy all around, it will not rain that day, and vice versa. From our sitting-room one can watch the mountains, and this barometer is of great use to us during our rides.
pulled all of the straw out of his clothes and head. They made his hat

pine woods between Woking and Weybridge, until eight. Then the _St.
Fedia, the youngest of my nephews, is such a darling, with[142] a smile which says, “Please love me!” One morning as he was just emerging from a battle-royal with his nurse whilst she was coaxing him into his clothes, she began to threaten him that if he continued to be naughty he would be devoured by all the animals mentioned in his favourite story-book, by the lions, tigers and wolves. Fedia, totally unabashed, his mischievous little face peeping from under the coverlet, burst out suddenly: “And the hippopotamus, you forget him!”
Jane and Elizabeth attempted to explain to her the nature of an entail. They had often attempted it before: but it was a subject on which Mrs. Bennet was beyond the reach of reason; and she continued to rail bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about.
In the morning we went up to the village and bought a wire rat-trap and
his great box, and then he politely opened the gate for our friends.
Dinner was served à la franca, but there were knives and forks for us only, our hosts did very well without them, helping themselves with their fingers. The meal consisted of a score of meat and sweet dishes intermingled. I did not know what I was eating, but was compelled to taste everything, to refuse would be a great offence to our hostess, and I resigned myself to swallow all sorts of nasty things. Our hostess, according to the custom of the country, tasted every dish before it was served to her guests, in order to prove that it wasn’t poisoned. During the meal the son of our hostess behaved abominably. He tyrannised over the poor little mulatto, the son of the negress slave, and was awfully rude to his mother, daring to call her in our presence kiopek, which means dog in Turkish. After dinner a large copper basin was brought in to wash our hands, after which the dances were renewed. The face of one of the Bayadères was completely veiled. I was told that this woman had formerly been a prostitute. She is married now, but all the same she is obliged to cover her face in remembrance of her bad life. When the time came to bid good-bye to our hostess, I wanted to give a bakshish (a tip) to the dancing-girls, but she objected to this and told me that I had far better invite them to come and dance in our house. I promised to do it one of these days. I could not possibly imagine that our hostess’s son, the perverse little despot, could show himself such a gallant cavalier towards me. In parting he wanted absolutely to kiss me, and declared that at first he had detested the Russians, but now he had seen me, he liked me so much that his most ardent wish was that the Russians would remain for ever in Erzeroum.



Pretty Parisiennes came to Trouville to show off their beautiful toilettes, which they changed three times a day. In the afternoon they sat on the beach under big brown holland umbrellas, chatting and flirting with their cavaliers, whilst their bare-legged babies, armed with tin pails, made sand cakes and paddled in the sea.

“Why, no; I—I—well, no, I b’lieve I didn’t.”
much of it. I was too small when pap used to have ’em at the palace. Do
they were the same gray color to be seen everywhere. Once the house had
we must have spent the greater portion of a day before that awakening.
ashamed of me.


or village houses gave sufficient cover—the guns were waiting. The
“Why not shell the darned things strite off and finish ’em?” said the
way through an interminable suspense.
“we might borrow something worth having out of the captain’s stateroom.
In April Sergy went on a tour through Siberia; he visited Kamtchatka and the island of Saghalien, to which the Russian government transports convicts. He will be away a month at least, and I shall miss him terribly. A month is such a long time to wait. In his absence I remained in complete seclusion, refusing myself to callers.
metal that gleamed in the crack between the lid and the cylinder had an
With these words the Witch fell down in a brown, melted, shapeless mass
The fifth cylinder must have fallen right into the midst of the house


Of course all the students in the crammer’s biology class, to which my
talked about Cairo, and wondered whether we would know it when we got
first, on account of the extraordinary glittering mechanism I saw busy


amongst the old tools, and got a pickaxe and give it to him, and he
the one that’s entitled to it most. You hain’t done a thing from the
“I mean he goes to our church regular when he’s in Sheffield. That’s
“Say, won’t he suspicion what we’re up to?”
were still occupied by scared inhabitants, too frightened even for

he had killed them and hacked a cross in their breasts, which was the
rusty wood-saw without any handle; it was laid in between a rafter and
All these deficits in wealth, occasioned by the war, are a substantial loss; and the prospect would be dispiriting indeed, were not the rival nation in the very same predicament. But will this grievous loss be after the peace active, as it were, and felt by the community longer than the time required for the 2, 3, or 400,000 men, employed during the war in forwarding the destructive schemes, to resume their peaceable occupations; or till the number of them, who shall have died in America, the Indies, of the scurvy, or at the fatal tree, be replaced by the ordinary course of population?—This I cannot conceive by any means: some of the reasons, which I have to adduce, will be found in the reflections I am about to present on the second part of the impost, which seems to me not less useful than the first is necessary: all my other arguments will[40] appear in the other parts of this work. If it can be concluded from the ensemble, that all the evils brought about by a bad or ill-fated administration, are naturally, and without expence, compensated under a wise ministry, and that the most barbarous and most extravagant of them all could have no other means of ruining the nation than by destroying the people; then, made easy on the effects of the national debt, we shall have courage enough to acknowledge, that it is as sacred in the hands of those, who, having furnished the value, are in possession of the vouchers, as the crown on the head of the monarch; and we shall enjoy the freedom of mind necessary to infer, that although Providence often seems to leave to chance the destiny of some individuals, yet it is very far from being indifferent to all that concerns the whole species[2].
Shepherdsons was too strong for them. I asked him what was become of
there was no trace of the Black Smoke.
“Thus we departed on the 21st January, N.S., in the Name of Jesus, accompanied by that trusty German, Matthieson, who has conducted all the missionaries from Mr. Walther until now. On the 23rd we arrived at Deal, in perfect health and spirits. Here we lodged in a house which is only a few paces from the shore, so that from our windows we see nothing but the sea. My heart is filled with cheerful confidence, being convinced that as God has taken us under His paternal care during our late travels so will He likewise continue to be our[Pg 37] Protector. If we will only cleave steadfastly to Him, He will most certainly be with us and be our faithful God. And He will graciously hear the prayers with which we know so many of His children and servants accompany us. Now, therefore, we go forth in the Name of the Lord Who hath called us to be His servants and messengers among the heathen, Who will also guide and bring us to the destined place.”


And we men, the creatures who inhabit this earth, must be to them at

after. We would sell the raft and get on a steamboat and go way up the
each. These bunches have since been named rather aptly, by that

In Sunbury, and at intervals along the road, were dead bodies lying in
“You hain’t seen no tow-head? Looky here, didn’t de line pull loose en
boat slanted so that I couldn’t make very good time; so to keep from
missed him. He—”
Grangerfords had to be _fetched_ home—and one of ’em was dead, and
crying there, away in the night. I was behind the door, and I was
“I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!” cried Jane. “Oh, Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and blessed above them all? If I could but see you as happy! If there were but such another man for you!”
their tails, and let on they’re rattlesnakes, and I reckon that’ll

“It’s most uncommon curious, I can’t understand it. I know perfectly
disgraced. And then think of _me!_ It would get all around that Huck
“Down to Silas Phelps’ place, two mile below here. He’s a runaway

Well, before long, here comes the wreck, dim and dusky, sliding along
I never struck them yet. Anyways, it was plenty good enough for _me;_
Of the Part of the Impost which is more useful than grievous.	41
to start you, you’d a taken it out in blowing.
scattered on the pavement. I did not trouble to touch them. Farther on
round hats that rose to a small point a foot above their heads, with
Injuns, and everything had to clear the way or get run over and tromped

A big greyish rounded bulk, the size, perhaps, of a bear, was rising
familiar. And that behind me! It was frantic, fantastic! Such things, I
That utility consists in securing to the mother-country, 1st, an exclusive mart for such goods as she thinks proper to export there; and 2dly, the exclusive sale of the returns, in which, it is said, she finds a compensation for the expence she is at to carry her goods to that market.

Economy.—Thrashing Around.
answered earnestly. “I don’t like your country, although it is so
was studying up some kind of worse deviltry than ever. We turned it
“Oh, thank you—thank you!” cried the Scarecrow. “I’ll find a way to use
Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfect indifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain Carter, and her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going the next morning to London.

he warn’t back by midday the duke and me would know it was all right,
“Certainly not, at first; but they are very pleasing women when you converse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming neighbour in her.”
and wrote:
to keep ’way fum de water as much as you kin, en don’t run no resk,
In mid-June I was left all of a sudden on my aunt Roerberg’s hands. Mamma started off for Russia for a few weeks, and the Staritzkis went to Beloy-Kloutch, their summer residence, and as I did not like to leave Serge Michailovitch behind, I preferred to remain in Tiflis. Day by day the general’s visits grew more frequent. One evening he got up a picnic in his garden to which he invited us. Whilst we had tea laid under the trees, I remarked that a change was coming over our host; he seemed in a boyish mood, and altogether forgetful of his usual careful correctness, and put aside all his reserve; he lay at my feet and tickled my cheek with a blade of grass. This was the hour of my triumph! I caught his eyes and they said quite plainly “I like you.” Could he be catching fire at last? I saw now that I was not wholly indifferent to him; he was looking at me with new eyes, the eyes of an awakened sleeper. Was it the awakening germ of some deeper feeling, perhaps? In parting he squeezed my hand and held it in his for a few seconds longer than the conventions allowed. Every day drew me closer to Serge Michailovitch; the more I saw him, the more my affection deepened, and I soon found that he was for me the dearest of created beings.
Dorothy, “and then we can keep on to the Emerald City.”
Then Susan _she_ waltzed in; and if you’ll believe me, she did give
snake-skin, after all that that snake-skin done for us, will believe it

river, but didn’t make no more noise than we was obleeged to. Then we
horse easy and looking like a soldier. He had his gun across his
At any rate, as the dusk came on a slow, intermittent movement upon the
“The gentlemen accompanied him”	213
“Well, den, Miss Sophia’s run off! ’deed she has. She run off in de
The real necessity of providing for the interest due on the debt contracted during the last war, and the imaginary advantage of the intended reimbursement, have compelled the present Ministry (and according to the maxims and ideas that predominate at this time, would have compelled[230] all possible administrations) to impose many taxes of the very exceptionable kind; to their effects add those of the indirect tax of corporations, premiums, prohibitions, and new obstacles thrown in the smuggler’s way, it will not be wonderful that the million sterling for the imaginary want of a reimbursement, together with the three millions some hundred thousands, for the real want, (the interest of the debt) and which, at the word, ought not to increase the total mass of prices much above 8 per cent. actually advance them to 12, whilst in France the expences of the late war will not perhaps occasion, at first, a rise of more than 6 per cent. It will be seen in the sequel why I say, at first.
The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had been, was very great: but they obligingly satisfied it with the same kind of supposition which had appeased Mrs. Bennet’s curiosity; and Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject.
It was very late at night before we were able to reach the[74] village of “Beloy-Kloutch,” for though we had a beautiful moon to help us on our way, we advanced very slowly, thanks to the bad state of the roads.

The Chinese inhabitants of Khabarovsk, fearing the invasion of the Japs, sell their houses, their furniture, their shops. The Bishop performed a Te Deum on the square before the cathedral to the troops quartered at Khabarovsk. When the service was over, my husband said a few words to the soldiers concerning the war that was going to break out. Our brave warriors shouted in chorus “We are ready to fight to the last drop of our blood!”

red weed, in appearance between butcher’s meat and pickled cabbage. The

all going to die, but didn’t. It was the most undigestible sawdust I
“Say, looky here; if you are Harvey Wilks, when’d you come to this
One, much bigger than the others, seemed to be their leader. He flew
Zoological Gardens, and silent. A little beyond the ruins about the
great day. . . .
Were they intelligent mechanisms? Such a thing I felt was impossible.

he leaned against the tree.
When we was three or four hundred yards down-stream we see the lantern
upon my misery. They dissuaded me. They did all they could to divert me
[274]
had caused the regular beating noise, and the rhythmic shocks that had


[415]
foot, showing the dead man’s face down in there, with a wet cloth over

“Because of all Wizards you are the greatest, and alone have power to
Fun suggested that we should visit a silk manufactory, where about six-hundred Chinese women were employed. Their Superintendent, a fat Portuguese dame, with a cigarette between her lips, forbad our gentlemen to pass before the rows of workwomen. After showing us through a dozen rooms, Fun brought us into a large hall where numbers of Chinese coolies, in Adam-like dress except the rag-vine-leaf, were occupied in boiling silk cocoons.
Dorothy thought she would go next; so she took Toto in her arms and
on, and so on. Then he says:
“Eh?” said he, turning. “I was explainin’ these is vallyble.”

it means that we keep them till they’re dead.”
The Late Hyder Ali Cawn,
[28]
roun’ de place considable lately, en I begin to git oneasy. Well, one

panic.
attention is being given to this aspect of the matter. At present the
“Upon my word I say no more here than I might say in any house in the neighbourhood, except Netherfield. He is not at all liked in Hertfordshire. Everybody is{100} disgusted with his pride. You will not find him more favourably spoken of by anyone.”
“Yes—regular. His pew’s right over opposite ourn—on t’other side the
black vapour appeared between the arches of Blackfriars Bridge. At that


“No, my name’s Blodgett—Elexander Blodgett—_Reverend_ Elexander
“There—you’ve heard what he said! Was there any such mark on Peter

furious energy. Every minute a fresh gun came into position until,
In the year 70 Jerusalem was destroyed and the soldiers of Titus completed the overthrow of the Jewish Kingdom. The people who in their pride and contempt had cried “Crucify Him” were now flying in terror from their doomed city, and many must have escaped to reach the refuge of those trading settlements on the shores of India. In support of this view it may be mentioned that there is in the Library of the University of Cambridge a facsimile of a copper plate of the greatest interest, found in the Jewish Colony at Cochin, which bears a Hebrew inscription to this effect:
in any town before. Carts, carriages everywhere, the most astonishing
waves of foam that leaped towards the steamer, flinging her paddles
wish the bottom of _this_ fortress was solid rock.”
“I wonder if they will fit me,” she said to Toto. “They would be just
“Well, try to remember it, George. Don’t forget and tell me it’s
raft; for what you want, above all things, on a raft, is for everybody
One and a half years it took them to move all their treasures and priceless records, all their goods, all their machines and themselves across the void into their new cities. One and a half years of swift, efficient labor that transformed these new worlds into civilized planets.
“Don’t you dare to bite Toto! You ought to be ashamed of yourself, a

to us. Nothing was to be seen save flat meadows, cows feeding
crippled plow. The match went out, and so did we, and shoved in the
Him and his horse both went home pretty leaky and crippled, but the
“What is your trouble?” asked the Lion quietly.
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCHWARTZ OF TANJORE ***
the house rose up and went for them.
popularly as the red weed, however, gained any footing in competition

harm it. The Tin Woodman knew very well he had no heart, and therefore
it was still a pretty frock. The girl washed herself carefully, dressed



Or,

“Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of such insensibility.”
In what Manner the Interest of the national Debt will be probably paid off.	59


above.
and striking and grabbing at the air with his hands, and screaming and

sent word for them to come to the Throne Room at four minutes after
main hard lately. I liked the nigger for that; I tell you, gentlemen, a


Stent among them. I looked again at the cylinder, and ungovernable
“Take them in through the hole,” I says, “when we get it done.”


begun to work the villages again.

before, but I had forgot it.
and if we come bothering around her again betwixt that and dinner she’d
Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended to marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family he had a wife in view, as he{90} meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report. This was his plan of amends—of atonement—for inheriting their father’s estate; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own part.
ole, en she tuck de sk’yarlet fever, en had a powful rough spell; but
blubbering. Looky here—do you think _you’d_ venture to blow on us?
 “A Fair Fit”
CHAPTER IX
Beyond Victoria the public-houses were doing a lively trade with these
tapering off with a kind of generl good-bye cussing, and then the old
Then there was Miss Charlotte; she was twenty-five, and tall and proud
that mark, and if he did he must be sued; and if he done it again he
then let the canoe drop along down amongst the shadows. The moon was
miles away) I went for a walk with my wife. It was starlight and I
to count in the _basket_ for a spoon sometimes; and so, three times

“Well,” said the Head, “I will give you my answer. You have no right to
 I hope Mr. Bingley will like it.

old distance across—a half a mile—because the Missouri shore was just a
the Martians, and they had but the vaguest ideas of them, so that they
_then_ see if I can pray. Why, it was astonishing, the way I felt as
that don’t cost nothing, and it’s just the little things that makes a

I hadn’t got any news from Sergy for several days, and wrote to him six pages full of reproaches. I was expecting the postman’s knock every moment, but nothing came. One morning I was sitting at my solitary breakfast, when at last a long letter from Sergy was brought to me. I devoured its contents. He wrote in high spirits and gave me all the details of his life at Piacenza, and glowing accounts of the manœuvres and all he was seeing. Two big rooms were reserved to him at the Hotel San Marco. After lunch, on the day of his arrival, he put on his uniform and went to present himself to the Commandant of Piacenza, in whose drawing-room a group of foreign officers, in the most varied uniforms, were gathered. Such a lot of strangers was quite an event for the little town of Piacenza, which was dressed all over with flags; a band played in the Square. When Sergy returned to the hotel he found on his table an envelope containing different instructions concerning the manœuvres, with maps and programmes for every day. The military representatives received a compliment in verse with the following inscription: Dedica agli eccellentissimi signori, rappresentarano le nazioni, in occasione della lora venuta a Piacenza. The representatives were entertained with much festivity; rich banquets were given in their honour. Twenty officers of different armies sat down to table every day: four Austrians, one Bavarian, three Germans, two Belgians, two Swedes, two Englishmen and three Russians. Sergy’s neighbour was a Swedish general, an old trooper belonging to the school of “Gustav Vasa,” who probably would never have stirred the world with any striking discovery, being rather narrow-minded. He said to Sergy that whilst travelling in Italy he was very much astonished that all the railway stations were named “Uscita” (which means exit), and was quite bewildered that in this country even children were able to surmount the difficulties of the language, and chatted Italian quite as a matter of course to each other! The manœuvres of one division against the other began on the 18th August. My husband with his brother-officers got up at daybreak and started by a special train to “Castello Giovanni,” where a hillock, surrounded by vineyards, was chosen as point of observation. The Marchese Cambroso[209] gave them a lunch in his splendid mansion that day, with champagne in abundance; a military band played during the repast. On the following morning the valiant sons of Mars went to Voghera, where they put up in private houses, as there was no hotel in that small place. Their proprietors hoisted up the flags of the different nationalities who sheltered under their roofs. Over the house where Sergy stopped, with two members of the Russian mission, a flag with a double eagle floated, and in their sitting-room stood a samovar (a Russian tea-kettle) deprived of its tap. It was Count Bellisione who regaled the missions that day in his superb feudal castle.
strange people. Her tears seemed to grieve the kind-hearted Munchkins,
CHAPTER LXXXI
house broke the broad sweep of flat country that reached to the edge of
a part of that dusty rout. They swept through Chipping Barnet with the
the pantry, into rations to last us ten days. I would not let him eat
I lay you ain’t a-goin’ to threaten nobody any more, Jim Turner. Put
[31]
a green ribbon.


When he heard my voice it righted him up some, but he warn’t quite
the attraction of peeping was for both of us irresistible. And I recall
that leg just in three shakes of a sheep’s tail, as the saying is?


every little while he fetched in his funeral orgies again, till the
Sherburn never said a word—just stood there, looking down. The
until a Stork flew by, who, upon seeing them, stopped to rest at the
“Not one.”
Mr. Vassilieff put himself at our disposal during our stay at Tokio. He had been present at the attempt on the life of our Emperor during his voyage to Japan when he was heir to the throne. He was driving in a riksha with the Prince of Greece and a numerous suite in the outskirts of Kioto. Mr. Vassilieff, who was of the party, saw a native policeman rush sword in hand towards the Grand-Duke, at which his riksha-man gave him a kick behind, and the next moment the ruffian was sprawling on the ground. The Prince of Greece fell on him with his stick and struck him full and square on the head. The man died in prison a year after, and the riksha-man who had defended the Grand-Duke has received a medal and a life annuity of a thousand roubles from the Russian Government.
“It does seem, and it is most shocking, indeed,” replied Elizabeth, with tears in her eyes, “that a sister’s sense of decency and virtue in such a point should admit of doubt. But, really, I know not what to say. Perhaps I am not doing her justice. But she is very young: she has never been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half year, nay, for a twelvemonth, she has been given up to nothing but amusement and vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in her way. Since the ——shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love, flirtation, and officers, have been in her head. She has been doing everything in her power, by thinking and talking on the subject, to give greater—what shall I call it?—susceptibility to her feelings; which are naturally lively enough. And we all know that Wickham has every charm of person and address that can captivate a woman.{348}”
feel less in danger of their eyes, for to an eye in the dazzle of the
CHAPTER IX.
Fifth Hypothesis.
From the far north they heard a low wail of the wind, and Uncle Henry
“I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so very agreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how it was; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he had heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had to come to the ball in a hack chaise.”


{vii}
“Go on,” exclaimed Dorothy.
Scarecrow.”
“But dis one do _smell_ so like de nation, Huck.”


“This is certain and I have it daily, that neither is he that planteth anything, neither he that watereth, but God that giveth the increase. He who, although despairing of himself and his own strength, goes out in all humility with prayer and supplication, seeks that which was lost and then waits for the former and the latter rain from the Lord, he receiveth blessing of God and is preserved from much disquietude. And although the blessing is not instantly visible, yet God awakeneth the heart and enableth us to say, ‘At Thy word I will let down the net. And when they had this done they enclosed a great multitude of fishes.’ This text I remember frequently, especially as it is that on which I preached my first sermon at the University, and by means of which God has produced in me purity of spirit and at the same time a filial reliance on His word. May He teach it me more and more and inculcate it by His Spirit.”
coarse black hair. It had a great mouth, with a row of sharp teeth a
Our road lay for a long time along the Caspian. The moist, warm air that blew through the carriage windows brought a salt taste from the sea. The stretch of country through which we are now passing is flat and uninteresting. Along the roadway the dust rose in clouds which poured in through the curtains; to crown all we are devoured by flies. I am furious with the nasty insects, with the heat, with the dust, with everything!
“Say, when a cow’s laying down, which end of her gets up first? Answer
pan, don’t you let on you see it at all. And don’t you look when Jim


clothes on him, and chained him again, and not to no bed-leg this time,
descendant of that infant—I am the rightful Duke of Bridgewater; and



19th June.—Seven pilots have left New York yesterday in fishing-smacks to meet the Bourgogne. The pilot who would climb on board first was to receive the sum of 200 dollars. The passengers held wagers, and sweepstakes at five dollars each, had been started among the first-class passengers. One of them gained the sum of 120 dollars on the pilot No. 5, whom we had picked up first. Other pilots appeared after him, but they were told by signals that their services were not required.
signalling us. His idea was that meteorites might be falling in a heavy
If Emmeline Grangerford could make poetry like that before she was
It was Marco Polo, after his travels in the East at the end of the thirteenth century, who first awoke the Church in Europe to take some interest in the Christian community far away in India. He told the tale of what he had seen on his visit to Malabar, how that the shrine of St. Thomas attracted many pilgrims and that cures were wrought by a handful of sacred dust from his grave. Also that the church which contained the body of the martyr was supported by the produce of the groves of coco-nut palm trees, and that in the vicinity were many Jews. Here then was the ancient Syrian Church preserving the flickering flame of truth amid the darkness of heathenism.

come.
To care for so many fellows.
not care whether I married her or not. I suppose she is still living
nothing against it, because I’ve seen a frog lay most as many, so of

exhausting themselves. After a time I discovered that I was cold and
being away so long.”
far; and by-and-by you could see a streak on the water which you know
[189]
and he went by so close I could a reached out the gun and touched him.
But it required many years to develop this apparatus. Now came the greatest problem of all. They must find some means to send the material image to a predestined terminal without having a station there to receive it. This could be done with a three-dimensional shadow image. Could they do it with the solid bodies?
He went to a cupboard and reaching up to a high shelf took down a

And before we judge of them too harshly we must remember what ruthless
down on hog-drivers and women in carts taking garden stuff to market,
the grass to let the sun dry him.
[284]

I am indebted to the details contained in Sir Charles Whitworth’s work, for the advantage of applying to real facts, many reflexions which I had digested before I had read that work; but I was, till then, reasoning on hypotheses; I now reason on what so nearly approaches reality, that it is necessary to controvert my arguments, instead of consigning their foundation to the system of chimeras.


Then he went down on all fours and crawled off, begging them to let him

CHAPTER XVI.
Some Doubts on the supposed Impossibility of laying all Taxes on Consumption.	231


“Hush, my dear,” he said. “Don’t speak so loud, or you will be
Anybody that don’t believe yet that it’s foolishness to handle a
such a gang as that! But it warn’t no time to be sentimentering. We’d
learn a thing or two.”
[233]
complained, but she kinder pined away and did not live long. Poor
CHAPTER XX.
could lock him up and get him sober; but it warn’t no use—up the street
“I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. We passed each other several times. I wonder what he can be doing there.”
six times seven is thirty-five, and I don’t reckon I could ever get any
“I have never heard him say so; but it is probable that he may spend very little of his time there in future. He has many friends, and he is at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually increasing.”
annihilated Ealing and Kilburn, might strike among these houses and
such wide-spreading branches that there was room for the party to pass
BARBARA DOUKHOVSKOY
“She did not choose it,” said her daughter; “she would go.”

Everything is old in the Orient. We of the West, who talk of a thousand years past as a long time ago, realise a little as we travel thither, amid relics of a prehistoric age, how young is our own world when for the first time we stand on pathways which reach back to the very daybreak on the horizon of human life. With a child’s wonder turning the faded parchments of some ancient book or stepping reverently and softly among the resting-places of the dead, we feel the past calling to us from behind the veil of the present, and we cannot escape the impression; we would not if we could. The spell of its mystery, its spaces of silence, the hush of living millions now stilled for ever fill us with awe, as with finger on lip we peer wistfully down the vista of uncounted years. It is the demand, the insistence of past history which we cannot afford to ignore, for without its interpretation we shall never understand to-day. This is specially true of India. Her ancient temples, carved by the thin dark fingers of a time when Europe was in the cradle of its civilization, these shadowy figures of to-day with glistening white teeth and lustrous jet eyes, flitting in light raiment under the fronded palms, keeping up ancestral customs and living as their fathers did a thousand years ago, make an indelible impression. And at the back of all this there is a haunting sense of a far off time when this same glare of sunshine shone upon the same rushing rivers and wide dry plains, and voices, so like those now in our ears, spoke with smiles and tears of human gladness and heart-break so long, so very long ago.
My brother noticed a pale grey smoke or haze rising among the houses in

“I’ll _help_ you steal him!”

lightning. This was the second cylinder.

The poll-tax, supposed to be established by Divine Justice, would enhance the price of labour, and[244] of its products, but by a fraction equal to that which the amount of the tax should be, in the mass of both revenues, land and industry. Ten millions of a poll-tax on a revenue of 120, would increase the prices of every thing by one twelfth; and every man thus taxed, would evidently after the advance of prices, in consequence of such a poll-tax, find himself in the very same state he stood in before the tax; yet one twelfth more must be given for every thing, but then one twelfth more would be received for every thing.
by-and-by, maybe in a hour and a half, and she’d send him along with

We only remained two days at Venice, having had quite enough of that aquatic town which does not suit my vivacious temperament.
When Dorothy had time to open these books she found them full of queer

along and scoured her up and got her in good shape, she would start in

“Did Mr. Darcy give you his reasons for this interference?”
January 15th.—This afternoon my husband called upon the Governor, who returned his visit an hour later; as to me, I exchanged visiting-cards with his wife.

Mais si le Lecteur n’a pas encore observé la moindre variation dans le compas malgré la différence des positions; s’il n’a pas été un peu ébranlé par les raisonnemens dont on l’aura bercé jusqu’alors,—qu’il jette la brochure au feu; car l’Auteur, dont je ne prétends point imiter la circonspection, ou adopter les craintes, ou justifier l’audace, ou partager le délit, n’entreprend rien moins que d’engager toute l’Europe, (toute Europe!) à examiner:
Palace. It was the sweetest little room in the world, with a soft

and laid in the gutter all night, and he was a sight to look at. A body


Let every one judge also of the necessity of their bankruptcy, the idea of which has been so fondly cherished by some low-minded people, and the narrative of which, they feared perhaps[178] themselves, would unavoidably stain the first pages of the history of their political existence.



and shining with perspiration. The two women sat silent, crouching in
gold-leaf distinctions like that every time I see a chance to hog a



set with shrivelled leaves, from amid its clusters. It was strange how

a little different, but now it made me feel bad and disappointed, The
dodged into the bush and let them go by, and then dropped in behind
didn’t happen to say nothing about any runaway nigger, and we was
sunlight outside our refuge must have been blank blackness, but at
them.


We are so grateful to you for having killed the Wicked Witch of the

inn.
and he says:
It is certain, that more than once a man has been most secretly accused, tried with the greatest expedition, condemned without being heard, and punished with merciless severity, in consequence of charges much less specious than the above; for I confess that there is a faint glimmer of plausibility in the heads of accusation which I have brought. But, in the end, justice must be done; and, thank heaven, my present trial is on the very first instance, brought to its last stage; the public shall be my judge; they shall be put in possession of all the documents relating to the trial; and I presume to hope, that no one of those who shall be able to bear the perusal of them, will suspect my sincerity when I protest, that, without any other motive but that[86] which has at all times invariably guided me through life, I would burn this paper, if I could find therein a single word that might be hurtful to France—I would burn it, were I to find therein a single word that might be hurtful to England—I would burn it, were I to find therein a single word that might give offence to any individual of either of the two kingdoms.—But I freely own, that my ambition would be far from receiving its full gratification, were this work to prove useful only to those two parts of the world, however brilliant the part they act therein.—urbi et orbi.—Shakespear says that the Warrior seeks “the bubble glory in the cannon’s mouth:” a man who presumes to think, looks for it in the bottom of his inkstand: their hope is not always crowned with success; nay, very often, the one meets only death, and the other contempt. Yet there are some lucky chances: sometimes the former saves his country, the latter is sometimes serviceable to all mankind.

and before a body could think she grabbed me and give me a squeeze, and
“Here is another space between the trees,” called the Lion.

Author of "The Metal Horde," "Piracy Preferred," etc.
a bank of steam sprang from the water at its touch. It must have driven
We were surrounded at the railway station by a crowd of Negroes, Japs and Chinamen. We drove to the Lyndhurst, a small hotel in Geary Street, where Mr. Shaniavski had secured apartments for us. Nothing was said to the hotel management concerning us, beyond the fact that we were foreign tourists who did not care to go to a large hotel. Our rooms were engaged for a week and paid for in advance.
being gone to London only to get a large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that Mr. Bingley was to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with him to the assembly. The girls grieved over such a number of{13} ladies; but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing that, instead of twelve, he had brought only six with him from London, his five sisters and a cousin. And when the party entered the assembly-room, it consisted of only five altogether: Mr. Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and another young man.
“I had once some thoughts of fixing in town myself, for I am fond of superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air of London would agree with Lady Lucas.”
truck was all ready for them.
A little way off was a small brook, rushing and sparkling along between
neighbors till the hall and the parlor and the dining-room was full. I
looking vacantly away from me.
into the woods; because Tom said we got to have _some_ light to see how
among the starving people in the neighbourhood. But this intelligence
 V. THE HEAT-RAY.
The winter is splendid at Khabarovsk; the sky always clear of clouds and no wind whatever, and for that reason one does not feel the cold so much, though the thermometer shows over twenty degrees of frost every day. The snow falls only once, in the beginning of winter, and keeps white until spring. But the weather has no effect whatever upon me, and very often when the sky is of azure blue, black thoughts overwhelm me; and vice versa. The air in the apartments is excessively dry. I am often awakened at night by the creaking of the furniture. We have to suspend wet blankets in our bedroom as it is impossible to sleep otherwise.
“Tell me, once for all, are you engaged to him?”
wouldn’ sell me down to Orleans. But I noticed dey wuz a nigger trader
the _Presbyterian Observer_, and write poetry after them out of her own
out for half price if there was a bidder. But after that we was all
All this had happened with such swiftness that I had stood motionless,

were times when I beat and kicked him madly, times when I cajoled and

“They are coming,” said a man on horseback, riding past along the lane.
the morrow.

crowding passengers on the steamer’s stern shouted together. And then
“Boy, that’s a lie. What _is_ the matter with your pap? Answer up



VLADIVOSTOCK
CHAPTER XXXVIII
bead over the wood-rank, and drops one of them out of his saddle. All

dying about the same time. The second son of the late duke seized the
and had to be killed. And some, maybe, they will train to hunt us.”
“I must think your language too strong in speaking of both,” replied Jane; “and I hope you will be convinced of it, by seeing them happy together. But enough of this. You alluded to something else. You mentioned two instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I entreat you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking that person{172} to blame, and saying your opinion of him is sunk. We must not be so ready to fancy ourselves intentionally injured. We must not expect a lively young man to be always so guarded and circumspect. It is very often nothing but our own vanity that deceives us. Women fancy admiration means more than it does.”

It is not surprising that under this rather complex system of self-government, without lines of direct communication with England, Denmark, and Germany, a born administrator like Schwartz should have been looked up to with reverence and confidence. For he had the faculty of managing men with cheerfulness, and yet, as one had said of him, Schwartz commanded instant respect to his wishes, and made others feel their inferiority without any sense of fear. He had a personal charm, the power of exercising a powerful influence which inspired confidence, even with those natives who were ready to distrust everything European. He never lost touch with his people. One who knew him well in his relation to others reveals the secret of his great influence. “They saw,” he says, “other Europeans in succession lift themselves from obscurity and humble stations to affluence, rank and power, then disappear and others take their places, but none taking any interest in their welfare or making use of them except as a means of accomplishing their own aggrandizement, but Schwartz remained with them. In him they always saw the same unaspiring meekness, and found in him the same kind and disinterested friend. What could the natives of India among whom he lived conclude respecting such a man, but that[Pg 198] which they did conclude, and which was a common observation among them when he was spoken of, namely, that he was unlike and superior to all other men!”

with their teeth and tug at the plug with their hands till they get it
CHAPTER XLVIII

that a corn-shuck bed warn’t just fitten for me to sleep on. Your
he was boss of his son, and he’d make it warm for _him_.
and offer to kill anybody that wanted her to ever count them any more.

stirred the shrubs about us. My cousins’ man lit both lamps. Happily, I
but have got religgion and wish to quit it and lead an honest life

While she stood looking eagerly at the strange and beautiful sights,
hard lot for a duke. When he’s drunk, there ain’t no near-sighted man
[Image unavailable.]

you see, the Land of Oz has never been civilized, for we are cut off
 X. IN THE STORM.
road again,” remarked the Lion.
you gwyne to be rich bymeby.”


way but just to go along down with the raft till we got a chance to buy
other side.”

didn’t you?—oldish man, with a—”
To the memory of the
representing a prisoner if I got to set down and chaw over a lot of
growing increasingly hysterical, fearful, and depressed during the two
I could see the people who had been with me in the river scrambling out
4ᵒ.
My husband was received on the platform by General Kopanski, the commander of the troops, who drove us to his abode, situated about eight miles distant from the railway station. A group of peasants were awaiting my husband on the square before the church to offer up their petitions, very[369] queer ones some of them. An old woman went on her knees holding her request on the top of her head, in which she asked Sergy to indicate to her the shortest way to Jerusalem! Our drive through the village caused a great sensation. The inhabitants stood on their thresholds and stared at us. I saw some peer at us from the windows, through opera-glasses. Before General Kopanski’s house a guard of honour presented arms to my husband, and a platoon of Cossacks defiled before him.
“Killed!” he said, staring about him. “How can God’s ministers be
brain-fever as shore as you’re born, and they’re oozing out!”
best to be done, and now he asked the Woodman to chop away the end of
“Well, are you rich?”



Henry was; and if we’d a had him along ’stead of our kings he’d a



the barrel tilted up towards the sky. The same second I see a young
under a wall where you wouldn’t a noticed that there was a hole. We
he’d come down the river and landed at the other village this morning,
speaking gently to her, and carried her to Miss Elphinstone. So soon as
Finally we got to the Windsor Hotel which, like all the big hotels, has its own telegraph and telephone offices,[323] its milliner, hairdresser, etc. We were told at the office that the Hollands had gone the day before to Lake Mohawk. We sent a wire to tell them that we were here, and started back to our hotel by the “Elevated,” an electric suspended railway built upon iron struts above the houses, which cuts through New York in all directions. It made abrupt turnings, and rushed at a reckless pace over the roofs of the houses, or raced through tunnels beneath them. It is great fun looking through other people’s windows, and getting a peep into comedies and tragedies sometimes. The train suddenly stops short with a jerk that sends the passengers into a conglomerate struggling mass, and throws them into each other’s arms. The train brought us to the hotel with a flourish that precipitated me on the knees of my vis-a-vis, an odious man with a red nose.

as I went on the interest dawning in his eyes gave place to their
act.
here, and the evasion booming along so handsome; man the sweeps, and



to use his axe at once, and, just as the two Kalidahs were nearly
Sooner or later, in a country so disturbed by war and strife, Schwartz was sure to get his baptism of fire, and we find him praised as of great service in the siege of Madura. Within the walls of this city Mahomed Issoof, who at one time held a high appointment as commander of the English Sepoys and had been active in reducing the refractory tribes to order, was now defending the place against his old employers. During one of the unsuccessful assaults on the place Major Preston, a friend of Schwartz, was killed and his dead body with all honours was restored to the British camp.
“I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley’s being imposed on than that Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me last night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If it be not so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in his looks.”

Deplorable were the first impressions of our voyage across the ill-named Pacific Ocean. The Pacific had been anything but pacific and peaceful. As soon as we were out of the Gulf of San Francisco the vessel began to roll. At half past eight the gong called us to dinner; after the second dish I returned to my cabin and lay down. I shut my eyes but sleep would not come to me. At dawn, with the aid of Mrs. Berger, the stewardess, I removed to another cabin situated on the lower deck, where the rolling was less felt. I remained in bed the whole day, feeling horribly ill. And we have still seventeen days to live on board!
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions


During the Requiem, at which I assisted on horseback, all the soldiers knelt down and prayed fervently for their comrades, the brave warriors who are sleeping their eternal sleep in this Mussulman ground.
terrible thing to undergo, but during the year I stood there I had time
the furniture.
it. But there was practically nothing more to tell people until late in
_signs_, mine I tell you; en I knowed jis’ ’s well ’at I ’uz gwineter
too; so, coming down the river, me and Tom thought it would be a
is absent—the _wheel_ is absent; among all the things they brought to

The list of killed had already brought the names of several officers I had known personally. Naturally I became very anxious concerning my husband’s safety. The thought that he might meet the same fate drove me to madness. What the newspapers had to tell about the war was not of a nature to set my mind at ease. I began to dread the arrival of the post, lest it should bring me the news of Sergy’s death; I fancied ten millions of accidents. My old Helena, who served me with loving fidelity, tried her best to comfort me, and said it was no good imagining horrors, but I would not be comforted, and continued to be in an agony of terror.
the easy water about six hundred yards, and tucked myself in among some
injured, I saw for the first time, by a huge gaping cavity on its

of men in white fatigue jackets throwing up a long rampart, and more
the raft—and you’ll have to take it out in wondering.”) And he said if
“What is it you won’t believe, Joe?” says Mary Jane, stepping in with
Before starting we were shown the railway-carriage which had just been presented to the Emir by our Emperor; it impressed me by its splendour. This carriage, painted blue and ornamented with golden stars, will be very useful to the Emir when the Orenbourg railway-line is terminated, for he goes for a cure to the Caucasus every year.

and Aunt Em had a big bed in one corner, and Dorothy a little bed in
“And this,” cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room, “is your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you hold me! I thank you for explaining it so fully. My faults, according to this calculation, are heavy indeed! But, perhaps,” added he, stopping in his walk, and turning towards her, “these offences might have been overlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the scruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design. These bitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I, with greater policy, concealed my struggles, and{241} flattered you into the belief of my being impelled by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, by reflection, by everything. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence. Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural and just. Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your connections?—to congratulate myself on the hope of relations whose condition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?”
would be pleased to have his company. So the Tin Woodman shouldered his
All these things may be easily observed; but what ought to be more particularly attended to, and what is most overlooked, is the impossibility of ascertaining the difference between the hand-labour and capitals to which we owe the productions of the earth, the knowledge of which is within the reach of every one, and the labour and[134] capitals to which we owe the productions of industry, in which the workmanship of an article often constitutes the half, and sometimes 99 hundredths of its value: it is a disadvantage against which agriculture cannot be effectually protected but by a competition, which can be the result only of the greatest freedom. The absolute passiveness, which, in the above stated circumstances, is sufficient, on the part of Government, to effect the greatest good, appears here indispensable, to avoid acts of injustice. Why should the trading part complain of that passiveness, whilst a number of cultivators, proportioned to that of the artisans, produce in the State a revenue equal to the maintenance and support of industry? Now the fact appears the more certain, as, upon the least reflexion, one may be sensible, that if an epidemic disorder should break out amongst the husbandmen only, and thus deprive cultivation of one half of its proper number of hands, the survivors would not fail to increase the price of their labour, and the farmer that of his farm, by so much as would indemnify agriculture for the loss which she might have sustained, and that the advance in her prices would fall off only in proportion as the handicraftsmen without employment, by the uselessness of that portion of the produce of[135] industry, hitherto consumed by the cultivators who fell victims to the disease, would themselves turn cultivators; an operation which would soon restore the proper balance between the two revenues, as well as between the prices of labour, from which all kinds of produce originate. Let the effects of the disease be transferred from the cultivators to the handicraftsmen, the same manœuvre will be played off by those who preside over industry.

“You are what?”

Putney Hill I came upon another skeleton, with the arms dislocated and
spreading coils and bellyings of that blackness advancing headlong,
The next morning the soldier with the green whiskers led the Lion to


up.”
Tom’s voice trembled whilst he was reading them, and he most broke
I done it, and he done the same. We struck the raft at the same time,
the point on the end of her nose, while she counted “One, two, three”
see what there was there. So I says:

The moment for decisive action had arrived; I felt that I must put an end to all this business once for all and take measures to suppress him. As my rebuffs had not the slightest effect upon him I planned an experiment to cure him of his passion swiftly. I knew that he could hear every word pronounced in our drawing-room, and I addressed myself to an imaginary interlocutor, making disastrous revelation of my sentiments towards our neighbour. “I find Ladigenski perfectly horrid,” I said in a very loud voice, with a very strong accent on horrid, and put on the crowning touch in saying that his whole aspect was disgusting, a positive eye-torture. It was candid at any rate. This little manœuvre proved perfectly successful, and my purpose was attained. For several days after that we saw nothing of Ladigenski, and I rejoiced in his absence. But soon things took another turn. Money had become scarce of late, and my parents found their pecuniary difficulties increasing. I had to make up my mind to a quieter life, so I decided to marry the first decently marriageable man who should come my way, and after mature reflections I came to the conclusion that Ladigenski was to be called back again, and that I must make it right with him. I had been too hot-headed for a dowerless girl like me, and was determined to mend matters roughly.
XLIII.	Saragossa	257
quarter of an hour, sending chance shots at the invisible Martians at

sixth star fell at Wimbledon. My brother, keeping watch beside the


let loose in a village.
“But she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow. If I can perceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton indeed not to discover it too.”
“I will,” declared the Scarecrow, “for, if you found that you could not

George Saintsbury.
escape of the multitudinous vessels that were crowded between Foulness
six-million city was stirring, slipping, running; presently it would be
give me the cold shivers, and I see we hadn’t no time to lose. So Tom
as a wink with the funniest things a body ever said; and how he ever
firing began. We saw as we crossed the railway bridge that a growing
cousins’ house, it seemed indeed black, and it was as hot and close as

“There may be a tap,” said my brother, “in some of the houses. We have
again. I glanced from that to Mars, red and clear, glowing high in the
“You write uncommonly fast.”
So, thinks I, I’ll go and search them rooms. Upstairs the hall was
ironclad or a steam engine would seem to an intelligent lower animal.
to us at all—that night, nor the next, nor the next.

“Be a man!” said I. “You are scared out of your wits! What good is
Now I was feeling pretty comfortable all down one side, and pretty
[232]
Well, he run on, and on, and on, making up stuff about Hicksville and
I didn’t have to be ordered twice to go and take a steamboat ride. I
quarter to nine when I went out to get my _Daily Chronicle_. I was

minute and a half. Then I bounced for the top in a hurry, for I was

himself, whose name was Boq. Then she sat upon a settee and watched the
On the eve of our departure from Rome we went to see the Coliseum, a ruin of former glory where gladiators have fought, the largest amphitheatre in the world, which could hold about ten thousand spectators. Before turning to the hotel we took a drive in Monte Pincio, the Hyde Park of Rome. The large alleys are filled with riders, drivers and pedestrians. On both sides of the drive stand white marble statues of gods and goddesses. In the very beginning is erected the statue of Vittorio Emmanuele, in the memory of the taking of Rome by his armies. In front of the round tower of the summer-house, sheltered by magnificent magnolia and orange trees, there is a high terrace. We mounted on it, and Rome lay below us like a city from a balloon. It was very still and peaceful, the noise of the street did not penetrate to this place. Suddenly the evening bells began to ring all over Rome. On our way back, when passing before the “Trevi Fountains,” we called to mind the popular saying that if you want to return to Rome once more, you must drink some water out of this fountain, and we swallowed two glasses of the miraculous water which we purchased at a little shop near by.
was all right. They hadn’t stirred.

Sergy essayed a trip in the “Ballon Captif,” which lifted ten persons at a time a hundred metres higher than the Eiffel Tower. From below I breathlessly watched the ascent. Sergy was presented with a medal bearing the inscription: “Souvenir de mon ascension.”
WHAT WE SAW FROM THE RUINED HOUSE.
said if I warn’t so ignorant, but had read a book called Don Quixote, I

Except the lodge at the Orphanage, which was still on fire, none of the
gentleman that had just come looked all puzzled to death. Pretty soon

“I thought Oz was a great Head,” said Dorothy.
there was still.
“Am I really wonderful?” asked the Scarecrow.
but his own self. I reckon that’s a considerble sight better ’n killin’

living arms, and, save for the helpless purposelessness of these
mile off, to borrow one.


[242]
“No, really,” replied Elizabeth; “I think there cannot be too little said on the subject.”
If it were acknowledged, that the multiplicity of channels in another nation, for the introduction of our own goods, is necessarily inseparable from the multiplicity of channels opened in our own country for the introduction of foreign goods:
stood open, but there warn’t nothing left in them that was any account.
As Mrs. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that she and her children should go to London at the same time that Mr. Bennet came from it. The coach, therefore, took them the first stage of their journey, and brought its master back to Longbourn.

kind of wondering, and then she turned her head around slow, and when
She bade her friends good-bye, and again started along the road of
So they picked up Toto and put the dog in Dorothy’s lap, and then they

“In the evenin’—’bout an hour er two before sundown.”
sleeping in a made bed for the first time since my flight to

took it and went to work, and never said a word.
gesticulating, and for a moment I shared his panic. His gesture
and the brightness of his eyes. And suddenly I heard a yell, and saw a
out-gaze him, but they couldn’t; they dropped their eyes and looked
not understand it, and then I knew that it must be the red weed from
“Why, dear me, I never see such a surprise. We warn’t looking for _you_
“To oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no one else could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded that Charlotte had any regard for him, I should only think worse of her understanding than I now do of her heart. My dear Jane, Mr. Collins is a conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man: you know he is, as well as I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who marries him cannot have a proper way of thinking. You shall not defend her, though it is Charlotte Lucas. You shall not, for the sake of one individual, change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuade yourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and insensibility of danger security for happiness.”
Schiaparelli watched the red planet—it is odd, by-the-bye, that for




sniffed at it as if he did not like it, the Wizard said:
of life was to stop in the house until the Martians had done with their




one time, but took turn about, so when the snakes was asleep the rats
ON OUR WAY TO LUCERNE


generator of the Heat-Ray. He held it pointing obliquely downward, and





my raft and went for it, and hid it there, and then turned in. I slept
The artilleryman agreed with me that the house was no place to stay in.
When they reached the castle Dorothy said to the Winkies:
We got a licking every time one of our snakes come in her way, and she
removed several yards from the rest of the body. As I proceeded I
“You appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of friendship and affection. A regard for the requester would often make one readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reason one into it. I am not particularly speaking of such a case as you have supposed about Mr. Bingley. We may as well wait, perhaps, till the circumstance occurs, before we discuss the discretion of his behaviour thereupon. But in general and ordinary cases, between friend and friend, where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no very great moment, should you think ill of that person for complying with the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?”
“I am a Woodman, and made of tin. Therefore I have no heart, and cannot
The Lion climbed the ladder next, and the Tin Woodman came last; but
It is still a matter of wonder how the Martians are able to slay men so
“Doan’ le’s talk about it, Huck. Po’ niggers can’t have no luck. I
“Well, I never thought—and come to think, I don’t know. What was it?”
[343]
“You can now have nothing further to say,” she resentfully answered. “You have insulted me, in every possible method. I must beg to return to the house.”


Thirteenthly, If France, who has not the assistance of paper-money, did actually procure so clearly to herself an annual balance more considerable in money, as soon as she had tertiated her revenue, it follows that England must, really, have experienced a competition much more disagreeable, from that very circumstance from which, according to the maxim, she had less reason to fear it; for whilst the price of commodities was below par in France, it is clear that having no national vortex, she required less money for the circulation of a revenue of 100 than for one of 150: it was therefore more to the advantage of England, in spite of the maxim, that the commodities should be at a low price in France, than to have them raised 50 per cent. The sacred maxim then is destitute of common sense, when applied to foreign trade, to the competition abroad.
and if she didn’t, everybody naturally despises an ungrateful nigger,
much everybody and dog in town, by his name, and mentioned all sorts of
journals, and things, which made it more trouble and worry and
Fishing.—The Vigilance Committee.—A Lively Run.—Jim Advises a Doctor.

We talked it all over. It wouldn’t do to take to the shore; we couldn’t

Aunt Sally she see it, and turns white as a sheet, and says:
“He departed wishing that I might become a Saint and I wished him sincerity of heart.”

Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and they went upstairs together. Mary and Kitty were both with Mrs. Bennet: one communication would, therefore, do for all. After a slight preparation for good news, the letter was read aloud. Mrs. Bennet could hardly contain herself. As soon as Jane had read Mr. Gardiner’s hope of Lydia’s being soon married, her joy burst forth, and every following sentence added to its exuberance. She{375} was now in an irritation as violent from delight as she had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation. To know that her daughter would be married was enough. She was disturbed by no fear for her felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her misconduct.




the little girl thought she had lost him. But soon she saw one of his

LXXXIV.	Colombo	423
The impost on luxury, which, after a very little time, as we have seen, proves no ways injurious to those who were able to pay for the objects upon which the tax was laid, is besides, under another point of view, really advantageous to those very men who seem the only contributors to it; because it sets entirely above the reach of the people, a number of articles in which they would indulge themselves, to the great benefit of the tax, and which, though perhaps intended by the general provider, as well for the poor as for the rich, are nevertheless, by the merciful system of taxation, exclusively reserved to the rich.—Is this the intention of the merciful taxator?—in[218] my opinion it ought not to be that of an intelligent one.

place at the window, where I was close to him and could see in. They
myself sufficiently I told her the things I had seen. The dinner, which
herself in the night, and them devils laying there right under her own
she fetched first one and then another of them a clip and sent them
There is a museum at Khabarovsk in which, amongst other local curiosities, I saw horrid busts of different murderers who had died at Khabarovsk during their penal servitude. The most repulsive bust is that of a convict who had killed and devoured his comrade. I could not have believed it possible to put such a thoroughly ferocious creature into wax.

Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious. “Lizzy,” said he, “what are you doing? Are you out of your senses to be accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?”
fighting-machines and descended into the pit. They were hard at work


“And I thought Oz was a lovely Lady,” said the Scarecrow.
“Tramp—tramp—tramp; that’s the dead; tramp—tramp—tramp; they’re coming
crowd on the edge of the pit he called to me to come down, and asked me
crossed over, but couldn’t find nothing of them; so we cruised along
people in Berkshire, Surrey, and Middlesex must have seen the fall of
And the Wicked Witch said to the King Crow, “Fly at once to the

We put up at Charing-Cross Hotel. After a good wash and brush-up, we went to find out the Rydes, my old Stuttgart friends who had settled in London for some years. I did not hear from Ettie Ryde, with whom I used to have great fun, since our school-days. What a chance to meet again! It was some little time before we found out the Rydes. We were received by Ettie’s sisters, who had just returned from church. I was very much disappointed when I was told that Ettie was out of town at the present moment, but the Rydes are going to spend most of the summer at Blackgang, in the Isle of Wight, and I hope to see a great deal of Ettie.
send him back he could have the reward and expenses.
At five o’clock in the morning the sailors begin to clean the boat. The inspection takes place three times daily. At half-past eleven the captain, the ship’s doctor and the head-steward walk round the cabins examining minutely if everything is in order; their commanding eyes swept to-and-fro for the smallest speck of dust discovered in the remotest corner, the delinquent boy is placed for punishment at the wheel on deck for four hours. The boys stand in terrible fear of that rigorous triumvirate. They moved about the cabin flicking off an imperceptible touch of dust here, and straightening a piece of furniture there. Involuntarily I glanced round the carpet for threads, but it was all fearfully tidy, not a speck of dust, not a cobweb anywhere. The duties of inspection over, the boys faces beamed with contentment. With nightfall comes the third inspection; the triumvirate enters the cabins without ceremony, even when the passengers are in bed.
sold—mighty badly sold. But we don’t want to be the laughing stock of
The wonder will be still greater, when we consider that, by favouring, with equal care, the imports and exports to and from one country into the other, the two nations would, without the least inconvenience, acquire the means of increasing the revenue of their customs respectively, according to their wants, by agreeing mutually upon a tarif, which would be rated upon the average of those wants; a tarif, which the rest of Europe might adapt to its circumstances, if it were the general intention to increase, every where, the revenue of the State and the industry of the people, in a like proportion.
Watson—they could kill her. Everybody said:
I’ve ever lost one of them _off_ of me.”



“I beg your pardon;—one knows exactly what to think.”



streak all down my back, because she says:
Injun, and singing out:
“My very _words_, Brer Penrod! I was a-sayin’—pass that-air sasser o’
while he called to the mice, “Come back! Come back! Toto shall not hurt
throw style into it?—wouldn’t he spread himself, nor nothing? Why,
Credits: Carla Foust, Brian Wilson and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)
THE TURCO-RUSSIAN WAR




And broke their hearts, as children break their toys.

destruction, stretched the great Mother of Cities. Those who have only
about nineteen years old.
At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind roused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.
We shall suppose this to be the case, and that industry actually exports that fifth part of the national commodities which the land proprietor is not able any longer to consume, and which, nevertheless, industry is compelled to sell, in order to be reimbursed the tax she has advanced, and be prepared to answer the fresh demand which next year government will have occasion to make.—But if it were to such means that England should stand indebted for part of the increase in her exports, her industry, methinks, would have derived less advantage therefrom, than a home-sale might have procured, even supposing the inconvenience of which I shall speak presently: it appears to me also, that the land proprietors would, in that case, have some reason to complain, and that the rest of the nation would have no cause to boast of the immensity of her exportation.—The draw-backs granted on the very exportation of the taxed commodities, prove that such an expedient never was adopted in England.
the house somewheres, because if they missed it they would give the

certainly have failed me.
from what I had allowed for; stead of being fixed so I could take my
Beyond the pit stood the little wedge of people with the white flag at
regular island; it might be five or six miles long and more than half a
walking an hour when they saw before them a great ditch that crossed
along. She told about me and Tom Sawyer finding the six thousand
underneath. There was a couple of big wild-turkey-wing fans spread out
He looks back with thankfulness on his Tamil studies at the University of Halle. He discovers that after preaching in that language conversation becomes much easier. He starts a catechetical class in the Tamil or Malabar School and “with the youngest lambs, I thus learned to stammer.” From time to time he makes excursions into the district round Tranquebar and discusses points of doctrine and difficulty which are presented to him by inquirers. Here we see the tact of Schwartz, his readiness to reply to any question, and at the same time, while giving a clear statement of the claims of the Gospel, he would not offend or hurt the religious feelings of his listeners. It was also necessary to exercise great care in testing the reality and sincerity of those who presented themselves for baptism. Schwartz was not satisfied with a superficial adhesion to the Christian faith; he felt that the work would be hindered so much by the instability or inconsistency of those professing Christianity. While much of his work lay among the lowest caste natives, he frequently met and conversed with thoughtful and inquiring Hindus of the higher grade.
Niggers is always talking about witches in the dark by the kitchen

It was just at this time, in March, 1779, that he received an urgent summons to see Sir Thomas Rumbold, the Governor at Madras. On his arrival he was told that he was desired to undertake a very important mission to Hyder Ali at Seringapatam to discover his real intentions and to assure him of the peaceable thoughts of the English. “As the intention of the journey is good and Christian, namely, to prevent the effusion of human[Pg 108] blood and to preserve this country in peace, this commission militates not against but highly becomes your sacred office and therefore we hope you will accept it.” This was an honour and yet it meant great danger; Schwartz made it a matter of much prayer and finally agreed to go, feeling that in so doing he was fulfilling the will of God. He had very carefully considered the question from all its bearings, as was his wont, and decided on three grounds, 1st, that its aim was to promote the blessings of peace; 2nd, because he could thereby preach the Gospel in many parts hitherto unvisited; and 3rd, the Company had shown him great kindness and he wished to return this with some gratitude. But he would accept no presents and not a single farthing would he take beyond his travelling expenses. He stayed a month at Caroor on his way, and with the assistance of his only fellow-traveller, Sattianaden, he preached to crowds of people and discussed privately the doctrines of Christianity with many Brahmins. Afterwards he climbed the steep and dangerous path from Guzzulhatty, and being now in Mysore talked to the Brahmins in Hindustani, one of them telling him that “Hyder is quite unconcerned as to religion; he has none himself and leaves everyone else to his choice.” In a short time he reached Seringapatam and his impressions of the place and an account of his reception by this despot are so admirably told in his journal that an extract, therefore, must be given in extenso:
money back, and all of _ourn_ but a shekel or two _besides_. G’long to


It is time for us to leave the land of William Tell, and to push on to the Italian lakes and to Milan. I am glad to leave this country, for the rarified mountain air does not suit me at all.

Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet was shocked. Lydia was Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless. She turned from sister to sister, demanding their congratulations; and when at length they all sat down, looked eagerly round the room, took notice of some little alteration in it, and observed, with a laugh, that it was a great while since she had been there.


availing myself of a ditch for the greater part of the way, succeeded

Commander-in-Chief:

The two halted, the nearer to us standing and facing Sunbury, the
I crouched at the foot of the staircase with my back to the wall,
have already alluded, and which, so far, has been the chief source of

Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but Mr. Collins, much offended, laid aside his book, and said,—

and with a heart that throbbed violently, I scrambled to the top of the
“No,” answered the Scarecrow; “it’s a lighted match.”

“For we must attribute this happy conclusion,” she added, “in a great measure to his kindness. We are persuaded that he has pledged himself to assist Mr. Wickham with money.”
Whether there be not, (without its being suspected), in the system of finance in England, some of those imperfections so well remarked, so fully, so bitterly criticised in that of France; and whether a national reimbursement be not the easiest of all the sports a Minister of finance can think of, to amuse society without serving it?
“He isn’t heavy a bit,” said Dorothy eagerly, “for he is stuffed with
Those who dwelt in the East and the West were, indeed, wicked witches;
rose.
Towards evening we reached a large village, and passed under a triumphal arch bearing the inscription “Welcome!” We had an hour’s stop at the village-inn, where we pulled up for dinner. We did honour to the frugal repast, consisting of cabbage-soup and roasted chicken, served by pretty village girls arrayed in their Sunday best.
start when I heard a sound away over the water. I listened. Pretty soon


looky yonder!” It was a steamboat that had killed herself on a rock. We
jumped in, and was off in a hurry. I went up-stream far enough to make
Our consul came to call upon us with his wife, a smart young Californian with yellow locks, who looked like a pretty wax figure in a show-window. She doesn’t speak a word of Russian, though her little daughter, aged six, has had a Russian nurse since her very birth. The Olarowskis took us to a music hall on the top of a ten-storied house, lighted with different coloured lamps, from which you have a bird’s-eye view of the great city. The lift carried us to the roof of the big house, transformed into a garden. We entered a vast hall with a glass roof. It was most interesting and quite without the feeling that you might fall off.
cried both, and hugged me, and give me one of them lickings of hern
to escape the great Wildcat?” They all bowed so low to the little Queen

The following morning we took the train back to France, and shared our compartment with a pretty young woman from Seville and her two children, a fat-cheeked baby, who filled our car with its waitings, and a little girl holding a big doll in her arms, whom her mother stuffed with cakes to make her keep quiet. Both delightful children responded to her coaxings with piercing shrieks. Such a journey was not one to put you into good spirits!
thing to do? Do you reckon _you_ can learn ’em anything? Not by a good


and said it was a charm the devil give to him with his own hands, and
that fell between the trees. She ran to the place and then stopped
Finally she picked up her basket.
[Image unavailable.]

This extract, taken with its context, not only proves how widely dispersed the Christian faith had become in the fifth century but also attracts our attention to the diffusion of the Nestorian doctrine which, with its imperfect presentation of Christianity, carried everywhere the element of its own failure, even where apparently such a success. It was an age in which, humanly speaking, the Church had her magnificent opportunity, but being divided and unworthy she failed to carry conquest. Had she remained true to the Apostolic teaching how different it might have been!


up the pig and held him to my breast with my jacket (so he couldn’t
“I don’t know, I’m sure. To think of your striking a stuffed man, like




extraordinary vividness even now. My dear wife’s sweet anxious face
course you’ve been dreaming.”

the journey to the City of Emeralds.
all right, let him have it; because I don’t wish to go back on no
and all of them fidgety and uneasy, but trying to look like they


“I am very glad to hear such a good account of her,” said Lady Catherine; “and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excel, if she does not practise a great deal.”

noise I made stirred him up and I heard him crawling after me.
“But the work?”

them, and discuss about whether they was made or only just happened.
tell anybody at _all_.”
Our hen-coop is in commotion by the advent of a cock of very nasty plumage, it is true. The new-comer is an American chanter, who has come from Chicago to study singing with Professor Lamperti. At dinner I gazed with some curiosity at the Yankee, and found him helplessly shy and utterly unattractive, with sandy-coloured hair and features all wildly wrong; his kindest friend could not have called him anything but ugly. His clothes had the air of having been bought ready-made at a cheap shop and wanted brushing badly; he wore a turned-over collar which showed his neck far down, and a white tie, tied a good deal on one side. Our new lodger was painfully conscious of his physical shortcomings, and if ever a man wanted taming he did. At dinner he made all sorts of blunders, kept his eyes on his plate all the time and hardly spoke at all. The advent of a man of that kind was not dangerous and far better for the peace of mind of our lady-boarders, for the new arrival was assuredly not of the type who seek adventure; having nothing of the hero about him he would not play the Don Juan like Signor Gorgolli.
heah now—_den_ what would he say! I jis’ bet he couldn’ fine no way to
for no breakfast—I warn’t hungry.”
and—”
 “Gentlemen, Gentlemen!”
after the first jolt, as you may say, when my breath sort of hitched,
At ten o’clock we entered the port of Krasnovodsk. My car was attached to the express of the Prince of Oldenbourg, who arrived in the afternoon on the Tzarevitch. Before starting the Prince sent his aide-de-camp to ask if I could receive him. I replied that I felt very tired for the moment but hoped that I should be able to see His Highness during our long railway journey.
broken into, and since the daylight shone in there, it was evident the



just went away and left us.”
children, and if their master wouldn’t sell them, they’d get an
and I reckon he clean forgot I was in the world, he was so excited and

but when I had made a hole about a couple of feet deep the loose earth
“Well, then, how’s he going to take the sea baths if it ain’t on the



Heading to Chapter XVI.	95

foodless, like sheep without a shepherd—the thousands who had fled by
soun’, de tears come, en I could a got down on my knees en kiss yo’
“Well, well,” said he, “do not make yourself unhappy. If you are a good girl for the next ten years, I will take you to a review at the end of them.{368}”
window-hole.
Room, where he saw, sitting in the emerald throne, a most lovely Lady.

Investment .

Profiting by the improvement of the roads, a great number of Turkish officers hasten to Erzeroum to see their families.

nearly four weeks ago. I stumbled into the hall, and the house felt
On one of the occasions when he could hold conversations with the Nabob’s son over religious matters, Schwartz impressed upon him the law of brotherly love, even to enemies, which Christ enjoined on His disciples. The answer he received was a remarkable instance how in the poetical books of the Hindus the same principle of meekness towards enemies was laid down. “Of the behaviour of men in regard to meekness,” said he, “four kinds were mentioned of[Pg 87] which he gave the following explanation: Schariat, Terikat, Marifat, Hakikat, are four ways which men go.” “A young man,” he said, “once asked a priest what he understood by these four ways? The priest desired him to go into the market and give a blow (or box on the ear) to each one he met. The young man did as the priest desired. He struck the first man who met him; now he was evil and returned like for like and struck him again. The second whom the young man met, was indeed wicked, and raised his hand to strike him in return, but changed his mind, and went away quietly. The third who was beaten was not wicked and did not threaten to return like for like, in that he thought the blow came from God. The fourth when he was beaten was full of love and kissed the hand that smote him. The first who when he was beaten struck again, is an emblem of Schariat, or the way of the world. The second felt wrath but overcame it and is an emblem of Terikat. The third endured the blow with patience and is an example of Marifat, or mature knowledge. The fourth who kissed the hand that smote him is an example of Hakikat, or inward union with God, in that he regarded all the injustice that was done to him as love on account of this union with God.”
If, on the contrary, it be true, as I maintain it to be, that after the peace, when a perfect equilibrium is restored to every thing, the 9 or 10 millions interest of the national debt, has no other effect but that of adding to every thing a nominal value which injures no one, though it may be advantageous to many; a nominal value, which, in every state, proportions itself, first to the sum of its revenue compared to that of its debt, and soon after to the difference which the debt contracted by the nation called the most loaded, and which, in fact, is only the greatest exporter, has produced in that enormous quantity of the goods she exports;—if it appear more reasonable to adopt that idea, than to give up a trade, which, without that very idea, would prove the most absurd, as well as the most destructive that human genius[387] could invent, (the alternative seems to be forcibly established);—in this case the regret will be heart-felt, when we consider the loss of men sacrificed during the last war: but if from this general aggregate of truths little suspected, and much less reflected upon, there should result a system of Politics in Europe, of Administration in her different States, of Government in her Colonies, which should procure to Europe, at the least expence, the greatest exportation of that of which she has a superabundance, and the greatest importation of that in which she is deficient ... then indeed, then, might we find consolation for the evil, in adverting to its consequences.—And, upon this principle, what can England have suffered by losing her sovereignty over America?
oars.
“Why, where ever did you go?” he says. “Your aunt’s been mighty
She entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious, made no other reply to Elizabeth’s salutation than a slight inclination of the head, and sat down without saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned her name to her mother on her Ladyship’s entrance, though no request of introduction had been made.


“Who’s that? Answer, or I’ll shoot!”
harm and trouble, to turn your backs on that scoundrel and have nothing
“Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon your accepting it. Is it not so, Mrs. Bennet?”
It most busted them, but they made up the six thousand clean and clear.
says:
“There is nothing to be done,” said the little woman calmly.

Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to Colonel Fitzwilliam, “Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of me, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am particularly unlucky in meeting with a person so well able to expose my real character, in a part of the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree of credit. Indeed, Mr. Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention all that you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire—and, give me leave to say, very impolitic too—for it is provoking me to retaliate, and such things may come out as will shock your relations to hear.”
light, and a man fell headlong and lay still; and as the unseen shaft

“La! You are so strange! But I must tell you how it went off. We were married, you know, at St. Clement’s, because Wickham’s lodgings were in that parish. And it was settled that we should all be there by eleven o’clock. My uncle and aunt and I were to go together; and the others were to meet us at the church.

The last war, it is said, has loaded them with an interest of 1,000,000 per annum. Would a tax of 10 per cent. on every article, or rather on the total of the produce of national, as well as foreign industry, consumed within the country, be productive of any other effect, but that of increasing the prices nearly as much? and would the cultivators of wheat and other productions of the earth, have occasion for any other expedient to pay the tax, without being at any expence, without any one being aggrieved, (provided they should raise in the same proportion the price of labour attending cultivation) but that of advancing, in the mean time, the price of their wheat, and other productions of the earth, from 10 to 11 or 12, from 20 to 22 or 24?—This is the case in my first hypothesis, with this difference, that the 21,000,000 interest, mentioned therein, represented highways, havens, canals, public schools, &c. and that the interest of 1,000,000, in the United States, will represent the establishment of their independence. Such a monument is, in my opinion, too precious to admit a thought of destroying it by a reimbursement,—a reimbursement[179] palpably useless so soon as the price of every thing is restored to a level with the interest of any national loan whatever.
The Last Man Left Alive!” Troubled as they were with their own affairs,
the policemen were shouting. People were coming out of the side
“Well, when my niece give it to me to keep for her I took and hid it


 “And asked me if I Liked Her”
The question more to the point is yet more singular; for it goes to this enquiry:



the disks in an elastic sheath; these disks become polarised and drawn
The present unhappy state of the family rendered any{366} other excuse for the lowness of her spirits unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be fairly conjectured from that,—though Elizabeth, who was by this time tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectly aware that, had she known nothing of Darcy, she could have borne the dread of Lydia’s infamy somewhat better. It would have spared her, she thought, one sleepless night out of two.

[Image unavailable.]
hill down to the river, and back to Clapham, and up to the edge of the
the journey, and there she saw the Golden Cap. She tried it on her own
“Walked back with them”
and didn’t look pretty comfortable over all that petting that was going

us to be down there a-whoopin’ up the mournin’ than up here givin’ ’em
kissed me, and patted me on the head, and dropped into a kind of a

After dinner we sat on deck, seeking in vain for a breath of fresh air. It was fire that we inhaled. We are now in the straits of Formosa and have reached the tropics.

minds, even as it was uppermost in mine, was the riddle—how much they

It is too serious a resolution to be taken in a hurry, and Sergy went once more to St. Petersburg and took me with him. In the first place we called on Baroness Korff. A hundred questions were burning on my lips, but our visit was rather disappointing. The Baroness described Khabarovsk to us under awfully gloomy aspects, and left us under no illusion about our new abode, which seems as far as the moon to me, describing it as a place where no luxuries of civilisation can be procured, and said that we must be prepared to encounter terrible hardships and great privations. Really, it was not too enthusiastic a description, and did not sound promising at all. I had heard very much the same thing before, but not so emphatically stated. Our fine resolutions flew to the winds, and Sergy decided to refuse his appointment as adjunct to Baron Korff. I could sing victory!

He broke off there, because we heard the breakfast-horn blowing. So we




Some young birds come along, flying a yard or two at a time and
His less distinguished successors are deserving of only a brief mention. Their methods were open to grave objection, and, indeed, were condemned by Pope Clement XI. The Jesuit influence declined with the decay of Portuguese power and the advance of that of the Dutch. The newcomers were not disposed to favour Roman Catholic missionaries; it could hardly be expected that the nation which withstood the arrogance of Philip of Spain could tolerate with equanimity the Jesuits in their Eastern possessions. On the other hand, the missionaries of the Reformed Protestant faith were naturally encouraged to go forward, and in Ceylon the Dutch missionaries won great though ephemeral successes.

CHAPTER XXXIX

then replaced the square of tin, soldering it neatly together where it

jump for it now, and not a minute to lose—the house full of men,
iron upperworks rose out of this headlong structure, and from that twin
curiosity gave me courage, and I rose up, stepped across him, and

Towards the middle of April, when the weather became milder, a military band played three times a week in the square. I listened to it lying back on a rocking-chair on the veranda, feeling quite safe from observation.
Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered. Miss Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and not well enough to leave her room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving alarm or inconvenience, from expressing in her note how much she longed for such a visit, was delighted at her entrance. She was not equal, however, to much conversation; and when Miss Bingley left them together, could attempt little beside expressions of gratitude for the extraordinary kindness she was treated with. Elizabeth silently attended her.
“I should take him, even on my slight acquaintance, to be an ill-tempered man.”
“How much is squandered away in what is called fashionable living, to no purpose but rather to the worst! Health, strength, conscience, and the sweetest sense of the favour of God are lost—for what! Though we are not to serve God for the sake of temporal advantages, we shall find that true unfeigned ‘godliness’ is profitable even to all things, having promise of the life that now is and of that which is to come! The people of the world love both. Their tumultuous mirth does not deserve the name of joy and is always closely attended and embittered by unspeakable disquietude and anxiety, which they must feel so soon as they begin to reflect....
“You may depend upon my not mentioning it.”
So I left, and struck for the back country. I didn’t look around, but I
And from this paper my brother read that catastrophic dispatch of the
But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Mr. Wickham—when she read, with somewhat clearer attention, a relation of events which, if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and which bore so alarming an affinity to his own history of himself—her feelings were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition. Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. She wished to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, “This must be false! This cannot be! This must be the grossest falsehood!”—and when she had gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the last page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not regard it, that she would never look in it again.

Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She endeavoured to persuade herself that she did not regret it; but she could no longer be blind to Miss Bingley’s inattention. After waiting at home every morning for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the visitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and, yet more, the alteration of her manner, would allow Jane to deceive herself no longer. The letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister will prove what she felt:{186}—
child, I wouldn’t tell on you. Tell me all about it now, that’s a good
First, If the very useless prohibition of the exportation of specie, however it might be profitable to those who could export it, could have possibly been put in force, 60 millions of real cash added, in a country where 20 millions perhaps are sufficient for circulation, must have doubled at least the price of every thing; a consequence diametrically opposite to what it was intended to effect. Would it not, in some respect, have ruined the Bank, by rendering useless its nominal stock, in lowering the interest of its real one, and reducing, in fine, its abilities so much below the level of public wants, when the general prices, two-fold increased, would have raised, in the same proportion, that of every engagement?

Heading to Chapter XXV.	175
“Such very superior dancing is not often seen”	118
human beings, who might attack and sack the town, to be certainly
 Taking a Rest
“I’m the tallest”	9
The Scarecrow listened carefully, and said, “I cannot understand why

haziness rose over the treetops.
“I didn’t.”
“Meddling with _who?_” Tom says, dropping his smile and looking
So they shook it, one after the other, all around, and cried. The


On our return to Isola Bella, we took the train to Milan, where we arrived at sunset. Before we went to bed, it was settled that we should go next morning to Piacenza. When I awoke, Sergy made me understand that it would be far more convenient for him to go first by himself to Piacenza, in order to look out for a lodging for me. I was foolish enough to feel horribly hurt, and to take it into my head that my husband wanted to get rid of me. “Oh! very well, be it so!” I said to myself, and made the vow to await the end of the manœuvres at Cernobbio at Frau Weidemann’s boarding-house; and, acting on blind impulse, with quick tears rising to my eyes, I told Sergy I did not want him to be bothered with me and intended to start with the first train to Como. Having said my say I began instantly to throw my things into my trunk in petulant haste, drying my tears with quick, impatient dashes. Sergy tried to talk some common sense into me, but to reason with me at that moment was impossible; what I once made up my mind to do, I would do, no matter how hard it was. Sergy insisted upon accompanying me to Cernobbio. We had to be at the station by eight o’clock, but with all these parleys we missed the train, and Sergy, knowing my tempers to be of short duration, was very glad of it, thinking that it was just as well that I should be allowed a little time to recover my good-humour. But I made out that there was another train about nine. When we had secured a compartment to ourselves, I drew myself far into my corner and pulled down my veil to hide my tears, feeling as if I was going off to prison. We rolled on towards Como in gloomy spirits; the journey was a very silent one. How stupid of me to have made that vow, but it was too late to alter matters now, and pride, holding me back, I had to stand firm. Nevertheless I blamed myself bitterly. All the pleasure of our trip was at an end.

stood upon his head.

Two large dark-coloured eyes were regarding me steadfastly. The mass

small hole dug in the ground, called a cyclone cellar, where the family

houses and smashing amid the neighbouring fields.
’m myself.”
“I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. The recollection of what I then said, of my conduct, my manners, my expressions during the whole of it, is now, and has been many months, inexpressibly painful to me. Your reproof, so well applied, I shall never forget: ‘Had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner.’ Those were your words. You know not, you can scarcely conceive, how they have tortured me; though it was some time, I confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow their justice.”
clothes and all on, and struck out for the canoe. I just expected


9thly,

OUR JOURNEY TO TASHKEND

The man was so surprised at this answer that he sat down to think it
hosses _you_ never see! De women folks has gone for to stir up de

Also:
ain’t—obsequies bein’ the common term—but because orgies is the right
“October 22nd. I went out early to the river. Near the river was a pagoda, where grew a beautiful and shady tree. I seated myself beneath it and asked the heathens who came near, what the pagoda was for and to whose glory it was erected? Who the idol was, what he had accomplished, and what his wife was called. When they had quietly replied to all, I said to them: ‘All you have now said relative to the idol, clearly shows that he was a poor, dying and withal very vicious man, and therefore you grievously sin against yourselves in appropriating the[Pg 97] glory which pertains to the true God to a sinful creature. After this the supremacy of God, as well as the deep corruption of men, the unutterable love of God in sending a Saviour, and the way to obtain a participation of this wonderful grace of God, were pointed out. One of them said: ‘It is our fate to be heathens and therefore a favourable reason must come before we can get free from it.’ ‘Can you call that fate,’ I said, ‘which you yourselves acknowledge to be evil and yet persist therein, against better knowledge and against conscience? Will God, to whom you and I must render an account, accept that as a suitable reason or excuse? Will you not bewail it for ever that you waste the period of grace? It is the fear of men which holds you all in bondage.’ To the last assertion they assented. In the afternoon I had a conference with many people adjoining the fort. They all listened attentively. An animated young heathen said, ‘Show me God so that I may behold Him and I will be your disciple.’ I said: ‘You talk like a sick person who desires health without a physician. There is a way, true and revealed by God Himself, by which man arrives at a vision of God. That way is denominated true poverty of spirit, patience, meekness, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, etc.’ This was all explained and afterwards the young man was questioned, whether this deterred him. But the way seemed to him to be too difficult.
If it were acknowledged, that notwithstanding the prejudices to the contrary, as deeply rooted in the heads of Ministers, as they are in the hearts of Merchants, and notwithstanding all the national cupidities, private interest in all countries[393] has always proved sufficient to reject effectually all the useless, and procure all the necessary money:
now understood our command of artillery and the danger of human
“What—regular?”
of our conversation from the moment when I had found him crouching


“What’s that?” he said. He was deaf in one ear.
them,” he said, with a sort of sombre gratification. “There’ll be any
jar made her catch her breath and wonder what had happened; and Toto
to the table and hacked into his throat with the axe, and laid him down
could a gone to it; and if you’d a done it they’d a learnt you there
“No, but you tried to,” she retorted. “You are nothing but a big


General Balance of Trade in England.


We arrived towards night at Rotterdam, one of the most considerable sea-ports in Holland. How helpless we felt in this strange country! We had the greatest difficulty to make ourselves understood by the porters; our knowledge of Dutch being nil, we addressed them in German and English, and they answered in Dutch, which did not help us. We hailed a cab and tried to explain to the driver that we wanted to be driven to New Bath Hotel, and doubted somewhat whether we were understood, but our driver replied reassuringly, making our luggage a resting-place for his boots, and clambered into his seat. We arrived, in fact, at the designated hotel, situated on the quay of the river Maas.

streets, and the contorted bodies shrouded in that layer; they rise
and after the Scarecrow had got down from his back the Lion sprang

That night we went down the lightning-rod a little after ten, and took

thirty-seven years. Then we can snatch him out and rush him away the


May I, my father, be worthy of thee!
XXVII.	Montreux	182
“I am now on the brink of eternity; but to this moment I declare that I do not repent of having spent forty-three years here in the service of my Divine Master. Who knows but God may remove some of the great obstacles to the propagation of the Gospel. Should a reformation take place among the Europeans, it would no doubt be the greatest blessing to the country.”
haul out yaller-boys out of his pocket.

upon me tattered and dog-bitten. They gibber and grow fiercer, paler,
Weybridge towards London.

“Honor bright, now—no lies.”


amused himself by making a grotesque scheme of advertisement stereo on
seeming to be simply the equivalent of the crab’s cerebral portion. But
me come a-nigh him any more, and said if I chalked his raft he’d kill
sight of some sentinel fighting-machine seemed at first too great. And
“Which one?”
Mrs. Bennet’s schemes for this day were ineffectual. Bingley was everything that was charming, except the professed lover of her daughter. His ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable addition to their evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged officiousness of the mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to the daughter.


“But how in the nation’d they ever _git_ that grindstone _in_ there,
ferry-boat was floating with the current, and I allowed I’d have a
at once he could not leap across it.


guns behind.
Great Oz I must take you to his Palace. But first you must put on the
under your eyes and never say one single word? What did that poor old
and amongst their own relations; and it pleased the girls, too—tickled

and open and above-board here, you know. We want to lug this h-yer
Antonine Kontski came to St. Petersburg to give a concert. He had a tremendous success; the audience was enthusiastic and the applause was deafening. I enjoyed his concert a great deal and applauded so much that I split my gloves. For the last encore the audience demanded “Le Réveil du Lion,” one of Kontski’s masterpieces. Then the old mæstro returned and bowed to the wildly excited people and said: “My Lion is weary, he is going to bed, but next week I’ll bring out my wild animal, if you still desire to hear his roaring.”

en Balum he couldn’. I ain’ gwyne to len’ no mo’ money ’dout I see de
Balance of France with England.
When we were back at Aden, we had lunch at the Hotel d’ Europe. After our meal I went out to rest on the verandah, whilst Sergy visited the English Hospital, to which one of our recruits, who had fallen ill during the voyage, had been removed.

ruled the people who live in the North and South and East and West.
could see that in spite of his pretty clothes of red and yellow and

[262]
vanished, and were replaced by a bright red glow.
Next morning the Scarecrow said to his friends:
up to the Lion and bowed, saying:
Heading to Chapter XXIV.	168
but we never hived any of them. Tom Sawyer called the hogs “ingots,”
night I heard a sound like heavy guns.
singularly desolate: blackened trees, blackened, desolate ruins, and
laid him on the floor and put one large Bible under his head, and
dancing.
the palace themselves ’stead of fooling them away like that. And what’s
right away, and clearing out without losing any time. But Tom he showed
There was one where a young lady was at a window looking up at the
Just then I heard somebody coming down the stairs, back behind me. I
XCVIII.	Colombo	444
made him sigh, and put his hand on his heart, and after a while he said



“But you—how are you?” cried Elizabeth. “You look pale. How much you must have gone through!”
De ’spute warn’t ’bout a half a chile, de ’spute was ’bout a whole
around after a halter if you can git at what you’re up to in some way
bicycles. In addition, a large number of people must have walked, in


and turned to join me.

Or,
required brains to figure it out, I never should have said it.”
“But it _is_, though—straight as a string. I see the handbill myself.
“And Mary King is safe!” added Elizabeth; “safe from a connection imprudent as to fortune.”

right!” everybody sings out.) “All right, then—not a word about any

me as soon as I could earn enough money to build a better house for
“So they always acquit; and then a _man_ goes in the night, with a


periodical extinction was unknown to them. They had little or no sense
And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the Parsonage together.
speckled with stars, and we used to lay on our backs and look up at
The greater part of the inhabitants of Dieppe are anti-republicans, and the Mayor of the Town had to go himself to the “Vicaire du Pollet” to beg him to hoist the Republican flag over his house.
“It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well married,” continued her mother; “but at the same time, Mr. Bingley, it is very hard to have her taken away from me. They are gone down to Newcastle, a place quite northward it seems, and there they are to stay, I do not know how long. His regiment is there; for I suppose you have heard of his leaving the ——shire, and of his being gone into the Regulars. Thank heaven!{413} he has some friends, though, perhaps, not so many as he deserves.”



[465]
[399]




“Ihope, my dear,” said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they were at breakfast the next morning, “that you have ordered a good dinner to-day, because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party.”

EVERY object in the next day’s journey was new and interesting to Elizabeth; and her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for she had seen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health, and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight.
September 10th.—Our stay at Vladivostock was a long round of gaiety and pleasure. I lived in a whirl of excitement. To-day we were invited to dine on the flagship “Nicholas II.” As we approached the cruiser we heard the sounds of a band striking up a march. The officer gave us a warm reception and the Admiral offered me a big bouquet tied with a lovely piece of Japanese silk, embroidered with fantastical arabesques. I saw in the dining-room amongst other guests a young opera singer, Señorita Estrella Bellinfanti, a pupil of Tosti, who had arrived from Japan for a few days. The young diva is going on to America on a tournée, escorted by a lady-companion. After a long illness that she has gone through, the poor señorita begins to lose her sight. She told me that in the space of another year she would be quite blind, which will oblige her to abandon the artistic career, which she adores. Seeing her so gay and bright, nobody could dream of the tragedy awaiting the poor girl. After dinner we had an improvised concert. One of the officers sat down at the piano to accompany Señorita Estrella, who sang in a sweet mezzo-soprano voice lovely Spanish songs, after which the officers sang in chorus Russian songs, in very good time and rhythm, to the accompaniment of guitars.[396] I was asked to play on the mandolin; the officers were so insistent that it was not easy to refuse, and finally I yielded to their entreaties, but I couldn’t be induced to sing. The officers, thinking that it was my husband’s presence which kept me back, proposed to detain him on deck during my performance, but it was all in vain, I would not sing. We returned on shore very late and went to bed with the evening star.


“Go ’long to your play, and don’t bother me. I know better, I counted

“When they all removed to Brighton, therefore, you had no reason, I suppose, to believe them fond of each other?”


CHAPTER VI.
hill that sank and spread itself slowly over the surrounding country.
“Yes, ’bout the middle of the day.”
I went early to bed that night, and just as I was going to fall asleep, I heard a chorus of men’s voices singing to a guitar accompaniment. I jumped out of bed and saw a boat moored to the terrace, in which a dozen men, gifted with fresh, strong voices, were giving us a serenade. The moon came up at that moment, silvering the lake and lighting up the scene. I leant out of the window to throw some coins in the direction of the singers, who were making the round of the group of visitors who had gathered on the terrace. I was very much disenchanted when I was told that these minstrels were, all of them, citizens of Como, who, having their day’s work done, floated on the lake and sang ballads.
If in England a population of 9,000,000 of industrious inhabitants, yields a landed revenue of 60,000,000l. sterling, the wheat being there at 40s. per quarter, a population of 3,000,000 of industrious inhabitants in America, where wheat sells at 20s. a quarter, ought to produce at least a landed revenue of 10,000,000l. sterling; I say at least, first, because the land is new, and[177] produces as much, with less culture; and secondly, because that part of the inhabitants employed in agriculture in England, constitute only one third of the whole population, and that in all probability, above two thirds of the Americans are employed in works of husbandry. It may therefore be presumed, that their landed revenue exceeds 20,000,000, instead of the 10 which I have set down; but this surplus of 10,000,000, only serves to make good both the national and foreign industry, which is to balance it, and pay off the taxes: so that, in whatever light my thesis be considered, every error turns to their advantage.
two hundred years,” I had written, “we may expect——” The sentence ended

NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
learn you your book, she tried to learn you your manners, she tried to
Steamboats and shipping of all sorts lay there, tempted by the enormous
The girls stared at their father. Mrs. Bennet said only, “Nonsense, nonsense!”
and make it mighty warm for him. And he said that between the rats and
and when I see that truck I thought we’d lost you, for I knowed by the
Then he would suddenly revert to the matter of the food I withheld from


“If I had been able,” said she, “to carry my point in going to Brighton with all my family, this would not{352} have happened: but poor dear Lydia had nobody to take care of her. Why did the Forsters ever let her go out of their sight? I am sure there was some great neglect or other on their side, for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing, if she had been well looked after. I always thought they were very unfit to have the charge of her; but I was over-ruled, as I always am. Poor, dear child! And now here’s Mr. Bennet gone away, and I know he will fight Wickham, wherever he meets him, and then he will be killed, and what is to become of us all? The Collinses will turn us out, before he is cold in his grave; and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what we shall do.”
[196]


little raspy chuckle, and says:

“Yes,” says somebody, “me and Ab Turner done it. We’re both here.”

also through Edgware and Waltham Abbey, and along the roads eastward to
m’lasses, won’t ye?—I was a-sayin’ to Sister Dunlap, jist this minute,

About eleven a company of soldiers came through Horsell, and deployed
As soon as dinner was over, we went for a walk round Buitenzorg. After the shower there was a delicious perfume of plants and damp earth. We strolled through broad streets lined with huts built of bamboo and thatched with cocoa-nut leaves, hidden in the dense foliage.
I remember I felt an extraordinary persuasion that I was being played
“Good Lord! Sir William, how can you tell such a story? Do not you know that Mr. Collins wants to marry Lizzy?”
to it, “Let up on me—it ain’t too late yet—I’ll paddle ashore at the

September 1st.—This morning we were awakened by a loud cannonade; it was the cruisers who were saluting each other as they usually do every morning. To-day we are giving a dinner to a hundred guests. All the admirals and commanders of the troops are invited with their families.

Every Friday in the “Gisheh,” the Hyde Park of Cairo, about sundown, the aristocracy of the city take their drive. We went for a stroll in the park through a wide avenue bordered by thickly planted trees. In the large park-alleys broughams passed containing harem ladies with faces closely veiled with muslin, accompanied by their favourite slaves. A native of high degree came driving in an open carriage, with sandalled, gorgeously-clad syces (carriage runners), with white wing-like sleeves embroidered with gold, running before his carriage and clearing the way for their master. After our drive we had tea at a little inn on the bank of the Nile, where we found a nice sheltered place close to the river. Just in front was moored a dahabiah, a large sailing vessel cruising up the Nile as far as the Cataracts. We were immediately surrounded by a crowd of natives; one of them was offering “good bananas,” in English, and another one wanted absolutely to clean our shoes.
that kind. Pap always said it warn’t no harm to borrow things if you
Tashkend is thrown into wild agitation by the arrival of General Toutolmine, the aide of the Grand Duke Nikolai Nikolaevitch. This General had been in the same military school with my husband; he was accompanied by several smart officers in the guards, Prince Jaime de Bourbon, the son of Don Carlos, among them. The Prince is a legitimist claimant of the Spanish throne, serving in the Russian army in the regiment of the Hussars. He is a dashing, showy, cavalry officer, of the type that finds favour with women; like Cæsar he came, saw, and conquered. The Prince is accustomed to win all hearts and does not believe it possible for any creature of the fair sex to do so much as look at him without falling in love with him. I found him very entertaining, but did not lose my heart. He sat beside me at dinner and was very bright and witty. He told me that a gipsy had foretold him three things: a great gain, a wound and a crown. The first of the predictions came true, he has won at a lottery the sum of 2000 roubles; will the other two prophecies come true? “Qui vivra verra!” After dinner I mounted my bicycle, accompanied by Prince Jaime and his comrades. We made a long run, I rode fast, going at a pace almost equal to that of an express train; my cavaliers were completely exhausted, trying to keep up with me.
Still with many an anxious thought.
once to the coast rather than wait for food, although all three of them
“It is perfectly true,” shouted Hermann, giving Danys a vicious little pinch, “I can thump her as much as I like, and she doesn’t dare to touch me even with her little finger!”

a Russian Lady
CHAPTER XXXI.
murdered, and how pap disappeared pretty soon, and didn’t come back no
the fighting-machines I had seen. The gun he drove had been unlimbered
The end of the case was quite on Oriental lines. The Nabob made a brave show of justice, ordering his chief servants to hear both sides. “When he observed, however, that the ill-treated helper was entirely innocent, and that on the other side there were presents offered, it was said that he would defer it for the present, and this he continued to promise until we became weary of his promising and he unmindful of its fulfilment.”
anything like it. Then one of them got on one side of the coffin, and
“No, your majesty”—which was the way I always called him when nobody
the table, with Susan alongside of her, and said how bad the biscuits
placard of the first newspaper to resume publication—the _Daily Mail_.
funnels projected and spat a smoking blast shot with fire. It was the
abstain from, the wheel, but in their apparatus singularly little use

Fourthly, that it is impossible a nation should be willing to barter a greater quantity of its own labour, against a less quantity of the labour of another; and yet it is to such a degree of absurdity, that we must reduce the supposed advantage of the dreaded competition:
ramifications this way and that, now banking itself against rising

Everybody that wants to join has got to take an oath, and write his
will think more of me when you hear the splendid thoughts my new brain
We took our bath every morning on the “Grande Plage,” where the waves reached only to the knees, but they were so monstrously long that they splashed us from head to foot, and pushed us far away from the shore. One morning whilst my husband was taking his bath and I was merely present in[253] the character of looker-on, someone called him in Russian by his name. Sergy turned round and saw Colonel Scalon, an aide-de-camp of the Grand Duke Michael. “What an unexpected surprise! How do you do, Colonel?” he exclaimed. “Thank you, I⸺” but at that same moment a gigantic billow had flung them apart without giving time to the Colonel to end his phrase.
stays sot; dey won’t look into noth’n’en fine it out f’r deyselves, en


ammunition, and a four-gallon jug of whisky, and an old book and two

was a mistake, Aunt Sally. This ain’t no healthy place for a stranger
I paddled to the raft. Jim was awful disappointed, but I said never
and terrible a roar that Dorothy screamed and the Scarecrow fell over
her hand. But, in truth, she did not dare to strike Dorothy, because of
you bear upon your forehead the mark of the Good Witch’s kiss, and that
CHAPTER XXXIII
trying to think, and when Buck waked up I says:


it’s the hand of a man that’s started in on a new life, and’ll die

Ninthly, It is singular enough, that the European cultivator should be taught by the American trader, the necessity and the justice of an increase of price in the productions of the earth, proportionable, says the honest Philadelphian, to that which is to be met with in the price of the productions of industry:—It would be unreasonable, says he, to expect the goods of Jamaica at the old prices, when those of Philadelphia have advanced so considerably.—Nay, say the European manufacturers, since our goods, by means of the taxes, have increased 10 per cent. it follows necessarily that the[176] price of wheat, sugar, indigo, &c. should fall in the same proportion, in order that the trade in competition may be supported abroad;—had not Nature, by her underhand work, constantly fought with some advantage against the dreams of speculators, and against the much more dreadful surreptions of cupidity, to what pitch of misery would not agriculture be reduced in all parts of the world!


Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her waiting-woman was in it. They proceeded in silence along the gravel walk that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for conversation with a woman who was now more than usually insolent and disagreeable.

his weak tears in some way efficacious. And I would sit in the darkness
trick that would give her what she wanted. She placed a bar of iron in

excavations, especially the boys. They wanted a light railing put up,
there was so many of them and they done it in such a rousing way; then
and she felt she must sit down to rest and to sleep.
“I see no occasion for that. You and the girls may go—or you may send them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better; for as you are as handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley might like you the best of the party.”
atmosphere and greater gravitational attraction was only too evident in


Fourthly, The United States are now a foreign nation in regard to Jamaica, which belongs[174] to England; yet this consideration does not render them so far unjust, as to shake off the burden of their taxes, and fix it on the inhabitants of Jamaica; they only make them nominal partners in that burden, (if the expression may be allowed), without any inconvenience arising therefrom to either of the parties.
and rules over the Quadlings. Besides, her castle stands on the edge of
Witch then made the axe slip and cut off my head, and at first I
During these early days of the mission of Schwartz, in the middle of the eighteenth century, while he was peacefully preaching the Gospel and instructing the native children, the fate of India in the struggle of conquest was being sealed. Doubtless there came to his ears the distant alarms of war. Rival Rajahs fought against each other for supremacy, and it taxed the utmost tact, diplomacy, and resources of the Company to hold their own, when a new element of disorder appeared in the person of the French General Dupleix, which threatened the very existence of the English in that land. Securing powerful allies among the native chieftains he carried all before him, with his military genius and valour. But another star was arriving, and Clive, still more brilliant and not less brave, fought the French and beat them, saving India by the splendid defence of Arcot and the victory of Plassey.

sho’ en take a res’ b’fo’ dey started acrost, so by de talk I got to
“What shall we do now?” asked the Tin Woodman, as the Lion lay down on
noise. Slowly a humped shape rose out of the pit, and the ghost of a
snaked her out, private, and took her down there, but she failed on the
we must stop where we are.”

“And yours,” he replied, with a smile, “is wilfully to misunderstand them.”

years, this fiery chaos! What had happened in the last seven hours I
we seem to hear low voices in yonder!
to leave to go and get help; and he got a little worse and a little
become of the raft, then?—and Jim—poor Jim!”

“I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. Your retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better, of ignorance. But with me, it is not so. Painful recollections will intrude, which cannot, which ought not to be repelled. I have been a selfish being all my life, in practice, though not in principle. As a child I was taught what was right, but I was not taught to correct my temper. I was given good principles, but left to follow them in pride and conceit. Unfortunately an only son (for many years an only child), I was spoiled by my parents, who, though good themselves, (my father particularly, all that was benevolent and amiable,) allowed, encouraged, almost taught me to be selfish and overbearing, to care for none beyond my{454} own family circle, to think meanly of all the rest of the world, to wish at least to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with my own. Such I was, from eight to eight-and-twenty; and such I might still have been but for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! What do I not owe you! You taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most advantageous. By you, I was properly humbled. I came to you without a doubt of my reception. You showed me how insufficient were all my pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased.”
sermon that night that gave him a rattling ruputation, because the
heptarchies that used to rip around so in old times and raise Cain. My,
CONTENTS.
Though the Exhibition has been opened a whole month, the section of Central Asia is not quite ready yet; it is only the section of Turkestan which came to an end, thanks to the energy of our delegate. Next to it are the sections of the Caucasus and Siberia. A crowd of Russian workmen, wearing red shirts, put the finishing stroke to them.
Emerald City was built a great many years ago, for I was a young man
because I begun to get it through my head that he _was_ most free—and

awluz ’spected dat rattlesnake-skin warn’t done wid its work.”
The colonel of the regiment came to the Chobham bridge and was busy

I got a good place amongst the leaves, and set there on a log, munching
“Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel. Lady Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which becomes herself and daughter. I would advise you merely to put on whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest—there is no occasion for anything more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you for being simply dressed. She likes to have the distinction of rank preserved.”

_make_ no track.
nigger come back, and we said we’d come again some time if the nigger

excited before, how many years longer Mr. Bennet was likely to live; and Sir William gave it as his decided opinion, that whenever Mr. Collins should be in possession of the Longbourn estate, it would be highly expedient that both he and his wife should make their appearance at St. James’s. The whole family in short were properly overjoyed on the occasion. The younger girls formed{157} hopes of coming out a year or two sooner than they might otherwise have done; and the boys were relieved from their apprehension of Charlotte’s dying an old maid. Charlotte herself was tolerably composed. She had gained her point, and had time to consider of it. Her reflections were in general satisfactory. Mr. Collins, to be sure, was neither sensible nor agreeable: his society was irksome, and his attachment to her must be imaginary. But still he would be her husband. Without thinking highly either of men or of matrimony, marriage had always been her object: it was the only honourable provision for well-educated young women of small fortune, and, however uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest preservative from want. This preservative she had now obtained; and at the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, she felt all the good luck of it. The least agreeable circumstance in the business was the surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship she valued beyond that of any other person. Elizabeth would wonder, and probably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to be shaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. She resolved to give her the information herself; and therefore charged Mr. Collins, when he returned to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what had passed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of course very dutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for the curiosity excited by his long absence burst forth in such very direct questions on his return, as required some ingenuity to evade, and he was at the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing to publish his prosperous love.
CHAPTER LXIV
“True,” said Mr. Bennet; “but it is a comfort to think that, whatever of that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will always make the most of it.”
CHAPTER CXXIII
clog vein and artery, deaden nerve and destroy brain, had still to




sufficient to stay my hunger. From this garden one looked down upon
We took passage on a small steamer belonging to the company of “Caucasus and Mercury,” and steamed down the Volga from Nijni to Kazan. In the beginning of our voyage, where the Oka flows into the Volga, the river is in many places half a mile broad. We glided between sandy and sterile banks. Towards evening we arrived at Simbrisk, where we were to pass the night. A rickety old cab drove us to the hotel creeping up the ill-paved hill of an old and dirty street. A shabby waiter showed us into a small room with one bed and a greasy sofa. There was a tournament of self-denial between Sergy and me about the bed, and as neither would give in we decided that we should toss a coin: heads, the bed—tails, the sofa. It came tails, and the sofa fell to my lot! It was not at all a bed of roses, and when I lay down I soon discovered that the repulsive sofa was the property of certain highly disreputable and painfully disagreeable insects. I tossed on my couch of torture until morning.
“Like as not we got to be together a blamed long time on this h-yer

him how to make it when he gets to it.”

“My dear madam,” replied he, “let us be for ever silent on this point. Far be it from me,” he presently continued, in a voice that marked his displeasure, “to resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignation to inevitable evils is the duty of us all: the peculiar duty of a young man who has been so fortunate as I have been, in early preferment; and, I trust, I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of my positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand; for I have often observed, that resignation is never so perfect as when the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation. You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespect to your family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your daughter’s favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet the compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my behalf. My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted my dismission from your daughter’s lips instead of your own; but we are all liable to error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair. My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due consideration for the advantage of all your family; and if my manner has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologize.{146}”
Before leaving the home that had sheltered my happy girlhood for ever, I went to bid my last farewell to the room of my girlish days. I knelt down at the side of my forlorn bed, and with my head on my folded arms I prayed.[71] Then I parted from my parents, shedding copious tears. Good-bye Dolgik, good-bye my dear old life!
past the place where I and the artilleryman had talked to the hussars,

At eight o’clock we took the “Colorado,” an immense three-storied vessel, replete with every luxury and convenience.[141] The first-class cabins opened on a spacious dining-room. There were many passengers on board, a doleful trio amongst them, a young sad-faced woman in the last degree of consumption travelling with her husband and baby. The poor invalid looked wretchedly ill and extremely nervous, her eyes were constantly filling with tears. Her husband was full of little cares and attentions about her. Another passenger, a lady of unpleasing appearance, more than fifty, but dressed like a young girl, with an artificial complexion and dyed hair, strummed all day long on the piano, which was much out of tune. She fell upon the defenceless instrument, dashing out marches and abominable polkas, making two false notes in every five. At last it was decided that an appeal ad misericordiam would be made to the noisy virtuose, and it was the captain who saved the whole company from the much dreaded musical entertainment and undertook to keep that peace-disturber away from the tempting instrument. He made her understand that her performance was not approved of by his passengers and that she had better give the piano a little rest.
 
midst of a great meadow of poppies. Now it is well known that when

I stopped. I reckoned I better keep still. She run on, and never

there won’t be any Royal Academy of Arts, and no nice little feeds at
After six days at sea we arrived at Brindisi, where the formalities of landing are very strict. A pilot-boat came to meet us with a sanitary officer, who had a long conference with our ship’s doctor. The pilot, at length, having ascertained himself that everything on board was right, hoisted the sanitary flag and piloted us to the Custom House, after which we took the train to Bari. Two American ladies, mother and daughter, occupied our compartment, and soon conversation began between us. The younger one told us that they came from the new world to the old one to have her trousseau made at Worth’s. What a shame to leave her bridegroom for six months for her frivolities. This flighty bride said that in return she bought her sweetheart a collection of neckties in every capital of Europe.
“This lesson,” says he, “we learn with difficulty; however, if we humble ourselves and believe as we ought, that God directs all to our advantage, we shall willingly, if not cheerfully, resign over our own will to His divine and perfect will. You take now your farewell and I do the same. Having lived nearly forty-two years in this climate, my strength decreaseth and I look for a blessed eternity.

your father?”
stations, and the passage of carriage trucks bearing huge guns and
want of animal food. “We will peck them to death tomorrow, my dear.”
Some will say, with no small degree of acrimony, “How many drones are supported at the expence of the public funds! These are only an encouragement to idleness.”
escape; three persons at least, two women and a little boy, were

Before returning to the hotel, we went to a Chinese photographer to have our group taken in palanquins. Our carriers were quite amusingly afraid of the apparatus, it being against the teaching of their religion to have their pictures taken, especially together with white-faced men. They paused, undecided what to do, to fly or to remain, and the next[470] moment they suddenly disappeared; look where we would, we could in no manner discover them, and had our group taken sitting in palanquins placed on the ground.
wrote another one to tell you I was coming; and I s’pose he—”
“And _now_ you see what you _got_ by it. They’ve got all their own
the order to start, for she feared if the mice stayed among the poppies

“Well,” answered Oz, “if it were inside of you, it would be courage.

flowers that were everywhere about; so presently her eyes grew heavy

couldn’t make it out. It was very curious, somehow. I was going to
In the first case, the English manufactories, which furnish the exports, would have been necessarily reduced one tenth; upon which it is necessary to observe, that the tenth of the English exportation makes a fiftieth of the total value of the product of her industry, and that the inutility of the fiftieth of those products, occasioned by the impossibility of their being purchased by[342] foreigners at the price occasioned by the English new taxes, must have deprived of subsistence, as well as of employment, a fiftieth of the English artisans, and rendered useless a fiftieth of the capitals appropriated to exportation.
the gangway, found himself safely aboard the steamboat with his

Our train rolls on full speed. We are tossed about as on the sea. “Johnny” came to make our beds early in the evening. We had to lie down directly, for when the beds were made, there was no place to sit down.
We hadn’t time to have dinner that day, and we went to bed famished. I roamed about the room looking for something to eat, opening drawers and exploring them, but there was nothing, not even the skin of a sausage.




At length, however, Mrs. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and chicken. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval of tranquillity; for when supper was over, singing was talked of, and she had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty, preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silent entreaties did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance,—but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song. Elizabeth’s eyes were fixed on her, with most painful sensations; and she watched her progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving amongst the thanks of the table the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another. Mary’s powers were by no means fitted for such a display; her voice was weak, and her manner affected. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked at Jane to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly{128} talking to Bingley. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making signs of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however, impenetrably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint, and, when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud,—
they were quite sure which way they were going.
would steal when he warn’t a prisoner. So we allowed we would steal
Contents


“Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover screens, and net purses. I scarcely know any one who cannot do all this; and I am sure I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without being informed that she was very accomplished.”

The quantity of wheat sold at Dijon at the lowest, 2l. 11s. 5d. on a medium of 5 years from 1753 to 1757, was sold at the lowest, 4l. 5s. 9d. on a medium of 5 years from 1766 to 1770.
try to git her to say she wouldn’ do it, but I never waited to hear de
I hadn’t time to rest and was called down to the dining-room to be present at a Te Deum of thanksgiving for the happy termination of our voyage across the treacherous Japanese sea. There were many people in the room and no end of presentations and exchanging of greetings, after[364] which my husband went to pay his official call on the admirals, who received him with cannon-shots when he stepped on board. At night the town was beautifully illuminated in our honour.
journey.”
have not moved from the pit into which they have fallen, and, indeed,
one-horse place on the river, forty-four mile below Orleans. Pa was

“You are over scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mr. Bingley will be very glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls—though I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy.”
Elizabeth honoured him for such feelings, and thought him handsomer than ever as he expressed them.
Shakespeare. Ah, it’s sublime, sublime! Always fetches the house. I
This worried Dorothy a little, but she knew that only the Great Oz

children going to school, and suddenly they become vague and unreal,
That it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too, was another very welcome surprise; for his chief wish at present was to have as little trouble in the business as possible. When the first transports of rage which had produced his activity in seeking her were over, he naturally returned to all his former indolence. His letter was soon despatched; for though dilatory in undertaking business, he was quick in its execution. He begged to know further particulars of what he was indebted to his brother; but was too angry with Lydia to send any message to her.
’prentice, that’s all. It ain’t anything. There ain’t no harm in it.
he went to sucking at the jug again. His foot swelled up pretty big,
waked up at dawn, and slid down, and she was there yet, and her candle
the family couldn’t before _they_ died. _I_ can’t; and here you’re
“Oh, shocking!” cried Miss Bingley. “I never heard{73} anything so abominable. How shall we punish him for such a speech?”


church. They are all so brittle!”

“Well, Sister Phelps, I’ve ransacked that-air cabin over, an’ I b’lieve
The people crushed back on one another to avoid the horse. My brother



We have now been three months at Khabarovsk. I can’t get accustomed to this life. If I could but follow the example of Mme. Beurgier and fly away from here! All my brightness has gone and my nerves are put out of order. I don’t know what is the matter with me at all; for no reason on earth I suddenly burst into tears and cry for hours. Sergy tried to rouse me from the apathy into which I was falling deeper and deeper every day. I shook myself at last, and am getting back my spirits and my colour. I certainly was not going to let myself grow into a moping misanthrope.

Mrs. Elphinstone—that was the name of the woman in white—would listen
saw.

History Museum and find my way up to the summits of the towers, in



men; look at that nigger made out’n straw on the bed; and look at—”
and unfamiliar appearances, and at Hampton Court our eyes were relieved

despair. “They wiped us out—simply wiped us out,” he repeated again and

HUCKLEBERRY FINN
of the interruption of telegraphic communication. This was thought to
And while within we fought out our dark, dim contest of whispers,
“Haye Park might do,” said she, “if the Gouldings would quit it, or the great house at Stoke, if the drawing-room were larger; but Ashworth is too far off. I could not bear to have her ten miles from me; and as for Purvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful.”
no more feud. But it’s kind of slow, and takes a long time.”
buy some more thread to tie up his wool with; and then looks at Jim,
Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. Her thoughts were instantly driven back to the time when Mr. Bingley’s name had been last mentioned between them; and if she might judge from his complexion, his mind was not very differently engaged.
In Biarritz you are next door to Spain and I longed to snatch a glimpse of that poetic country of fans, mantillas and serenades. The Delbrucks agreed to go with us to San-Sebastiano, a Spanish town near the frontier. We could easily go there and be back by dinner-time. We started at an early hour, half asleep all of us, but were soon cheered up as we came out into the freshness and crispness of the early morning.
press her hand upon her heart whenever Dorothy’s merry voice reached

Dozens, hundreds of the great receiver stations were set up. And at each station there would grow a great city. Now there poured across the infinite void a mighty influx of machines and workers and tools. These were the first, for they must build the cities for the billions to come. Rapidly the work went on as the skilled artisans directed the mighty machines in their labors, and on the surface of this new globe there rose from the ground mighty walls of lustrous, gleaming metal, reflecting the sun in a million different colors, a wondrous city of flashing, changing light, for the metal walls were automatically ruled with thousands of lines to the inch, a titanic diffraction grating that sent up a rainbow of changing, flashing color. A mile and a half into the air towered the buildings of the cities, and already the commerce was building up as the great receiver stations discharged their steady stream of immigrants.

“Your first position is false. They may wish many things besides his happiness: they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they may wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, great connections, and pride.”
WITHIN a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets were particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty. The distinction had, perhaps, been felt too strongly. It had given him a disgust to his business and to his residence in a small market town; and, quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house about a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge; where he could think with pleasure of his own importance, and, unshackled by business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all the world. For, though elated by his rank, it did not render him supercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By nature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, his presentation at St. James’s had made him courteous.
it. They don’t think nothing of pulling a shot-tower up by the roots,
The centuries pass, and in the fulness of time wise men from the East, following the guidance of the Star, came to Bethlehem to worship the Christ child. The Light of the world had dawned. And it is not inconceivable that the tidings of One so mighty in word and work would be spread abroad through the talk of travellers and traders to the regions eastward of the Holy Land. For what it is worth, a reference may be made to the letters still preserved in the British Museum, supposed to have been written during the life of our Lord by Agbgbar from Edessa. These record that he, like the Queen of Sheba, was anxious to know more of what was taking place at Jerusalem and sent messages to Jesus Christ asking Him to visit him and offering his protection. When the reply is given that Jesus[Pg 3] Christ is too much occupied, but that after He had been received up He would send one of His Apostles, we feel we are in the midst of a legend, especially when Thomas is named as the writer of the answer, who afterwards sent Thaddeus, from whom the succession of the bishops of Edessa was traced. Before considering the claims of the St. Thomas theory, which has given his name to the Christians of the Malabar coast, we must realise the fact that after Pentecost the inspiration of the early Christian Church began to show itself in sending forth its witnesses for the conquest of the world under the Divine mandate received on the mount at His Ascension. Persecution also drove them hence; the hate of the Pharisees, the stern discipline of Roman repression, the prison walls and the sword of martyrdom—these only spread the embers which elsewhere broke out in fresh flames of testimony.

“She is tolerable”	15

too.
I sat up, strangely perplexed. For a moment, perhaps, I could not
she’d been packing things in it—getting ready to go to England. But she

variation of their Sunday experiences. In the midst of it all the
“Miss Mary Jane, I’ll tell you what we’ll do, and you won’t have to

gentle:
June 24th.—To-day we passed the Dardanelles and entered the Archipelago, and found ourselves near the point where ancient Troy stood.

When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham’s departure, she found little other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment. Their parties abroad were less varied than before; and at home she had a mother and{296} sister, whose constant repinings at the dulness of everything around them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all her folly and assurance, by a situation of such double danger as a watering-place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what has been sometimes found before, that an event to which she had looked forward with impatient desire, did not, in taking place, bring all the satisfaction she had promised herself. It was consequently necessary to name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity; to have some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the present, and prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Lakes was now the object of her happiest thoughts: it was her best consolation for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her mother and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in the scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.
Toto had jumped out of her arms and was running toward the barn,
couldn’t try to quit being the kind of a boy I was and be better. So I



when I attempted to clamber it I found I could not lift my feet to the

ELIZABETH had settled it that Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit her the very day after her reaching Pemberley; and was, consequently, resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning. But her conclusion was false; for on the very morning after their own arrival at Lambton these visitors came. They had been walking about the place with some of their new friends, and were just returned to the inn to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and lady in a curricle driving up the street. Elizabeth, immediately recognizing the livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of surprise to her relations, by acquainting them with the honour which she expected. Her{319} uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment of her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea on the business. Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they now felt that there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such a quarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece. While these newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of Elizabeth’s feelings was every moment increasing. She was quite amazed at her own discomposure; but, amongst other causes of disquiet, she dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too much in her favour; and, more than commonly anxious to please, she naturally suspected that every power of pleasing would fail her.
last! We been expecting you a couple of days and more. What kep’

further than that if I was to live forever. I don’t take no stock in

flashes and the men falling and an invisible hand, as it were, lit the
with that nigger safe and sound, and that with sixteen men and


men—fighters of fish it is this time!”
nor the widow couldn’t ever find me any more. I judged I would saw out
interval of restlessness, and prowled from window to window, peering
I did not dare to go back towards the pit, but I felt a passionate
He tore it up, and says:

Elizabeth was forced to go.
“I’m tired of this, but I’ll endure it till one o’clock. Till one
lantern hanging on the jackstaff of a double-hull ferry-boat. I skimmed
reckon I done the same. You couldn’t a got drunk in that time, so of


woke up I didn’t know where I was for a minute. I set up and looked
August 11th.—The rain falls in torrents, and the state of the sky does not promise improvement of the weather for the moment. The tempest-flag is hoisted in the port. Impossible to go out to sea to-morrow!

Another inconvenience is, that a picture, which, in its ensemble, might hold out, through a thousand incorrections and as many essential defects, a grand subject which, to become generally interesting, seems to wait only for the pencil of a skilful artist, viewed, unfortunately, by pieces, (and indeed it cannot be viewed otherwise,) presents at each time, nothing but a singularity, an oddity, which will cease to be so only when brought near to another; and this last, nevertheless, will require the same indulgence in order to its being rightly understood. The picture which I have presumed to take in hand is, I[54] think, nearly of this kind. My wish, and a bold one it is, would be, that no judgement be pronounced on any of the particular parts, till they have been seen all together; for there are but few of them which, till another has been examined, is not liable to very just objections: and under each head I have answered to those only which it was essential to refute, that the reader might be able to go through the whole of the exhibition, which, had the plan of it been presented in the first page, might have subjected the book to be committed to the flames without mercy, and, indeed, without much apparent injustice.
[30]

    _Sick Arab—but harmless when not out of his head._

“I do not know,” said the Head; “but that is my answer, and until the
Next night we stuck a picture, which Tom drawed in blood, of a skull
“I am not likely to leave Kent for some time. Promise me, therefore, to come to Hunsford.”
In customary suits of solemn black,
to look at the hillside I was leaving. Thick streamers of black smoke
in the pie. So then we laid in with Jim the second night, and tore up


landlord should leave his. I took care to have the cart there and then,
filtered in, not through the window, which remained black, but through

It must be borne in mind that Schwartz had ever before him the future of these children, and the possibility of these being one day catechists and schoolmasters who would be entrusted with the guidance of other minds. In this and in other directions we recognize how far-seeing was his policy, and that with the limited means at his disposal, so different from the resources of to-day, he did useful work in education and training. He tells us his plan in one of his letters:
“It’s perfectly true,” I said.
a-gwyne to raise.”
Another, Keistenmacher by name, died after a few weeks of his arrival. The question of caste in the Church[Pg 26] had become an “apple of dissension,” and two new missionaries, Walther and Pressier, reversing the practice of Schultze, maintained the toleration of caste as a matter of principle so that the Sudras were now kept a yard apart from the Pariahs, and their children in the schools separated. One important development marked this period of the mission: Aaron, a native catechist who had been baptised by Ziegenbalg, was ordained a minister according to the rights of the Lutheran Church, and sent to Tanjore. Other missionaries came out from Europe. One only perhaps needs specific mention here, Philipp Fabricius, who arrived at Madras in 1742 and for fifty years laboured with much wisdom and patience. He made a close study of Tamil literature and is always to be remembered as the hymn writer of the Tamil Christians. He was pre-eminently a scholar; indeed so slow and reverent was he in his translation work that when he was making his Tamil version of the Holy Scripture it is said that “he crept through the original Bible text on his knees as if he was himself a poor sinner or mendicant, carefully weighing every word to see how it might best be rendered.” It is a sorrowful fact to record that through financial speculations in which he was deceived by a dishonest catechist, poor Fabricius ended under a cloud of debt which brought scandal on the mission work, and old and quite weary of life, on the 23rd January, 1791, he passed to his rest.
Jackson’s Island is good enough for me; I know that island pretty well,

narrow intensity only of our immediate security. I had not realised
together—that is, I mean the doctor was shipping a sick man to t’other
used the charm of the Cap. Once was when she had made the Winkies her
[Image unavailable.]
will make her put on mourning; and unless the crops are better this
When it was daylight, here was the clear Ohio water inshore, sure
“Why, dog my cats, they must a ben a house-full o’ niggers in there
once, and then she hung fire on a rhyme for the dead person’s name,
here?”

He kept me with him all the time, and I never got a chance to run off.
When I went down to luncheon I was taken by storm by Danys, who had felt one of these sudden fancies to me, which children sometimes do form for their elders. She rushed up to me, and flinging her arms tempestuously around my neck kissed me so rapturously that I was afraid of being smothered.
these Martians for the first time they seemed to be endeavouring to
purple velvet, and my grandfather thought he would see what he could
into the main road with a narrow opening, and had a delusive appearance
meadow. And then, very slowly, I realised that by a miracle I had
“Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you.”

and I got my paddle ready. There was a big steamboat laying at the
I found a jolly companion in the person of my cousin Nathaly Staritzki. One evening we went to see La Traviata sung in Armenian, which rather disagreed with Italian music. Nathaly was, like me, easily moved to laughter. As the opera proceeded we became more and more hilarious, and our behaviour was such that caused many disapproving glances to be cast in our direction. At the most pathetic moment, when the prima-donna breathed her last breath, we ran out of our box, putting our handkerchiefs to our mouths and overturning the chairs on our passage.

the ground, for the air within it was hot, and this made it so much
what he was going to do, and was he going to stay? Jim got out his
three windows in the houses near, and leaving us astonished.
things. Think of me, and the terrible trouble I’m in at being found
rob, you _mean_,” says I to myself; “and when you get through robbing
smuggle it to Jim to kill the seneskal with, it would a been all right.
axe slip again, so that it cut right through my body, splitting me into


my advice listened to.”

wonder where she should pass the night, she came to a house rather
“Now we’re all right. We’ll _dig_ him out. It’ll take about a week!”
They seemed to increase as night drew on, until at last the roads, my
of light had passed. I stood over him waiting for the next flash. When
the woods, and then filled up the canoe with water, and loaded rocks

“Read it aloud,” said their father, “for I hardly know myself what it is about.”
and houses and bridges were all painted bright red, just as they had
“I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They can only wish his happiness; and if he is attached to me no other woman can secure it.”

tow-head, I begun to look sharp for a boat to borrow, and the first time

hand in it.
anybody had got any wind of the Royal Nonesuch there yet. (“House to
hope so, anyway.”
the same room and bed; so, being tired, we bid good-night and went up
The morning after the balloon had gone up with Oz, the four travelers

made a truck out of the limbs of trees, from which he chopped away all

Huck and the Judge.—Superstition.

for interest, when he does come. Tom was over the stile and starting
We used to live in Kharkoff in winter and passed the summer months in Doljik, our beautiful estate which claims to be counted amongst the stately homes of Russia, situated forty miles distance from town. Our removal to Doljik was a regular treat for us children, our joy and the servants’ nuisance, for when they began to pack up, we were only in their way, under pretence of help, poking about among the straw, scattered in the yard, throwing it over one another whilst playing hide-and-seek.
Though the Neva thawed very late this year, larks were singing, and the sky was blue, and the whole air was full of the spring promise. It gave me a wild desire to go abroad and fly over hill and dale. Sergy wanted to take a two months’ leave of absence, but the doctor that he had summoned to certify the absolute necessity of a cure, after having given his diagnosis, said that Sergy was blessed with excellent health. As it was absolutely necessary to find an ailment of some kind, I had recourse to artfulness. Before the doctor took leave, I put my head through the door and[134] made faces behind his back, grimacing so wildly that Sergy had to struggle with suppressed laughter; the muscles of his face moved and his lips twitched. “Oh, I don’t like that at all!” cried out the mystified Æsculapius. “I see now what is the matter with you! your overstrained nervous system calls for energetic treatment, and a month’s holidays, at least, is the sort of physic you want. Your ailment is overwork, pure and simple!” When the doctor left I burst into wild laughter, and thought him the nicest physician in the world. My scheme was thus successful, and Sergy, being ordered abroad by the doctor to take a long rest, had obtained a six weeks’ leave of absence.


then says to myself:

around any, because he’ll want to know the news. Tell him I’ll have his

As it passed it set up an exultant deafening howl that drowned the
other large things by Nat, the nigger that fed him, and he must be on
the people, because naturally they wanted to know. A little thing like
We laid low and kept still, and never shoved out till nearly ten

“This must be the Land of Oz,” said Dorothy, “and we are surely getting
CHAPTER X.
“Look here, if you’re telling the truth you needn’t be afraid—nobody’ll

beneath the wedgelike lower lip, the incessant quivering of this mouth,


“I was trying to do for the best in sellin’ ’em out so quick. If the
better; but it wouldn’t for me, because I do know better. Gimme a

THE CAUCASUS
Mary Jane, and she could dig him up again and get it; but that ain’t
chimney tops and passed. Yet, save ourselves, there did not seem to be
Here and there they were scattered, nearly fifty altogether, in that

like it’s spirits whispering—spirits that’s been dead ever so many
Martians fired, and the clumsy projectile whirling over the trees and
“The 18th October was the day appointed for the public conference which the Romish Padre was to hold with me. I went, accompanied by two helpers, after previous prayer to God. The rules by which we were both to bind ourselves were these: (1) To do everything in love and without heat; (2) To make the Word of God alone the judge in the dispute; (3) To allow all that should be advanced on either side to be taken down by a capable scribe, so that at the expiration of the conference, the whole might be reviewed. These three rules were proposed by me; and the members of the Romish congregation had nothing to urge in objection, though[Pg 160] whether the Romish Padre would be satisfied with them, they could not decide. At eight o’clock in the morning we arrived. Many of the Romish persuasion were assembled. They received me, but not with much courtesy. At length they collected together opposite the church, where I expounded to the members present many beautiful passages, as Matt. v. 1-10; John xiv. 6; 2 Cor. iv. 1; 1 Tim. i. 4-6; Matt. ii. 28. One of their chief persons said, ‘You speak as if one need never sin any more.’ At length, at eleven o’clock, a messenger arrived from the Romish Padre, with a message that he would not come, for he did not consider it to be necessary. The Romish were somewhat moved at his having broken his word on the subject, after having promised them that he would appear without fail.

[Pg viii]
That the total of English exports must have been reduced from 14 millions 300 thousand[341] pounds to 13 millions, for want of means in our foreign buyers to pay the whole amount of English exports at their advanced price:
what he can hear, and I’m a-branching out to get something to eat for
of Spanish merchants and rich A-rabs was going to camp in Cave Hollow
The day after we went and spent the whole afternoon in the neighbouring town of Newport, to visit the Exhibition of Agriculture. There was only one passenger in our compartment, a stiff, solemn-looking lady, who plunged her nose in her book all the way without uttering one word. On arriving at Newport our silent companion dropped on my lap a small bunch of flowers and a leaflet describing the way to get to Heaven. It flashed upon me that, perhaps, that lady was some kind of missionary who wanted to snatch me from the grip of the Evil One, and rescue my soul from destruction.
In November Sergy had to go to St. Petersburg and took me with him. Whilst there, I had the chance to be present at a banquet given in the Hall of the Assembly on the day of the jubilee of the Academy of the General Staff. With difficulty I got a place in the gallery, from where I could see very well. As I was ascending the stairs, someone called me by my name, I looked round and saw the Grand Duke Michael hastening up to me. Putting out a welcoming hand His Highness exclaimed,
I was at home at that hour and writing in my study; and although my
On that same day the missions were invited to dinner at Monzo. I remained alone at the hotel and sat in the deep window-seat to witness their departure. Varallo found it his duty to entertain me during my husband’s absence and brought up an album with coloured views of Milan, which he began to explain to me.
we cleared out for the mill, leaving Jim at work. We smouched the
it wouldn’t leak no more, and took it and my saw to the canoe again.
[274]
“Well,” I says, “it’s a rough gang, them two frauds, and I’m fixed so I
“It’s out on Horsell Common now.”
So you understand the roaring wave of fear that swept through the
The entire wall area of the great room was covered with projectors, and before each one sat a man, but the mighty cylinder in the center was carefully railed off.


They waited until Dorothy awoke the next morning. The little girl was

He then goes on to prove how unfounded is the assertion that “a missionary is a disgrace to any country.” Speaking not of himself alone but also of his fellow-worker, Mr. Jaenické, he shows how in times of difficulty the Government have been only too thankful to enlist their services. On one occasion one of the richest inhabitants said to him, “Sir, if you send a person to us, send one who has heard all your ten commandments,” and another time a Rajah said to one of the leading men of the British Government: “We all, you and I, have lost our credit, let us try whether the inhabitants will trust Mr. Schwartz.” And they did so. In fact, if the Christians at all risks had not stood loyal at such a crisis the Fort could not have resisted the attack. It was not the poor native Christians who were living profligate lives, but the Gentoo dubashes who were lending money at exorbitant interest and were allowed to collect the same without any supervision.
“That we better glide out of this before three in the morning, and clip
farmer carried me under his arm to the cornfield, and set me up on a
And then he perceived that, very slowly, the circular top of the
afraid it ain’t there no more. I’m awful sorry, Miss Mary Jane, I’m
how _did_ they git that grindstone in there, s’I. Without _help_, mind

“_Which_ candle?” I says.
the French and the Martians might prove very similar. She had been
So he told Jim how we’d have to smuggle in the rope-ladder pie and


guns are being placed. Presently the Martians will be coming this way
hadn’ ben for Huck; Huck done it. Jim won’t ever forgit you, Huck;
except that already in one week the examination of the Martian

and afterward drive Oz himself out of the Land of the West. Now the
“Don’t they give ’em holidays, the way we do, Christmas and New Year’s
Great nature’s second course,
Japan having taken a menacing attitude towards Russia, my husband has received the order to prepare his troops to be ready for battle. The mobilisation must be completed in the month of April. At the thought that war was about to be proclaimed, my courage failed me. When I called to mind all the hardships I had to endure during the Russo-Turkish war, I could do away with myself.
our heads. When we was passing by the kitchen I fell over a root and

“I’ll tell you something. We got to be here three days. If you’ll

Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of Mr. Philips’s house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia’s pressing entreaties that they would come in, and even in spite of Mrs. Philips’s throwing up the parlour window, and loudly seconding the invitation.

waylay him.
invariably preceded feeding; it had no modulation, and was, I believe,
Meanwhile good tidings came from the seat of war; a conference, which assembled in Paris, occasioned a suspension of hostilities. It must surely be the presage of peace, and I clung with all my might to my hope that war would soon be over, and that all my anxieties, my worries, would be at an end. Cheered and strengthened, I so far recovered my spirits as to be able to receive Colonel K., but that gentleman proved to be very unsympathetic and disappointing, for instead of confirming my happy expectations, he prophecied dreadful things, and when I said I hoped better days were in store for me, he replied that it was easy to hope, that hope’s cheap, but nevertheless any possibility of peace was held to be out of the question, and that war would go on for a long time yet But I refused to face that picture. “It won’t, it won’t,” I screamed out, but it was only to make myself believe it wasn’t true. At that moment my anger had risen so high that I struggled against an impulse to fling him out of the room. At last, no longer able to contain myself, I lost all self-control. “I hate you!” I cried out vehemently, and darted past him into Helena’s room and locked myself in. It was certainly very rude of me to give way to such an undignified outburst of passion, but I was so furious with my visitor that I could not be polite to him at that moment, to save my life.
slowly and painfully out of the cylinder. As it bulged up and caught
in ruffled gowns, with round red spots upon their cheeks and tall,

use to her. As for the Lion, he sniffed the fresh air with delight and
pretty soon comfortable again.

shove off for the big water as fast as ever you can.”
skasely, but ole King Sollermun, onless you counts dem kings dat’s in a
[454]
In spite of having been at St. James’s, Sir William was so completely awed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courage enough to make a very{203} low bow, and take his seat without saying a word; and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge of her chair, not knowing which way to look. Elizabeth found herself quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her composedly. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-marked features, which might once have been handsome. Her air was not conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her visitors forget their inferior rank. She was not rendered formidable by silence: but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone as marked her self-importance, and brought Mr. Wickham immediately to Elizabeth’s mind; and, from the observation of the day altogether, she believed Lady Catherine to be exactly what he had represented.
king ’ll get it again, and it ’ll be a long day before he gives anybody
stretch of flat meadow, six twelve-pounders standing neatly at equal
brains, and it is worth a lot of bother to be able to think properly.”
14ᵒ.

Close inshore was a multitude of fishing smacks—English, Scotch,
I speak of all Europe, it is true, as if she formed but one State, whilst she is supposed to exhibit so many interests, and these so very opposite to each other. This question deserves a deeper discussion than I am able to give it; yet I presume to think that the answer I could give, might be susceptible of demonstration, had we, on all the countries in Europe, statements only similar to those which Sir Charles Whitworth has given of the British trade, and were we to add thereto the means and faculties which are to be met with in England of procuring the details and proofs of every particular that concerns the public. Destitute however of an advantage so precious, so worthy of a nation sufficiently enlightened to dread nothing but being left in the dark on any part of her own interests, of a nation judicious enough not to disdain a ray of light, from whatever quarter it may come, and generous enough to perceive, with pleasure, that by enriching herself, she has, to this day, enriched all Europe;—
But they were in no hurry. Cylinder followed cylinder on its
before the Woodman.

lay in crisp, almost flaxen curls on his low forehead; his eyes were


train at St. Albans or New Barnet. My brother thought that was
sound sweeping down the broad, sunlit roadway, between the tall
News from Russia arrives only three times a week. As soon as the mail-post is perceived from the belfry, one flag is hoisted to signal the mail from Vladivostock (via America), two flags the post coming from Blagovestchensk (via Siberia) and three flags the courier from Nikolskoe (the small local mail). It took long for letters to come; by the time you get an answer to the questions you made, you may forget what you were asking about. In October I got mother’s letter written in July. Only far echoes come of what is going on in the world outside. I hadn’t got the patience to read the belated accounts that arrive by post weeks after the events. Here is an example of how long it takes for news from the civilised world to reach Khabarovsk. Captain Olsoufieff, Baron Korff’s aide-de-camp, had been sent by the Baron on business to a remote part of Siberia, and has learnt only now, on returning to Khabarovsk, that Baron Korff is dead, and that my husband was his successor! In October the rivers began to freeze, and the mails were delayed for some weeks. We got our correspondence by land across the snow-covered mountains by means of pack-horses, and in what a state can well be imagined. Our letters were all torn and wet, and it was difficult to decipher the contents.
“A little short of four miles—right out in the country, back here.”
A General Good Time.—The Harem.—French.



CONTENTS.
see me and went for me. He chased me round and round the place with a
It is also observed, that, without the interference of administration or of philosophy, the balance between want and the relative quantity of the different productions of the earth, is always, upon a medium, admirably supported by the sole interest of the cultivator, ever perfectly and solely guided by the common demand for each of these productions.
“What must I do?” asked the girl.

Never before in England had there been such a vast or rapid
eleven put a candle in this window, and if I don’t turn up wait _till_

how could I kill the Wicked Witch? If you, who are Great and Terrible,
THE STILLNESS.

killed him!” The crowd closed up around them, and shouldered and jammed
(Under the Inspection of the Author)
Soon after, a messenger from Erzeroum brought me an urgent letter from Sergy, telling me that he must remain in Erzeroum until the evacuation of our troops. He advised me to return to Tiflis until then, but instead of that I was determined to start for Erzeroum and rejoin my husband. I implored Mr. Danilevski to send me there with the first military conveyance, but better fortune awaited me: Mr. Danilevski was sent himself as a courier to Erzeroum, and having taken compassion on me, he proposed to take me with him in his post-cart, warning me that I must be ready to start at any moment. As there was but small chance that I would find a better occasion, I accepted gladly and began hastily to prepare for our journey. There was only one drawback, I couldn’t take Helena with me, there was no room for her in the post-cart. But I could not let such a chance slip, and was willing even to sacrifice Helena. The poor old woman entreated me with tears not to undertake this mad journey, but it was no time to show weakness, my courage seemed to have developed itself rapidly, for adversity is a great teacher; distance was nothing to me. I trusted my star and laughed at the most gigantic obstacles, and Helena had to submit to the painful necessity of letting me go. I did not allow myself to sleep that night lest I should not be awake when the hour came for starting. The next morning I received a note from General Kousminski; that gentleman, whom I had never known before, the chief of the military communications, extended a helping hand to me and proposed to take me with Helena in his comfortable travelling-coach. This was awfully generous of him and I hastened to accept his offer thanking him profusely. I was so happy I would have kissed everybody, but there was only Helena, so I kissed her. Dreading that long voyage for Helena I told her that I could very well do without her and proposed she should return to Tiflis, but the dear old woman protested hotly and said she was quite decided to follow me anywhere. It was all settled, we were to start next day at dawn. I went to bed radiously happy at the thought that on the morrow I should be far away from Kars, and closing my eyes, I departed to sweet dreamland, seeing myself already in my husband’s loving arms.
out sharp and black against the western afterglow. The Martians and
right; but he’s missed seeing his brother Peter die—which he mayn’t
Weybridge its impact was marked by flashes of incandescent white, that

Anybody but pap would a waited and seen the day through, so as to catch
“I don’t think we put that money in a good place.”

February 12th.—After dinner everyone who had pretensions to music played or sang in the salon. The wife of a French officer, who was returning to Toulon after having ended his military service in Cochin-China, favoured the company with arias and cavatinas. The lady is very smart and elegant, but her warbling does not suit her plumage, her musical gifts not being of an extraordinary order. At first she was somewhat nervous and, in her agitation, dropped all her notes. Another would-be prima[479] donna, an old hen that imagined that she could crow, and whose singing would make the dogs howl, with many simpers began to squeak love songs as high as she could reach, with a voice particularly discordant with tune. She accompanied herself on the piano, and thumped the poor instrument enough to destroy the keys. Her performance put my teeth on edge, and I cast her no tender glances; but my neighbour, a meagre exalted German lady, went into raptures, showing the whites of her eyes and repeating, “Famos, colossal!” A pretentious and bad pianist took her place, and massacred, with the greatest assurance, one of Chopin’s most beautiful compositions. After the pianist a young girl sat down at the piano, whose musical gift didn’t go further than “La prière d’une vierge.” After two hours of such anti-musical performance, the salon emptied little by little, and her solo was executed, so to speak, to empty seats.

broad, and awful still and grand. We went down the hill and found Jo
“Oh, your Majesty, we thought you would be killed! How did you manage


anxieties keep the mind sensitive and painful. I grew very weary and

Farther on towards Weybridge, just over the bridge, there were a number
“With three younger sisters grown up,” replied Elizabeth, smiling, “your Ladyship can hardly expect me to own it.”
Susan behind her. “It ain’t right nor kind for you to talk so to him,
brother William was the cussedest joker in the world, and hadn’t
January 25th.—An English officer and his family occupy the apartment next door to ours. The children are shamefully spoilt by their mother, who never reproves them. They can’t keep quiet one minute and get into everybody’s way, getting hideous sounds out of two combs, and beating the drum into our ears. When they were attacked by a fit of bad humour, nobody could approach them in safety. They lay down on the floor and kicked and howled. Their manners at table d’hôte were of the worst, for they made as much noise as they could with their spoons and knives. I found this morning the youngest of the family, the best-loved child, an extremely troublesome little Saxon, beating his ayah (nurse) with the leg of his rocking-horse, which had come off. That insupportable brat has been instantly dispatched to bed by his father. The room opposite to us is occupied by a Dutch opera-singer, who is going on a tour to Siam. I heard her practising her exercises the whole morning.
“The missionaries themselves used to confirm and meet together for ordinations. The catechists used to baptize. Each congregation was independent, and ruled by its own missionary, although the missionaries would occasionally meet, as it were, in synod, and were in the[Pg 197] habit of accepting guidance of any more prominent men, as, for example, of Schwartz, whom his brother missionaries always regarded as their spiritual father, and created into a quasi-bishop. Each missionary in local affairs was assisted by his catechists, who, under his presidency, formed a sort of disciplinary council, the decisions of which in various matters brought before them were usually confirmed by the civil power. The missionary was, in fact, regarded as the head of the community, in the same principle as native headmen were recognized, and was permitted to fine, flog, and otherwise punish offenders belonging to his community.”
“Has this one been going on long, Buck?”

Then the others softened up a little, too, and I was mighty thankful to
established; the whole place was in such confusion as I had never seen
that walks this earth!”
[1]Vava: diminutive of Barbara.
WHAT I SAW OF THE DESTRUCTION OF WEYBRIDGE AND SHEPPERTON.

was as if it quivered, but really this was the telescope vibrating with
the leaves and branches. He fastened it together with wooden pegs and
they stopped and I stopped. One of them says:



nohow. I got to turn out and find my nigger.”
“I can’t imagine,” says the old gentleman; “and I must say it makes me
so I reck’n’d ’at by fo’ in de mawnin’ I’d be twenty-five mile down de
On account of imperative European engagements!
Pap he hadn’t been seen for more than a year, and that was comfortable

of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
We had to pay some calls, driving in a beautiful “troika,” belonging to General Unterberger. We made a great sensation in the streets. Our cortège was triumphal; the Prefect of the Police drove before us and a numerous escort of Cossacks galloped behind our carriage. We were cheered by the crowd on our way; hats and caps flew in the air. My neck was nearly dislocated, having to bow right and left all the time.

fearful. Certainly I was more curious to know the reason of this




“Yes; Mr. Lothrop’s. Why?”
they was set up three or four foot above ground on stilts, so as to be
We started at cock-crow, and soon discovered that we were in no path at all. There was no road, not even a track; our driver was compelled to clear a way for himself à la grace de Dieu, as best he could over heaps of snow. We came near falling into a hut through a big hole in the roof, which, instead of a chimney, gave passage to smoke. In comparison with the enormous heaps of snow on our untrodden road this hut presented but a mere mound. We were now in the most dangerous parts and followed a track winding round precipitous ravines. On the narrowest part of the cliff, just over a deep precipice scarcely three inches between the wheels and the brink, we met a field-battery and there was hardly room for our sledge to pass.


laughed, when he came to the top of the water, and swam in to shore.

listen for the steps to get further, and when he nudged us Jim must
“This is the last time you can summon us,” said the leader to Dorothy;
Language: English
LUCERNE
as you may say. His forehead was high, and his hair was black and
weed clambering over the buttresses of Waterloo Bridge.
or somebody prayed that this bread would find me, and here it has gone


We travelled to Russia via Poti. Early the following morning our boat was to leave that town and we had to pass the night at a hotel. I was tired and depressed; directly after dinner I got into bed and cried myself to sleep. When I woke up in the morning the wind moaned outside and the rain poured down in torrents. I went to the window and looked at the unquiet sea; great waves were tumbling over the pier; it was a very unpleasant day indeed for a sail, therefore, we decided to travel back to Tiflis, and afterwards take the carriage road that leads to Vladicaucasus.
shove off we was a quarter of a mile below the island, and it was
XII.	Tiflis	73
“Yes,” answered the Scarecrow. “Everything is green here, while in the


“Hel-_lo!_ Where’d _you_ come from?” Then he says, kind of glad and
it; and the suit went agin one of the men, and so he up and shot the
There was nothing to be got to eat at the stations during the whole run. At one of the stoppages we bought from an ambulant vendor an earthen cup and a teapot with hot water, the whole for one cent. At every stoppage we thought it was Kobe and that we had to get out.
perceived this was a wrecked train, the fore part smashed and on fire,
front of it, with his arms and his body going all the time, and
hill. Almost as quickly as it came the head went back to the body, and
Sergy went in a steam-launch along the Gulf to visit the villages inhabited by Russian colonists. I had made myself quite ill by this time with the thought that we could not expect our household and things before Christmas. I felt awfully discouraged thinking of all the privations we should have to endure. The path of a General Governor’s wife is not always strewn with roses. How many thorns there are for a few flowers! I can never reconcile myself with the life in this wretched land. I suffered miseries of home-sickness, and had the desire of a caged bird to fly. I dream only of going back to St. Petersburg, but it is foolish of me, I may as well ask for the moon. I, who from my very infancy had only to stretch my hand to gather all the joys of life, was I going to doubt my lucky star now?
be satisfied. But she said she’d set up for him a while anyway, and

the moon came out and shone brightly. So they lay down among the sweet
water, and you could see every little chimbly-guy clean and clear, and


the daytime, and robbed the lot. Your newspapers call you a brave

Nor stomach troubles laid him low,
concealed.

After lunch a slight breeze arose, swelling out the sails and making us advance at the rate of twelve knots an hour. To-night the musical talents of the passengers manifested themselves for the first time on board. The commissaire played the flute and the second officer sang love ditties. I remained till late on deck, admiring the sea lighted by a magnificent moonshine. Suddenly I heard a shrill scream, and one of the lady-passengers ran up to me in her night-gown, shouting for help. It appeared that an enormous rat had been promenading over her during her sleep.
sometimes it wouldn’t talk without money. I told him I had an old slick
Jim up in King Lear’s outfit—it was a long curtain-calico gown, and a
up some way to leave there. I had tried to get out of that cabin many a




I ain’t no mo’ now.
repeatedly, and this to some extent relieved the stress.
“‘When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which took him to London might be concluded in three or four days; but as we are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when Charles gets to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend his vacant hours in a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintance are already there for the winter: I wish I could hear that you, my dearest friend, had any intention of making one in the crowd, but of that I despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the three of whom we shall deprive you.’


of smoke sprang out of her funnels.


All night long the Martians were hammering and stirring, sleepless,

_Romeo!_ that way, like a bull—you must say it soft and sick and
goes; slip off your chain, and there you are. Nothing to do but hitch
meet it! At the sight of the second monster my nerve went altogether.
We put up again at the Hôtel Belle-Vue, and again the hostess stood on the steps with a smiling welcome. On the entrance door a board bore the inscription in English: “A happy Christmas and New Year!”

[Image unavailable.]
been good to me. I cannot tell you how grateful I am.”


This last visit and its fatherly and pathetic counsels would never be forgotten. When December came the two doctors consulted as to the best remedy, and decided to give the patient tincture of steel and infusion of bark, and this had the desired effect. For a time there seemed signs of improvement, and his friends congratulated one another on the chance of his recovery. On the first Sunday in Advent the Sacrament of the Holy Communion was administered to him to his great profit and blessing. It was, however, a sorrow to find that while his more painful symptoms had abated it was only too[Pg 177] evident that his illness had affected his memory and enfeebled his mind. Things relating to this world had become of lessening interest, while eternity became nearer and more real. One of the favourite books with Schwartz had been Young’s “Night Thoughts,” and these poems were a refreshing memory to him now. He now busied himself with putting in order his papers, and amongst them was an old letter which awakened afresh his interest in missions. His comment to his friends was:


“I’ve no wish to stop about here,” said I. “I think I shall go to
from the chaise. In another moment they were caught and swept forward
to have ’m, but doan’ gimme no rats; I hain’ got no use f’r um,
noise, flew into the air and were soon out of sight.
about something that’s on its mind and can’t make itself understood,
wonderful adventures they had met with.
“I didn’t say, but it was last night.”
short of it, and you’ll just have to change to a red flann’l one till I

side. The Lion went back a third time and got the Tin Woodman, and then

something like that they can get their hands on; and it takes them

black hair fell over his eyes, and his face was dark and dirty and


broken heart will be at rest.” He went on a-wiping.


    Whilst I his fate do tell.
the body and roast a piece of it. I done it, and he eat it and said it



Leatherhead. I will not tell the needless trouble I had breaking into
clean away with it. My servant here k’n tell you ’bout it, gentlemen.”
had helped her do this. The second time was when she had fought against

The following estimates may be of some service; their utility is independent of the absolute precision of the facts on which they are founded; one may, as occasion requires, extend or contract the compasses.
broken handle. Others polished the blade until all the rust was removed

fighting. I did not know even the circumstances that had precipitated
no fault of mine. I played it as low down on them as I could.
“The widow. She told me.”
(Ungrateful being.)
and says:
the afternoon, and then—fire, earthquake, death! As if it were Sodom
[483]

together and fix a day as soon as they could, and then we elected Tom
CHAPTER X.
I just knowed how it would be; I just expected it. _I_ didn’t know
prisoners; and prisoners don’t care how they get a thing so they get
would have had one human being outside it, unless it were some relation
“Quite enough,” said the woman over the gate. “Thenks”; and all three
blossom. He used to marry a new wife every day, and chop off her head
along its palings.
When we returned to our hotel we found the captain and two ship officers of our cruiser the Admiral Nakhimoff who had come to invite us, as well as all our companions, including the Hollands, to come and take a cup of tea on board that night. Being awfully tired, I was not fit for visitors just then, and as our guests settled themselves into a comfortable position in their chairs, making no attempt to go away, I went to my room under the pretext of a bad headache.



the bread and what was left of the butter, and she grabbed me, and
Dorothy began to sob at this, for she felt lonely among all these
and then presently faint through a veil of smoke, receding
Jim said bees wouldn’t sting idiots; but I didn’t believe that, because

nothing to hear nor nothing to see—just solid lonesomeness. Next you’d
one bring a long piece of string.”
Phelps’ was one of these little one-horse cotton plantations, and they
out to these vessels were thrust off with boathooks and drowned. About
Fourthly, That, in regard to the coin, the most wretched paper-factory, assisted with that credit which is founded, not on kindness, but on justice and interest, is far preferable to the richest mine in America.
mixed up in it. He can say he never seen us together, and it’ll be the
again some time or other.”
20th June.—The sea is very calm to-day, not a breath of air ripples the surface of the ocean. Every morning the passengers look over the map on which our route is marked by small flags. This morning I was awfully happy to see that there was but a short distance left to New York.
money up stairs and count it before everybody—then ther’ ain’t noth’n
bullyragging him for sport, and he a-cussing and a-threatening with all
you all do?”
in the wagons. There was considerable whisky drinking going on, and I
altogether believe him. One man asked me if I see the niggers steal it.
tried to go nearer, the heat was so intense that it singed his
of land which was dry and very thick with trees and bushes and vines,
are out of the forest?”
about a hundred times as many shovels as they wanted, but nobody hadn’t
“‘Stay with us,’ was their exclamation; ‘we wish to listen to you further. Sit down both of you, you are tired of standing.’

“No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you will stay where you are.” And upon Elizabeth’s seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about to escape, she added, “Lizzy, I insist upon your staying and hearing Mr. Collins.”
Well, I seemed to be in the open river again by-and-by, but I couldn’t
couple of days till she didn’t know how many sheets she had any more,

For my own part, I remember nothing of my flight except the stress of
again—or let go—the raft was swept away, and the poor Scarecrow was
When we got up-stairs everybody gethered around the table, and the king

June 10th.—To-day a gala banquet was given at the Casino by Ali-Effendi. The most cordial union seemed to reign between the Russians and Mussulmans, but was it all very sincere? At the end of the repast, when the champagne had loosened the tongues and quickened the spirits, Maksoud-Effendi came up to the Persian Consul, glass in hand, and proposed to drink to his health, but the Persian, a water-drinker,[123] like every good Mussulman, refused the toast, at which Maksoud-Effendi took offence, and flying into a passion, dashed the contents of his glass into the face of the astounded Persian and vociferated with furious eyes and face aflame: “Ah, you wouldn’t drink to my health by mere politeness, well, do it now by mere force!” The Consul started up wiping his face and his clothes, muttering a prayer to be purified from the stains of wine.

at St. George’s Hill was brought down, did they give the artillery the
Darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence.
had hogged a thousand and one tales that way, and then he put them all
“You, who so well know my feelings towards Mr. Darcy, will readily comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he is wise enough to assume even the{293} appearance of what is right. His pride, in that direction, may be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it must deter him from such foul misconduct as I have suffered by. I only fear that the sort of cautiousness to which you, I imagine, have been alluding, is merely adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose good opinion and judgment he stands much in awe. His fear of her has always operated, I know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be imputed to his wish of forwarding the match with Miss de Bourgh, which I am certain he has very much at heart.”
bet you he’ll fetch one ef he gits a chanst.”
Dorothy and put them over her eyes. There were two golden bands

in a solemn voice. At once the cap changed to a slate, on which was

spring water whiles another man’s a _start’n_ one wid tears.”
into this thing. Come along, Hines; come along, the rest of you. We’ll
CHAPTER CXIX
out of his head again!”
their horses feeding out of nosebags or pawing the ground.

“Whatever I do is done in a hurry,” replied he; “and therefore if I should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five minutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here.”
a sweep, and then the pilot sticks his head out and laughs, and thinks

[313]

“Upon my word! Well, that was very decided, indeed—that does seem as if—but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know.”
hour and day by day, nearer and nearer. It seems to me now almost

THE ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield. The visit was returned in due form. Miss Bennet’s pleasing manners grew on the good-will of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was found to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to, a wish of being better acquainted with them was expressed towards the two eldest. By Jane this attention was received with the greatest pleasure; but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment of everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them; though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value, as arising, in all probability, from the influence of their brother’s admiration. It was generally evident, whenever they met, that he did admire her; and to her it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a way to be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure that it was not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Jane united with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and an uniform cheerfulness of manner, which would guard{28} her from the suspicions of the impertinent. She mentioned this to her friend, Miss Lucas.
crowd on the run. And I saw one, one day, out by Wandsworth, picking
There was a flash of light on the screen and the image became clear and sharp. They seemed to be in a huge room, the walls were lined with small electro-vision boards, tier above tier of balconies ran around the sides of the great room, and in the center rose a mighty cylinder. The entire wall area of the great room was covered with the projectors, and before each one sat a man. But the mighty cylinder in the center was carefully walled off. Now, as they watched it, it suddenly glowed faintly bluish—the air about it was being ionized—there arose a faint, deep hum; then there appeared about it an intense corona of air, ionized under the titanic forces within it—tiny shooting sparks crackled blue over all its polished surface——
IX.



“Only this,—that if he is so, you can have no reason to suppose he will make an offer to me.”
handkerchiefs to their eyes and keeping their heads bent, and sobbing a
But my fixed idea of reaching Leatherhead would not let me rest, and in

come to an end, and that they were no longer prisoners in a strange


So far as I could see, the thing was without a directing Martian at
The Queen of the Field Mice
over, and I reckoned I would walk off with the gun and some lines, and
to fill the balloon with, to make it float.”
that I was quite an important person. By and by an old crow flew near
Tom give him a dime, and said we wouldn’t tell nobody; and told him to

“Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Philips talks of turning away Richard? and if he does, Colonel Forster will hire him. My aunt told me so herself on Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear more about it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town.”
Four or five little black figures hurried before it across the
mighty ca’m and slow—he says:
birds was right about it. Directly it begun to rain, and it rained like

as long as I was in, and in for good, I might as well go the whole hog.
“Jour printer by trade; do a little in patent medicines;

Every year in October, during the full moon, the Chinese aborigines of Khabarovsk feasted that planet. They thrust into the “Amour,” from the top of a mountain, lanterns of all the colours of the rainbow. Bands of Chinamen walked about the streets perched on high stilts, shouting and gamboling, to the great joy of the populace.

“That must be a matter of opinion,” said the Tin Woodman. “For my part,
and I had been three nights coming the thirty miles. I traveled nights,

BOULOGNE-SUR-MER

“You are considering how insupportable it would be{35} to pass many evenings in this manner,—in such society; and, indeed, I am quite of your opinion. I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the noise—the nothingness, and yet the self-importance, of all these people! What would I give to hear your strictures on them!”
The battle was on. At first the force beings hung in a sphere, a three-dimensional cordon, about the ships, then suddenly their lambent red glowed more strongly, and the screens in the far-off laboratory went dark. They had in some way prevented the transmission of further messages. The men at once formed the ships in a great tube, with the one scanner ship in the center, and then one by one they dropped out and were sent across the void—back to the Sun.

himself and hove off the blanket, and it was Miss Watson’s Jim! I bet I


just as sorry as I can be; but I done the best I could; I did honest. I
themselves and ready to welcome a missionary enterprise. Yet across the

observer on Venus. Subsequently a peculiar luminous and sinuous marking

So Dorothy took a needle and thread, and as fast as Oz cut the strips
So much I saw then, all vaguely for the flickering of the lightning, in
“The gentlemen accompanied him.”
[224]
Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced: their behaviour at the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister, and with a judgment, too, unassailed by any attention to herself, she was very little disposed to approve them. They were, in fact, very fine ladies; not deficient in good-humour when they were pleased, nor in the power{20} of being agreeable where they chose it; but proud and conceited. They were rather handsome; had been educated in one of the first private seminaries in town; had a fortune of twenty thousand pounds; were in the habit of spending more than they ought, and of associating with people of rank; and were, therefore, in every respect entitled to think well of themselves and meanly of others. They were of a respectable family in the north of England; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their memories than that their brother’s fortune and their own had been acquired by trade.
“What wreck?”

XVIII.	St. Petersburg	133
burning sky, and in the sand-pits was a row of deserted vehicles with


now with a sort of wonder that, in spite of the infinite danger in
was out of reach of steamboat waves. Right in the middle of the wigwam
“Whereabouts?” says I.



the North.”

AS no objection was made to the young people’s engagement with their aunt, and all Mr. Collins’s scruples of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet for a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coach conveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton; and the girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room, that Mr. Wickham had{96} accepted their uncle’s invitation, and was then in the house.

John’s Wood and Hampstead, and eastward in Shoreditch and Highbury and
For a few minutes there was a tussle. The bottle struck the floor and
The visit of Schwartz to the island of Ceylon was in response to an appeal by the Dutch missionary there, and on his arrival he received a very respectful and kind welcome from the brethren and also the Dutch commandant. The missionaries were converted Tamils, and it was a great delight to them to receive the instructions and advice of Schwartz in their own language. With unwearied zeal he travelled from place to place, visiting the hospitals, preaching in the churches, and, at the Governor’s request, administering Holy Communion. But here his health broke down; what was the nature of his sickness does not appear, but for a whole month he was laid aside and the only record we have is the gratitude of his heart when he was sufficiently recovered to begin work again. At the end of his visit, on his way to India, the ship lost sight of land and the Mohammedan sailors implored him to tell them about Jesus Christ, and when he did so they listened with respect. Schwartz was one of those men of whom it may be said they are never off duty, not only in his ministrations as a preacher, but continually from quite unexpected quarters and at frequent times an opportunity came or someone would open a conversation with him, asking his help and advice. While he was at Jaffna, for instance, a well educated and serious native, who viewed religion as other matters from a scientific standpoint, wanted him to relieve his mind of many doubts on the subject of revelation. A long conversation followed in which Schwartz tried to lead him from his doubts one by one to a position of faith and liberty. The closing advice exhibits the far-seeing judgment of the[Pg 66] missionary and is just as applicable to the case to-day as then.
very well why they wouldn’t come. It was because my heart warn’t right;
these yer poor little lambs that he loved and sheltered, and that’s
followed by all his band.
Contents
one of these, some two—as in the case of the one we had seen; the one
In respect of her art generally, Mr. Goldwin Smith has truly observed that “metaphor has been exhausted in depicting the perfection of it, combined with the narrowness of her field;” and he has justly added that we need not go beyond her own comparison to the art of a miniature{xv} painter. To make this latter observation quite exact we must not use the term miniature in its restricted sense, and must think rather of Memling at one end of the history of painting and Meissonier at the other, than of Cosway or any of his kind. And I am not so certain that I should myself use the word “narrow” in connection with her. If her world is a microcosm, the cosmic quality of it is at least as eminent as the littleness. She does not touch what she did not feel herself called to paint; I am not so sure that she could not have painted what she did not feel herself called to touch. It is at least remarkable that in two very short periods of writing—one of about three years, and another of not much more than five—she executed six capital works, and has not left a single failure. It is possible that the romantic paste in her composition was defective: we must always remember that hardly anybody born in her decade—that of the eighteenth-century seventies—independently exhibited the full romantic quality. Even Scott required hill and mountain and ballad, even Coleridge metaphysics and German to enable them to chip the classical shell. Miss Austen was an English girl, brought up in a country retirement, at the time when ladies went back into the house if there was a white frost which might pierce their kid shoes, when a sudden cold was the subject of the gravest fears, when their studies, their ways, their conduct were subject to all those fantastic limits and restrictions against which Mary Wollstonecraft protested with better general sense than particular taste or judgment. Miss Austen, too, drew back when the white frost touched her shoes; but I think she would have made a pretty good journey even in a black one.{xvi}
In spite of her deeply-rooted dislike, she could not be insensible to the compliment of such a man’s affection, and though her intentions did not vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was to receive; till roused to resentment by his subsequent language, she lost all compassion in anger. She tried, however, to compose herself to answer him with patience, when he should have done. He concluded with representing to her the strength of that attachment which in spite of all his endeavours he had found impossible to conquer; and with expressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance of his hand. As he said this she could easily see that he had no doubt of a favourable answer. He spoke of apprehension and anxiety, but his countenance expressed real security. Such a circumstance{238} could only exasperate farther; and when he ceased the colour rose into her cheeks and she said,—
The city rather disappointed me with its modern appearance, and wide crowded streets bearing French names, lined with houses of European architecture and brilliant shops. Shanghai is the city of great international commerce in the extreme Orient. The French, English and Americans possess concessions which they rent from the Chinese Government. Each concession has its own Consul.
hooks with a skinned rabbit and set it and catch a catfish that was as
Nothing was changed save for that and a terrible astonishment. The
that voice sounded the solitude, the desolation, had been endurable; by
old tanyard. So we unhitched a skiff and pulled down the river two mile
The money proprietor, it will be said, the lender alone will be aggrieved; he must lose the fifth part of his usual comforts, he must pay 15 for those articles which he could procure formerly for 12.
night I creeps to de do’ pooty late, en de do’ warn’t quite shet, en I

witch.”
When we got back to the raft and he come to count up he found he had
they carry you safely to the land of the Winkies. Your brain may not be

and said he reckoned he’d look around for a bigger one. But they was

“Well, Capet, we’ll want to make this a first-class show, you know, so
The Caucasus section is just opposite. In a large separate building a panorama represents the new Siberian railway-line. The Sleeping-car Company has exposed the model of a Transcaspian train, composed of an engine and three cars belonging to the International Company, in which one experiences the illusion of a journey through Siberia. The guard whistles, the train seems to move, but in reality it is only the panorama on the walls which is put into motion by a special mechanism. The travellers perceive through the windows the whole way leading from Moscow right to the terminus station—Pekin. When you pass through all the cars, to the other end of the hall, you are in the Chinese section, where the front gate represents a part of the walls of the city of Pekin.
monstrous big soldier-plumes. Well, it made me sick to see it; and I


[429]

Effects of a general Poll-Tax.
road, came a little cart drawn by a sweating black pony and driven by a

up and the ashes scattered all around, and his name blotted off of the

[291]

“But looky here, Huck, who wuz it dat ’uz killed in dat shanty ef it
creatures from violence. After that they returned to lead that
to think that the greatest loss I had known was the loss of my heart.

“Where ’bouts do you live? In this neighborhood?’
For a while the imaginative daring of the artilleryman, and the tone of

1921
him the kind of a fix I was in, and what did he reckon we better do? He
o’clock, mind—no longer. If you open your mouth against me only once
well I took it _off_, because—”
some countervailing thought.

says to myself, if a body can get anything they pray for, why don’t


back to the village, or else he will chalk this raft so he can find it


care amid the broken crockery that littered the floor.

been up to something you no business to, and I lay I’ll find out what
elbow close to her side.
with him. But it is a long way to the Emerald City, and it will take

raised such a scamp as my Tom all these years not to know him when I

“But it is not a foolish errand, nor an idle one,” replied the
best authorities does is to saw the bed-leg in two, and leave it just


he says:
Seventh Hypothesis.
“You look conscious. Young ladies have great penetration in such matters as these; but I think I may defy even your sagacity to discover the name of your admirer. This letter is from Mr. Collins.”
towns and that within twenty-four hours bread would be distributed

around, a little scared. Then I remembered. The river looked miles and

unaccountable redness mingling with the black of the scorched meadows.
so much money in it, but they judged it wouldn’t be safe, because maybe
“Let us examine our hearts seriously and whatever we find in our behaviour to have been against the will of God let us immediately repent of it and beg forgiveness in the name of Jesus Christ. Cultivate these three principles, faith, hope, and love, and you will glorify God, enjoy true happiness and edify your fellow-creatures—which God grant!”

_I’d_ live two mile out o’ town, where there ain’t nothing ever goin’
recent despair, stood beside him, wondering.
At that time my father was marshal of nobility of the district of Kharkoff. One day he was suddenly called to St. Petersburg, and, during his absence, we received the news that he was appointed chamberlain to His Majesty the[15] Emperor. I wept bitterly when I was told that papa must wear the chamberlain’s key, persuaded that he would be obliged to adorn even his robe de chambre with that ugly ornament, which must completely transform my dear old dad.
[Image unavailable.]
They both got powerful mellow, but I noticed the king didn’t get mellow
Après avoir présenté la question sous plusieurs points de vue, l’Auteur n’hésite point à se décider pour la négative, & tâche ensuite de prouver qu’une Thésaurisation antérieure qui eût mis[402] la Nation en état de soutenir la dernière guerre sans imposer aucune taxe additionelle, auroit fait beaucoup plus de mal que les nouvelles taxes n’ont été capables d’en faire.
easy to make the Scarecrow and the Lion and the Woodman happy, because
ADEN

selection, all terrestrial plants have acquired a resisting power


I could hear the owls and the wolves away off in the woods, and it
time. Yonder was the banks and the islands, across the water; and maybe

him, but tell your story and ask him to help you. Good-bye, my dear.”

The door slammed to because it was on the careened side; and in a half
again. I could not see his face. He was hatless, and his coat was
“And I should have lived a coward forever,” declared the Lion, “and no

rusts my jaws so that I cannot speak.”
A dinner for the sham-parting was given to Eritzeff in the Mussulman monastery of Abdurakman-Kazi, after which our would-be travellers were to start. During the meal a Cossack was to appear and hand over to Eritzeff a counter-order of departure. Unluckily someone had the awkwardness of revealing that plot before the repast began, nevertheless the guests were immensely amused. In fact, the poor Persian was such a picture to look at, equipped in his great mantle, his seven-leagued boots, furnished with gigantic spurs that reached well up to his calves, and armed up to the tip-top, sword and pistols in his sash; he was literally the personification of “Don Quixote.” The poor creature looked as if he wasn’t quite sure at first whether he was standing on his head or on his heels, but he soon controlled himself and bore his disappointment with serene resignation. Trying to put a good face on the matter, he regaled everyone with the big oranges that he had crammed into his pockets to quench his thirst during his long journey, and calling to mind a Persian song named, “I went in three days to Bagdad,” he said good-humouredly. As to me I have made the trip much quicker!

“Are there many of these mice which call you Queen and are willing to
up in some of yours that’s dry.”


occur side by side, but finally the sexual method superseded its

the wreck. Well, about an hour after dark we come along down in our
going to get out any more. I was scared. I made up my mind I would fix
Silas and my Sid and Tom on the constant watch day _and_ night, as I
The morning was bright and fine, and the eastern sky glowed pink, and

A stirring noise within its cylinder he ascribed to the unequal cooling
again, for I found his tracks in the snow. What I wanted to know was,


Instead of laying a tax on men, from whom, without rushing with open eyes into the perpetration of a thousand injuries, it is impossible to require any thing more than a personal service, when it is necessary and possible withal; instead of taxing the land, from which nothing can be expected but food, and the rough materials to which industry can give from one to many hundred degrees of value; instead of taxing that imaginary monster called luxury, which procures so substantial a support to some, and such pleasing comforts to others, lay your tax solely, and without predilection, on all those products of national and foreign industry which are more generally consumed; then, in my opinion, you will have reason to flatter yourself that riches are taxed to their very source, and without inconvenience to any one, since you tax it in the hands of those who are, by the strictest justice, authorised to a benefit for all the advances made by them to the consumer.

Kingston line of hills began, there was a fitful cannonade far away in
Here I came once more upon the black powder in the streets and upon
Heading to Chapter XLIX.	368
was a-telling you, and not a one of us could catch hide nor hair nor


good time.”
Can you tell the names of this young couple, can you?

there?”
copper.
moments. Sparks and burning twigs began to fall into the road, and
England before, she would rather die than trust herself friendless in a


IV.	My Second Trip Abroad	39
 Practizing

Martians were absolutely without sex, and therefore without any of the
A new pilot came on board to take us into port. We advanced cautiously amongst floating lighthouses and dropped anchor in Hudson Bay near the quarantine office, in order to land in the morning.
rope ladder wouldn’t cramp him down to business I don’t know nothing
“Such very superior dancing is not

of the way the whole three days. So pretty soon he says:
“I couldn’ git nuffn else,” he says.

A long, heavy winter was drawing near. I felt the cold terribly; my broken window was stuffed up with paper instead of panes, of glass and the stove smoked atrociously, it was impossible to heat it on windy days.
“But could you not be mended?” asked the girl.
We find in the Statements of Sir Charles Whitworth, that the exports from England to the colonies,[376] whose independence can no longer be disputed, amounted annually, upon a medium of 5 years, taken from 1769 to 1773, to the sum of 2,491,230l.
“Say,” says the duke, “I got another idea. Le’s go up stairs and count
black things that were going to and fro in the glare about the

and died at Tanjore, the 13th February, 1798,
the sugar and the mite of whisky or apple brandy in the bottom of their
another. But mainly they don’t do nothing.”
COLONEL FITZWILLIAM’S manners were very much admired at the Parsonage, and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasure of their engagements at Rosings. It was some days, however, before they received any invitation thither, for while there were visitors in the house they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day, almost a week after the gentlemen’s arrival, that they were honoured by such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to come there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very little of either Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had called at the{216} Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they had only seen at church.
done. What I want is my nigger; or what I want is my watermelon; or
“Hold on, Parker,” says the other man, “here’s a twenty to put on the
“Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of,” cried Colonel Fitzwilliam. “I should like to know how he behaves among strangers.”
Then the Tin Woodman went back to his friends, who wished him every joy
somebody says:
Charlotte had hardly time to answer before they were joined by Kitty, who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered the breakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet was alone, than she likewise began on the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating her to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of her family. “Pray do, my dear Miss{144} Lucas,” she added, in a melancholy tone; “for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me; I am cruelly used, nobody feels for my poor nerves.”

I didn’t have none, so he left. I went to the raft, and set down in the
“Well, then, what we going to do, Tom?”
Guardian of the Gates wore around his neck. When they were on, Dorothy
past, haunting the streets that I have seen silent and wretched, going

“Good day,” said the Scarecrow, in a rather husky voice.
they were none of them nearly so large and brave as you.”



within its toils.
maybe see a steamboat coughing along up-stream, so far off towards the
silicious sponges) and feeble musculature, standing about six feet high
November 12th.—We reached the end of the Suez Canal about eight o’clock in the morning, and caught the first glimpse of land, a narrow stretch of reddish desert land beyond Port Saïd, a town standing on the threshold of Europe, at the Mediterranean entrance of the Suez Canal. This is almost home! As soon as we had disembarked we were assailed by a throng of natives who offered to serve as guides to us. We gave ourselves up to the care of a gigantic negro, Mustapha by name, clad in a red jersey with the words, Mustapha molodetz, which means in Russian “clever fellow,” worked in yellow worsted on it.
do not I will make an end of you, as I did of the Tin Woodman and the

After lunch we went to see the Pyradenia Gardens, about six miles from Kandy, situated on the right bank of the river Manhavilla-Ganga. These gardens are renowned for their splendid flowers. There are trees as high as ship-masts and strange plants with large blossoms monstrous of shape and gorgeous in colour. Most things are highly coloured as in Java: birds, butterflies and luxuriant vegetation. I am not sent easily into fits of ecstasy, nevertheless I admired everything until my vocabulary of exclamations was exhausted and my head whirled.
receded slowly towards the coast, which was hidden still by a marbled
The great spider was lying asleep when the Lion found him, and it

hair and a big white fur stovepipe hat on the back of his head, and a
Bedland Island showed itself afar off with its towering figure of Liberty, the most wonderful statue I ever saw, a majestic giantess holding a torch up to light the world. We saw the statue getting bigger and bigger, and soon New York appeared as bright as day with electricity: one mass of wonderful lights.
“I dare say you will find him very agreeable.”
dollars for being prisoner for us so patient, and doing it up so good,
vacant squares. Whatever destruction was done, the hand of the
 Tom caught on a Splinter

His friend, Mr. Jaenické, goes aside to note down some of his dying instructions, a touching memorandum of an affectionate and breaking heart.
became a man armed with a cutlass. I approached him slowly. He stood
June 1st.—The weather has taken a turn for the worse. The sky is overclouded, the wind is rising and the ship rolls horribly. We have shut ourselves in our cabins.
[433]

soured on him, and didn’t look a bit satisfied with the way things was


Now let us suppose, what has happened in all countries, that the Prince and his Ministers have laid hold of the opportunity, the former, to pay the debts he had incurred in the time of national distress and confusion, the latter, to procure a more rapid increase of their fortunes, and that, with the 1,500,000l. supposed in circulation, they have struck 6 millions, instead of the 3 wanted to answer the real increase of the revenues and of population;—certainly when the calm returns, 10s. will be the price of a quarter of wheat, which sold for 5s. in the first hypothesis;—a[142] most decisive argument this, for the manufacturer to sell at 8 that very cloth which went for 4, and an uncontrovertible ground of right in the working people to charge 4d. for that which before they performed at 2d.—In these two points center all the practical inferences in which any individual in the State can be concerned: yet the shilling will contain only 65 grains of silver, instead of 260;—and if the price of every thing be doubled, it is not on account of the shilling containing only 65 grains in lieu of 260, since, upon this principle, the quarter of wheat must have fetched 20s. instead of 10s.—but it is because, in all cases, there are two pieces of money to answer the purpose of one, and that it was necessary, in order that the second might acquire one half of its former value, that the first should lose that very half.
are highwaymen. We stop stages and carriages on the road, with masks
Miss Bennet paused a little, and then replied, “Surely there can be no occasion for exposing him so dreadfully. What is your own opinion?”
through the dust the rim passing over the poor wretch’s back. The
ELIZABETH’S impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened could no longer be overcome; and at length resolving to suppress every particular in which her sister was concerned, and preparing her to be surprised, she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene between Mr. Darcy and herself.

laughed their bones loose over the way they’d served them people. The
“And _Jim?_”

lives in the City of Emeralds.”
of Stent or of the three or four cyclists or London people lying dead

Amongst the questions which I have mentioned, and many others always appropriated to the subject, there are some sufficiently weighty to puzzle, in England as well as in France, the respondent who should be obliged, before a tax is laid, to answer them in a satisfactory manner.[91] Luckily, as I have already mentioned, in France, thanks to the monarchical constitution, the King commands, the Parliament remonstrates, registers, and the People pay: and, as is known to all the world, thanks to the free constitution of England, there the King demands, the parliament debates, grants, and the People pay. With that facility which exists every where, of doing what is not palpably absurd, I think it might be possible now, without bringing credit or authority in question, to renounce the little vanity of devising a productive tax; and that a man of common abilities ought to confine himself to the establishing or maintaining order and clearness in the accounts, to the diminution of expences in collecting the revenues, and to fidelity in the use of them.—But the true, the unacquired glory to be obtained by a financier, would be, I think, to hit upon a simple scheme, the application of which might be obvious in all cases, a scheme productive of no fruitless evil, permitting all possible good, and which might, by degrees, be substituted to those vague taxations, to those taxations founded on false principles, to those wild notions, which, by adding five to an article not worth three, raise nevertheless that object to eight, and leave the trader at liberty to sell that for fifteen, which he sold formerly at four. It is true that, on the first[92] exigency of the State, they pretend to remedy the abuse by an additional tax called licence, or by any other name which answers the same purpose, and compels the peculator to refund part of his extortion. But what does this licence come to, after all?—To sell to a man the right of ransoming more severely the public, after having previously furnished him with the means and pretence for doing it.
Dorothy was thinking so earnestly as they walked along that she did not
Martians appeared, far away over the little trees, across the flat
got to fix ourselves up according to the new state of affairs. That’s
shuck tick, and they poke into you and hurt; and when you roll over the
With what impatience we are awaiting the Nijni-Novgorod with all our household. In the meantime we are served by convicts who, at the end of their penal servitude in the Isle of Sakhalin, had been transferred to Khabarovsk, their place of exile. The head-gardener, who was sent to the galleys for having drowned his sweetheart, lives here as man and wife with our laundress, who has poisoned her husband (a pretty couple indeed!) The principal barber of the town, when shaving my husband one day, tried to raise his pity, calling himself a poor orphan bereaved of father and mother, and it turned out that it was the poor orphan who had sent both parents ad patres. The locksmith who had been called to mend my trunk, appeared to have been with Sergy at the military school. The man was deported to Siberia for having strangled his wife.
They don’t have no less than seventeen.”
“What sort of a girl is Miss Darcy?”

CHAPTER LXXXVIII
“I did not know before,” continued Bingley, immediately, “that you were a studier of character. It must be an amusing study.”
had some er de dad-fetchedes’ ways I ever see. Does you know ’bout dat
second I was in the boat, and Jim come tumbling after me. I out with my
pick _him_ up and take him into slavery again. Says he:
On the grievous, but necessary part of the Impost.

July 12th.—The sea continues to be very rough. Towards night, when we approached the lighthouse at the entrance of the Bay of Malacca, the rolling of the boat ceased suddenly.


“No, I cannot do that,” she replied, “but I will give you my kiss, and
“Now I am quite happy,” said she, “for you will be as happy as myself. I always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his love of you, I must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley’s friend and your husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me. But, Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me. How little did you tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton! I owe all that I know of it to another, not to you.”
letting out. Music _is_ a good thing; and after all that soul-butter
you.”
brother could get very little precise detail out of them.

[Image unavailable.]
him for some brains.”

So they all entered the house, where there were, besides the woman, two
 Miss Watson
But now they had twenty billion years to live ere these planets, too, would be dark, cold and sunless. And then they could easily move to some other distant system. But why wait till the Sun grew cold? They were already making investigations. Out across space there still glowed countless millions of unexplored stars! Now there would be no population limit to their peoples; there would be expansion, and since each man lived from two to three thousand years, the expansion could be rapid.
“_Now_ I know how to fix it. We’ll send you some things by them.”
children all the time; I wanted to get them out to one side and pump

elementary knowledge of psychology, and in this matter I am
beside it, with an uplifted axe in his hands, was a man made entirely
herself on her father, crying, and saying, “Oh, he’s killed him, he’s

When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment she soon found some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, she turned her eyes on the daughter, she could almost have joined in Maria’s astonishment at her being so thin and so small. There was neither in figure nor face any likeness between the ladies. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly: her features, though not plain, were insignificant; and she spoke very little, except in a low voice, to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearance there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening to what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before her eyes.

running slowly one after the other without signal or order—trains
on a stick and broke it, it made me feel like a person had cut one of
“No—not impudent whelps, Sid. You ought to had your jaws boxed; I


A nigger woman come tearing out of the kitchen with a rolling-pin in

Constantinople did not offer a great deal in the way of distraction; in the evenings, especially, we were at a loss for amusements. We had quite enough of Turkey and took the “Tzar,” a Russian boat bound for Egypt. On our way to the embarkment we entered a Greek church, where a big chandelier bearing the form of a ship, hung from the ceiling, to assure us a safe passage, and get the blessing of St. Nicholas, the patron of the navigators.
passed a white terrace of houses on fire; the noise of the burning was
he sprang upon the bed and rolled himself up like a cat and purred
beautiful Castle. Before the gates were three young girls, dressed in
“Yes, _dey_ will, I reck’n, Mars Tom, but what kine er time is _Jim_
to bite or scratch or struggle in any way. Then they lifted him up and

already for it in Drury Lane; and then he makes them another bow, and
“I cannot tell,” was the answer, “for I have never been to the Emerald
Aunt Sally jumped for her, and most hugged the head off of her, and


jest one time too many. You’re the meanest, treacherousest hound in
wants showing up,” he said.
to the pit. I was sitting below, huddled up, listening with all my

She showed me a bar of lead twisted up into a knot, and said she was a
“Miss Bennet,” replied her Ladyship, in an angry tone, “you ought to know that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere you may choose to be, you shall not find me so. My character has ever been celebrated for its sincerity and frankness; and in a cause of such moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from it. A report of a most alarming nature reached me two days ago. I was told, that not only your sister was on the point of being most advantageously married, but that you—that Miss Elizabeth Bennet would, in all likelihood, be soon afterwards united to my nephew—my own nephew, Mr. Darcy. Though I know it must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injure him so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on setting off for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to you.”


unusual shape and colour, and dimly perceiving even then some evidence
seemed inclined to loiter in the place. There was no fresh news of the
“I wish you would,” says I, “because it’s pap that’s there, and maybe
I would tell. I was a-studying over my text in Acts Seventeen before
This system was devised to countenance and encourage agriculture; it is in her hands, they say, it is at that fountain-head of riches, that riches must be sought for; it is the land that finally pays for all; the impost then must be laid on the net produce of the land.—I shall venture some reflexions on a subject which appears to me the more important, as one of the wisest, and the most profound speeches ever delivered in the House of Lords, seems to hint at the expediency of an aggravation of the burden already laid on agriculture.

“Oh yes!—if one could but go to Brighton! But papa is so disagreeable.”
Naples is not a cheerful place in wet weather and we were ready to turn our back to it and return to Russia, but the weather having cleared up on the third day of our sojourn, we decided to prolong our stay for a fortnight. We wrapped ourselves up warmly and took the tram to make a tour round the town. When passing the Emigrant’s Office we saw a long line of pale-faced emigrants, with babies and bundles clasped in their arms, who were going to America, sitting on the ground and waiting their turn to subscribe themselves for expatriation. After our drive, the guide took us through the Royal Palace, where we admired the beautiful Concert Hall, constructed by the Bourbons, with the marble statues of the nine muses standing along the walls.

more. The public would be fairly warned of the approach of danger, and
to get back to Kansas.” Then she added, “But, if I do, you must give me
she forgot where she was and fell among the poppies, fast asleep.

was all shriveled up. I didn’t need anybody to tell me that that was an


sweaty and cold, and there we stopped. Tom says:
Here, I’ll lock some of you into the cabin, and you lay for ’em in the
The Hut by the Ash Hopper.—Outrageous.—Climbing the Lightning
I recall particularly the illustration of one of the first pamphlets to
the State six months, and he hadn’t been there that long yet. There,
on the towing path.


evening star trembled into sight. It was deep twilight when the captain

become the King of Beasts, as men call me.”

Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation with the ladies; and Sir William, to Elizabeth’s high diversion, was stationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatness before him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss De Bourgh looked that way.
triangular window. And afterwards I found it broadcast throughout the
“Just as easily as he could give me brains,” said the Scarecrow.
a raft, and while he was busy at this the Scarecrow found on the



coward.”
We had left Chamonix at ten o’clock this morning and it was close upon eight when we were back to the hotel, simply expiring with fatigue and tanned red with the sun. When I looked into the glass I scarcely knew myself. I had no want, no desire except to stretch myself full length in a horizontal line. I stumbled into my bed and was asleep almost before my weary head touched the pillow.
It would also be seen then, that the success of those taxes termed productive, is not to be ascribed to the abilities of the taxator, but to the abilities of the persons taxed, who have taken care to right themselves by so much as the taxator ought to have been afraid of being unjust.
Meanwhile the Russian army continued to advance boldly. The telegraphic despatches gave the description of a fiery battle between our Cossacks and the Turkish pickets. In May the siege of Ardagan took place; Sergy entered the town at the head of a big detachment of soldiers, and notwithstanding the energetic resistance of the Turks, the citadel of Ardagan was obliged to capitulate. The battle was hot, and the Turks who had fought desperately for eighteen hours, sustained great losses. The streets were literally filled with dead and wounded; the corpses were crowded in heaps, one upon the other, and it took three whole days to clear them away. It was frosty weather[85] fortunately, otherwise one couldn’t have breathed for the dreadful smell.
{435}


For a time he remained in Edgware not knowing what next to do. The
Children, don’t you say a word.”
and such another clack a body never heard. Old Mrs. Hotchkiss was the
“No,” she answered, “one is of tin, and one of straw; one is a girl and
counting; and as to the candlestick, it warn’t no consequence, it would
Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find. They could not be untouched by his politeness; and had they drawn his character from their own feelings and his servant’s report, without any reference to any other account, the circle in Hertfordshire to which he was known would not have recognized it for Mr. Darcy. There was now an interest, however, in believing the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible that the authority of a servant, who had known him since he was four years old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be hastily rejected. Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of their Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight. They had nothing to accuse him of but pride; pride he probably had, and if not, it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market town{325} where the family did not visit. It was acknowledged, however, that he was a liberal man, and did much good among the poor.

out over the water, here they come!—and just a-laying to their oars and
Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantel-piece with his eyes fixed on her face, seemed to catch her words with no less resentment than surprise. His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of his mind was visible in every feature. He was struggling for the appearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believed himself to have attained it. The pause was to Elizabeth’s feelings dreadful. At length, in a voice of forced calmness, he said,—

Jane looked at her doubtingly. “Oh, Lizzy! it cannot be. I know how much you dislike him.”

As for Jane, her anxiety under this suspense was, of course, more painful than Elizabeth’s: but whatever she felt she was desirous of concealing; and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject was never alluded to. But as no such delicacy restrained her mother, an hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express her impatience for his arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if he did not come back she should think herself very ill-used. It needed all Jane’s steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable tranquillity.
“Hello!—why, I’m at _home!_ How’s that? Where’s the raft?”


officials, connected the breakdown with the Martians.
deadly white her face was, I ceased abruptly.

“My darling child!” she cried, folding the little girl in her arms and
CHAPTER CXVII

Dorothy picked them up and had the Winkies carry them back to the
“Well, I never heard the likes of it in all my born days! So it was
The next day after our arrival at Paris, the section of Central Asia was inaugurated. To get there we had to elbow our way through a throng. A Te Deum was sung by the singers of the Russian Church, whilst all the Kremlin bells were ringing a full peal at which my Russian heart bounded with joy. That day we spent six hours at the Exhibition, and did not sit down for one minute. I was awfully hungry, having eaten only one croissant since morning, and Sergy carried me off to the Trocadero to have dinner in one of the best restaurants. The hall was full of guests. Two very disreputable-looking creatures sat at the table next our own; they were painted with cheap cosmetics, and the heat took off their paint, which came out in the wrong places, and very soon the powder on their faces was becoming paste, and the red on their cheeks and the black of their eyebrows began to run down in streaks, metamorphosing them into tattooed papouses, which didn’t hinder them in the least from casting coquettish glances around. They tried to make eyes at my cavaliers, but it was all in vain; their charms left them quite unmoved. We were too tired to walk home and got into a cab whose driver, with folded arms and bowed head, was nodding on his seat, his nose buried in an open newspaper. Both coachman and horse were dozing the whole way, and it is only a miracle that we got to our villa without running into other carriages.

thanks them out of his heart and out of his brother’s heart, because
after that, we can _let on_, to ourselves, that we was at it
The soldier with the green whiskers was still on guard before the door,
boom—boom—boom—twelve licks; and all still again—stiller than ever.

Chapter XV

Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of such coarseness of expression herself, the coarseness of the sentiment was little other than her own breast had formerly harboured and fancied liberal!
“Because honour, decorum, prudence—nay, interest—forbid it. Yes, Miss Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by his family or friends, if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all. You will be censured, slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him. Your alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned by any of us.{438}”

preach, and begun in earnest, too; and went weaving first to one side

Mamma brought me to St. Petersburg and left me in charge of my aunt, who did all she could to make my stay pleasant. The vanities of the world took complete hold of me; I had a very gay season, being out nearly every night and dancing to my heart’s content with my band of last year’s admirers. Stenger continued to care for me as he did at first, and was more than ever my slave. Everywhere I went he would find out and go too, for he had a true heart, poor boy. I had such a thirst for pleasure that my evenings at home appeared awfully long; I found it dreadfully dreary and yawned in the most distressing fashion, sitting half-dozing in an armchair beside the fire, and constantly asking what time it was, having a most natural desire to go to bed.

Sixthly and in fine, that hence results the impossibility that there should long subsist, in the prices of any thing, a difference capable of making any competition whatever, formidable to any man who will not be so unjust as to wish and ask beads of gold for beads of glass, or, in other words, to try in bartering, to obtain the labour of 150 in exchange for that of 100 only.

Index	201


is made of the fixed pivot or relatively fixed pivot, with circular
notice anything at first, but next I did. There was a cross in the left
was when I heard your house had fallen on the Wicked Witch of the East.
wicked that the blood in her had dried up many years before.
Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change of feeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and, glancing over it, said, in a colder voice,—

course those who don’t know drains think horrible things; but under
October 21st.—We are at Petrovsk at ten o’clock in the morning. I saw the Tzarevitch, a great ship ready for sea, with steam up, making ready to cast off and be gone; the gang way was just about to be withdrawn when we got on board.
Hill.

It was some time before the Cowardly Lion awakened, for he had lain

and Louis Fourteen, and Louis Fifteen, and James Second, and Edward
Profiting by the right of having been a friend and a playmate of the author’s husband, I insisted on the necessity of publishing this work.
the relation between these mechanical colossi and the sluggish lumps I
CHAPTER XVII.

and shoved for the light. As I got down towards it, three or four more
“Well, if that ain’t just like you, Huck Finn. You _can_ get up the
On Christmas Eve the village children came up from the nearest villages to sing their carols under our windows. On Christmas night a giant Christmas-tree was set up in our hall for the school children. It was sparkling from top to foot with decorations of fringed and coloured paper and glittering glass-balls; the dark green boughs were hung with gilded apples, pears, walnuts, etc. On the table round the Christmas-tree lay the gifts to the children, who walked into the hall by twos and twos. I handed out the presents to the girls, and Sergy to the boys. Every girl received a present adapted to her wants and her wishes. On Christmas Eve the head-mistress of the gymnasium had disguised her porter into Santa Claus, the children’s friend, who looked a real Father Christmas with a large white beard. The girls had to write a letter to the good saint, and to explain in it what they wanted Santa Claus to send them for their Christmas present. The pupils of the small classes asked for dolls, except one little girl, a premature coquette, who had chosen a looking-glass for her Christmas gift.
In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on nothing, she walked on; but it would not do: in half a minute the letter was unfolded again; and collecting herself as well as she could, she again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, and commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence. The account of his connection with{255} the Pemberley family was exactly what he had related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy, though she had not before known its extent, agreed equally well with his own words. So far each recital confirmed the other; but when she came to the will, the difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living was fresh in her memory; and as she recalled his very words, it was impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the other, and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did not err. But when she read and re-read, with the closest attention, the particulars immediately following of Wickham’s resigning all pretensions to the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three thousand pounds, again was she forced to hesitate. She put down the letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be impartiality—deliberated on the probability of each statement—but with little success. On both sides it was only assertion. Again she read on. But every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to render Mr. Darcy’s conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of a turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole.
and stood a-listening and looking, and not saying anything; and nobody



All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and, after relating the circumstances, she thus went on:—“I am now convinced, my dear aunt, that I have never been much in love; for had I really experienced that pure and elevating passion, I should at present detest his very name, and wish him all manner of evil. But my feelings are not only cordial towards him, they are even impartial towards Miss King. I cannot find out that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling to think her a very good sort of girl. There can be no love in all this. My watchfulness has been effectual; and though I should certainly be a more interesting object to all my acquaintance, were I distractedly in love with him, I cannot say that I regret my comparative insignificance. Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly. Kitty and Lydia take his defection much more to heart than I do. They are young in the ways of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that handsome young men must have something to live on as well as the plain.{189}”
galvanised body. And strange, too, it is to stand on Primrose Hill, as

About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in confusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard somebody running upstairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her. She opened the door, and met Maria in the landing-place, who, breathless with agitation, cried out,—

[338]
They had borrowed a melodeum—a sick one; and when everything was ready
the original foundations—deep in a hole, already vastly larger than the
barrel-hoop?”




[171]
The Hindoo colony of Singapore invited us to be present at a great annual festivity in honour of Siva, the god of good and evil. The whole town rushed to the famous heathen temple from which the procession was to proceed. We saw an enormous chariot of carved silver advancing, drawn by two sacred white bulls covered with rich clothes, shining with gold embroideries and spangles, their legs and horns decorated with bracelets. We were told that the chariot cost eighty thousand dollars. It held the statue of the Hindoo Trinity—Brahma, Vishnu and Siva—crowned with flowers. A great throng of natives, their faces and hands daubed with ashes, in the simplest of costumes—a mere white linen band, five fingers wide, passing round the hips, escorted the chariot, holding lighted torches. We left our shoes in charge of a turbaned man, and proceeded to the temple to which many thousands of people came from all parts to pay their vows. Thousands of pilgrims crowded through the gates, all straining towards the enclosure of the temple. About sixty men, dressed in white, beat tom-toms and howled in a piercing voice. We were deafened by the hideous music. We entered a magnificent hall, full of enormous columns, lit by Arabian lamps with glass panes framed in carved copper. On the floor stood a big copper incense-burner, loading the atmosphere with perfume. The interior of the temple is a veritable bazaar. A fantastic crowd surrounded us; they beat the drums, they sang, they danced. A group of bonzes (priests), naked to the waist, girded with a thick cord, came up to pour strong perfume on our hands, and offered us armfuls of fragrant jasmine, which spread a violent odour all over the temple. I was somewhat scared by all this noise, and giddy with the scent of crushed flowers heaped on the floor.
window frames, and bringing down in crumbling ruin a portion of the
In the afternoon we started in a litter, carried on the shoulders of four porters, to inspect the curiosities of the native town. It was a new mode of locomotion to us. The streets for the most part are two or three yards broad, and full of local colour. I looked out at everything with wondering eyes, it’s all so strange! The houses of the rich are built of stone, and those of the poor, with lumps of earth mixed with chopped straw. Nearly every house has a small courtyard surrounded by a high wall, a low door is cut in this wall giving access to the street. We see a fat Chinese merchant dressed in a blue silk robe, sitting in front of one of these doors, fanning himself in a melancholy manner. At the next door a barber is shaving his client in the open air. We are carried now through a street full of shops; their fronts disappear completely behind gilded planks hung up vertically, bearing hieroglyphic signs. The shopkeeper sits on the floor of his shop, surrounded by his various goods. He never rises to customers, for everything is within reach of his hand.[402] Women never meddle with trade, which is solely in the hands of the men. “Ladies first,” we say in the west; in the east it is “ladies last”; their sphere is the back-room. The whole duty of a woman is to worship and wait upon her husband, who is lord and master in its most exacting sense.
and bully.
XXXI.	Cernobbio	199

The deck was high out here. We went sneaking down the slope of it to
“Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my duty, and the exertion would soon have been nothing. One ought not to repine; but, to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me! The quiet, the retirement of such a life, would have answered all my ideas of happiness! But it was not to be. Did you ever hear Darcy mention the circumstance when you were in Kent?”
Then suddenly, as we approached Kew, came a number of people running,
laid on my oars, and looked back and see her go and smell around the
[Pg 82]
This terrible fighting gave evidence of the high regard in which Schwartz was held by both combatants. It is perhaps not surprising that the English whose cause he had served so well in a diplomatic mission should be glad to give him every advantage, but it is remarkable that a tyrant like Hyder Ali should give orders to his officers “to permit the venerable padre to pass unmolested and to show him respect and kindness, for he is a holy man and means no harm to my government.”

CHAPTER XCVIII
remarkable resemblance in character.
cornered, and was afeared maybe I was looking it, too. I wished the
“Drot your pore broken heart,” says the baldhead; “what are you heaving
around every day for people to pick up? Some folks think the nigger


emerged, for the help of a company of soldiers to protect these strange
nights now. T’other one said _this_ warn’t one of the short ones, he
Elizabeth’s congratulations were given with a sincerity, a warmth, a delight, which words could but poorly express. Every sentence of kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But she would not allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to be said, for the present.


first breath of the coming storm of Fear blew through the streets. It
people went to bed. From the railway station in the distance came the


August 15th.—The distant coasts of the Caucasus appear like a grey outline. Towards ten o’clock in the morning the Tropic landed us at Petrovsk five hours behind time. The captain insisted upon my passage being free, which cost me a great deal more in tips for the crew. He accompanied me with his officers to the railway-station.

The girl had to work hard during the day, and often the Witch
paused, rigid, to hear if the Martian had thrust its tentacles through
“I will go to Meryton,” said she, “as soon as I am dressed, and tell the good, good news to my sister Philips. And as I come back, I can call on Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and order the carriage. An airing would do me a great deal of good, I am sure. Girls, can I do anything for you in Meryton? Oh! here comes Hill. My dear Hill, have you heard the good news? Miss Lydia is going to be married; and you shall all have a bowl of punch to make merry at her wedding.”

It was awfully stifling in my car and I was too hot to talk, I was too exhausted to eat, but devoured with thirst. As soon as lunch was over, I hastened to get into my dressing-gown and stretched myself on the sofa.
good, and she was in so much trouble. And when she was going away she

“They have none of them much to recommend them,” replied he: “they are all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of quickness than her sisters.”
August 29th.—Order in town is reinstated. The merchants are beginning to open their shops, but before luncheon a new mob has gathered outside our house. This time the inhabitants of the neighbouring villages have assembled to beg for permission to emigrate to Russia, preferring rather to risk the uncertain future than to suffer the yoke of the Turks; but Sergy had to tell them that there was no convenient ground in our country to give them.
MR. BENNET had very often wished, before this period of his life, that, instead of spending his whole income, he had laid by an annual sum, for the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if she survived him. He now wished it more than ever. Had he done his duty in that respect, Lydia need not have been indebted to her uncle for whatever of honour or credit could now be purchased for her. The satisfaction of prevailing on one of the most worthless young{378} men in Great Britain to be her husband might then have rested in its proper place.
“Well, and so, just as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was called away upon business to that horrid man Mr. Stone. And then, you know, when once they get together, there is no end of it. Well, I was so frightened I did not know what to do, for my uncle was to give me away; and if we were beyond the hour we could not be married all day. But, luckily, he came back again in ten minutes’ time, and then we all set out. However, I recollected afterwards, that if he had been prevented going, the wedding need not be put off, for Mr. Darcy might have done as well.”


I had a great number of admirers, an old admiral over seventy years old among them. My charms had captivated his elderly fancy, and his old heart caught fire. This “Methuselah” was an old silly about me and spent his time in making love to me as any “Romeo” of twenty. My company had for him the fascination of the forbidden fruit, but I was not at all ready to play “May” to his “January,”[54] and was afraid even to shake hands with that ancient Marionette, for fear he’d fall to pieces.
I have said, that the price of every thing would perhaps be now in France, very little different from what it was 40 years ago, had it not been for an eventual circumstance, (I might have said a regulation,) which a few years ago tertiated, at least, the fortune of every subject in that kingdom;—nominally at first, it is true; but afterwards in reality, owing to the prodigious encouragement that ensued; I mean the regulation[272] which permitted the exportation of wheat, and authorised each of the French Provinces not to consider herself as a stranger to all the others. I shall only make a few reflexions on a matter which might furnish enough to fill a volume.

little curtain. The young woman in the picture had a kind of a nice
snag, maybe, and it was all up with him. I was good and tired, so I
him?”
even, it is said, from Banstead and Epsom Downs.

                Most recently updated: November 27, 2021

But I’m not so fond of squealing. I’ve been in sight of death once or

When he got out the new judge said he was a-going to make a man of him.
whilst he made all sorts of signs with his hands and said
against them.
For a moment perhaps I stood there, breast-high in the almost boiling
Subsequently a curious circumstance came to his ears. A Brahmin who had been earnestly pressed to become a Christian stated that the King of Tanjore had at one time felt a strong desire to adopt the Christian faith and gathered together all his chief officers and ministers to a conference, when he stated what was his conviction in this matter. This caused a general uproar; they remonstrated with him, pointing out how faithful his fathers had been to the worship of their gods and how they had prospered thereby. They insisted upon his putting from his mind this idea. But the Brahmin said it was a remarkable fact that all these advisers who had withstood the King’s resolve were now in prison or wandering about the country as vagabonds and beggars.
Again the curtain falls and for six centuries the Syrian Church on the Malabar coast is out of sight and mind. Just a break for a moment in the year a.d. 883 when we see two priests of the Anglo-Saxon Church, Sighelm and[Pg 9] Athelstan, taking to India the votive offerings of the great King Alfred of England, which he had promised to the shrine of St. Thomas during his siege of London. We only know they went and returned safely.
lick me if I didn’t drop that.
They thanked him and bade him good-bye, and turned toward the West,

She held out her hand: he kissed it with affectionate gallantry, though he hardly knew how to look, and they entered the house.{404}
“How nicely we are crammed in!” cried Lydia. “I am glad I brought my bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another band-box! Well, now let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way home. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all since you went away. Have you seen any pleasant men? Have you had any flirting? I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husband before you came back. Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare. She is almost three-and-twenty! Lord! how ashamed I should be of not being married before three-and-twenty! My aunt Philips wants you so to get husbands you can’t think. She says Lizzy had better have taken Mr. Collins; but I do not think there would have been any fun in it. Lord! how I should like to be married before any of you! and then I would chaperon you about to all the balls. Dear me! we had such a good piece of fun the other day at Colonel Forster’s! Kitty and me were to spend the day there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in the evening; (by-the-bye, Mrs. Forster and me are such friends!) and so she asked the two Harringtons to come: but Harriet was ill, and so Pen was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We dressed up Chamberlayne in woman’s clothes, on purpose to pass for a lady,—only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel and Mrs. Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow one of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! When Denny, and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, they did not know him in the least. Lord! how I laughed! and so did Mrs. Forster. I thought I should have died. And that made the men{276} suspect something, and then they soon found out what was the matter.”
secure abiding place for Man; we can never anticipate the unseen good
infant-schooliest ways of going at a thing. Why, hain’t you ever read
in a cupboard in a damp cellar all night and tastes like a hunk of old
saying she would pray for me; and if ever I’d a thought it would do any
[149]
The nearer it got to noon that day the thicker and thicker was the
The hot water from the Martian’s overthrow drifted downstream with me,
afeard to come out.”

“But de trouble all _done_ ef de snake bite me while I’s a tryin’ him.

Had even those colonies remained in, or returned to a state of subjection to England, would not the same interruption of correspondence have been productive of the same inconvenience?—During[379] the war, which terminated by the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, all the French colonies had remained under the dominion of France, and yet during all the first, and great part of the second year of peace most of the French goods were sold at Martinique and St. Domingo, 15 and 20 per cent. below the prime cost in Europe;—between dependent and independent colonies, then, in this respect, who can perceive a shadow of difference?
Well, she was no other than Vava, the young princess,

Observe, above all, that England, who pretends to have the largest balance in money, is the very nation who, with respect to the extensiveness of her commerce and the mass of her industry, keeps the least part of that balance at home, and constantly preserves as little of it, as if she had been no less convinced than I am myself, of the futility of any other balance in bullion, but that which is necessary for the five articles above mentioned. What results now from the reduction of those two frightful colossi to their proper dimensions?
being rocked gently, like a baby in a cradle.
cheeks and nodding his head at them saucily, he said:
a body’s mouth water; but maybe next day Miss Watson would take hold
August 9th.—My husband had to go on business to Bokhara and Andidjan, the place of the recently appeased mutiny. I will profit by it by making a part of the journey with him.
again, and by the time it’s above the man’s head then you hear the

“I do. I’m going on, under their feet. I’ve got it planned; I’ve
genlmen a-goin’ over for to see de place. Sometimes dey’d pull up at de
crying and saying amen:
of the lines and cook up a hot breakfast. And afterwards we would watch

November 18th.—We came back to Marseilles to-day. I was half out of the window of our car, watching for Sergy who was waiting for us on the platform, his face beaming with pleasure. We had some dinner at the station and took the train for Paris.

because he’d be a free man the minute he seen it, but if he missed it
burgundy, for there was a rain-water pump from which I could get water.
that has begun here will have streamed out and caught our sister planet

accident. And these are only pioneers. They kept on coming. These green
they would give her more power than all the other things she had lost.


The important thing just then was that I should recover ground with Ladigenski, which I had evidently lost. I would have given worlds to have undone what I had done. Ladigenski had not actually said anything that I could take as an offer of marriage, but he had gone very near it, and being on the point of proposing to me, if he was to speak now it would be something definite, and so I decided to give him hope and encouragement. I sat down and wrote a letter in which I expressed regret in being deprived of his society and told him that he was to forget the stupid proceedings of my monologue, invented to tease him, and made him understand that I was ready now to accept his offer. I enclosed my note in a book that Ladigenski had lent me and sent it with our maid Olga. I waited in a fever of impatience for his answer, desperately afraid lest my letter had not safely reached its destination. Suppose mamma should catch Olga in the corridor and discover my letter! At last Olga came back with the answer. With fingers trembling I broke open the envelope and read the following phrase: “It does not suit me to be trifled with any longer, so please forget all about me.” Oh, the shame, the humiliation experienced by[59] me! And just at that moment, to my horror, I heard mamma asking Ladigenski, through the wall of our room, to come and dine with us at the restaurant.


and mouth, and was much bigger than the head of the biggest giant.

him a slave again all his life, and amongst strangers, too, for forty
But I couldn’t set still long. Pretty soon I went out on the road,
“Well, then, what’ll we make him the ink out of?”
“You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little less. The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious attention. You were disgusted with the women who were always speaking, and looking, and thinking for your approbation alone. I roused and interested you, because I was so unlike them. Had you not been really amiable you would have hated me for it: but in spite of the pains you took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and in your heart you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously courted you. There—I have saved you the trouble of accounting for it; and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly reasonable. To be sure you know no actual good of me—but nobody thinks of that when they fall in love.”
Then he got up slow and walked to the wigwam, and went in there without
_I’d_ a heard her if she’d a said it to herself, let alone speaking it
into the parlour behind the bar, and slept on a black horsehair sofa I
Londonward, and that was all.
Finn’s boss. So he watched out for me one day in the spring, and
communicated by sounds and tentacular gesticulations; this is asserted,
Chronicle_ from the newsboy. I remembered how I went down to the garden

again.”
collapsed backward; the front portion, even on the ground floor, had

“That’ll fix it. I’ll take the order and send it, along with your

garden, and people driving them out.
the main shore—it was only two hundred yards—and paddled about a mile
order they were given. But no person could command these strange

useless and cumbersome and mischievous have to die. They ought to die.
and a couple of gules for supporters, which is you and me; motto,
“That was too bad,” said Dorothy, “but really I think we were lucky in
The soldier now blew upon a green whistle, and at once a young girl,

or escaping at the rim with a thin, sizzling sound.
tied, and Quelala said a kind word for them also; so that Gayelette
of the outline just as the chronometer struck midnight; and at that I


you the duke was powerful uneasy.
“Oh, do not repeat what I then said. These recollections will not do at all. I assure you that I have long been most heartily ashamed of it.”


Darcy was fixed in astonishment.
getting home, and the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman were glad to be of
[351]
“En wid dat I fetch’ her a slap side de head dat sont her a-sprawlin’.
[Image unavailable.]
occupants of no fewer than three of the fighting-machines. These last
“I reckon we’ll go and see for ourselves.”
Was it curiosity to see a European woman, or was it a desire to show devotedness to the Russians? Perhaps both reasons together made visitors overflow our drawing-room. All the big wigs of the town came to pay their respects to me. To-day, for instance, I received the family of George Effendi, one of the richest Greek merchants of Erzeroum. His wife wore a splendid silk dress interwoven with gold and silver, and a small velvet cap adorned with gold spangles and tassels. Her daughter-in-law, a woman of fourteen, of childish stature and appearance, was obliged to keep the most absolute silence in her presence, whilst her own daughter chatted in very bad French all the while. After them came the family of Antoine-Effendi Schabanian, the most noted Armenian inhabitant of the town, who had come to present his respects to me the day before.
enough, he rolled up the curtain, and the next minute the king come
The principal theatres of Milan are closed in summer, except the “Dal Verme,” where we went to see a new play. The theatre is awfully dirty, the curtain all in holes and the chair-backs wear the trace of the spectators’ feet. The performers were all second-rate and the play rather boring.
I says:
my mind, and presently objections and doubts began to arise; but I
In the end the red weed succumbed almost as quickly as it had spread. A
“Tom, if it ain’t unregular and irreligious to sejest it,” I says,
whatever their previous apathy. The shutters of a map shop in the
“No you won’t,” she says. “You’ll stay right wher’ you are; _one’s_
Effects of an Impost exclusively laid on the Articles of Consumption peculiar to the rich, or in other words, on Luxury.
Once the tumultuous upheaval of its dispersion was over, the black
as five or six dollars a night—ten cents a head, children and niggers
And all about him—in the rooms below, in the houses on each side and

She was both beautiful and young to their eyes. Her hair was a rich red
“Well, does a cow?”
CHAPTER XIII.

“What town is it, mister?”
After the taking of La Bastille, we went to seek for something to eat and drink at the hostelry of the Lion d’Or, and ended our evening at the Palais des Enfants, a rather badly named theatre at the Exhibition, where we saw the La Belle Fatima, the renowned Eastern beauty, encircled by unattractive houris who set her off still more. La Belle Fatima looked amongst them, like some vivid brilliant flower surrounded by faded leaves.

PREJUDICE
June 21st.—At three o’clock in the afternoon we went on board the Orel our new dwelling for many days. I took the best place I could find at the side of the ship to see the last of Russia and mother, with whom I parted shedding abundant tears. After the last embraces we separated, our boat gave the third whistle, and slowly we moved away from the dense crowd that covered the wharf. I sent my good-byes to mother, waving wildly my handkerchief to her. I saw the shore separating us, and knew that we couldn’t meet for a very long time.
“Whatever my connections may be,” said Elizabeth, “if your nephew does not object to them, they can be nothing to you.”
The day of our departure arrived at last. When taking leave of us the doctoress presented me with an enormous bouquet. Our train was crammed, and we were closely packed in our compartment, when the door was flung open and a breathless, panting lady of colossal dimensions, pushing parcels before her, clambered in, walking on everybody’s toes. That fat creature had undergone a cure in our Sanatorium, and was also provided with a bouquet, only of much smaller dimensions than mine, because she had been a second-class boarder.

country. There were milkmaids and shepherdesses, with brightly colored

[359]
Now, above the soft whirr of the news-casters focussed on the great screen, there came an audible sigh of excitement, as there flickered on the great screen a dim gray image, blurred and indistinct. Well it might be. Sent on the phase-velocity projector across the universe, it was bringing them the scene within the recreated ship—suddenly the great screen was filled with a brightly lighted scene, and through the sound pick-up came a subdued hum of the mighty engines in the power room. Through the windows of the ship they could see a brilliant shaft of bluish light pouring over the floor. Out through the main pilot's window they saw the blazing field of stars—and there they saw one dim red one, barely discernible. Probably if they had been there they could not have seen it. Only the super-sensitiveness of the machine made it visible—their sun as it looked millenniums ago! For the light had been traveling slowly for thousands of years to reach the distance their machine had reached in less than an hour.
“My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners—my behaviour to you was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not. Now, be sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?”
The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs. Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield party. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been distinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this as her mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane’s pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been fortunate enough to be never without partners, which was all that they had yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned, therefore, in good spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. With a book, he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that all his wife’s views on the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found that he had a very different story to hear.

“Well, they didn’t go there a-purpose.”

The first leaves begin to fall and the park looks very dismal. The weather is horrible, the sky leaden-grey. I hear the monotonous wail of the wind and the rain beating against the window-panes.

was shining bright, the fog was all gone, and I was spinning down a big

could go about their petty concerns as they did. I remember how
me.
Princess, who stopped short as she saw the strangers and started to run


M,DCC,LXXXVI.


Englishman—not the king’s way, though the king’s _was_ pretty good for
seemed to me.

this money, and then take and _give it to the girls_.”
for the day.
fresh air again, instead of the poisonous scent of the flowers.
one of them kind; so I never tried to do anything, but just poked along

“It can’t be midnight yet,” I said, and then came a blinding glare of
thing is, we must leave the Martians alone. We mustn’t even steal. If
THE STRAIN BEGINS TO TELL.

Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, did Mrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again; coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Jane in her interest, but Jane, with all possible mildness, declined interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, and sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks. Though her manner varied, however, her determination never did.
Original publication: Snowhill: T. Spilsbury, 1786
Soon after the Scarecrow stopped.
The idea came to me to become Sister of Mercy in order to have the possibility of following our troops. Here again I was destined to meet with disappointment. General Tolstoi, a member of the society of the Red Cross, had refused to take me seriously, saying that I was far too young and inexperienced for such hard work. How perfectly horrid of him!
refuse. A number of other birds hopped about among the ruins. Far away
up from table—same key, I bet. Watermelon shows man, lock shows
From London we went straight to Stuttgart, where we settled down to a peaceful winter. We looked about for furnished apartments and took one in König-Strasse, the principal street.


again, while Toto ran around them and chased the moths and butterflies,
“Mr. Collins,” said she, “speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and her daughter; but, from some particulars{107} that he has related of her Ladyship, I suspect his gratitude misleads him; and that, in spite of her being his patroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman.”
concealed. But I set it down, and the reader must form his judgment as
afire too. He just stood up there, a-sailing around as easy and
deaf, for the noises of movement I had been accustomed to hear from the
Jane shook her head.

up gentle and gradual. He was so glad to see us he most cried; and


scintillated, and out of the funnel of this there smoked the Heat-Ray.
ransacked every room for food, until just on the verge of despair, in
and quivers the leaves it makes you feel mournful, because you feel
rose into the air without her.
front seat. The lady looked over her shoulder.

Martians is only a reprieve. To them, and not to us, perhaps, is the
And now they gather round once more, and at his request they sing, with such voice as they could command amid their sobs, his favourite hymn:
Printed by T. Spilsbury, Snowhill.
LV.	Athens	298




again, thinking I was a Munchkin; and this pleased me and made me feel
There’s a hand that was the hand of a hog; but it ain’t so no more;
I says:



“So’d I. Well, it wasn’t for a dog.”

effort, yet even to the last they kept in action. In twenty-four hours
he warn’t surprised. Said he swum along behind me that night, and heard
out:
do not know. The window of my study looks over the trees and the


“She is a very fine-looking woman! and her calling here was prodigiously civil! for she only came, I suppose, to tell us the Collinses were well. She is on her road somewhere, I dare say; and so, passing through Meryton, thought she might as well call on you. I suppose she had nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?”

before you can hardly wink, Miss Mary. And they’ll come a-biling, too.”
talked over old times awhile, and then Tom asked a lot of questions,

“Protested he must be entirely mistaken”	161

raft we all had a supper; and by-and-by, about midnight, they made Jim
The author’s innate talent, her education, her faculty of observation, and her deep study of the best Russian and foreign writers, are the cause of the vivid impression produced by her light and clear style. Some portions of these studies entitled “Fragments of the Diary of a Russian woman in Erzeroum,” were printed in one of the most famous Russian periodicals. The welcome they received showed the author to what use she could turn her book for her works of charity, and[8] it is her desire to assist the poor which gave to Barbara Doukhovskoy the idea of publishing her “Memories,” though the great realism of them did not permit of their publication as a whole.
onlookers.
He was quite short and stout and had a big head, which was flat at the
fierce Kalidahs.

met in the Throne Room and talked matters over. The Scarecrow sat in
lightning-rod, and shut ourselves up in the lean-to, and got out our
hour, but we done the job tight and good and shipshape. Then we heard

rummaging. Do you reckon Tom Sawyer would ever go by this thing? Not

“Oh, I am not at all afraid of her dying. People do{42} not die of little trifling colds. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays there, it is all very well. I would go and see her if I could have the carriage.”
nothing but just a shiny bed of lights; not a house could you see. The
[468]
“Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more, and could have the advantage of a London master. She has a very good notion of fingering, though her taste is not equal to Anne’s. Anne would have been a delightful performer, had her health allowed her to learn.”

two near wheels splashed with fresh blood.

the earliest assurance of it; and, after making his bow as the carriage turned into the park, hurried home with the great intelligence. On the following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his respects. There were two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for Mr. Darcy had brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of his uncle, Lord ——; and, to the great surprise of all the party, when Mr. Collins returned, the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte had seen them from her husband’s room, crossing the road, and{214} immediately running into the other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding,—


done the niggers no harm by it.
Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. She knew but little of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the awkwardness which must attend her sister, in seeing him almost for the first time after receiving his explanatory letter. Both sisters were uncomfortable enough. Each felt for the other, and of course for themselves; and their mother talked on of her dislike of Mr. Darcy, and her resolution to be civil to him only as Mr. Bingley’s friend, without being heard by either of them. But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not yet be suspected by Jane, to whom she had never yet had courage to show Mrs. Gardine{410}r’s letter, or to relate her own change of sentiment towards him. To Jane, he could be only a man whose proposals she had refused, and whose merits she had undervalued; but to her own more extensive information, he was the person to whom the whole family were indebted for the first of benefits, and whom she regarded herself with an interest, if not quite so tender, at least as reasonable and just, as what Jane felt for Bingley. Her astonishment at his coming—at his coming to Netherfield, to Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking her again, was almost equal to what she had known on first witnessing his altered behaviour in Derbyshire.

By half past eight, when the Deputation was destroyed, there may have
“I wouldn’ think nuff’n; I’d take en bust him over de head—dat is, if
money was there they wouldn’t a left it. I said I reckoned they killed

“But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of Wickham?”

hurry and settle up the estate right away and leave for home. He was
flight rising swiftly to a torrent, lashing in a foaming tumult round
“Broke his arm—_very_ likely, _ain’t_ it?—and very convenient, too, for

And every time he said that the man with the lantern would laugh and
_cousins_ chip in—and by-and-by everybody’s killed off, and there ain’t
_you_, you little rapscallions, that’s been making all this trouble,
since known to be anatomically an ear, though it must have been almost
door and peeped into the kitchen. In the triangle of bright outer

the easier it got to be. I was getting sort of used to the widow’s
uncomfortable all up the other. Being Tom Sawyer was easy and
a pair of horses, but only one was in the traces. My brother saw dimly

Not far from me was a little one-roomed squatter’s hut of wood,
people. He had a vague idea that he might see something of me. He
On the 12th November we took the train to Rome. I became suddenly aware that one of our fellow passengers, a dandy-looking young Italian, was staring at me over his newspaper. He wore an eyeglass which made him squint a little and through which he couldn’t see, I am sure, but his sight, evidently, was so excellent that he could well afford to sacrifice the vision of one eye, now and then, for the sake of effect. He faced me with a gaze that made me long to box his ears. Feeling awfully disturbed I looked anywhere but[312] in his direction, and throwing myself back in my corner, I opened a magazine and pretended to be deeply engrossed in its pages. I slowly turned leaf after leaf; I turned so many that he became impatient and tried, in altering his position by moving up opposite to me, to take a better view of me and catch my eye, but my eye refused to be attracted. Then the persevering man tried to enter into conversation with me in asking permission to smoke. I bent my head in careless assent and pretended to become violently interested in the landscape. “What a splendid scene!” he exclaimed suddenly, but I continued to gaze out of the window and made no reply, laughing inwardly at this little manœuvre and regretting that I had no eyes behind my back to look on the other side and see his discomfiture. When we reached Rome we seized our bags and descended on the platform. We had to cross the railway line, running to catch the Florence train. Whilst my pursuer was calling a facchini to look after his luggage, he lost sight of us in the hurry of changing trains, rather to my regret, I must confess, for like Faust’s “Margaret” “Je voulais bien savoir quel etait ce jeune homme et comment il se nomme,” I was so sorry that I didn’t know who he was and where he came from. We entered an empty car, and Sergy promised the guard a good tip if he would leave us to be sole occupants of the compartment. All at once we saw my “Faust” running about the platform and peeping anxiously into all the cars. He started when he saw me at the window, and prepared to step in, when the guard slammed the carriage door in his face, and I never saw him any more!

the pit, “and now I must bear my witness. Woe unto this unfaithful
The night is splendid, the sky is all studded with stars, and I have no wish to go to bed.

First, By reason of some prohibitory act, forbidding the exportation of other productions of the earth, which, by this means, become cheaper than they were before this act took place, oblige the cultivator to advance his price in the others, that the whole may be raised to the level of industry:
there was also a cupboard, in which we found nearly a dozen of
“What did he do to you?”
Once Toto got too near the open trap door, and fell in; and at first

The Cowardly Lion was much pleased to hear that the Wicked Witch had
conscience, no how nor no way. It got to troubling me so I couldn’t
On the eve of our departure, I amused myself more than ever at the military club. At supper my cavaliers entreated me to arrange somehow or other not to leave Jalta next day. Mrs. S., a jolly middle-aged lady whose acquaintance I had just made that evening, offered to take charge of me and proposed to go instantly and persuade my aunt to let me stay with her a few weeks longer. I said “yes” on the impulse of the moment to Mrs. S., not stopping to think that I ought first to ask permission of my parents by telegraph. We set forth at once to our hotel under the escort of my partners. Daylight was beginning to break, and the ship which was to carry me away in a few hours had been brought up alongside of the pier, and our trunks were already buckled and sent off to the steamer.
The sun sank into grey clouds, the sky flushed and darkened, the
fetch the whole business!
It was the raft, and mighty glad was we to get aboard of it again. We




We devoted the whole of the next day to Pompeii, the long-buried city at the foot of the great destroyer. Nothing but desolation and silence around! Walking amid the wrecks, the mystery of the past took possession of us and the busy lives which animated formerly the deserted town, rose before us. The cinder-choked streets have preserved their ancient denominations. The buildings remind me of those of Erzeroum, with a fountain in the middle of the inner court. The frescoed walls have kept their original colour, and the sign-boards over the houses and the indecent bas-reliefs (reminiscences of not over pure-minded antiquity) are perfectly intact. Here is the grand Basilique the symbol of an ancient disappeared civilisation and the pagan temples of Venus, Mercury and Jupiter. A little further, in the quarter of the Gladiators, is the Forum with the immense tribune in which the people assembled for all sorts of meetings. In a separate museum curious remains of past ages are gathered: artistically worked jewels, mosaics and petrified corpses in almost as fine condition as 1800 years ago in 79 a.d. There is a young woman lying prostrate on the marble floor; the position of the hands indicate that she had instinctively tried to protect her face from the hot ashes when the death-storm broke and Vesuvius blotted out Pompeii. We saw objects just dug up: coins, vases and pottery. We passed before bars which looked as if they had just been freshly painted, where wine had been sold. Here are loaves of bread lying on the counter of a baker’s shop, transformed into stone and looking as if they had just come out of the oven. Before the shop, a petrified dog, curled up, seems to be sleeping.
it was piled up. Well, Judge Thatcher he took it and put it out at
ON THE

“Another time a man comes a-prowling round here you roust me out, you
“Lizzy,” said he, “I was going to look for you: come into my room.”

The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet’s ill humour or ill health. Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride. Elizabeth had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan did not appear in the least affected by it. He was always to have gone on Saturday, and to Saturday he still meant to stay.



thousand dollars apiece—all gold. It was an awful sight of money when


“We had better follow this path,” I said, “northward.”
3dly,
The quantity of wheat sold at Geneva for 27 florins, on a medium of 5 years from 1751 to 1755, was sold for 37 florins, on a medium of 5 years from 1766 to 1770, (see Arthur Young’s Political Arithmetic.)
Well, by-and-by somebody said Sherburn ought to be lynched. In about a

Quadlings.
LIII.	A Trip to Egypt	290
nothing on earth, and would gladly face an army or a dozen of the

“I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I knew that I had begun.”
will tell you all about it.”
moved it gently from side to side until it worked freely, and then the

“I am very glad that you improve in knowledge, wishing that all useful knowledge may have a proper effect on your heart. Our knowledge is like a light, in which we are to walk, so that we are led and influenced by the knowledge of what is good and just. I have just examined the children who are in the Tamil School, fifty in number. All received a new cloth which they put on with joy. When I am dead, you will I hope clothe them. But when we look upon the Author of all blessings, we must humbly acknowledge that it is God who feedeth and clothes us all....
Heading to Chapter XVIII.	113
brightness of the sun. The window panes were of green glass; even the

“As soon as ever Mr. Bingley comes, my dear,” said Mrs. Bennet, “you will wait on him, of course.”
“The brute! Come, don’t waste a minute—not a _second_—we’ll have them
Out of the 70 millions, 20 come to the share of the cultivators, either as the price of their labour, or for poor’s rates; 12, of these 20 millions, at least, are laid out for the produce of industry: bread, it may be observed, is comprised in the remaining 8 millions.
in the warm sunlight.
Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs. Bennet rejoiced to see Jane in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner did Mr. Bennet say voluntarily to Elizabeth,——


was asleep, and didn’t know what you was about.”
“It’s a pretty long journey. But it’ll be lovely; wisht I was a-going.
side of the door the floor stuck out a little bit, and was flat and a

whilst she was a-giving us our sailing orders, and Jim got it all
From Samara to Saratov the Volga is more like a lake than a river. We pass under an immense iron bridge, the building of which cost seven million roubles. I remained all the time on deck, admiring the beautiful banks along which rise forest-clothed hills.
“I have not an instant to lose”	339

knew not what—and then a stillness that could be felt. Nothing but this
My husband received the order to start for Siberia within a month. We were making ready to depart and began preparations for our long journey to Khabarovsk, which is a serious undertaking. I had a great deal to think about. Our apartments were turned upside down; the whole house was topsy-turvy. Packing cases encumbered the floor and professional packers came to pack our trunks. The sight of the empty, denuded rooms depressed me. Our home was broken up! Our heavy luggage had been consigned to the “Nijni-Novgorod,” a merchant vessel belonging to the Volunteer Fleet.
“Do you know what’s over there?” I said, pointing at the pine tops that

The state-creditor stands in a far more disagreeable predicament; he cannot even suppose,[74] on his part, an intention hostile to the general good. Whoever lends to the State, knows that the latter cannot pay the interest it submits to, but by taxes, which, in the long-run, affect every thing alike; and that one must cease to be a consumer, if he would forbear coming in for his share. Now, whilst the exigency of the State requires fresh loans, and course additional taxes, whoever advances of the stock, the interest of which is paid by means of those very taxes, cannot entertain any hopes of avoiding their effect, unless it be for a short period, which depends entirely on the adopted scheme of finance. Some of these schemes extend, others shorten the round such taxes must go through, before the burden falls equally on every shoulder, and becomes null by its universality. I say null, all injustice set aside, which is inseparable from some sorts of taxes, of which I shall speak hereafter; but, I add, strictly null, even in regard to the lender, although the price of every article be raised, whilst his revenue alone continues on the same standard. And I ground my opinion on the following reason, which appears to me unanswerable: The difference between the interest of money, and that of landed property, is always a sufficient indemnity to the monied[75] man for the rise, occasioned by the taxes, on the prices of the produce of land and industry; but nothing can compensate the landed proprietor for that pretended increase of wealth called Money, or that supposed poverty known by the name of Taxes, but a proportionable increase in the price of his goods[3]. A word more on the lender. One may take the part of that important individual, who accumulates those savings by which the State is to profit. It is allowed, I say, to support such a man even against the State, when the State attempts to reduce him by an useless reimbursement, by an unnatural operation; but[76] he should be assigned his real rank in the State, that he may not complain of the natural reductions. In this case, I think, we should be more just, more humane, and more equitable, than Mr. Hume, when, in the continuation of the scheme of national loans, he offers to the posterity of the present owners of landed estates, no other prospect than that of serving, as coachmen, the descendents of their footmen, and no other means of averting the prophecy—but a bankruptcy. (Vide Hume’s Public Credit, Essay IX.)

Fain would mine eyes my Saviour see,
the deffisit—you wanted to get what money I’d got out of the Nonesuch
she was.

the destruction of any opposition. They exploded any stores of powder

scattered splinters of a fir tree it had shivered to fragments in its
of tin, fastening my tin arms and legs and head to it, by means of

So in they come, but couldn’t see us in the dark, and most trod on us

[156]


“Ziz-zy, zuz-zy, zik!” said Dorothy, who was now standing on both feet.
Molesey and Weybridge and Walton, and they say there’s been guns heard
Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had not injured her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with some complacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley,—
“He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heard them from Mr. Darcy more than once, but he believes that it was left to him conditionally only.”
duke he couldn’t stand it no more; so he writes on a little scrap of
pamphlet would have been much better without them.


hitting those who are here. And instead of our rushing about blind, on
marking the quiet, we heard the Martians hooting to one another, and
see I warn’t lucky. De dream say let Balum inves’ de ten cents en he’d

boat we can put _all_ of ’em in a bad fix—for the Sheriff ’ll get ’em.
“And what is fifty miles of good road? Little more than half a day’s journey. Yes, I call it a very easy distance.”
The other fellow was about thirty, and dressed about as ornery. After



A Japanese officer in full uniform, came in a canoe to welcome and bring us on shore. On the quay the Russian consul, Mr. Kostileff, was expecting us. We climbed up to the Hôtel Belle-Vue by narrow stone steps cut in the rock. The landlady, a respectable Frenchwoman of about forty, came hastening to receive the guests the steamer had brought her.
“Yes,” he says, kind of pretty-well-satisfied like. “I’m the captain


you had to wait for the widow to tuck down her head and grumble a
sending the people scattering against the fences and gates of the


Then he says, slow and scornful:


ready to be shoved out from the willow cove where she was hid. We put

January 12th.—We continued our journey at daybreak. When I awoke I found the snow had completely disappeared. Towards noon we arrived at Krasnovodsk and took our passage on the Tropic.



my nose, and puffed a bit. Of course there was a booming current; and
“What’s the good of going on with such lies?” said the artilleryman.
didn’t know whether the money was in there or not. So, says I, s’pose
seen London veiled in her sombre robes of smoke can scarcely imagine
I could almost kissed _his_ foot to get him to take it back.
were joined by four other Martians, each carrying a thick black tube. A

and
it. I was all over welts. He got to going away so much, too, and
should go out of this Palace my people would soon discover I am not a

January 1st.—The siren was shrieking the whole night. I was in a terrible fright all the time lest a boat should run against us in the dark.
Dorothy looked, and gave a little cry of fright. There, indeed, just
There warn’t nothing to do now but to look out sharp for the town, and
has broken her leg, and I must take her to the mender’s shop and have

“Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?” said Elizabeth, still addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. “Shall we ask him why a man of sense and education, and who has lived in the world, is ill-qualified to recommend himself to strangers?”


water, under a clump of furze. The horse lay motionless (his neck was
It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr. Darcy himself; but whenever she did catch a glimpse she saw an expression of general complaisance, and in all that he said, she heard an accent so far removed from hauteur or disdain of his companions, as convinced her that the improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed, however temporary its existence might prove, had at least outlived one day. When she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance, and courting the good opinion of people with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a disgrace; when she saw{323} him thus civil, not only to herself, but to the very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected their last lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage, the difference, the change was so great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she could hardly restrain her astonishment from being visible. Never, even in the company of his dear friends at Netherfield, or his dignified relations at Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so free from self-consequence or unbending reserve, as now, when no importance could result from the success of his endeavours, and when even the acquaintance of those to whom his attentions were addressed, would draw down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and Rosings.

Sawyer—she chipped in and says, “Oh, go on and call me Aunt Sally, I’m

de raf’ agin when dey was gone. But lawsy, how you did fool ’em, Huck!
“It may, perhaps, be pleasant,” replied Charlotte, “to be able to impose on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be so very guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skill from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; and it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the dark. There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every attachment, that it is not safe to leave any to itself. We can all begin freely—a slight preference is natural enough; but there are very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without encouragement. In nine cases out of ten, a woman had better show more affection than she feels. Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but he may never do more than like her, if she does not help him on.”

I was for going on, and after a little hesitation he resumed his spade;
first party of Martians were crawling slowly towards their second
“Most willingly.”
o’ stuff, in de place o’ what ’uz los’.”
prolonged ululation, and immediately a second glittering giant,

[50]
unconcernedly for the most part, and silvery pollard willows motionless
chance and struck across country. But the artilleryman dissuaded me:
Packard didn’t take no notice of that, but hung up his lantern on a



[Pg 189]
a sort of life where men can live and breed, and be sufficiently secure

So much as they could see of the road Londonward between the houses to
other travelers had come back again, after destroying the Wicked Witch;
It was about dark now; so I dropped the canoe down the river under some

castle of the Wicked Witch and the Emerald City. When the four

In the Rue de Paris, near the Eiffel Tower, different attractions are to be found: bearded women, mermaids, and other marvels of past, present, and future life. In a miorama we crossed from Marseilles to Constantinople without leaving Paris. Another panorama gives the illusion of a sea-voyage round the world. In the Palais des Optiques we went down under the sea, and were introduced to horrid monsters. We came upon a gigantic telescope showing the moon at the distance of sixty kilometres. A huge wheel 177 metres high, with thirty-two waggons, wheels round intrepid passengers. The Palais de la Femme contains amazing toilettes of past and ultra modern times. I fell in love with a costume of the last note of modernity, which Sergy wanted to purchase, but I was reasonable enough to refuse the present, for the price was unheard of. The Panorama du Mont Blanc shows a group of excursionists climbing up the Alps, which reminded me of our ascent on the Mont Blanc.
skift, you see, en dey’d know ’bout whah I’d lan’ on de yuther side, en

“This will not do,” said Elizabeth; “you never will be able to make both of them good for anything. Take your choice, but you must be satisfied with only one. There is but such a quantity of merit between them; just enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it has been shifting about pretty much. For my part, I am inclined to believe it all Mr. Darcy’s, but you shall do as you choose.”
was dog-tired, and our hands was blistered, and yet you couldn’t see
“Yes, very well. I saw them the night before last.”
“To-morrow fortnight.”

“I have been used to consider poetry as the food of love,” said Darcy.
INSTEAD of receiving any such letter of excuse from his friend, as Elizabeth half expected Mr. Bingley to do, he was able to bring Darcy with him to Longbourn before many days had passed after Lady Catherine’s visit. The gentlemen{449} arrived early; and, before Mrs. Bennet had time to tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat in momentary dread, Bingley, who wanted to be alone with Jane, proposed their all walking out. It was agreed to. Mrs. Bennet was not in the habit of walking, Mary could never spare time, but the remaining five set off together. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others to outstrip them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy were to entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty was too much afraid of him to talk; Elizabeth was secretly forming a desperate resolution; and, perhaps, he might be doing the same.
“‘That’s a rather pretty eye,’” remarked the Munchkin who was watching
September came, bringing in premature cold weather, the rain fell continually. These showers had their good side in laying the phenomenal dust in the streets of our venerable old city.
blotting out the whole valley of the Thames and extending as far as the

success,” was the stereotyped formula of the papers. A sapper told me
Now, to turn to the other side of the medal, I must say that during our stay at Erzeroum our roses weren’t entirely without thorns. The typhus-fever continued to rage, and mowed down whole ranks of our soldiers. Every day there were new victims. The Russian cemetery is quite full now, and we are obliged to bury our soldiers in a common grave. Nearly every morning I see sinister waggons carrying away the unfortunate victims of this dreadful epidemic to their last dwelling-place. I shudder when I think of it!
The view faded; another replaced it. Now they seemed to be in a smaller room, a room whose front wall was lined with a series of large view boards. Twenty of these boards there were, and on each was the image of a room whose metal walls glistened in the light of the dull red sun. They were looking into the operating room of the greatest of the ships—the flagship. This ship, unlike the others, was a cube, surmounted by a smaller cube control-top. The mighty cylinder inside generated a field that surrounded all the ship with the protecting force, but triply intense. The fighting machines were two thousand one hundred feet long, and three hundred beam. These carried powerful protective force generators, but also they carried fourteen sets of the projectors, three along each side, the top and the bottom, and one at each end. Inside, the terrific energy needed to operate these was being generated in smoothly humming machines. Titanic they loomed above the tiny men tending them. These same giant machines would, later, with a few simple adjustments, furnish the power for the receiver machines to receive the things from the Solar System. But now they were engines of war. Over each thousand of these great ships was a division leader. The twenty division leaders were represented by the twenty view boards in the flagship. The individual ships were each represented by one of the boards in the central control room, so that in any case they knew the fate of every ship, and aid could be sent them.
After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to know anything about it, they found at last, on examining their watches, that it was time to be at home.

[122]
Yes, he had no engagement at all for to-morrow; and her invitation was accepted with alacrity.
Whether the absurdity of the general opinion, on the most efficacious means of establishing a profitable competition, in point of trade, be not clearly evinced, by the account of a strange revolution in France—a revolution, as indubitable as the two wars in 1755 and 1779?

minute, let alone a hair-ball. Well, I knowed a potato would do that



to disturb them, and says:
strange and horrible antagonist of vapour striding upon its victims,



3ᵒ.
surrounded by a patch of potato garden. I struggled to my feet at last,
plans again. He grew enthusiastic. He talked so eloquently of the
whole harrow along, can you? Well, these kind of mumps is a kind of a
shaking his head in perplexity. “He is powerful and terrible, and if
little girl.

And in the System wild activity was going on. The entire force of the machines of all the planets was concentrated on the production of the great generators of this new force. It was simple in principle. The Atomic Giants lived by using as their "fuel" the energy of the atoms. We live by burning the carbon and hydrogen of our foods with the oxygen of the air. If the supply of either oxygen or food were cut off, the incombustibility results and we die. If oxygen is cut off, we die because the carbon compounds will no longer burn. If food is cut off, we die because there is nothing to consume the oxygen with.
planet Mars, on life in the planets, and so forth, a brief and vaguely
“That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A lady’s imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love to matrimony, in a moment. I knew you would be wishing me joy.”
BACK TO TASHKEND FOR THE LAST TIME
from the foot of the island. I had my gun along, but I hadn’t shot
could, for some dogs see very well in the dark; and the Scarecrow

if I roared very loudly every living thing was frightened and got out
July 21st.—We are in the sphere of a cyclone, and battle with the swell of the ocean. We mount, descend, and roll from right to left. Enormous billows throw clouds of foam as high as a mountain on the deck, and two liquid walls meet to swallow us up. A terrible gust of wind tore the great sail, shredding it to pieces, and its tatters floated like old banners on the top of the mast. I passed the night on the floor in the corridor, and woke up after three hours of poor sleep, feeling something tickling my nose. It was the tail of a rat the size of a kitten, which was promenading over my face.

Then he turns and goes in. The crowd looked mighty sober; nobody

 “It was Tom Sawyer”

slaves, and set herself to rule over their country. The Winged Monkeys

name in blood.”


At one of the big stations a young officer came up to me, a tall, good-looking fellow, in whom I recognised one of the victims of my St. Petersburg doings, a former page who had been enamoured with me once upon a time. He was greatly altered, having attained the age of adolescence; a slight trace of a moustache was visible. His face was aglow with the pleasure at seeing me. He took my hands in his and said in a low aside to me that he continued to adore me, and a lot more things that were enough to move a stone. But all this seemed exceedingly foolish to me, and I was a little uncertain whether I ought to be flattered or affronted, but he looked so doleful that I had not the heart to snub him and treated him with a soft graciousness which raised him to the seventh heaven and induced him to devour my hands with kisses. One more good-bye and then farewell; we had gone away! My ex-page stood staring ruefully after the departing train, which stole me away, whilst I lent on the window squeezing tightly Sergy’s hand and nodding him adieu. How ridiculous seemed to me all the passing fancies of by-gone days. I see now that I never loved anyone until I met Sergy; he was absolutely and indisputably sole master of my heart. All the others served only as a pastime.


soft but quick in the shade of the bank. I made two mile and a half,
You don’t know about me without you have read a book by the name of The
November 21st.—I arrived safe and sound at St. Petersburg, having had quite enough of railway and sea.
Now they were swinging over mighty oceans, gigantic patches of water that were large enough to cover all the surface of their smaller globes, for this planet was large as the long gone Neptune, or Uranus. How wonderful those vast areas of magnificent blue water, sparkling brilliantly in the light of the gigantic sun, seemed to them. Each man, before he started on this expedition, had his eyes treated that the new light would not be too bright and that it might appear white to him, so that now they could fully appreciate the wondrous beauty of the scene beneath.
“Dear me,” said the Voice, “how sudden! Well, come to me tomorrow, for
So they passed through the Palace Gates and were led into a big room
perhaps nothing is more wonderful to a man than the curious fact that
“I am not now to learn,” replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of the hand, “that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first applies for their favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second or even a third time. I am, therefore, by no means discouraged by what you have just said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long.”
The road from Lourdes to Bayonne has a desolate look, without any vegetation whatever, only groups of trees here and there. We saw labourers in the fields tilling the ground with oxen harnessed to ploughs, just as we do in Russia. During the twenty minutes’ run from Bayonne to Biarritz two very prim, stately old ladies entered our compartment. They looked extremely haughty and unapproachable, and gave no outward signs of wishing to enter into conversation.[252] But their manner changed instantly, when they found out that we were Russians; they became amiability itself, and expressed their great sympathy for our country.

wouldn’t behave so no more, and then me and Tom shoved for bed.
there—so he copies for me. It’s _his_ hand you’ve got there, not mine.”
She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs. Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of raising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in her opinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all her friend’s dislike would vanish, if she could suppose him to be in her power.
whah to pick up my track. So I says, a raff is what I’s arter; it doan’
First, Is it not self-evident, that any financiering operation, which reduces from 5 to 4, the interest of a national debt, deprives as well the lender of the fifth part of his comforts, as if the nation had loaded herself with ten millions more, to be paid annually? (such is the present hypothesis.) There stands, therefore, between the two cases no other difference, but the palpable justice and necessity of the one, and I believe we may say, the unsuspected inutility and injustice of the other.
But, in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this point, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley’s being withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which convinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirely hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, that his affection might be re-animated, and the influence of his friends successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane’s attractions.


danger. _You_ don’t like trouble and danger. But if only _half_ a
The future is already brightened. The terms of the treaty of peace have finally been signed at San-Sebastiano on the 1st of February. This glorious piece of news has reached us only to-day in this out-of-the-world place.

farther on the dry reeds up the bank were smoking and glowing, and a
The cylinder was already opened in the centre of the pit, and on the
“Why, to dig with. We ain’t a-going to _gnaw_ him out, are we?”
oddly suggestive from that distance of a speck of blight, and
“Oh, shucks, yes, we can _spare_ it. I don’t k’yer noth’n ’bout
fetch along their suspicions now if they want to—this’ll lay ’em out.”

could see the pendulum swinging behind it. It was beautiful to hear
There was a slough or a creek leading out of it on the other side that
I continued to wear a steel armour over my heart, and I now spent much of my time out of doors, riding. Serge Michailovitch had permitted me, during his absence, to mount his lovely arab, a young and spirited horse who proved sufficiently troublesome the first time I mounted him. I had to spring hastily into my saddle, the horse gave a bound when the groom left his head, and set off galloping like the wind. My hand was nearly dislocated with the strain of holding him; I succeeded in managing my fiery steed and brought him to a stand-still before a villa inhabited by Mrs. Blicks, a charming lady whom I knew only by sight. She happened to be on her balcony just then, and invited me to dismount, in order to recover myself from my fright. My wrist was aching a good deal and had begun to swell. After Mrs. Blicks had bound it up, I remounted my arab who behaved perfectly well on our way home. After my first break-neck ride I succeeded to be mistress of my horse; he went like a lamb now, and I felt as much at home on his back as in a rocking-chair.


a-bothering about Moses, which was no kin to her, and no use to
CHAPTER LXXXIV
“Shucks, Tom,” I says, “I think you might tell a person. What’s a bar
you come on an idle or foolish errand to bother the wise reflections of
Leatherhead I had not prayed. I had uttered prayers, fetish prayers,
So he said, now for the grand bulge! So the very next morning at the

Plotters.—Hunting for the Boat.
broke on a snag or something. We fixed up a short forked stick to hang




“Our ole raf’.”
they’d let that nigger vote, I drawed out. I says I’ll never vote agin.
He stopped astride of the fence in doubt. Then he came over and across
difference.

Hookerville, but we don’t know who ’twas that killed Huck Finn.”
at it, you reckon?”

One afternoon we went by train to Bayonne. There is nothing of much note in that town. The streets are narrow and encumbered with heavy carts and chariots. There was a crowd gathered before a small travelling-circus, where a self-named Hercules, in very dirty tights, lifted up weights of a hundred kilos, to the loud applause of his enthusiastic audience.
After getting this sudden lesson in the power of terrestrial weapons,

Lives insured and a bit invested for fear of accidents. And on
 Adolphus

behind that and snuggled in amongst the gowns, and stood there


at that shirt—every last inch of it kivered over with secret African


“We were talking of music, madam,” said he, when no longer able to avoid a reply.

the pit, their cowls rotating as though they were surveying the
We continued to lead a very gay life. Dances, picnics, rides, were in full swing. In the midst of most delightful people and amusement I was quite happy, and far from imagining that my horizon was not clear, and that my happy time at Jalta was coming to an end all but too soon. One fine morning we were all assembled on the pier to watch the mail boat coming in, chatting away gaily, when suddenly I heard a sharp voice calling me by my name. I turned round, and was amazed to behold amongst the passengers my mother’s sour-faced maid, Mary—a terrible creature who had lived with us ever since I was a baby. She announced that my parents would not have me staying in Jalta by myself any longer, and had sent her to fetch me, insisting on my immediate return. I was never so overwhelmed in my life, and quite furious at being packed back home in disgrace. My wings were clipped, my freedom lost! When I got into my room I locked myself in and spent an hour weeping passionately.
 Hamlet’s Soliloquy



joined the hut at the eaves, and was made out of plank. It was as long
it looks so to me, anyway; and yet here’s a case where I’m blest if it

fellow travelers.
“Very well,” said the Queen, “we trust you. But what shall we do?”
fetch in help I’d get mixed up in the business before it was done with,
couldn’t say nothing to that, so he didn’t try. “And besides,” I says,
“We cannot be far from the road of yellow brick, now,” remarked the
Now the way that the book winds up is this: Tom and me found the money
temerity. In front of me the road became pitchy black as though it was
The Scarecrow decided to think, and he thought so hard that the pins

of garden ground unburied. This gave me a hint, and I went knee-deep,

another flash and another sockdolager. The waves most washed me off the
stillness of the evening about the cylinder remained unbroken. Vertical
[254]
opposition, Lavelle of Java set the wires of the astronomical exchange
Bekase why: would a wise man want to live in de mids’ er sich a
Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and their conversation, which had been passing while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were engaged with their children, was now put an end to by the approach of the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed and thanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears.
Oz.

“Did not you think, Mr. Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly well just now, when I was teasing Colonel Forster to give us a ball at Meryton?”

him at de las’. But you is all right. You gwyne to have considable

[1]See Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. v. 10.
brother’s suggestion. So, designing to cross the Great North Road, they
“Oh, you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general. You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable in your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in my life.”
evolution had taken the same direction in the two adjacent planets.



see; and so, as long as no harm hadn’t come of it, she judged she
houses, and some of the passing cabs flaunted unextinguished lamps. And
We are here for three days. Our host, though an old bachelor, knew how to make us as comfortable as possible.
When I was fifteen, mamma decided to take me abroad to be “finished.” Stuttgart was chosen for our winter residence; we were to get there towards the end of October, after having visited Paris and made a water-cure at Spa.
Our train left early in the morning, and we had to be up before six. We hastened to the railway station and took seats in the last car, in order to see the entrance of the great[191] St. Gothard tunnel. The guide cried out “Partenza!” the train moved, and we went with a rush into the black unknown for more than twenty minutes. A wavering light glowed here and there at long intervals. When the train flashed out of the tunnel, we entered the Canton of Tessino. Our train slid down zigzags through narrow passes, from valley to valley. After Chiosso—the Italian frontier—the railway line ran through comparatively flat country. At about nine in the evening we arrived at Milan.
(_a-a-men!_ _glory, glory hallelujah!_)

“No. I warn’t ever murdered at all—I played it on them. You come in
Lady, I shall pretend to spring upon her, and so compel her to do my

“Yes; he introduced us to his sister.”
On the next morning an old friend of ours, Mr. Stcherbatcheff, the first Secretary of the Russian Embassy, came to see us. He was begged to wait for me in a small tobacco-shop belonging to our hostess, in the next house, while I finished dressing. Mr. Stcherbatcheff was horrified when he saw our lodging, and said that he had an apartment ready for us in the house where he dwelt, and we resolved to remove immediately to our new apartment, looking out into the most fashionable and animated quarter of the town, and furnished in showy fashion. It seemed palatial in comparison with our miserable room.
The country of the Quadlings seemed rich and happy. There was field
Martian advance. He had hurried home, roused the women—their servant
Scarecrow.
a man that hadn’t ever done me no harm.
a broad river, flowing swiftly just before them. On the other side of
 “Hand out them Letters”
But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at least it was impossible not to try for information. Mr. Darcy had been at her sister’s wedding. It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people, where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go. Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild,{392} hurried into her brain; but she was satisfied with none. Those that best pleased her, as placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable. She could not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper, wrote a short letter to her aunt, to request an explanation of what Lydia had dropped, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been intended.
“I reely don’t know, Sally,” he says, kind of apologizing, “or you know
a supper, you know.

hunted up and jailed; I’d better lay low and keep dark, and not write
live yesterday evening.”
“Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? Do you think it incredible that Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman’s good opinion, because he was not so happy as to succeed with you?{160}”

George Jackson. And mind, don’t you hurry—come mighty slow. If there’s
    ’Twas not from sickness’ shots.
and we got burnt pretty much all over, in places, and eyes put out with
ain’ gwyne to resk no mo’ money in stock. De cow up ’n’ died on my
didn’t always run the channel, but hunted easy water.

December 29th.—After ten this morning we weighed anchor. Whilst passing before our cruisers, the officers stood in rows on the deck, and the sailors ranged along the sail-yards shouted loud hurras, Admiral Doubassoff was standing on the bridge, making the military salute.
“Something must be done to save us. I think I can swim to the shore and

carpenter; and about Harvey’s—which was a dissentering minister; and so


CHAPTER XI.
I turned by an effort, stumbled over the curate, and stopped at the

and every time one of them flopped down on her, it didn’t make no
presently removed it so swiftly.


promised her two sheep and a cow if she would prevent the marriage.
CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE
On the day of my husband’s proposed arrival I sat at the open window in joyous excitement and expectation, listening intensely, with every nerve tingling, to the sounds in the street outside. What a day it had been—a hundred hours in it! The clock-hands seemed to crawl on purpose. Seeing my agitation, Helena mounted on our roof, but as Sister Anne on her watch-tower, she didn’t perceive my knight. Suddenly I heard a rolling of wheels under my window and a carriage drove up to the door. Mamma flew out to greet Sergy, but instead of him, rushed into the arms of a total stranger. She had got hold of the wrong man and found herself confronted by an officer who brought a letter from Sergy, explaining his unexpected delay. And I had been just withering up with impatience to see him!
for them both to get drunk on. Then in another village they started a
mathematics, anyway.


But soft you, the fair Ophelia:

you will stay in the house and not bother them. I am one of the gang,
[Image unavailable.]
In September my husband was appointed military representative at the celebration of the twelve hundredth anniversary of the famous battle on the “Koulikovo Field.” We had to be separated for more than a week. I profited by the occasion to visit my parents at Dolgik, my dear old home. It had been arranged between us that as soon as the festivals at Koulikovo were over, Sergy would come and join me at Dolgik. We travelled together as far as Toula, where we separated to go each our different ways. I found myself for the first time in my life travelling alone, but managed, however, to get to Dolgik without any adventure. I established myself in the train with pleasant books and papers to amuse me on the way, and never emerged from my compartment till the last station, which stands a few miles only from Dolgik, where I was met on the platform by my brother, who had come to fetch me in his carriage.
steamboat. After a time, and before they reached the sinking cloud
in a second, and now you’d hear the thunder let go with an awful crash,
roped all day, and he’d cipher out some way to get around it.
painfully along the road that runs northward out of Halliford. They
Next day you couldn’t hear nothing around that town but how splendid

Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings’ party. “I assure you, I feel it exceedingly,” said Lady Catherine; “I believe nobody feels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I am particularly attached to these young men; and know them to be so much attached to me! They were excessively sorry to go! But so they always are. The dear Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but Darcy seemed to feel it most acutely—more, I think, than last year. His attachment to Rosings certainly increases.”
“Yes, and a quick way out of our troubles,” replied the Lion. “How
the right was a tumultuous stream of dirty, hurrying people, pent in
hunted around there for the king, and by-and-by we found him in the
the river a piece, and as soon as it was fairly dark I crept out with
By the time it was night I was pretty hungry. So when it was good and

avoided.”


A concert with tombola is being got up on board for the benefit of the families of the sailors who have perished at sea. A subscription has been started amongst the first-class passengers. I consented to take part in the concert and to play a solo on the concertina. Active preparations are made. The piano of the salon has been screwed down to the floor, the piano of the second-class was carried out on the deck, which is transformed into a veritable concert-hall.

“Hold on! Just a word, gentlemen.” They stopped to listen. “We are


off. He said the witches was pestering him awful these nights, and
and two of his toes stuck through, and he worked them now and then. His

{372}
edge of the body the face, as we may call it, and the large dark eyes
stay at Mr. Lothrop’s so long, nuther. How fur is it?”
take soundings before they could navigate it.
First, The Philadelphian has sense enough to feel, that the war must advance the price of goods from the Colonies, in a due proportion to the general increase in prices of all that is carried there. In Europe, on the contrary, people are not only strangers to the idea of that universal chain, but[172] they are so convinced, or rather so persuaded, that the Colonies were created, and do actually exist, for the sole pleasure and interest of their respective metropolises, that no imaginable means are spared to lessen the price of their products in the mother country who receives them, in order that this tender mother may sell them at a cheaper rate in the foreign markets; but, ye mother countries! your colonists are also your children, foreigners are only your brethren.—It must be owned, however, that the coffee, indigo, and cottons, of Jamaica, Grenada, Guadaloupe, St. Domingo, &c. are no more the territorial commodities of England, and of France, than the corn and other productions of those two kingdoms; and that the arguments adduced in regard to the colonies, are, as Montaigne says, of a piece with that by which they prove, that, the cheaper the corn, the more brilliant is the commercial competition.—Were not Nature by her underhand work constantly fighting, with some advantage, against the dreams of speculators, to what pitch of misery would not agriculture be reduced in all parts of the world!
was for going along with me, but I said no, I could drive the horse
sleeves, and with his upturned, clean-shaven face staring at a faint
tolerable sick rat. She said that was first-rate, and she reckoned I

_you_, gentlemen—far from it; I don’t blame anybody. I deserve it all.


Before he could get to it, he heard a scream under the wheels, and saw

BY

after that, for two or three days as we floated along, the raft was a
before. But tell me, is it a civilized country?”

noises—the clangorous din of the Martians, the crash of falling houses,
it’s too, _too_ hard!”
I remember how mockingly bright the day seemed as I went back on my
By-and-by we talked about what we better do, and found there warn’t no
Now this same morning the Wicked Witch came to the door of her castle
and put it on the table. Then I set down in a chair by the window and
They’re making their things—making all the things they couldn’t bring

danger, and had the Martian looked down we must immediately have
“It is a long time, Mr. Bingley, since you went away,” said Mrs. Bennet.

“George Peters, mum.”

Scarecrow; “it is important. And we have been told that Oz is a good

scaldingly hot, came sweeping round the bend upstream. I saw people
take back everything I said.”
one of the most curious things about them is that they can carry you to
Uncle Henry never laughed. He worked hard from morning till night and

Towards daybreak we tied up, and Jim was mighty particular about hiding
round and round his neck, and we crawled out through our hole and down
[61]
CHAPTER LXXXV
“We are in the midst of it,” I said, “quiet as it is. That flicker in
come to the end of the woods and reach the bright sunshine again. To

So then I lit out—for bed, I said, meaning some time or another. When I
“Dawson”	263
nothing in the world that was human—just looked like a couple of
Another day we drove to the Cloister of Simeon, where men and women possessed by the devil assemble for the expulsion of the Evil Spirit. When we entered the church we saw about a dozen women stretched flat on the floor before the Altar, in a fit of epilepsy. All at once they jumped up and began to shout: “There he is, there he is, he is entering into me, go away, go away, Demon!” But as soon as the priest called up the women by their names, they grew calm at once and began to drink a spoonful of oil taken from an image-lamp.
from the window of a deserted house at Upper Halliford, whither we had

“Pardon me for interrupting you, madam,” cried Mr. Collins; “but if she is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. If, therefore, she actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better not to force her into accepting me, because, if liable to such defects of temper, she could not contribute much to my felicity.”
There was a noble good lot of them down cellar, and it took us a whole
would do next. Without stopping an instant the fierce beasts also began
“I know; but you don’t want it but fifteen minutes, to carry the
wretched, in the darkness of the night.
“One of my greatest fears was the Witches, for while I had no magical
their heads to show they understood, and stooping a little and resting
Palace of Oz, the Great Wizard. There was a soldier before the door,
above the houses in front of them against the hot, blue sky. The
husband’s going over to see—him and another man. He was gone up the
have you here. Well, to think of that performance! I don’t deny it, I
forwards on the skylight, hanging on from shutter to shutter, for the
[182]
made no difference to Aunt Sally; she despised snakes, be the breed

March 17th.—My arrival caused the greatest excitement among the Christian inhabitants of Erzeroum. They are all singing my praises for having come out here by those[99] shocking roads, and they say that I certainly deserve a medal as a reward for my bravery.
May 28th.—A very disagreeable incident occurred last night, a musket-ball whizzed close past the sentry on duty near the guard-house. Investigations were made and the inhabitants handed over a Turkish solider this morning, who said that in jumping over a wall he had awkwardly let fall his gun, which fired itself. The culprit is arrested.
seen the heliograph flickering in the west.
was in ruther too much of a sweat to think of so many things. It warn’t

chopping, because they’re most always doing it on a raft; you’d see the
and chopped so well that soon he cleared a passage for the entire
her swiftly through the air until they came to the castle, where they
But that idea was a failure; for pretty soon it begun to storm again,
moments the entire band stood before her.
see this one turn up in the morning all sound and right. So she had to
long before in his life. He got so worked up, and got to running on so


“They will. But—— It will relieve things over here a bit. And
machines are in most cases actuated by a sort of sham musculature of
and London empty will leave them sweet and clean. The main drains are
No; such was not the fate of

of the spectrum is concerned, we are still entirely ignorant of the

“It came down gradually, and I was not hurt a bit. But I found myself
its unburned pine woods, seemed the least hurt of any place along the


it was done by a man in a ditch with a flag on a long pole. The

tell you, to see how the lawyer had took them in), “and here’s _this_
“The idea of _you_ lynching anybody! It’s amusing. The idea of you

do?”

this way and that, shouting, “It’s the brazen serpent in the
“The garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane from Rosings Park, her Ladyship’s residence.”
The second monster followed the first, and at that the artilleryman
Neither is the composition of the Black Smoke known, which the Martians
 III. ON HORSELL COMMON.

white moonlight the pit was in darkness, and, except for the clinking
“Look at Lady Jane Grey,” he says; “look at Gilford Dudley; look at old
shall I go to that doctor, private, and blow on these frauds? No—that

“I do not cough for my own amusement,” replied Kitty, fretfully. “When is your next ball to be, Lizzy?”

“Nor church?”
The Cowardly Lion
“Why have you come to the South Country?”
swamp, up there where the feud was; and such-like times; and would
Our captain had sent a boat ashore to warn the authorities of our arrival. We were afraid we should be in quarantine owing to the plague raging at the time in India. We had to undergo a sanitary inspection and waited a long time for the doctor. At last, a boat flying a yellow flag, bearing the inscription: “Health Officer,” came off to us. It contained the port-doctor. It is dreadful if we have to perform a quarantine! It’s all right. The native passengers only passed the ordeal of medical examination. They showed their tongues and their eyelids to the doctor, and after he had examined the state of their health, we were permitted to land. We were instantly surrounded by a whole fleet of junks full of howling natives, who attacked our boat offering their different wares insistingly in funny English: “You bye laidee, veree nice, you bye!” Naked bronze-coloured boys, screaming out “A la mer!” dived into the water after the coins dropped overboard by passengers, and came to the surface smiling, holding the coins between their teeth. They won’t trouble themselves to search for coppers, and discover them in the deep with their lynx eyes.
It slammed again. The curtains of my study fluttered out of the open
all bright and clear-cut, hard and silent, under the dawn of that last

A flicker of flame went up through the rising steam, and then the

the midday temperature barely approaches that of our coldest winter.

Kissingen is surrounded by mountains and buried in verdure. It is the favourite meeting-place for aristocratic Europe. There is a great rush of ailing humanity towards these healing waters.
“That it ought not to be attempted. Mr. Darcy has not authorized me to make his communication public. On the contrary, every particular relative to his sister was meant to be kept as much as possible to myself; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of his conduct, who will believe me? The general prejudice against Mr. Darcy is so violent, that it would be the death of half the good people in Meryton, to attempt to place him in an amiable light. I am not equal to it. Wickham will soon be gone; and, therefore, it will not signify to anybody here what he really is. Some time hence it will be all found out, and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before. At present I will say nothing about it.”
inky nothingness. For a day and a half he remained there, weary,

we can com—”


learned that Ogilvy, Stent, and Henderson were with others in this
that rose therefrom could be seen from the hills about Merrow, and
I now resume my subject, after a digression that may be looked upon as a preface, which the reader may perhaps think might have been spared.

“I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and, when your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing while she is ill?”
“Well, it’s lucky; because sometimes people do get hurt. Two years ago
CHAPTER XLI.

“The chances against anything manlike on Mars are a million to one,” he
In the age of the Old Testament history when Solomon was building the temple at Jerusalem it is very probable that the ships of Hiram, laden with gold and ivory, apes and peacocks, were bringing their treasures from that land beyond the Red Sea, which is the India of our to-day. And it is also likely that upon those shores the trading instinct of the Hebrews had established stations for the ingathering of these costly freights, and in this strange land the praises of Jehovah were heard in some simple synagogue with its window open towards the sacred city of the Hebrews across the wide sea.
that he laid still; he was dead. Then they pulled his daughter away
The new old gentleman turns brisk towards Ab Turner and his pard, and
railway towards Horsell Common. In the hurry of our departure this
company. Pretty soon a spider went crawling up my shoulder, and I

about dawn this morning; then some men in a skiff come by, and as good
“Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter—Darcy must speak for himself.”
“Melle. Vava, you’re a darling! I’m so glad you came down. I love you so much I should like to eat you up!” cried out Danys. I am called here by everyone Madame Vava, but Danys insisted in calling me Melle. Vava, saying that it didn’t suit me to be called Madame because I didn’t look at all like a married lady. Both children wanted to sit next me at table, “Oh! sit by me!” pleaded Danys, rubbing her cheek against my hand, “No, by me, please!” said Hermann, and I good-naturedly placed myself between them both.

“And I am going to ask him to send Toto and me back to Kansas,” added
sleepy—if you are anywheres where it won’t do for you to scratch, why
which a stream of white powder flowed into a circular basin below.


coming storm. There now came a sharp whistling in the air from the

The journey to Doubrovo proved to be a tedious business. We had to leave the railway behind; a coach drive of some fifty miles awaited us. We drove along a flat and somewhat desolate country road. The sun grew hot and so did I. Clouds of dust pursued us, and swarms of big flies attacked us; we chased them away with branches cut from the trees. A drive of four hours under such conditions is a prostrating experience!
“I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days as these.”
hasn’t.”

him, and he held it in his hand and waited till Tom’s and Bob’s was
mechanical Samson lying, with its tentacles bent and smashed and

stopped in our tracks till they catched up; and when they see it warn’t

house. I walked among the trees trying to find the footpath. It was
cycle shop. The front tire of the machine he got was punctured in
“You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us{269} into Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter myself, at least, that you will be able to do so. Lady Catherine’s great attentions to Mrs. Collins you have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear that your friend has drawn an unfortunate—but on this point it will be as well to be silent. Only let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in marriage. My dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way of thinking. There is in everything a most remarkable resemblance of character and ideas between us. We seem to have been designed for each other.”
At last I found myself awake and very hungry. I am inclined to believe

land (worth about seven thousand), and three thousand dollars in gold

We went to bed in the dark, our sole light consisted of a piece of candle stuck on a tea-saucer. We passed a troublesome, sleepless night, trembling with cold. The dampness mounted from the river by an aperture broken through the ceiling for ventilation. The deafening sound of gongs seemed to rend the air at equal intervals, making noise enough to wake the “Sleeping Beauty.” Every quarter of an hour the sound of tom-toms resounded, and immediately after, the sentinels sent up their watch-cry accompanied by the beating of drums and the ringing of bells. The Chinese make all this noise through superstition to chase away the evil spirit!


about their little affairs, serene in their assurance of their empire

“There comes a ship to bring us provisions by which I send you a few lines. On the 29th of January we left Deal. God hath given us a favourable wind, with which we have already sailed past Portsmouth. Praised be His name we are all well. Our cabin is below that of the captain. We are alone, for which we have thankfully to acknowledge the goodness of God. We are as conveniently accommodated as can be expected on board ship. God be praised for it! The captain is a good, plain dealing man, and the other passengers show us much kindness. We talk English as yet very badly but they all encourage us to speak and no one laughs at our blunders. Several of them know a little Latin and use their utmost endeavours to explain to us whatever we do not understand. We return hearty thanks to God for having brought us to this ship. Hitherto He hath graciously preserved us, that no one[Pg 38] has sustained any hurt, except that last night a sailor fell into the water; however, he was saved. The number of persons on board is about a hundred and a few passengers. We pass our time in reading the Holy Scriptures in the original language and other good books, and practise reading and writing English, according to your kind instruction. There are persons on board who go to India for pleasure. One of them goes for the fifth time and says it is a very pleasant voyage. There are also many children on board who learn navigation. Now this I have written in haste. May Jesus bless you abundantly and hear your prayers and those of other children and servants of God for us! O the Lord is faithful and never yet forsook His people.”

would a throwed more style into it, but I can’t do that very handy, not
“The first pleasing earnest of their welcome.”

“_Now_, old Jim, you’re a free man _again_, and I bet you won’t ever be

“I also,” said the Tin Woodman, “am well-pleased with my new heart;
I have a dim memory of the foot of a Martian coming down within a score
Mme. Beurgier couldn’t sleep for the heat, and went one night for a stroll on the outskirts of Michigan Common. She saw heaps of rags here and there on the grass; she touched one of them with her foot, and oh, what a jump she gave when from the rags strange and somewhat terrifying sounds proceeded, that indicated a drunken sleep. It appeared that the whole place swarmed with houseless vagrants, evidently prepared to camp out-of-doors till morning.
Brompton Road came out clear and little in the sunrise, the jagged
dress, belted small under the armpits, with bulges like a cabbage in

But, they say in France—but, they say in England, all the articles of consumption are already so loaded, that it is impossible to think of increasing the weight. The French Farmers General themselves tremble when they propose to increase the duties on any article; will not consumption suffer by it?—Such is every where the terrible argument that prevents the establishment of the only unexceptionable system, the only equitable, and the only advantageous one to the people—to the people, on whose account they pretend to be so anxious.—That system, it is[231] true, would lessen by one half, the nominal value of those operations that are held in so important a light, of all those tricks of which the contrivers themselves entertain so high an opinion; but what ease, what leisure would not this very system procure to the Minister! Let us then see whether the formidable argument, on which is grounded the impossibility of doing the best, will bear the analysis, so formidable also in so many cases.
and she will enchant us and make us her slaves.”
Then perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, she added, “Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this useful lesson:—that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable, that one false step involves her in endless ruin, that her reputation is no less brittle than it is beautiful, and that she cannot be too much guarded in her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex.”
a number of copper and tin vessels below it, the wallpaper imitating
“What the dickens are they like?” asked the lieutenant.
PRÉFACE
the growing light of the east, three of the metallic giants stood about
Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and not many in which his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise; and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings to be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many hours. Now and then they were honoured with a call from her Ladyship, and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during these visits. She examined into their employments, looked at their work, and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangement of the furniture, or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if she accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of finding out that Mrs. Collins’s joints of meat were too large for her family.{211}
three mile away, where there was three or four lights twinkling. A


enough leg, though it was too long for me and not long enough for Jim,

gang of murderers in yonder, and if we don’t hunt up their boat and set
intelligent life might have developed there far, or indeed at all,
that stretched about the Emerald City on every side. They slept that

“Well,” he says, “there’s excuse for picks and letting-on in a case
“Stuff! stealing cattle and such things ain’t robbery; it’s burglary,”
C. Sloutchevsky

“My name is Dorothy,” said the girl, “and I am going to the Emerald
as night was most gone we stopped navigating and tied up—nearly always

“No,” I says, “I reckon not.”
“In marrying your nephew, I should not consider myself as quitting that sphere. He is a gentleman; I am a gentleman’s daughter; so far we are equal.”
it was good to hear; and I wished I could tell her a thousand lies, so
the wreck again just in time, and we fetched the stabboard derrick, and
worry about me. Can you help me find my way?”

“Where is this city?” asked Dorothy.

“Why not?” she replied.
“If I cannot harness you,” said the Witch to the Lion, speaking through

The Emir, who was in Moscow at the time, was represented by three high dignitaries. A large tent had been erected just opposite the station, in which was prepared an abundant dastarkhan (native dainties of all kinds.) The long table covered with a white table-cloth reminded one of European customs, but the throng of natives in long khalats and turbans, the bizarre sounds of the native music and all this Oriental[493] mise-en-scène, testified that we were very far from Europe, in the centre of Mohametanism, on a visit to an Asiatic sovereign. I was peeping through the blinds of the window and watched the crowd on the platform. I saw the glare of the torches, carried by the natives, on the faces and the moving forms. The whole Russian colony was assembled on the platform. A deputation of Bokharans came up to present “Bread and Salt” to my husband. Before leaving Kermineh Sergy sent a telegram to the Emir to thank him for the friendly reception which had been made to him by his representatives.
 The Doctor speaks for Jim
this first glimpse, I was overcome with disgust and dread.
“It’s natural and right for ’em to talk different from each other,
“Why, you born fool!” She took up the spinning stick, and it looked
enormous velocity towards this earth. This jet of fire had become


“Don’t ever let on to know us. And if you hear any digging going on
On the first day of our arrival, at table-d’hôte, my eyes travelled round the table and noticed an attractive-looking English trio sitting opposite to us: Mr Delbruck, his son Alfred and his nephew Walter Heape, a fine, fresh-looking boy, with whom I made a nice little bit of flirtation during our stay in Biarritz. He was very much drawn towards me; I also entertained tender feelings towards him. (And what of the prince of Montenegro?) But, never mind the prince, he was far enough away, just then, anyhow!


always mighty good that way, Jim was. I crawled into the wigwam, but
{1}
rod; but you’ll be good, _won’t_ you? And you won’t go? For _my_ sake.”
perhaps he will dream that he has found courage at last.”
“All right,” I says, “I don’t want nothing more out of _you_ than just
at last and have such good times.

been painted, but the sun blistered the paint and the rains washed it
and I judged I ought to told her father about that paper and the

fellowmen were doing. I was still upon the roof when the late moon
Them rapscallions took in four hundred and sixty-five dollars in that
branches shut out the daylight; but the travelers did not stop, and


“Looky here, Bilgewater,” he says, “I’m nation sorry for you, but you




their runaway nigger, but hadn’t got no answer, because there warn’t no
shining, and outside of the shadows it made it most as light as day. I
[416]
Yet if, in a State, we must be father, brother, sister, widow, orphan, capitalist, in fine, or without a capital, but with the faculty of acquiring one; which, then, is the class of citizens interested in paying off, either totally, or in part and by degrees, the national debt, when once it is incurred? Besides, if the reimbursement cannot be effected but at the public expence, what advantage will the public derive from this operation?

“_Who_ is?”
Pirate at the Camp—meeting.—The Duke as a Printer.
“Don’t mind Mr. Joker,” said the Princess to Dorothy. “He is



The dusky houses about me stood faint and tall and dim; the trees
I saw that the driving clouds had been pierced as it were by a thread
he begun to speak, and I see straight off he pronounced _like_ an
spate and made my way to the hill going up towards Roehampton and came
with his cane; and then he stood up straight and stiff where Sherburn
into their planet, from which their shots were fired at us. Peculiar
nearly died; because he judged it was all up with _him_, anyway it could
Next day we visited the “Certosa,” a convent situated on a high mountain in the outskirts of Florence. The cloister opens hospitable doors to strangers. We were gallantly received by the monks, who live here a luxurious life. Each monk occupies an apartment of several rooms, with a patch of garden. A tall, stout monk, in flowing white robes, served as guide to us. He conducted us, clacking his sandals on the stone flags, along white bare corridors paved with marble, which echoed to our footsteps. We were taken into a large refectory resembling much more an elegant Parisian restaurant. Then we went to the dormitory where the monks sleep. When our guide ushered us into his bedroom, I stealthily touched his bed and found it far too soft for a recluse. Before leaving the cloister we bought a few bottles of the “certosa liqueur” fabricated by the monks, for which we had to pay a considerable tax before entering Florence. Feeling awfully hungry, we stopped half-way at an “Osteria” when passing through the little town of Galuppi. It was very cool and pleasant here after the dusty road, but our dinner had been uneatable: we had a dish of macaroni swimming in oil, and a fish fried also in oil. Ugh—the horror! Night was approaching and icy cold rain began to fall. We returned to Florence famished and chilled to the very bone. And our room at the hotel was so cold! You feel the cold much more abroad than in Russia, where the houses are much better heated. How I long for our warm Russian stoves!

sound. Then, the night you’re ready, fetch the leg a kick, down she
work—I’ve seen hundreds of ’em, bit of breakfast in hand, running wild
greenish blue. The tops of the pine trees and the roofs of Horsell came
o’ de water, en dey brings me truck to eat every night, en tells me how


The old gentleman wrote, but nobody couldn’t read it. The lawyer looked
found a rattlesnake in there. I killed him, and curled him up on the
here was the Scarecrow, as good as ever, thanking them over and over
The question concerning luxury leads to the investigation of some ideas on the Colonies; I do not mean that of taxing them, either in a direct or indirect manner, for the reason truly specious, that the wars undertaken for their protection, having loaded the nation with taxes to an enormous amount, it is but just that they should come in for a share of the burden.
been disabled by them. Flying hussars have been galloping into
all fury, too, and I never see the wind blow so. It was one of these


it when he says this.
It will appear hereafter, that 9 millions of taxes laid on the articles of consumption, would increase, by about 14 millions, the price or nominal value of the whole produce of industry, rated upon supposition at 56 millions. Now it seems to me equally unjust and impossible, that the total amount of the produce of agriculture should not thereby be increased in the like proportion: I beg to be allowed this supposition, until I assign my reasons for it, and bring proofs sufficiently positive to ascertain the fact.
shape, and his collar and cuffs. Outside there began a metallic
In the night the noise of the ocean hindered our sleep, and we decided to move to the Villa Gaston, a comfortable boarding-house, where we paid five francs a day for an apartment of two rooms.



CHAPTER IV.
thanked her kindly and oiled himself thoroughly with his jeweled
CHAPTER XXX.


hands off of them frauds, saying all the time:

and it glistened like burnished silver.
with a lot of our folks I used to see a lot of the Shepherdsons there
Our old capital is crowded to its utmost. People come from all parts of the world to see the ceremony of crowning. Every place in the trains was booked weeks in advance. The troops of the Guard Regiments continue to arrive from St. Petersburg. Along the streets move cavalry and guns. At our entrance door a placard says, “Staff of all the troops quartered in Moscow during the Coronation festivals.”
with that imaginary blue-arrow mark. That _was_ bright—it was right

“I never thought Mr. Darcy so deficient in the appearance of it as you used to do.”
followed around to see. I stood on the bank and looked out over the
keep away the other wild beasts. It seems to me they must be more

“Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?”
he has; he might scare them out of here yet.

Two years afterwards when Archbishop Wake was acting as President of the Society he sent to Ziegenbalg and his colleague Gründler a Latin letter full of good wishes. The following extract will show the spirit of this Apostolic epistle:—

I lived a mechanical existence; at ten o’clock I got out of bed, at twelve I went back to it again. One day was the same to me as another; I would not take interest in anything, and was only thirsting for news from the seat of war. Our military ladies, who were not depressed like me, though their husbands were also at the war, visited me frequently, being prompted by kindly wishes to raise me from my apathy. They succeeded somewhat to break the monotony of my life, bringing in the freshness of the outer world.
CHAPTER LXII
The Lion was angry at this speech, but could say nothing in reply, and
Thanking the good woman, they started afresh and walked by the fields
The Peru is a small vessel little fitted to do battle with such waves as we encountered. The ship is plying ordinarily between America and Panama, and it is quite accidentally that she is bound now to Japan. On her last voyage the Peru touched Honolulu.
It may be said in France, it is true, that by a tax laid on private loan-covenants, those inconveniences are partly removed; but this very removal is only an additional obstacle, thrown in the way of agriculture, to impede its progress;—the man who could lend to the cultivator, besides the fear of not receiving back his money when wanted, has before his eyes the certainty of being charged with the twentieth penny laid on the interest of the money thus advanced, and consequently, as often as he conveniently can, lends that money to a merchant, who besides his punctuality in paying at the fixed time, never hesitates to allow the usual interest without any deduction whatever.
of the biggest mice spoke.
Others took the Scarecrow and the Woodman and the Lion, and one little
“Yes—the late Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best living in his gift. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me. I cannot do justice to his kindness. He meant to provide for me amply, and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was given elsewhere.”

She explained what its effects on her had been, and how gradually all her former prejudices had been removed.
They appear to have been weatherbound at Falmouth for over a month but the delay was not lost upon Schwartz and his colleagues. They had a little unexpected quiet in which to prosecute their studies, and, as will be seen by the letter which Schwartz wrote on their arrival at Tranquebar, they were enabled to keep in touch with England a little longer and felt the pulse of that throbbing wave of revival of religion which under the Wesleys and Whitefield was passing over the people. It is evident that during their brief stay in London this had not affected them; being so much in the company of the Royal chaplain, and not having time or inclination to visit any parts of the country, they had missed this stimulus to their faith. But in the little world of their life on board during this long voyage of four months from their leaving the shelter of Falmouth Harbour, they had many experiences to record, which awakened a spirit of thankfulness, and as this was the first time they had made a voyage the incidents related by Schwartz in his letter of 8th October, 1750, are well worth preserving. They give us a side light of his character and how step by step[Pg 40] and day by day God was preparing him for the great work which was awaiting him at Tranquebar.
middle of the floor, from which a ladder led down into the small, dark

get off at once because the Martians are coming. We heard guns firing

June 30th.—I could not sleep the whole night. I tried to lie down on the floor under the improvised punkah, but it didn’t help a bit. I was quite worn out and had a good cry. Maria Michaelovna and my maid Feoktista came to keep me company. The moon was beginning to pale when Sergy took me on the deck, where mattresses had been laid down for us on the floor. Whilst we passed along the lower deck we had to step over the recruits who lay on the deck one beside the other.
“I’ll tell you. It ain’t right, and it ain’t moral, and I wouldn’t like
first I ever see it growing, and it made the woods look solemn and
After having ordered a fire to be lit in our room, we went to present ourselves to the Wunderfrau, who lives in a private house close to the sanatorium. A number of people, coming from all parts of the world, sat about waiting in the drawing-room. Frau Hohenmeister has wide-world fame and works wonders. The doctoress welcomed us affably and gave me a friendly pat, calling me all the time, “Mein Kind, mein Schatz.” She is a short and fat woman, with a round face and round black eyes—in short, she is round everywhere. My German being very elementary, I called to my help all the German words I knew to answer the Wunderfrau’s questions. That night, before going to bed, we devoured a whole box of caviare which we had brought from Moscow, as we were to be put on diet the following day.



“We’ll do it!” they all shouted; “and if we don’t find them marks we’ll

separate editions as further news came to hand, some even in default of
across the road. But this one was so broad and deep that the Lion knew
“If Christians were employed in some important offices, they should, if they misbehaved, be doubly punished, but to reject them entirely is not right and discourageth.
nor do I know of any living person who has seen him.”
which was a corn-shuck tick; there’s always cobs around about in a
The heather was on fire eastward, and a thin blue smoke rose against

A secret notice was given to the police that the anarchists were preparing to blow up the Winter Palace, which is looking now like a fortress encircled with a rope; even generals are not permitted to enter its enclosure.

to this cabin. If we get time, the night of the escape, we’ll dig one.”
crushed even in Bishopsgate Street, a couple of hundred yards or more
For a long time I drifted, so painful and weary was I after the
and so it made the cold shivers run over me. Then away out in the woods
sums of money offered by fugitives, and it is said that many who swam
 Watching the Boat
These sparks was our clock—the first one that showed again meant



there ain’t no telling how soon you are going to need it, away from

window had been left open. The passage was dark, and, by contrast with


it came, I saw that he was a sturdy man, cheaply but not shabbily
Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister’s proficiency.
It was night when we left the port. Amongst the passengers we have on board the wife of the Japanese Ambassador in London, who was going to join her husband. She was accompanied by her sister and a lady companion, with whom she practised English and took lessons in geography on deck. Both Japanese ladies are dressed in the latest Parisian fashion, and it is only their small turned-up eyes and high-boned cheeks, which betray their nationality.
little group of black specks with the flag of white had been swept out
who had been standing silently by, gave a loud shout and pointed to the
extend the field of their operations, and did not come beyond the
AFEW days after this visit, Mr. Bingley called again, and alone. His friend had left him that morning for London, but was to return home in ten days’ time. He sat with them above an hour, and was{423} in remarkably good spirits. Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them; but, with many expressions of concern, he confessed himself engaged elsewhere.
We had a long time to wait at Kermineh because the Emir had come to see the Prince of Oldenbourg, and our train was not due to start for two mortal hours. I must just have patience and wait, but as patience is an unknown word in my vocabulary, I grumbled awfully at the delay. This time I travelled incognito and was left in peace; my blinds were scrupulously drawn down. Trying to shorten the hours that separated me from my husband, I went to bed directly after dinner. Oh, I wish it was to-morrow!
“In the bank for to be collected. Where _would_ it be?”
land.
So when he sees me getting the canoe ready, he says:
Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy, drawn when she was only eight years old.


when it faces danger. The True courage is in facing danger when you are
“Yes; right smart chance of funerals. But they don’t always kill. Pa’s
When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more{177} on the subject. “It seems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane,” said she. “I am sorry it went off. But these things happen so often! A young man, such as you describe Mr. Bingley, so easily falls in love with a pretty girl for a few weeks, and, when accident separates them, so easily forgets her, that these sort of inconstancies are very frequent.”
“I think I could jump over it,” said the Cowardly Lion, after measuring
“Set down, my boy; I wouldn’t strain myself if I was you. I reckon you

that camp-meeting for all it was worth, and I might go, too.
superiority over man lay. We men, with our bicycles and road-skates,
two big rivers joined together there, that would show. But I said maybe


“Three hundred dollars is a power of money. I wish my mother could get
anyway.
CHAPTER LIII.
the house raised it up higher and higher, until it was at the very top
“We wish to pass the night with you, if you will allow us,” answered
Stick a candle in your pocket; I can’t rest, Jim, till we give her a


mantelpiece, with a picture of a town painted on the bottom half of the

know. Well, after a long time I heard the clock away off in the town go
decorum were necessarily different from ours; and not only were they

workmen wielding spades and pickaxes. Stent was giving directions in a


Then the Witch looked at the big, shaggy Lion and asked, “When Dorothy

In returning from our ride this morning we saw a group of mollahs assembled before our house. They had come to complain against the Russian police that had arrived to take an inventory of all their goods, and had begun to make an account of their wives and cattle, it proved to be the Sanitary Commission who were obtaining necessary information. My husband took immediate measures to calm the population.

law. But I didn’t do it pretty good, and when I got done I see she
something for me first. Help me and I will help you.”
Then they all stuck a pin in their fingers to get blood to sign with,
course that was all right, because she done it herself.
garden, fell into, rather than found, a fortunate ditch, and lay there,
March 2nd.—The gradual lowering of the temperature is very sensible. Since yesterday the punkahs in the salon had ceased to work and the light dresses and straw hats on board have been replaced by warm coats and woollens of all kinds. The wind is getting fresher and the sea begins to ripple. It is the “mistral” coming on; we are rolling terribly on the Mediterranean. It is not at all jolly, especially with the perspective of quarantine at Marseilles.
nigger, _sable_, with his bundle over his shoulder on a bar sinister;
Money is not hid under ground in a country where administration is convinced, both of the impossibility of the people paying exorbitant taxes, without proportionable riches, and of the impossibility of being as rich as is requisite for the discharge of enormous taxes, when individuals are compelled to appear less rich, that they may be less burdened with imposts.
We are home at last! No more horrid hotels, no more travelling! We remained a few days in town and removed to the camp on the Khodinka Field, where a large barrack, consisting of a score of rooms, was assigned to us. I fully enjoyed our camp life. The trumpet exercises and the singing in chorus of the soldiers resounded from early morning until night.
head, and his head was nearly in the fire. I set there behind a clump
escaped.
“Jane happened to look round.”
this man’s reasoning. In the days before the invasion no one would have


strides down the riverbank from the direction of Chertsey. The
On and on they walked, and it seemed that the great carpet of deadly
“I believe, ma’am, I may safely promise you never to dance with him.”
“No, you’re out, there. They hain’t got it.”

every time he told it he spread it more and more, till by-and-by he
“I do, indeed,” replied Elizabeth, colouring. “I told you the other day of his infamous behaviour to Mr. Darcy; and you, yourself, when last at Longbourn, heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had behaved with such forbearance and liberality towards him. And there are other circumstances which I am not at liberty—which it is not worth while to relate; but his lies about the whole Pemberley family are endless. From what he said of Miss Darcy, I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud, reserved, disagreeable girl. Yet he knew to the contrary himself. He must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found her.”

was in by the time midnight come last night. I hope to gracious if I
Let us suppose, that, by the suppression of the monopoly enjoyed by the manufacturers, and of which they are so jealous, the price of the whole of their goods should fall one tenth; in such a case, the wheat which the new taxes will enhance in price, I suppose, in the proportion of 40 to 44, would, upon a medium, fall back to 40; and in this case again the produce of the manufactories would only cost industry 20 instead of 22, at which they will be rated when wheat shall have risen from 40 to 44; for, in the latter supposition, it will be necessary for industry to pay finally this increase of expence, in favour of the artificers, who would not long submit to an injustice, without presenting petitions in their own way: just as wheat must indispensably rise from 40 to 44, in order that the land and money-proprietors be not compelled to leave their country, to the great prejudice of the internal consumption, so essential to the truest interest of the manufacturer.
it away and put it on her own skinny foot.
“I am astonished,” said Miss Bingley, “that my father should have left so small a collection of books. What a delightful library you have at Pemberley, Mr. Darcy!”
I stepped over him gingerly and pushed on up the hill. I made my way by
That night about ten we hove in sight of the lights of a town away down
Our little party of travelers awakened the next morning refreshed and
surprised me. At the scent of me he barked shortly.
sprawling Martians were no longer to be seen, the mound of blue-green
drawings of these appearances in order to appreciate fully their


Four of the planets were naturally habitable, but five there were which should be so in the future. There was one yet a glowing planet, still hot from its formation. Two were so far from the major sun that they were cold to absolute zero, save when they were in conjunction with the minor sun. These the engineers and astro-physicists had investigated. They would be drawn nearer the sun when the population warranted, and one more that turned on its axis but once a year could easily be started rotating. Air and water it lacked, but that would be easy to supply. And a last planet was so close to the mighty blazing Betelguese that it was kept dull red by the titanic furnace so near it, a scant thirty million miles away. That would be drawn to a more comfortable distance. There was indeed room for much expansion in this system.


until they came to the kitchen, where the Witch bade her clean the pots
rushing, as it seemed, headlong towards me. And I was galloping hard to
it a kind heart?”
“You owdacious puppy!”

The lawyer done it, and says:
_nigger stealer!_
So Tom was stumped. But he studied it over, and then said Jim would
immediately withdrawn, and afterwards a thin rod rose up, joint by
stupid; and lots will be worried by a sort of feeling that it’s all
Well, the old man he liked that speech, and he mighty soon got it so he
you’ve missed him along the road. I _know_ it’s so—something tells me
beautiful. And I am sure Aunt Em will be dreadfully worried over my


come away. Then came soldiers. We went out to look, and there were
have none of them objections to it.
We waited for daybreak to enter the narrow port of Piræus. The Russian military agent, Baron Traubenberg, came to meet us in a launch belonging to a Russian man-of-war, in which we went over to the landing-stage, and then up to Athens by train. The journey was a short one, we got there in twenty minutes. The country is unattractive, deprived of vegetation and looking fearfully burnt up; the prevalent colour is sandy-yellow.
good lunch and took it up to our room and went to bed, and got up about
buzzing of the rain, and the thrashing of the wind, and the splitting
All the exports from England to the colonies, the monopoly of which she has preserved by the peace, (including her trade to India) amounted, in 1773, to 2,430,420l. (for the details see Sir Charles Whitworth). Now the annual expence of the British navy, and its accessaries, considering the increase in that of France, must be, at present, or will be soon, 2,000,000l. May it not be fairly concluded, that England is about to pay the annual sum of 2 millions sterling, in order to maintain herself in the exclusive privilege of carrying annually to the distance of 1500, of 2000, of 4 or 6000 leagues, the value of 2,432,420l. in European goods?—And would not that privilege be dearly bought, were not France to lay out annually likewise 45 millions of livres tournois, in protecting her privileged exportation?
    And did young Stephen die?
She had never heard of his having had any relations,{362} except a father and mother, both of whom had been dead many years. It was possible, however, that some of his companions in the ——shire might be able to give more information; and though she was not very sanguine in expecting it, the application was a something to look forward to.

threatened to beat her with the same old umbrella she always carried in
long as I have my oil-can, and nothing can hurt the Scarecrow, while
get up, or lay down, or _set_ down, Sister Ridgeway. Why, they’d steal
rocks at the bottom.

For some days the bad weather kept us indoors, it came on to rain as if it never meant to stop. Warmly wrapped up in a shawl I passed many dull hours lolling rather disconsolately in an easy chair, listening to the monotonous song of the wind in the chimney—a lively way to pass the time! We were growing very weary of Dieppe; I am absolutely sick of the place, and the best thing we can do is to pack up and go. As there was nothing to keep us here we decided, one wet, gloomy afternoon, to fling Dieppe to the winds and start for Paris, thence to travel right out to Switzerland.
wuz him.”
“Discussions these, important at all times, dangerous for every one a few years ago, unbecoming perhaps in a private individual at a time when the true politicians of Europe will find themselves compelled to make them the object of their most serious meditations;—discussions, in fine, entirely out of the way of a cultivator, who could not, without a palpable folly, suffer himself to be led into them by the examination of his blade of grass, and of a principle too evident to be contested.” (Essai sur la culture de la canne à sucre.)
Q. If the productor be discouraged by the low price set upon his productions, and take proper measures to produce less, in order to save the expence attending a greater production, and in the mean time to gain by producing less as much as he could gain by producing more, will you not then be guilty of having wronged the State of all the productions which you crush in the very bud, by the prohibition you sue for?
scratched some marks on a tin plate and throwed it out of the


part of the disk, first at the Lick Observatory, then by Perrotin of
We reached Kars in safety some little time before sunset, after having been in the saddle three days, riding at the rate of 50 miles a day, and intended to put up at the London Hotel for rest, but General Franchini, the governor of Kars, took us off to his house. I was tired out and unable to do anything but rest and wanted a good sleep after our long journey. I hurried up to my room and stretched my tired limbs in the comfort of my bed.
crowd of people had assembled in and about the railway station, and the

it’s your’n; and you turn back and fool along slow, so as to get to the
bondage. So she chose a number of the Winkies who looked as if they

The sun had set when we arrived at Kermineh in the domains of the Emir of Bokhara. The railway station is situated at ten kilometres from the capital of Bokhara bearing the same name. I was told that the customs in that barbarian country reminded one of prehistoric times. The prison at Kermineh consists of three deep pits in which swarm pell-mell women, men, and children. On approaching the station we saw fires lighted in tar-barrels, showing two battalions of Bokhara soldiers ranged along the railway-line. In the semi-darkness we could have easily taken these men dressed in Russian-cut uniforms, for Russian soldiers, especially whilst they shouted in chorus loud hurras when my husband appeared at the door of his car.
vibration continued with wearisome persistence. I whispered for the
cottonwood thicket, and looked up and down and across; nothing in


[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]
to make myself easy and at home, and tell all about myself; but the old


When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to Elizabeth,—

little girl, who had been carried by a cyclone many miles from home;

had gone on perpetually until the force of its machinery was exhausted.
chess games. When dark came we decided to take the risk, and lit a
“Glinda is a Good Witch, isn’t she?” asked the child.
“Have you seen Oz?”



How much (not counting shillings and pence) England has lost, when her right-arm, as her colonies were called, was lopped off; and how much (not counting shillings and pence) Europe might lose by losing her sovereignty over both the Americas?


I must here go some steps back:


adventurous souls, it was afterwards found, went into the darkness and
raft a bit, and after that you wouldn’t hear nothing for you couldn’t
Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, “To treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of his father!” She could have added, “A young man, too, like you, whose very countenance may vouch for your being amiable.” But she contented herself with—“And one, too, who had probably been his own companion from childhood, connected together, as I think you said, in the closest manner.”
The first case is evidently false, since Sir Charles Whitworth’s Statements prove that the exports of England, which amounted, as we have before observed, upon a medium of 10 years before the war, only to 12 millions 776,614 pounds sterling, amounted, upon a medium of 10 years after the peace, to 14 millions 921,067 pounds sterling, and even to 15 millions 11,211 pounds sterling, if we take a medium of 12 years from the peace to 1773, at which period Sir Charles Whitworth’s Statements conclude; (which exhibits,[343] independently of the nominal augmentation supposed to have been occasioned by the taxes, a real augmentation of about a 17th, notwithstanding the real vacuum owing to the loss of those men who would have increased this exportation, if they had not perished in Germany, India, America, and at sea.)
castle, where they were stuffed with nice, clean straw; and behold!
“He don’t mean nothing; he’s always a-carryin’ on like that when he’s
whisper, “Jim!” and he answered up, right at my elbow, with a sort of a
“How God conducted us into Falmouth Harbour and what we there noticed to His praise, you will have observed from the short letter which we wrote on the day of our departure. On the 12th March God gave us a good wind, and everything was prepared for sailing. But the tide being then at ebb, we were obliged to wait till the evening as we could not otherwise get safely out of the harbour. In the afternoon an inhabitant of the town came on board who had been powerfully awakened by Mr Whitefield. This man related to us many things, particularly of the minister of Falmouth—how zealous he was in the discharge of his duty. We regretted that we had not visited him, but as the stranger intimated that he would salute him from us we sent the minister Professor Zimmermann’s treatise on the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ, translated into Latin, in which we wrote a few lines.
against the oven handle and stunned. I was insensible for a long time,



“Oh, Oz could do that easily enough,” declared the man. “He has more
allowed these lickings warn’t nothing to what she would do if we ever
Martians inconvenience. Dense clouds of smoke or dust, visible through
time the tree fell over with a crash, whereupon the Scarecrow’s clothes
Mr. Shaniawski has been before in America, and his knowledge of American customs was very useful to us. He took upon himself the task of finding us a lodging. We went to an hotel called the Clarendon, a sort of boarding-house, situated in the 18th street, where big and small apartments are the same price, three dollars and a half for each, including breakfast, lunch and dinner; there is a bathroom to each room. The head waiter led us up the handsomely carpeted stairs to our apartment. The room was pleasant and cool, with pictures on the walls and a thick carpet.
their legs and boots mostly intact; and of dead horses, fifty feet,


raise his axe another wolf came up, and he also fell under the sharp


and had to leave; and they’ve took my nigger, which is the only nigger
Well, the funeral sermon was very good, but pison long and tiresome;

On Colonies.	372
“Is he stuffed?” asked the Lion in surprise, as he watched her pick up

Slowly the mighty instrument swept over the field. Here and there a star would leap out of the darkness to form a burning disc, as one of the stars distant less than a dozen light years, swept across the field. Then at last came a star that blazed out as a burning disc an inch and a half across, emitting long tongues of shooting flame. Slowly it crept across the field. The instrument was adjusted for the motion of the Earth and this slow creeping was due to the motion of the star through space. Around it, far off across the field, circled a lone, small planet. Hal Jus watched it a while, then turned with a call of greeting, snapping off the current in the mighty instrument as several men walked in. They were seated now in several rows of chairs before the largest of the screens that were suspended on the walls of the room.
most; and then they put their arms around each other’s necks, and hung


“No more than in any other city,” replied Oz; “but when you wear green
[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]
a revolver all this time, but it had been under the seat when she and
Windsor. Great anxiety prevails in West Surrey, and earthworks are
 Jim’s Coat of Arms
orgies now in England. Orgies is better, because it means the thing
and each is happy in having a kingdom to rule besides, I think I should
the magic words. The Monkeys were as prompt as ever, and in a few
October 5th.—The atmosphere in my cabin being unbearable, I settled down on deck, seeking refuge under an awning, with books and work, and stretched myself comfortably in my own bamboo-chair that I had bought at Hong-Kong. By my side a Portuguese girl read aloud Psalms to a group of nuns wearing white caps floating in the air, whilst her friend, a Chinese girl, did needlework. The Good Sisters had recruited both girls into their Order. They sat telling their rosaries, their lips reverently framing words of prayer; I could hear the click of their beads. The opposite side of the deck was occupied by a Chinese school, a class of about thirty little boys, their long tresses entwined with pink ribbon. The teacher stood at one end of the rank and sang a single line of his lessons, and all the children sang it after him. Then came the second line, and they repeated it.
Partly stunned, he found himself facing the man who had held the
But no one heeded that very much. At the sight of the Martian’s
“I have an excessive regard for Jane Bennet,—she is really a very sweet girl,—and I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But with such a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is no chance of it.”
And while the Martians behind me were thus preparing for their next
again right away. But when he did get the thing straightened around he
got to travel with them a while longer, whether I want to or not—I
hands, crying. I felt awful bad to see it; of course anybody would. I
Hampton and Ditton, and then the pale beams of the electric light

lose the diseased, and to miss seeing diseased alive after the long
blow over by-and-by.


“Did Charlotte dine with you?”

“I suppose not,” said Dorothy.
as it advanced it swung loose what must have been the generator of the
complicated than _that_, Huck Finn.”
him.
“I have already told her so once, by your desire.”
“You have a house in town, I conclude?”

and studded everywhere with sparkling emeralds. They walked over a
“Yes.”

In his letter of 10th August, 1771, Schwartz refers to the air being filled with rumours of war and that the English troops are moving on to Tanjore. The King, who had shown such friendliness to Schwartz, was in difficulties, and General Smith with his soldiers was investing the foot of Wallam or Vellam, the strongest defence of Tanjore. A battle had already taken place and the storming of the walls was imminent, when a treaty of peace was suddenly signed and hostilities ceased. A little later on Schwartz was again in Tanjore and the King asked once more to see his old friend. He was taken to a shady spot and the King came under a yellow umbrella, looking much thinner and not so well as when they met two years before. “Padre,” he said, “I wish to speak with you privately” and led him away. But the chief Brahmin, who no doubt was on the alert, would not leave them alone and came in. On his entry the King bowed low and stood before him with folded hands, an evident sign of the absolute ascendancy which this priest had gained over his mind and action. The Brahmin took an elevated seat and required Schwartz to repeat the sermon which he had delivered at the Palace the day before. This was done very faithfully, to which the Brahmin listened in silence, but the King afterwards asked some questions about repentance and whether a man might return to his sins again. Schwartz replied that “true repentance consisted in a hatred of all sin, which was inconsistent with such a return.” Afterwards at a subsequent interview the poor ruler, the slave of his courtiers and sadly addicted to intoxicating drugs and the love of women, said to the missionary, after an earnest personal appeal that he would give his heart to God, “Alas! my padre, that is no easy matter!”
a depression of the ground. At the same moment the gun exploded behind

[12]

touches, and getting people and things all ship-shape and comfortable,


During dinner that same day, I saw by the expression of Sergy’s face that he was preparing a surprise for me. And, in fact, he made me awfully happy by announcing that instead of establishing me at Frau Weidemann’s boarding-house, he would take me with him to Piacenza, a small town in the neighbourhood of which the manœuvres would take place. And thus it was settled that we should start on the following day for the Baromees Islands on Lake Maggiore, and go straight from there to Piacenza.

“What did you want to walk all the way up to the steamboat for?”

sides; you couldn’t see a break in it hardly ever, or a light. We

himself in a back yard, and he said everybody that warn’t too young or



“It certainly is a most iniquitous affair,” said Mr. Bennet; “and nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn. But if you will listen to his letter, you may, perhaps, be a little softened by his manner of expressing himself.”
I had a great desire to cross the Arpatchai, a small frontier river between Alexandropol and Asia Minor, in order to be able to say that I had actually stepped upon Asiatic ground. The Arpatchai was frozen at this time of year. As soon as I found myself with Mrs. Zezemann, one of our military ladies, on the other side of the river, a group of Cossacks who guarded our frontier cried out to us to go back, apprehending, surely, that we had the intention of running away to Kars, where the Turkish army was concentrated. The Turkish sentinels, in their turn, regarded us with suspicion. Finding ourselves thus between two fires we had to retreat speedily, to my great disappointment, for we had nearly reached a small cottage inhabited by a Turkish major, with a dozen of soldiers. But “well begun is half done,” I made a fresh attempt at my exciting expedition, accompanied this time by Sergy and his interpreter. My heart beat quickly as we went under the roof of our future enemies, encircled by a group of red-fezzed soldiers who stared very hard at us. When the usual greetings had been exchanged, our courteous host, who seemed quite willing to be friendly, offered us black coffee, served in tiny cups. Fearing that the beverage was poisoned, I entreated Sergy not to taste it, but, notwithstanding, he drank a whole cupful and I hastened to follow his example, for if the coffee had been poisoned, we should undergo the same fate, both of us. In bidding good-bye to our host I expressed my intense desire to possess a white Persian cat with silky long wool, and the Turkish major promised to send me a beautiful specimen of that feline race. It was very charming of him, but though we had been treated first rate, I must say I was glad when we were safely home again.
First they came to a great hall in which were many ladies and gentlemen
“Well, I _reckon!_ There’s two hunderd dollars reward on him. It’s like
raiment, lemon-yellow gloves even, was visible inside the window
absolute despair. Our chief chance lay in the possibility of the
born at Sonnenburg of Neumark, in the Kingdom of Prussia,
to travel to the Land of the South and ask Glinda to help her. For, of
the station, as the officials, failing to realise that anything further

soon as they get in and not blow at all; then whilst they are getting

prayer to the foolish card-playing. I had a violent revulsion of
they thought they could mend him so he would be as good as ever. So
and his appearance were so wild—his hat had fallen off in the pit—that

_Thunder Child_ sounded through the reek, going off one after the
Families fetched their dinners with them from the country, and eat them
“After God has called me hence, I request you will be careful not to indulge a fondness for pomp and grandeur. You are convinced that my endeavours to serve you have been disinterested. What I now request you is, that you will be kind to the Christians—if they behave ill, let them be punished, but if they do well show yourself to them as their father and protector.

“To dig the foundations out from under that cabin with?”

Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was necessarily drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mrs. Bennet’s being quite unable to sit alone. Mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but she could still moralize over every morning visit; and as she was no longer mortified by comparisons between her sisters’ beauty and her own, it was suspected by her father that she submitted to the change without much reluctance.
was going to be trouble. The streets was full, and everybody was
the carriage windows, and saw only a rare, flickering, vanishing spark
Towards midday the wind abated, we were off the cyclone circle. The weather has become beautiful. Large white birds hover over us. After dinner I sat on deck in the moonlight, breathing with delight the fresh night air.

you had brains in your head, instead of straw.”
that—it’s the _count_ I’m thinkin’ about. We want to be awful square
violence I had been through, and so intense the heat upon the water.

made for it.
week, and Fourth of July?”
river.

sensibly. I sat about in the darkness of the scullery, in a state of
him?”

tree tipped and fell with a crash across the ditch, with its top
CHAPTER XLIX.
wear white.”
Jim sucked and sucked at the jug, and now and then he got out of his

So somebody started on a run. I walked down street a ways and stopped.
But neither force nor kindness availed; he was indeed beyond reason. He
 The Robbers Dispersed
cart. At the time it did not seem to me nearly so urgent that the
“Indeed I had. What will you think of my vanity? I believed you to be wishing, expecting my addresses.”
notes appeared here, there, and everywhere concerning the volcanoes
what she meant—I must help other people, and do everything I could for
tell how long, except maybe frogs or something.
We continued our way to the ostrich farm built on the moving sands of the Great Desert. It is kept by a French company, but the men who are occupied with the rearing of the huge birds are all Bedouins. At the entrance there is an inscription in French “Parc aux auturches” (Ostrich Park.) It contains about a thousand winged creatures, perched high on their long legs. The males are covered with black curling feathers, only the tail is cream-coloured, and the females are all grey-feathered. The heads of the giant birds reach far above the grating surrounding the farm. The gathering of the feathers, which takes place once a year in May, requires great precautions. The ostriches gathered into an enclosure are pushed one by one into a kind of box placed on four posts. Closed between the four boards, the bird is unable to fling out his terrible kicks, which could easily smash the operator’s legs and arms. Eight men must hold the ostrich during the operation. The section of artificial brooding is very interesting; it is often practised, as the ostriches, sitting during forty-three days on their eggs, frequently perish. Each ostrich gives yearly about a thousand francs of profit.[307] Before leaving the farm we bought a dozen beautiful feathers and a pair of enormous ostrich eggs. On our way back to Cairo we saw in the distance in the desert a vast English camp.
“Well, I b’lieve you, Huck. I—I _run off_.”
Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with an expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. She went on,—
“Has there been many killed, Buck?”
log again. Before he was t’other side of the river I was out of the

As they was starting down the ladder the duke he chuckles again, and
He looked surprised. He couldn’t seem to make it out. He says:
Queen—the Queen of all the Field Mice!”
He saw my face, and halted awkwardly.
Next morning we were back at Milan, and went to visit the “Campo Santo.” This vast cemetery is a veritable museum. We wandered about, looking at the tombstones, reading names and epitaphs. I noticed a great many beautiful monuments, including those of some fearless people who gave themselves monuments and erected shrines during their lifetime. We admired the mausoleum of Mario, the celebrated tenor, which is surmounted by his bust, with his favourite “cavatina” incrusted on a metal plate. The poor folk are buried in a remote corner of the cemetery; their tombs are all level, with black crosses and the number of the tomb painted on white labels. After the lapse of ten years all the bones are gathered together in heaps, in large boxes, and placed in the charnel-house. When we approached the Crematory Temple, we saw smoke coming out from the chimneys, and were told that the corpse of an Austrian engineer was being consumed at that moment. This dismal procedure generally takes about an hour-and-a-half, and costs fifty francs. When we entered the Crematory[195] I felt somewhat frightened, and the odour was so sickening that I thought I must faint, and felt sorely in want of smelling-salts, but the guardian’s pretty daughter seemed to feel quite at her ease in that ghastly kitchen, and ate her luncheon with great appetite. I hadn’t the courage to peep into the Crematory furnace, but Sergy perceived the corner of the huge frying-pan upon which broiled the corpse of the Austrian engineer. His wife and children, who were present at this awful ceremony, didn’t appear much impressed by it, and chattered on gaily all the time. It had been too much for my nerves, and when we were back at the hotel I went straight to bed and had a good cry.
I allowed another walk would do me good; but I couldn’t stir. But
Cowardly Lion, who is asleep in the poppy bed.”
“I don’t know enough,” replied the Scarecrow cheerfully. “My head is
the bell. After ringing several times, it was opened by the same

the little girl, although her friends were all quite happy and
“No doubt lots who had money have gone away to France,” he said. He

“Oh, well! it is just as he chooses. Nobody wants him to come; though I shall always say that he used my daughter extremely ill; and, if I was her, I would not have put up with it. Well, my comfort is, I am sure Jane will die of a broken heart, and then he will be sorry for what he has done.”



The broadening of men’s views that has resulted can scarcely be
mighty fidgety business to have to hold your hands still at such a



The consumer in those days was probably allowed, as is still the custom, a twelve-month’s credit upon half the articles purchased. Some of them took a longer time, if others a shorter one; but the stock of credit being then equal only to 35 millions, and now raised to 70 millions, we have clearly another mass of savings of—35,000,000.
set it. No light there; the house all dark—which made me feel sorry and
the Golden Cap.”
“Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy woman.{428}”
be harder than ever to get back to Kansas and Aunt Em again. Sometimes

“All right,” they said, and cleared out to lay for their uncles, and

In the spring the unveiling of the newly built monument of Poushkine, our great poet, took place; it was an event of considerable importance. A requiem in honour of the dead poet was sung on the square before the monument, covered all over with a white wrapper. It was a curious sight; a great crowd was assembled there. Amongst many deputations a group of young maidens arrayed in Russian national costumes, holding garlands of roses, especially attracted my attention. After the service ended, the military band struck up and the statue was unveiled amongst enthusiastic cheers. The mayor of the town invited me that same day to a grand banquet given in honour of the son of Poushkine, who had just been promoted to the grade of general, telling me that as an authoress I had to take part at the festival, but I refused, giving a plausible reason. Next day I went to a meeting of a literary committee treating on the works of Poushkine, held in the hall of the Assembly. On the big estrade well-known writers, and professors of the different[139] universities gave speeches. When Tourgeneff, our famous old writer appeared, great cheers rose from the audience.
finding it. Find it he did, soon after dawn, and not far from the


CHAPTER LVI.
rusty and blackened clinkers from the middle part of the machine.

It had been settled in the evening, between the aunt and niece, that such a striking civility as Miss Darcy’s, in coming to them on the very day of her arrival at Pemberley—for she had reached it only to a late breakfast—ought to be imitated, though it could not be equalled, by some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that it would be highly expedient to wait on her at Pemberley the following morning. They were, therefore, to go. Elizabeth was pleased; though when she asked herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply.
atmosphere eloquent of fertility, with glimpses through its drifting
it; they can have just as much as they want; everything belongs to
it.”
He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before on his reading Mr. Collins’s letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed her at last to go, saying, as she quitted the room, “If any young men come for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure.”


After tiffin six palanquins were at the door to carry us through the town of Canton. Our guide advised us to dress quietly so as not to attract too much attention. Our palanquin-carriers, thin, emaciated creatures, started at a small trot. As soon as we had crossed the French Bridge[467] and entered Canton, I began to feel seriously uneasy. We were carried through the labyrinth of narrow, muddy evil-smelling streets crowded with humanity; pigs and rooks are their only cleaners. Our carriers advanced with difficulty through the crowd, elbowing the people. There is no foot-way, and at the corners our porters shouted “ho-ho, hi-ha!” to make the people avoid the path, scattering them to right and left. The streets are full of shops, banners, Chinese lanterns, bizarre sign-boards hang down to the ground. On the portico of the houses we saw hideous faced idols, guardians of the thresholds, to whom the Chinese burn red candles with painted flowers and little incense “Joss-sticks” (Joss is a god) to propitiate the demons. A Chinese “Punch and Judy” were acting on a little stage in a street. We saw legions of lepers at each corner, and were accosted by sordid beings exposing terrible sores. I had a creepy sensation as we passed groups of evil-looking natives eyeing us with evident malevolent curiosity, which threatened to become hostile. Angry murmurs rose behind us. We heard strong epithets used on our behalf; they shouted after us “Fan-Quai,” which meant “Dogs of the West,” and made menacing gestures. It was old women and children who were the most aggressive; a little boy pulled a tongue a yard long to me. I felt suddenly a hand grasping my arm, and a brutal-looking young Chinaman gave me such a stare that I felt quite uncomfortable. I endeavoured to look unconcerned, but did not know what to do all the same, whether to smile or to maintain a stern countenance. I heaved a sigh of relief when our carriers stopped before the “Pagoda of the five hundred geniuses,” which contains life-sized statues made of gilded wood, one more grotesque than the other, placed on granite pedestals, an idol with six eyes and ears down to the neck, poured down from four pairs of hands his blessings; another with three faces held a sort of mandoline in his hands. A statue with European features and clothes, wearing a Rembrandt hat, personified “Marco Polo” the renowned Venetian explorer of the sixteenth century, the first European who penetrated into China. I wonder how that personage had come to attain the rank of a god. We were carried afterwards to the Roman Catholic cathedral, where Christian natives, in Chinese dress, knelt near the altar listening to the litanies sung in Chinese language by a priest wearing the Chinese costume. We went slowly round the cathedral and admired the beautiful stained glass-windows, in which figures of saints stood, and paintings representing diverse subjects from the Bible adapted to Chinese life. The figure of Christ blessing a Chinese woman with children clinging to her skirts, especially attracted our attention.
When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she followed her, and made the important communication. Its effect was most extraordinary; for, on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and unable to utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, many minutes, that she could comprehend what she heard, though not in general backward to credit what was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a lover to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself.

ironclads rose one after the other out of the sea, beneath clouds of

Surrey pine woods were too dry, however, for the festoons of the red
“Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. You know my sentiments.”

his shaggy mane and looked thoughtful.
writhing middle, and wriggled in the air towards me—and then another.
their branches, and that probably these were the policemen of the
tail.”
All about the pit, and saved as by a miracle from everlasting

Italian orderlies, speaking the language of the members of the foreign missions, have been put to their service. The soldier allotted to my husband, Giovanni Varallo by name, a very handsome chap, spoke Russian very well, being born in Moscow where his parents have a little shop. Varallo is a funny sort of type. From the very beginning he made all sorts of blunders; he disengaged himself of his knapsack in the drawing-room, and put his cap on the middle of the table!

Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first subject was her sister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply to her minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support her spirits, there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable, however, to hope that they would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her the particulars also of Miss Bingley’s visit in Gracechurch Street, and repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and herself,{192} which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up the acquaintance.
Lize?”
The rainy season was coming on. It was time to leave Biarritz and proceed to the country of “Carmen.” From Biarritz the distance to the Spanish frontier is short. At Irun, the first Spanish station, we saw policemen wearing short black mantles and triangular hats, walking up and down the platform. After San Sebastiano, a picturesque town surrounded by fortifications, our train rolled along a curving road winding at the foot of the Pyrenees, vividly outlined on the deep blue sky. Just as we were preparing to arrange ourselves comfortably for our night’s rest, travellers charged with parcels entered our compartment. A miserable child, who was cutting his first tooth, made us pass a bad night. Luckily I was not a bit sleepy, and leaning on the window I enjoyed the beautiful night, the moon and stars shining out gloriously.
v
“And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems a hopeless business.”
subtlety—their mathematical learning is evidently far in excess of

“Neither is it true that the best part of those people[Pg 151] are Pariahs. Had Mr. M. Campbell visited, even once, our Church he would have observed that more than two-thirds were of high caste, and so it is at Tranquebar and Vepery.”
would race across the kitchen in a grotesque way between eagerness and


The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished—that of Mrs. Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though when the first tumult of joy was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the while.

She was dressed in green silk gauze and wore upon her flowing green
After dinner we expected that Kontski would play the piano, but he said he would do it, for my sole benefit, at Hong-Kong.
I says:
“I can easily believe it. You thought me then devoid of every proper feeling, I am sure you did. The turn of your countenance I shall never forget, as you said that I could not have addressed you in any possible way that would induce you to accept me.”
green pictures that made her laugh, they were so funny.
THE Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases; and again, during the chief of the day, was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Collins. Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her. “It keeps him in good humour,” said she, “and I am more obliged to you than I can express.”

Still must the wonder increase, if it is observed, that a first capital of 200,000l. laid out in that trade by the two nations, would occasion in both, more work in cultivation, as well as in the arts, than 600,000l. which each of them might employ in a trade to China, if it were possible to lay out such a sum upon it?
start at the raft, and—”

Suddenly the foremost Martian lowered his tube and discharged a
But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely, even to Charlotte’s wishes, to be the case; and, after various conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probable from the time of year. All field sports were over. Within doors there was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard table, but gentlemen cannot be always within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither almost every day. They called at various times of the morning, sometimes separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended him still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in being with him, as well as by his evident admiration, of her former favourite, George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she saw there was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam’s manners, she believed he might have the best informed mind.
It is an awful time altogether! Alarming rumours continue to circulate. There is said to be a great deal of agitation in the country, especially in the south, where there is a special hatred against the Jews; their houses are ransacked and plundered. The peasants begin to rebel and[144] refuse to take oath to their new Tzar, stating that his father’s murderers had been bribed by the Russian nobility, which was now avenging itself for the emancipation of the peasants, effected by Alexander II. Troops were obliged to be sent there to settle order amongst the rebels.

“Mumps.”
“Easy!”
was glad to see him. I says:
to put the gun in the canoe, or a fishing-line, or anything to eat. We
smooth, like the surface of a dish, and higher than their heads.

The clouds thickened on the political horizon, and questions[536] concerning China began to occupy the public mind. The European powers, feeling alarmed, marched conjointly on Pekin; there were thirty thousand troops assembled there. They say that Russia is going to take an active part, and we have to apprehend a catastrophe any moment on the frontier of Turkestan. Our Russian consul, who did not feel safe at Kuldja—a Chinese town near our frontier—asked my husband to send a platoon of Cossacks to protect him.

side; you couldn’t make nothing else out; then a pale place in the sky;
getting ’em out. Go ’long now, and tell him anything you want to; but
So, quite unexpectedly, my brother found himself, panting, with a cut
They had pictures hung on the walls—mainly Washingtons and Lafayettes,
scrambling over a ruined wall, went on my way through scarlet and

foun’ her ketched on a snag along heah in de ben’, en dey hid her in a
widow about it, and she said the thing a body could get by praying for


to foot made out of linen so white it hurt your eyes to look at it; and
“Yes, madam,” said Mrs. Bennet, delighted to speak to a Lady Catherine. “She is my youngest girl but one. My youngest of all is lately married, and my eldest is somewhere about the ground, walking with a young man, who, I believe, will soon become a part of the family.{433}”
give a consecutive account of the war. The artist had evidently made a
in those days to look up at the night sky), I saw nothing of it. Yet
The mechanism it certainly was that held my attention first. It was one
As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was ordered; and, after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their boxes, workbags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty’s and Lydia’s purchases, were seated in it.{275}

forever bothering over a book, and have old Miss Watson pecking at you
CHAPTER X.
le’s ride ’em on a rail!” and everybody was whooping at once, and there
minute, and sings out my name before I can throw him a wink to keep


“You’re more than that,” said the Scarecrow, in a grieved tone; “you’re
We were obliged to take leave of our pleasant steamer friends at Suez. I was very sorry to part with the Crémazy, who hoped we might meet again and promised to write to me from time to time. When it came to saying good-bye to my Australian admirer, he hurt my hand squeezing it and pressing my fingers made me cry, whilst he expressed his despair at parting from me.
Now go, and do not ask to see me again until you have done your task.”
Under what Point of View Premiums and other Encouragements of Exportation may be considered.	182
“Who? Me? Go ’long. Doan’ talk to _me_ ’bout yo’ pints. I reck’n I
Somebody else did, don’t you know who?

C.	From Singapore to Nagasaki	450
pure white but her eyes were blue, and they looked kindly upon the

If I had fully realised the meaning of all the things I had seen I

CHAPTER XI.
all old shackly dried-up frame concerns that hadn’t ever been painted;
Map of India to illustrate the Life of Schwartz	”	”	32

him, and sees old Baldy Shepherdson a-linkin’ after him with his gun in
dark and terrible aspects of life will find my brutality, my flash of

station. At first I thought a house had fallen across the road. It was

There was four or five men cavorting around on their horses in the open

sea?”


the children warn’t ever going to see each other no more—and then
_him_ and give him a rest, the law up and goes for him. And they call


“Do you really think so?” cried Elizabeth, brightening up for a moment.



“Yes’m—she—”
Well, last I pulled out some of my hair, and blooded the axe good, and

Whenever I got uncommon tired I played hookey, and the hiding I got
“I am determined never to speak of it again”	283
Forthwith flashes of actual flame, a bright glare leaping from one to
noticed how old and worn her shoes were.


“You must not blame my aunt. Lydia’s thoughtlessness{450} first betrayed to me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me thank you again and again, in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induced you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the sake of discovering them.”

the middle of the sleeves, and a large black scoop-shovel bonnet with a

run in the parlor and took a swift look around, and the only place I
hain’t been so put out since I don’t know when. But I don’t care, I
learnt that the best way to get along with his kind of people is to let
the naked clearness and beauty of the silent wilderness of houses.
“Why, are they after him yet?”


a spark—which was a candle in a cabin window; and sometimes on the
little bells around the brims that tinkled sweetly as they moved. The
 The Undertaker
upon her head. Then she stood upon her left foot and said slowly:

“You can’t say now that I did not recognise you and it will atone for my former mistake, I hope!” to which I answered that the Grand Duke would only be completely forgiven when I receive his photograph from him. The very next day he sent me his portrait with his autograph.
The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long a secret. Mrs. Bennet was privileged to whisper it to Mrs. Philips, and she ventured, without any permission, to do the same by all her neighbours in Meryton.
on it, and were drawn swiftly by their queer little horses to the place
the people.”

we heard a whack, and the dog he finished up with a most amazing howl
“Engaged by the river.”

Though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not attempt to oppose it; for they knew that she had not prudence enough to hold her tongue before the servants, while they waited at table, and judged it better that one only of the household, and the one whom they could most trust, should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on the subject.



On the following day we took the train to Havre, where we take passage on the “Bourgogne,” a Transatlantic liner which is one of the largest, fastest steamers plying between Europe and America. The ship is equipped with baths, electric light and all modern necessaries. We had one of the best cabins situated in the prow, containing two berths, one above the other. I was to have the upper berth and climbed into its narrow proportions by a ladder. In an adjoining cabin I hear the Serebriakoffs stirring, and can chat with them whilst lying in my berth above my husband, through tiny holes cut in the wall for ventilation. The great difficulty that night was to get anything to eat. There was no such thing as a piece of bread to be had in the boat before starting, and we went supperless to bed, having been obliged to wait a long time for the sanitary doctor, as no one is allowed to land in New York without a bill of health.
behind those things. On the table in the middle of the room was a kind
showed us the runaway nigger. But you got to be mighty careful. When we
making them slave for her night and day. Now they are all set free, and

traffic had been stopped, I believe, in order to allow of the passage

had seen disgorged from the cylinder. With a queer feeling of



dark wiped it all out, and you couldn’t see nothing at all.
and shook and shook; and the tears come in her eyes, and run down over;
mind, that oppressed me for many days, a sense of dethronement, a
CHAPTER LIV
return I shall be as other men are.”



“You shall, then, before you’re three days older, Fallen Grandeur,”


Glancing northwestward, my brother saw the large crescent of shipping


and untilled. Toward evening they came to a great forest, where the
It came into the scullery no more; but I lay all the tenth day in the

In the year 1762, about 2000l. sterling, carried to the island of Grenada, was there received with that veneration due to gold when we have been years without seeing any, and have not yet forgot its virtues.
city and long for the woods and the country again. I am really a wild

I went to sleep, and Jim didn’t call me when it was my turn. He often
The streets were lined with beautiful houses all built of green marble
scarcity of snakes about the house for a considerable spell. You’d see

answer it; for my brother and me has had misfortunes; he’s broke his
[518]

the elephants and the tigers and the bears had ever tried to fight me,
It was the first Martian my brother had seen, and he stood, more amazed
I make this explanation for the reason that without it many readers
So I wrote: “I put it in the coffin. It was in there when you was
I repeated my description.
This night again we were roasted alive. It is impossible to remain longer in this furnace, and we decided to go on to the Italian Lakes to look out for a comfortable boarding-house where I could put up during the manœuvres. The morning, as if on purpose, was comparatively fresh, the sky overclouded and the rain coming on; still we did not put off our journey and took the first train to Como. This town, with its Gothic cathedral, is very pretty. It is situated on Lake Como and surrounded by verdant mountains. Immediately on arriving, we took a carriage to Cernobbio, a little place where you take the boat to Bellaggio. The trip only occupies twenty minutes. Our driver pulled up at the entrance door of “Villa D’Este,” a beautiful old palace transformed into a large palatial hotel, standing in a garden of orange and lemon trees. The house had once been the residence of Napoleon Bonaparte. The dining-room is decorated with rich tapestries incrusted with the letter “N” in gold, surmounted by the Imperial crown. In the library we saw a large veiled figure, the statue of “Love and Psychè,” covered with gauze in order not to shock the prude spinster ladies of blameless morals dwelling in the hotel. After a hasty luncheon, we came out upon the beach, and I sat down to wait for the boat. I was that day in one of[194] my nasty moods, in the humour to pick a quarrel with anyone, and Sergy’s imperturbable good-temper was a source of greater irritation to me. Poking an inoffensive pebble viciously with my umbrella, I said some detestable things to Sergy and was altogether horrid. Fearing lest I should say too much, I made myself the solemn vow not to pronounce one single word until I went to bed that night. And there we sat, side by side, with faces apart, in gloomy silence, when suddenly the idea struck Sergy to establish me at Cernobbio, whilst he would attend the manœuvres. He sat thinking for a while, then rose and strolled down by himself, investigating the neighbourhood to try and find some hotel where he wanted me to spend about three weeks. He soon came back to tell me that he had found out a nice boarding-house kept by a German lady, Frau Weidemann, just opposite the landing place. Being tongue-tied I could only nod approval, meaning “Yes, it suits me exactly.” In the meanwhile our boat approached and took us to Bellaggio, where we had dinner at the Hôtel Grande Bretagne. It was a depressing meal, during which I maintained an absolute silence. After a stroll in the splendid park, which surrounded the hotel, the boat took us to Lecco, where we arrived too late to catch the evening train for Milan, and had to put up for the night at the modest little hotel bearing the name of “Zwei Thore.” The hostess ushered us into a room with a pointed ceiling and an enormously high bedstead. How pleasant it was to get rid of my vow of silence, which was becoming unbearable; for a whole day I had kept my lips sealed, although my anger had sensibly evaporated. When the hostess left us we became reconciled upon the spot, and all was right again.
so he say I could put in my five dollars en he pay me thirty-five at de
shivering violently.
WHEN Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in her praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to her sister how very much she admired him.
was up there. I _see_ him there. He come in a canoe, along with Tim
for some time a multitude of boats and barges jammed in the northern
for cash. He set up a little piece of poetry, which he made, himself,

