"A thousand devils!" exclaimed Harris. "That is an unhealthy place for men
accustomed, like us, to live in the open air. As to me, perhaps I should prefer
being hung.”

"One does not escape from the gallows," replied Negoro; "but from prison--"

"You were able to make your escape?"

"Yes, Harris. Only fifteen days after being put in prison. I was able to hide
myself at the bottom of the hold of an English steamer, sailing for Auckland, of
New Zealand. A barrel of water and a case of conserves, between which I had
intruded, furnished me with food and drink during the whole passage. Oh! I
suffered terribly, from not being willing to show myself when we were at sea.
But, if I had been imprudent enough to do it, I would have been confined again
at the bottom of the hold, and, voluntarily or not, the torture would be the same.


Besides, on my arrival at Auckland, they would have returned me again to the
English authorities, and finally brought me back to the penitentiary of Loanda,
or, perhaps, hung me, as you said. That was why I preferred to travel incognito."

"And without paying your passage!" exclaimed Harris, laughing. "Ah! that is
not considerate, comrade, to be fed and carried gratis!"

"Yes," returned Negoro, "but thirty days' passage at the bottom of the hold--"

"At last that was over, Negoro. You set out for New Zealand, in the land of
the Maoris. But you have returned. Was the return made under the same
circumstances?"

"Not so, Harris. You may well believe that, over there, I had only one idea--
to return to Angola and take up my trade of slave-trader again."

"Yes," replied Harris, "one loves his trade--from habit."

"For eighteen months--"

Having pronounced those last words, Negoro stopped suddenly. He seized
his companion's arm, and listened.

"Harris," said he, lowering his voice, "was there not a trembling in that
papyrus bush?"

"Yes, indeed," replied Harris, seizing his gun, always ready to fire.

Negoro and he stood up, looked around them, and listened with the greatest
attention.

"There is nothing there," said Harris. "It is this brook, swelled by the storm,
which runs more noisily. For two years, comrade, you have been unaccustomed
to the noises of the forest, but you will get used to them again. Continue, then,
the narration of your adventures. When I understand the past, we shall talk of the
future."

Negoro and Harris sat down again at the foot of the banyan. The Portuguese
continued, in these terms:

"For eighteen months I vegetated in Auckland. When the steamer arrived
there I was able to leave it without being seen; but not a piastre, not a dollar in
my pocket! In order to live I had to follow all trades--"

"Even the trade of an honest man, Negoro?"

"As you say, Harris."

"Poor boy!"

"Now, I was always waiting for an opportunity, which was long coming,
when the 'Pilgrim,' a whaler, arrived at the port of Auckland."

"That vessel which went ashore on the coast of Angola?"

"Even the same, Harris, and on which Mrs. Weldon, her child, and her cousin
were going to take passage. Now, as an old sailor, having even been second on
board a slave ship, I was not out of my element in taking service on a ship. I then


presented myself to the 'Pilgrim's' captain, but the crew was made up. Very
fortunately for me, the schooner's cook had deserted. Now, he is no sailor who
does not know how to cook. I offered myself as head cook. For want of a better,
I was accepted. A few days after, the 'Pilgrim' had lost sight of the land of New
Zealand."

"But," asked Harris, "according to what my young friend has told me, the
‘Pilgrim’ did not set sail at all for the coast of Africa. How then has she arrived
here?"

"Dick Sand ought not to be able to understand it yet, and perhaps he will
never understand it," replied Negoro; "but I am going to explain to you what has
passed, Harris, and you will be able to tell it again to your young friend, if it
pleases you to do so."

"How, then?" replied Harris. "Speak, comrade, speak!"

"The 'Pilgrim,"" continued Negoro, "as on the way to Valparaiso. When I
went on board, I only intended to go to Chili. It was always a good half of the
way between New Zealand and Angola, and I was drawing nearer Africa's coast
by several thousand miles. But it so happened that only three weeks after leaving
Auckland, Captain Hull, who commanded the 'Pilgrim,' disappeared with all his
crew, while chasing a whale. On that day, then, only two sailors remained on
board--the novice and the cook, Negoro."

"And you took command of the ship?" asked Harris.

"I had that idea at first, but I saw that they distrusted me. There were live
strong blacks on board, free men. I would not have been the master, and, on
reflection, I remained what I was at the departure--the 'Pilgrim's' cook."

"Then it was chance that led this ship to the coast of Africa?"

"No, Harris," replied Negoro; "there has been no chance in all this adventure
except meeting you, in one of your journeys, just on that part of the coast where
the 'Pilgrim' was wrecked. But as to coming in sight of Angola, it was by my
will, my secret will, that that was done. Your young friend, still much of a novice
in navigation, could only tell his position by means of the log and the compass.
Well, one day, the log went to the bottom. One night the compass was made
false, and the ‘Pilgrim,’ driven by a violent tempest, took the wrong route. The
length of the voyage, inexplicable to Dick Sand, would be the same to the most
experienced seaman. Without the novice knowing or even suspecting it, Cape
Horn was doubled, but I, Harris, I recognized it in the midst of the fogs. Then,
thanks to me, the needle in the compass took its true direction again, and the
ship, blown to the northeast by that frightful hurricane, has just been cast on the
coast of Africa, just on this land of Angola which I wished to reach."

"And even at that moment, Negoro," replied Harris, "chance had led me


there to receive you, and guide those honest people to the interior. They believed
themselves--they could only believe themselves in America. It was easy for me
to make them take this province for lower Bolivia, to which it has really some
resemblance."

"Yes, they believed it, as your young friend believed they had made the Isle
of Paques, when they passed in sight of Tristan d'Acunha."

"Anybody would be deceived by it, Negoro."

"I know it, Harris, and I even counted on profiting by that error. Finally,
behold Mrs. Weldon and her companions one hundred miles in the interior of
this Africa, where I wanted to bring them!"

"But," replied Harris, "they know now where they are."

"Ah! what matter at present!" cried Negoro.

"And what will you do with them?" asked Harris.

"What will I do with them?" replied Negoro. "Before telling you, Harris,
give me news of our master, the slave-trader, Alvez, whom I have not seen for
two years."

"Oh, the old rascal is remarkably well," replied Harris, "and he will be
enchanted to see you again."

"Is he at the Bihe market?" asked Negoro.

"No, comrade, he has been at his establishment at Kazounde for a year."

"And business is lively?"

"Yes, a thousand devils!" exclaimed Harris, "although the slave trade
becomes more and more difficult, at least on this coast. The Portuguese
authorities on one side, and the English cruisers on the other, limit exportations.
There are few places, except in the environs of Mossamedes, to the south of
Angola, that the shipping of blacks can now be made with any chance of
success. So, at this time, the pens are filled with slaves, waiting for the ships
which ought to carry them to Spanish colonies. As to passing them by Benguela,
or St. Paul de Loanda, that is not possible. The governors no longer understand
reason, no more do the chiefs (title given to the Portuguese governors of
secondary establishments). We must, then, return to the factories of the interior.
This is what old Alvez intends to do. He will go from the Nyangwe and
Tanganyika side to change his stuffs for ivory and slaves. Business is always
profitable with upper Egypt and the Mozambique coast, which furnishes all
Madagascar. But I fear the time will come when the trade can be no longer
carried on. The English are making great progress in the interior of Africa. The
missionaries advance and work against us. That Livingstone, curse him, after
exploring the lake region, is going, they say, to travel toward Angola. Then they
speak of a Lieutenant Cameron, who proposes to cross the continent from east to


west. They also fear that the American, Stanley, wishes to do as much. All these
visits will end by damaging our operations, Negoro, and if we care for our own
interests, not one of those visitors will return to relate in Europe what he has had
the indiscretion to come to see in Africa."

Would not one say, to hear them, the rascals, that they were speaking like
honest merchants whose affairs were momentarily cramped by a commercial
crisis? Who would believe that, instead of sacks of coffee or casks of sugar, they
were talking of human beings to export like merchandise? These traders have no
other idea of right or wrong. The moral sense is entirely lacking in them, and if
they had any, how quickly they would lose it among the frightful atrocities of the
African slave trade.

But where Harris was right, was when he said that civilization was gradually
penetrating those savage countries in the wake of those hardy travelers, whose
names are indissoluble linked to the discoveries of Equatorial Africa. At the
head, David Livingstone, after him, Grant, Speke, Burton, Cameron, Stanley,
those heroes will leave imperishable names as benefactors of humanity.

When their conversation reached that point, Harris knew what the last two
years of Negoro's life had been. The trader Alvez's old agent, the escaped
prisoner from the Loanda penitentiary, reappeared the same as Harris had always
known him, that is, ready to do anything. But what plan Negoro intended to take
in regard to the shipwrecked from the "Pilgrim," Harris did not yet know. He
asked his accomplice about it.

"And now," said he, "what are you going to do with those people?"

"I shall make two parties of them,” replied Negoro, like a man whose plan
had been long formed, "those whom I shall sell as slaves, and those whom----"

The Portuguese did not finish, but his ferocious physiognomy spoke plainly
enough.

"Which will you sell?" asked Harris.

"Those blacks who accompany Mrs. Weldon," replied Negoro. "Old Tom is
not perhaps of much value, but the others are four strong fellows, who will bring
a high price in the Kazounde market."

"I well believe it, Negoro," replied Harris. "Four negroes, well made,
accustomed to work, have very little resemblance to those brutes which come to
us from the interior. Certainly, you will sell them at a high price. Slaves, born in
America, and exported to the markets of Angola; that is rare merchandise! But,"
added the American, "you have not told me if there was any money on board the
‘Pilgrim.

"Oh! a few hundred dollars only, which I have succeeded in saving.
Fortunately, I count on certain returns."


"Which, then, comrade?" asked Harris, with curiosity.

"Nothing!" replied Negoro, who appeared to regret having spoken more than
he intended.

"Tt now remains to take possession of all that high-priced merchandise," said
Harris.

"Is it, then, so difficult?" asked Negoro.

"No, comrade. Ten miles from here, on the Coanza, a caravan of slaves is
encamped, conducted by the Arab, Ibn Hamis. He only awaits my return to take
the road for Kazounde. There are more native soldiers there than are needed to
capture Dick Sand and his companions. It will be sufficient for my young friend
to conceive the idea of going to the Coanza."

"But will he get that idea?" asked Negoro.

"Surely," replied Harris, "because he is intelligent, and cannot suspect the
danger that awaits him. Dick Sand would not think of returning to the coast by
the way we have followed together. He would be lost among these immense
forests. He will seek, then, I am sure, to reach one of the rivers that flow toward
the coast, so as to descend it on a raft. He has no other plan to take, and I know
he will take it."

"Yes, perhaps so," replied Negoro, who was reflecting.

"It is not 'perhaps so,_' it is ‘assuredly so,' that must be said," continued Harris.
"Do you see, Negoro? It is as if I had appointed a rendezvous with my young
friend on the banks of the Coanza."

"Well, then," replied Negoro, "let us go. I know Dick Sand. He will not delay
an hour, and we must get before him."

"Let us start, comrade."

Harris and Negoro both stood up, when the noise that had before attracted
the Portuguese's attention was renewed. It was a trembling of the stems between
the high papyrus.

Negoro stopped, and seized Harris's hand.

Suddenly a low barking was heard. A dog appeared at the foot of the bank,
with its mouth open, ready to spring.

"Dingo!" cried Harris.

"Ah! this time it shall not escape me!" replied Negoro.

Dingo was going to jump upon him, when Negoro, seizing Harris's gun,
quickly put it to his shoulder and fired.

A long howl of pain replied to the detonation, and Dingo disappeared
between the double row of bushes that bordered the brook.

Negoro descended at once to the bottom of the bank.

Drops of blood stained some of the papyrus stems, and a long red track was


left on the pebbles of the brook.

"At last that cursed animal is paid off!" exclaimed Negoro.

Harris had been present at this whole scene without saying a word.

"Ah now, Negoro," said he, "that dog had a particular grudge against you."

"It seemed so, Harris, but it will have a grudge against me no longer!"

"And why did it detest you so much, comrade?"

"Oh! an old affair to settle between it and me."

"An old affair?" replied Harris.

Negoro said no more about it, and Harris concluded that the Portuguese had
been silent on some past adventure, but he did not insist on knowing it.

A few moments later, both, descending the course of the brook, went toward


the Coanza, across the forest.
ok


CHAPTER III.

ON THE MARCH.

Africa! That name so terrible under the present circumstances, that name
which he must now substitute for that of America, was not for an instant out of
Dick Sand's thoughts. When the young novice traced back the last weeks, it was
to ask himself how the "Pilgrim" had ended by reaching this dangerous shore,
how it had doubled Cape Horn, and passed from one ocean to the other! He
could now explain to himself why, in spite of the rapid motion of his vessel, land
was so long coming in sight, because the length of the distance which he should
have made to reach the American coast had been doubled without his
knowledge.

"Africa! Africa!" Dick Sand repeated.

Then, suddenly, while he called up with tenacious mind all the incidents of
this inexplicable voyage, he felt that his compass must have been injured. He
remembered, too, that the first compass had been broken, and that the log-line
had snapped--a fact which had made it impossible for him to establish the speed
of the "Pilgrim."

"Yes," thought he, "there remained but one compass on board, one only, the
indications of which I could not control! And one night I was awakened by a cry
from old Tom. Negoro was there, aft. He had just fallen on the binnacle. May he
not have put it out of order?"

Dick Sand was growing enlightened. He had his finger on the truth. He now
understood all that was ambiguous in Negoro's conduct. He saw his hand in this
chain of incidents which had led to the loss of the "Pilgrim," and had so fearfully


endangered those on board of her.

But what, then, was this miserable man? Had he been a sailor and known so
well how to hide the fact? Was he capable of contriving this odious plot which
had thrown the ship on the coast of Africa?

At any rate, if obscure points still existed in the past, the present could offer
no more of them. The young novice knew only too well that he was in Africa,
and very probably in the fatal province of Angola, more than a hundred miles
from the coast. He also knew that Harris's treason could no longer be doubted.
From this fact, the most simple logic led him to conclude that the American and
the Portuguese had long known each other, that a fatal chance had united them
on this coast, and that a plan had been concerted between them, the result of
which would be dreadful for the survivors of the "Pilgrim."

And now, why these odious actions? That Negoro wished, at all hazards, to
seize Tom and his companions, and sell them for slaves in this slave-trading
country, might be admitted. That the Portuguese, moved by a sentiment of
hatred, would seek to be revenged on him, Dick Sand, who had treated him as he
deserved, might also be conceived. But Mrs. Weldon, this mother, and this
young child--what would the wretch do with them? If Dick Sand could have
overheard a little of the conversation between Harris and Negoro, he would have
known what to expect, and what dangers menaced Mrs. Weldon, the blacks, and
himself.

The situation was frightful, but the young novice did not yield under it.
Captain on board, he remained captain on land. He must save Mrs. Weldon, little
Jack, all those whose fate Heaven had placed in his hands. His task was only
commencing. He would accomplish it to the end.

After two or three hours, during which the present and the future were
summed up in his mind, with their good and their evil chances--the last, alas! the
most numerous--Dick Sand rose, firm and resolved.

The first glimmer of light then touched the summits of the forest. With the
exception of the novice and Tom, all slept. Dick Sand approached the old black.

"Tom," he said to him, in a low tone, "you have recognized the roaring of the
lion, you have remembered the instruments of the slave-traders. You know that
we are in Africa!"

"Yes, Mr. Dick, I know it."

"Well, Tom, not a word of all that, neither to Mrs. Weldon nor to your
companions. We must be the only ones to know, the only ones to have any
fears."

"Alone--in fact. It is necessary," replied Tom.

"Tom," continued the novice, "we have to watch more carefully than ever.


We are in an enemy's country--and what enemies! what a country! To keep our
companions on their guard, it will be enough to tell them that we have been
betrayed by Harris. They will think that we fear an attack from wandering
Indians, and that will suffice."

"You can count absolutely on their courage and devotion, Mr. Dick."

"I know it, as I count on your good sense and your experience. You will
come to my help, old Tom?"

"Always, and everywhere, Mr. Dick."

Dick Sand's plan was accepted and approved by the old black. If Harris were
detected in open treason before the hour for action, at least the young novice and
his companions were not in fear of any immediate danger. In fact, it was the
discovery of the irons abandoned by some slaves, and the roaring of the lion, that
had caused the American's sudden disappearance.

He knew that he was discovered, and he had fled probably before the little
party which he guided had reached the place where an attack had been arranged.
As for Negoro, whose presence Dingo had certainly recognized during these last
days of the march, he must have rejoined Harris, so as to consult with him. At
any rate, several hours would pass before Dick Sand and his friends would be
assailed, and it was necessary to profit by them.

The only plan was to regain the coast as quickly as possible. This coast, as
the young novice had every reason to believe, was that of Angola. After having
reached it, Dick Sand would try to gain, either to the north or to the south, the
Portuguese settlements, where his companions could await in safety some
opportunity to return to their country.

But, to effect this return to the coast, should they take the road already
passed over? Dick Sand did not think so, and in that he was going to agree with
Harris, who had clearly foreseen that circumstances would oblige the young
novice to shorten the road.

In fact, it would have been difficult, not to say imprudent, to recommence
this difficult journey through the forest, which, besides, could only tend to bring
them out at the place they had started from. This would also allow Negoro's
accomplices to follow an assured track. The only thing they could do was to
cross a river, without leaving any traces, and, later on, to descend its course. At
the same time, there was less to fear from an attack by animals, which by a
happy chance had so far kept at a good distance. Even the animosity of the
natives, under these circumstances, seemed less important. Once embarked on a
solid raft, Dick Sand and his companions, being well armed, would be in the best
condition to defend themselves. The whole thing was to find the river.

It must be added that, given the actual state of Mrs. Weldon and her little


Jack, this mode of traveling would be the most suitable. Arms would not fail to
carry the sick child. Lacking Harris's horse, they could even make a litter of
branches, on which Mrs. Weldon could be borne. But this would require two
men out of five, and Dick Sand wished, with good reason, that all his
companions might be free in their movements in case of a sudden attack.

And then, in descending the current of a river, the young novice would find
himself in his element!

The question now was, whether a navigable stream of water existed in the
neighborhood. Dick Sand thought it probable, and for this reason: The river
which emptied into the Atlantic at the place where the "Pilgrim" had stranded
could not ascend much to the north, nor much to the east, of the province,
because a chain of mountains quite close to them--those which they had
mistaken for the Cordilleras--shut in the horizon on these two sides. Then, either
the river descended from these heights, or it made a bend toward the south, and,
in these two cases, Dick Sand could not take long to find the course. Perhaps,
even before reaching the river--for it had a right to this qualification, being a
direct tributary of the ocean--one of its affluents would be met with which would
suffice for the transport of the little party.

At any rate, a stream of some sort could not be far away.

In fact, during the last miles of the journey the nature of the earth had been
modified. The declivities diminished and became damp. Here and there ran
narrow streams, which indicated that the subsoil enclosed everywhere a watery
network. During the last day's march the caravan had kept along one of these
rivulets, whose waters, reddened with oxyde of iron, eat away its steep, worn
banks. To find it again could not take long, or be very difficult. Evidently they
could not descend its impetuous course, but it would be easy to follow it to its
junction with a more considerable, possibly a navigable, affluent.

Such was the very simple plan which Dick Sand determined upon, after
having conferred with old Tom.

Day came, all their companions gradually awoke. Mrs. Weldon placed little
Jack in Nan's arms. The child was drowsy and faded-looking during the
intermittent periods, and was sad to see.

Mrs. Weldon approached Dick Sand. "Dick," she asked, after a steady
glance, "where is Harris? I do not perceive him."

The young novice thought that, while letting his companions believe that
they were treading on the soil of Bolivia, it would not do to hide from them the
American's treason. So he said, without hesitation: "Harris is no longer here."

"Has he, then, gone ahead?" asked Mrs. Weldon. "He has fled, Mrs.
Weldon," replied Dick Sand. "This Harris is a traitor, and it is according to


Negoro's plan that he led us this far." "For what motive?" quickly asked Mrs.
Weldon. "I do not know," replied Dick Sand; "but what I do know is, that we
must return, without delay, to the coast."

"That man--a traitor!" repeated Mrs. Weldon. "I had a presentiment of it!
And you think, Dick, that he is in league with Negoro?"

"That may be, Mrs. Weldon. The wretch is on our track. Chance has brought
these two scoundrels together, and--"

"And I hope that they will not be separated when I find them again!" said
Hercules. "I will break the head of one against the other's head!" added the giant,
holding out his formidable fists.

"But my child!" cried Mrs. Weldon. "The care that I hoped to find for him at
the farm of San Felice--"

"Jack will get well," said old Tom, "when he approaches the more healthy
part of the coast."

"Dick," remarked Mrs. Weldon, "you are sure that this Harris has betrayed
us?"

"Yes, Mrs. Weldon," replied the young novice, who would have liked to
avoid any explanation on this subject.

He also hastened to add, while looking at the old black:

"This very night Tom and I discovered his treason, and if he had not jumped
on his horse and fled, I would have killed him."

"So this farm--"

"There is neither farm, nor village, nor settlement in the neighborhood,"
replied Dick Sand. "Mrs. Weldon, I repeat to you, we must return to the coast."

"By the same road, Dick?"

"No, Mrs. Weldon, but by descending a river which will take us to the sea
without fatigue and without danger. A few more miles on foot, and I do not
doubt--"

"Oh, I am strong, Dick!" replied Mrs. Weldon, who struggled against her
own weakness. "I will walk! I will carry my child!"

"We are here, Mrs. Weldon," said Bat, "and we will carry you!"

"Yes. yes," added Austin. "Two branches of a tree, foliage laid across."

"Thanks, my friends," replied Mrs. Weldon; "but I want to march. I will
march. Forward!"

"Forward!" exclaimed the young novice.

"Give me Jack," said Hercules, who took the child from Nan's arms. "When I
am not carrying something, I am tired."

The brave negro gently took in his strong arms the little sleeping boy, who
did not even wake.


Their arms were carefully examined. What remained of the provisions was
placed in one package, so as to be carried by one man. Austin threw it on his
back, and his companions thus became free in their movements.

Cousin Benedict, whose long limbs were like steel and defied all fatigue, was
ready to set out. Had he remarked Harris's disappearance? It would be imprudent
to affirm it. Little disturbed him. Besides, he was under the effects of one of the
most terrible catastrophes that could befall him.

In fact, a grave complication, Cousin Benedict had lost his magnifying-glass
and his spectacles. Very happily, also, but without his suspecting it, Bat had
found the two precious articles in the tall grass where they had slept, but, by
Dick Sand's advice, he kept them safely. By this means they would be sure that
the big child would keep quiet during the march, because he could see no farther,
as they say, than the end of his nose.

Thus, placed between Acteon and Austin, with the formal injunction not to
leave them, the woful Benedict uttered no complaint, but followed in his place,
like a blind man led by a string.

The little party had not gone fifty steps when old Tom suddenly stopped it
with one word.

"Dingo?" said he.

"In fact, Dingo is not here!" replied Hercules.

The black called the dog several times with his powerful voice.

No barking replied to him.

Dick Sand remained silent. The absence of the dog, was to be regretted, for
he had preserved the little party from all surprise.

"Could Dingo have followed Harris?" asked Tom.

"Harris? No," replied Dick Sand; "but he may have put himself on Negoro's
scent. He felt him in our steps."

"This cook of misfortune would quickly end him with a ball!" cried
Hercules.

"Provided Dingo did not first strangle him," replied Bat.

"Perhaps so," replied the young novice. "But we cannot wait for Dingo's
return. Besides, if he is living, the intelligent animal will know how to find us.
Forward!"

The weather was very warm. Since daybreak large clouds obscured the
horizon. Already a storm was threatened in the air. Probably the day would not
end without some thunder-claps. Happily the forest, more or less dense, retained
a little freshness of the surface of the soil. Here and there great forest trees
inclosed prairies covered with a tall, thick grass. In certain spots enormous
trunks, already petrified, lay on the ground, indicating the presence of coal


mines, which are frequently met with on the African continent. Then, in the
clearings, where the green carpet was mingled with some sprigs of roses, the
flowers were various in color, yellow and blue ginger plants, pale lobelias, red
orchids, incessantly visited by the insects which fertilized them.

The trees no longer formed impenetrable masses, but their nature was more
varied. There were a kind of palm-tree, which gives an oil found only in Africa;
cotton-trees forming thickets from eight to ten feet high, whose wood-stalks
produce a cotton with long hairs, almost analogous to that of Fernambouc. From
the copals there oozes, by the holes which certain insects make, an odorous gum,
which runs along the ground and collects for the wants of the natives. Here
spread the lemon-trees, the grenadiers of a savage condition of a country, and
twenty other odorous plants, which prove the prodigious fertility of this plateau
of Central Africa. In several places, also, the perfume was agreeably mingled
with the tine odor of vanilla, although they could not discover what tree exhaled
it.

This whole collection of trees and plants was perfectly green, although it was
in the middle of the dry season, and only rare storms could water these luxuriant
forests. It was then the time for fevers; but, as Livingstone has observed, they
can be cured by leaving the place where they have been contracted. Dick Sand
knew this remark of the great traveler, and he hoped that little Jack would not
contradict it. He told it to Mrs. Weldon, after having observed that the periodical
access had not returned as they feared, and that the child slept quietly in
Hercules’ arms.

Thus they went forward carefully and rapidly. Sometimes they discovered
traces where men or animals had recently passed. The twisted and broken
branches of the brushwood and the thickets afforded an opportunity to walk with
a more equal step. But the greater part of the time numerous obstacles, which
they had to overcome, retarded the little party, to Dick Sand's great
disappointment.

There were twisted lianes that might justly be compared with the disordered
rigging of a ship, certain vines similar to bent swords, whose blades were
ornamented with long thorns, vegetable serpents, fifty or sixty feet long, which
had the faculty of turning to prick the passer-by with their sharp spikes. The
blacks, hatchet in hand, cut them down with vigorous blows, but the lianes
reappeared constantly, reaching from the earth to the top of the highest trees
which they encircled.

The animal kingdom was not less curious than the vegetable kingdom in this
part of the province. Birds flew in vast numbers under these powerful branches;
but it will be understood that they had no gunshot to fear from the men, who


wished to pass as secretly as rapidly. There were Guinea fowls in large flocks,
heath-cocks of various kinds, very difficult to approach, and some of those birds
which the Americans of the North have, by onomatopoeia, called "whip-poor-
wills," three syllables which exactly reproduce their cries. Dick Sand and Tom
might truly have believed themselves in some province of the new continent.
But, alas! they knew what to expect.

Until then the deer, so dangerous in Africa, had not approached the little
troop. They again saw, in this first halt, some giraffes, which Harris had
undoubtedly called ostriches. These swift animals passed rapidly, frightened by
the apparition of a caravan in these little-frequented forests. In the distance, on
the edge of the prairie, there arose at times a thick cloud of dust. It was a herd of
buffaloes, which galloped with the noise of wagons heavily laden.

For two miles Dick Sand thus followed the course of the rivulet which must
end in a more important river. He was in haste to confide his companions to the
rapid current of one of the coast rivers. He felt sure that the dangers and the
fatigue would be much less than on the shore.

Towards noon three miles had been cleared without any bad incident or
meeting. There was no trace of either Harris or Negoro. Dingo had not
reappeared. It was necessary to halt to take rest and nourishment.

The encampment was established in a bamboo thicket, which completely
sheltered the little party.

They talked very little during this repast. Mrs. Weldon had taken her little
boy in her arms; she could not take her eyes off of him; she could not eat.

"You must take some nourishment, Mrs. Weldon," Dick Sand repeated
several times. "What will become of you if your strength gives out? Eat, eat! We
will soon start again, and a good current will carry us without fatigue to the
coast."

Mrs. Weldon looked in Dick Sand's face while he thus talked. The young
novice's burning eyes spoke of the courage by which he felt animated. In seeing
him thus, in observing these brave, devoted blacks, wife and mother, she could
not yet despair; and, besides, why was she abandoned? Did she not think herself
on hospitable ground? Harris's treason could not, in her eyes, have any very
serious consequences. Dick Sand read her thought, and he kept his eyes on the


ground.
ok


CHAPTER IV.
THE BAD ROADS OF ANGOLA.


At this moment little Jack awoke, and put his arms around his mother's neck.
His eyes looked better. The fever had not returned.

"You are better, my darling," said Mrs. Weldon, pressing the sick child to her
heart.

"Yes, mama," replied Jack, "but I am a little thirsty."

They could only give the child some fresh water, of which he drank with
pleasure.


"And my friend Dick?" he said.

"Here I am, Jack," replied Dick Sand, coming to take the young child's hand.

"And my friend Hercules?"

"Hercules is here, Mr. Jack," replied the giant, bringing nearer his good face.

"And the horse?" demanded little Jack.

"The horse? Gone, Mr. Jack," replied Hercules. "I will carry you. Will you
find that I trot too hard?"

"No," replied little Jack; "but then I shall no longer have any bridle to hold."

"Oh! you will put a bit in my mouth, if you wish," said Hercules, opening his
large mouth, "and you may pull back so long as that will give you pleasure."

"You know very well that I shall not pull back."

"Good! You would be wrong! I have a hard mouth."

"But Mr. Harris's farm?" the little boy asked again.

"We shall soon arrive there, my Jack," replied Mrs. Weldon. "Yes, soon!"

"Will we set out again?" then said Dick Sand, in order to cut short this
conversation.

"Yes, Dick, let us go," replied Mrs. Weldon.

The camp was broken up, and the march continued again in the same order.
It was necessary to pass through the underwood, so as not to leave the course of
the rivulet. There had been some paths there, formerly, but those paths were
dead, according to the native expression--that is, brambles and brushwood had
usurped them. In these painful conditions they might spend three hours in
making one mile. The blacks worked without relaxation. Hercules, after putting
little Jack back in Nan's arms, took his part of the work; and what a part! He
gave stout "heaves," making his ax turn round, and a hole was made before
them, as if he had been a devouring fire.

Fortunately, this fatiguing work would not last. This first mile cleared, they
saw a large hole, opened through the underwood, which ended obliquely at the
rivulet and followed its bank. It was a passage made by elephants, and those
animals, doubtless by hundreds, were in the habit of traversing this part of the
forest. Great holes, made by the feet of the enormous pachyderms, riddled a soil
softened during the rainy season. Its spongy nature also prepared it for those
large imprints.

It soon appeared that this passage did not serve for those gigantic animals
alone. Human beings had more than once taken this route, but as flocks, brutally
led to the slaughter-house, would have followed it. Here and there bones of dead
bodies strewed the ground; remains of skeletons, half gnawed by animals, some
of which still bore the slave's fetters.

There are, in Central Africa, long roads thus marked out by human débris.


Hundreds of miles are traversed by caravans, and how many unhappy wretches
fall by the way, under the agents' whips, killed by fatigue or privations,
decimated by sickness! How many more massacred by the traders themselves,
when food fails! Yes, when they can no longer feed them, they kill them with the
gun, with the sword, with the knife! These massacres are not rare.

So, then, caravans of slaves had followed this road. For a mile Dick Sand
and his companions struck against these scattered bones at each step, putting to
flight enormous fern-owls. Those owls rose at their approach, with a heavy
flight, and turned round in the air.

Mrs. Weldon looked without seeing. Dick Sand trembled lest she should
question him, for he hoped to lead her back to the coast without telling her that
Harris's treachery had led them astray in an African province. Fortunately, Mrs.
Weldon did not explain to herself what she had under her eyes. She had desired
to take her child again, and little Jack, asleep, absorbed all her care. Nan walked
near her, and neither of them asked the young novice the terrible questions he
dreaded.

Old Tom went along with his eyes down. He understood only too well why
this opening was strewn with human bones.

His companions looked to the right, to the left, with an air of surprise, as if
they were crossing an interminable cemetery, the tombs of which had been
overthrown by a cataclysm; but they passed in silence.

Meanwhile, the bed of the rivulet became deeper and wider at the same time.
Its current was less impetuous. Dick Sand hoped that it would soon become
navigable, or that it would before long reach a more important river, tributary to
the Atlantic.

Cost what it might, the young novice was determined to follow this stream of
water. Neither did he hesitate to abandon this opening; because, as ending by an
oblique line, it led away from the rivulet.

The little party a second time ventured through the dense underwood. They
marched, ax in hand, through leaves and bushes inextricably interlaced.

But if this vegetation obstructed the ground, they were no longer in the thick
forest that bordered the coast. Trees became rare. Large sheaves of bamboo
alone rose above the grass, and so high that even Hercules was not a head over
them. The passage of the little party was only revealed by the movement of these
stalks.

Toward three o'clock in the afternoon of that day, the nature of the ground
totally changed. Here were long plains, which must have been entirely inundated
in the rainy season. The earth, now more swampy, was carpeted by thick mosses,
beneath charming ferns. Should it be diversified by any steep ascents, they


would see brown hematites appear, the last deposits of some rich vein of
mineral.

Dick Sand then recalled--and very fortunately--what he had read in
"Livingstone's Travels." More than once the daring doctor had nearly rested in
these marshes, so treacherous under foot.

"Listen to me, my friends," said he, going ahead. "Try the ground before
stepping on it."

"In fact," replied Tom, "they say that these grounds have been softened by
the rain; but, however, it has not rained during these last days."

"No," replied Bat; "but the storm is not far off."

"The greater reason," replied Dick Sand, "why we should hurry and get clear
of this swamp before it commences. Hercules, take little Jack in your arms. Bat,
Austin, keep near Mrs. Weldon, so as to be able to help her if necessary. You,
Mr. Benedict--Why, what are you doing, Mr. Benedict?"

"I am falling!" innocently replied Cousin Benedict, who had just disappeared
as if a trap had been suddenly opened beneath his feet.

In fact, the poor man had ventured on a sort of quagmire, and had
disappeared half-way in the sticky mud. They stretched out their hands, and he
rose, covered with slime, but quite satisfied at not having injured his precious
entomologist's box. Acteon went beside him, and made it his duty to preserve the
unlucky, nearsighted man from any new disasters.

Besides, Cousin Benedict had made rather a bad choice of the quagmire for
his plunge. When they drew him out of the sticky earth a large quantity of
bubbles rose to the surface, and, in bursting, they emitted some gases of a
suffocating odor. Livingstone, who had been sunk up to his chest in this slime,
compared these grounds to a collection of enormous sponges, made of black,
porous earth, from which numerous streams of water spouted when they were
stepped upon. These places were always very dangerous.

For the space of half a mile Dick Sand and his companions must march over
this spongy soil. It even became so bad that Mrs. Weldon was obliged to stop,
for she sank deep in the mire. Hercules, Bat, and Austin, wishing to spare her the
unpleasantness more than the fatigue of a passage across this marshy plain, made
a litter of bamboos, on which she consented to sit. Her little Jack was placed in
her arms, and they endeavored to cross that pestilential marsh in the quickest
manner.

The difficulties were great. Acteon held Cousin Benedict firmly. Tom aided
Nan, who, without him, would have disappeared several times in some crevice.
The three other blacks carried the litter. At the head, Dick Sand sounded the
earth. The choice of the place to step on was not made without trouble. They


marched from preference on the edges, which were covered by a thick and tough
grass. Often the support failed, and they sank to the knees in the slime.

At last, about five o'clock in the evening, the marsh being cleared, the soil
regained sufficient firmness, thanks to its clayey nature; but they felt it damp
underneath. Very evidently these lands lay below the neighboring rivers, and the
water ran through their pores.

At that time the heat had become overwhelming. It would even have been
unbearable, if thick storm clouds had not interposed between the burning rays
and the ground. Distant lightnings began to rend the sky and low rollings of
thunder grumbled in the depths of the heavens. A formidable storm was going to
burst forth.

Now, these cataclysms are terrible in Africa: rain in torrents, squalls of wind
which the strongest trees cannot resist, clap after clap of thunder, such is the
contest of the elements in that latitude.

Dick Sand knew it well, and he became very uneasy. They could not pass the
night without shelter. The plain was likely to be inundated, and it did not present
a single elevation on which it was possible to seek refuge.

But refuge, where would they seek it in this low desert, without a tree,
without a bush? The bowels of the earth even would not give it. Two feet below
the surface they would find water.

However, toward the north a series of low hills seemed to limit the marshy
plain. It was as the border of this depression of land. A few trees were profiled
there on a more distant, clearer belt, left by the clouds on the line of the horizon.

There, if shelter were still lacking, the little band would at least no longer
risk being caught in a possible inundation. There perhaps was salvation for all.

"Forward, my friends, forward!" repeated Dick Sand. "Three miles more and
we Shall be safer than in these bottom-lands."

"Hurry! hurry!" cried Hercules.

The brave black would have wished to take that whole world in big arms and
carry it alone.

Those words inspired those courageous men, and in spite of the fatigue of a
day's march, they advanced more quickly than they had done at the
commencement from the halting-place.

When the storm burst forth the end to be attained was still more than two
miles off. Now--a fact which was the more to be feared--the rain did not
accompany the first lightnings exchanged between the ground and the electrical
clouds. Darkness then became almost complete, though the sun had not
disappeared below the horizon. But the dome of vapors gradually lowered, as if
it threatened to fall in--a falling in which must result in a torrent of rain.


Lightnings, red or blue, split it in a thousand places, and enveloped the plain in
an inextricable network of fire.

Twenty times Dick and his companions ran the risk of being struck by
lightning. On this plateau, deprived of trees, they formed the only projecting
points which could attract the electrical discharges. Jack, awakened by the noise
of the thunder, hid himself in Hercules' arms. He was very much afraid, poor
little boy, but he did not wish to let his mother see it, for fear of afflicting her
more. Hercules, while taking great steps, consoled him as well as he could.

"Do not be afraid, little Jack," he repeated. "If the thunder comes near us, I
will break it in two with a single hand. I am stronger than it!"

And, truly, the giant's strength reassured Jack a little.

Meanwhile the rain must soon fall, and then it would in torrents, poured out
by those clouds in condensing. What would become of Mrs. Weldon and her
companions, if they did not find a shelter?

Dick Sand stopped a moment near old Tom.

"What must be done?" said he.

"Continue our march, Mr. Dick," replied Tom. "We cannot remain on this
plain, that the rain is going to transform into a marsh!"

"No, Tom, no! But a shelter! Where? What? If it were only a hut--"

Dick Sand had suddenly broken off his sentence. A more vivid flash of
lightning had just illuminated the whole plain.

"What have I seen there, a quarter of a mile off?" exclaimed Dick Sand.

"Yes, I also, I have seen--" replied old Tom, shaking his head.

"A camp, is it not?"

"Yes, Mr. Dick, it must be a camp, but a camp of natives!"

A new flash enabled them to observe this camp more closely. It occupied a
part of the immense plain.

There, in fact, rose a hundred conical tents, symmetrically arranged, and
measuring from twelve to fifteen feet in height. Not a soldier showed himself,
however. Were they then shut up under their tents, so as to let the storm pass, or
was the camp abandoned?

In the first case, whatever Heaven should threaten, Dick Sand must flee in
the quickest manner. In the second, there was, perhaps, the shelter he asked.

"IT shall find out," he said to himself; then, addressing old Tom: "Stay here.
Let no one follow me. I shall go to reconnoiter that camp."

"Let one of us accompany you, Mr. Dick."

"No, Tom, I shall go alone. I can approach without being seen. Stay here."

The little troop, that followed Tom and Dick Sand, halted. The young novice
left at once and disappeared in the darkness, which was profound when the


lightning did not tear the sky.

Some large drops of rain already began to fall.

"What is the matter?" asked Mrs. Weldon, approaching the old black.

"We have perceived a camp, Mrs. Weldon," replied Tom; "a camp--or,
perhaps, a village, and our captain wished to reconnoiter it before leading us to
aks

Mrs. Weldon was satisfied with this reply. Three minutes after, Dick Sand
was returning.

"Come! come!" he cried, in a voice which expressed his entire satisfaction.

"The camp is abandoned?" asked Tom.

"It is not a camp," replied the young novice; "it is not a village. They are ant-
hills!"

"Ant-hills!" exclaimed Cousin Benedict, whom that word aroused.

"Yes, Mr. Benedict, but ant-hills twelve feet high, at least, and in which we
shall endeavor to hide ourselves."

"But then," replied Cousin Benedict, "those would be ant-hills of the warlike
termite or of the devouring termite. Only those ingenious insects raise such
monuments, which the greatest architects would not disown."

"Whether they be termites or not, Mr. Benedict," replied Dick Sand, "we
must dislodge them and take their place."

"They will devour us. They will be defending their rights."

"Forward! Forward!"

"But, wait now!" said Cousin Benedict again. "I thought those ant-hills only
existed in Africa."

"Forward!" exclaimed Dick Sand, for the last time, with a sort of violence.
He was so much afraid that Mrs. Weldon might hear the last word pronounced
by the entomologist.

They followed Dick Sand with all haste. A furious wind had sprung up.
Large drops crackled on the ground. In a few moments the squalls of wind would
become unbearable. Soon one of those cones which stood on the plain was
reached. No matter how threatening the termites might be, the human beings
must not hesitate. If they could not drive the insects away, they must share their
abode.

At the bottom of this cone, made with a kind of reddish clay, there was a
very narrow hole. Hercules enlarged it with his cutlass in a few moments, so as
to give a passage even to a man like himself.

To Cousin Benedict's extreme surprise, not one of the thousands of termites
that ought to occupy the ant-hill showed itself. Was, then, the cone abandoned?

The hole enlarged, Dick and his companions glided into it. Hercules


disappeared the last, just as the rain fell with such rage that it seemed to
extinguish the lightnings.

But those wind squalls were no longer to be feared. A happy chance had
furnished this little troop with a solid shelter, better than a tent, better than a
native's hut.

It was one of those termite cones that, according to Lieutenant Cameron's
comparison, are more astonishing than the pyramids of Egypt, raised by the
hands of men, because they have been built by such small insects.

"Tt is," said he, "as if a nation had built Mount Everest, the highest mountain
of the Himalaya chain."


CHAPTER V.

ANTS AND THEIR DWELLING.

At this moment the storm burst with a violence unknown in temperate
latitudes.

It was providential that Dick Sand and his companions had found this refuge!

In fact, the rain did not fall in distinct drops, but in streams of various
thickness. Sometimes it was a compact mass forming a sheet of water, like a
cataract, a Niagara. Imagine an aerial basin, containing a whole sea, being upset.
Under such showers the ground was hollowed out, the plains were changed to
lakes, the streams to torrents, the rivers, overflowing, inundated vast territories.
In temperate zones the violence of the storms decreases according to their
duration; but in Africa, however heavy they are, they continue for several entire
days. How can so much electricity be collected in the clouds? How can such
quantities of vapor be accumulated? It is very difficult to comprehend this.
However, such are the facts, and one might suppose himself transported to the
extraordinary epochs of the diluvian period.

Fortunately, the ant-cone, with its thick walls, was perfectly impervious. A
beaver's hut, of well-beaten earth, could not have been more water-tight. A
torrent could have passed over it without a single drop of water filtering through
its pores.

As soon as Dick Sand and his companions had taken possession of the cone
they occupied themselves in examining its interior arrangement. The lantern was
lighted, and the ant-hill was sufficiently illuminated. This cone, which measured
twelve feet in height inside, was eleven feet wide, except in its upper part, which
rounded in the form of a sugar loaf. Everywhere the walls were about one foot in
thickness, and there was a distance between the stories of cells which adorned
them.


We may be astonished at the construction of such monuments, due to these
industrious swarms of insects, but it is true that they are frequently found in the
interior of Africa. Smeathman, a Dutch traveler of the last century, with four of
his companions, occupied the top of one of these cones. In the Lounde,
Livingstone observed several of these ant-hills, built of reddish clay, and
attaining a height of fifteen and twenty feet. Lieutenant Cameron has many a
time mistaken for a camp these collections of cones which dotted the plain in
N'yangwe. He has even stopped at the foot of great edifices, not more than
twenty feet high, but composed of forty or fifty enormous rounded cones,
flanked with bell-towers like the dome of a cathedral, such as Southern Africa
possesses.

To what species of ant was due, then, the prodigious style of architecture of
these cones?

"To the warlike termite," Cousin Benedict had replied, without hesitating, as
soon as he had recognized the nature of the materials employed in their
construction.

And, in fact, the walls, as has been said, were made of reddish clay. Had they
been formed of a gray or black alluvian earth, they must have been attributed to
the "termes mordax" or the "termes atrox." As we see, these insects have not
very cheering names--a fact which cannot but please a strong entomologist, such
as Cousin Benedict.

The central part of the cone, in which the little troop had first found shelter,
and which formed the empty interior, would not have contained them; but large
cavities, in close contact, made a number of divisions, in which a person of
medium height could find refuge. Imagine a succession of open drawers, and at
the bottom of those drawers millions of cells which the termites had occupied,
and the interior disposition of the ant-hill is easily understood. To sum up, these
drawers are in tiers, like the berths in a ship's cabin. In the upper ones Mrs.
Weldon, little Jack, Nan, and Cousin Benedict took refuge. In the lower row
Austin, Bat, and Acteon hid themselves. As for Dick Sand, Tom, and Hercules,
they remained in the lower part of the cone.

"My friends," then said the young novice to the two blacks, "the ground is
becoming damp. We must fill it up by crumbling the red clay from the base; but
take care not to obstruct the hole by which the air enters. We cannot risk being
smothered in this ant-hill."

"We have only one night to spend here," replied old Tom.

"Well, let us try and make it recover us from our fatigue. This is the first time
in ten days that we have not to sleep in the open air."

"Ten days!" repeated Tom.


"Besides," added Dick Sand, "as this cone forms a solid shelter, perhaps we
had better stay here twenty-four hours. During that time, I will go in search of
the stream that we are in need of; it cannot be very distant. I think that until we
have constructed our raft, it will be better not to quit this shelter. The storm
cannot reach us here. Let us make the floor stronger and dryer."

Dick Sand's orders were executed at once. Hercules, with his ax, crumbled
the first story of cells, which was composed of crisp red clay. He thus raised,
more than a foot, the interior part of the swampy earth on which the ant-hill
rested, and Dick Sand made sure that the air could freely penetrate to the interior
of the cone through the orifice pierced at its base.

It was, certainly, a fortunate circumstance that the ant-hill had been
abandoned by the termites. With a few thousands of these ants, it would have
been uninhabitable. But, had it been evacuated for some time, or had the
voracious newroptera but just quitted it? It was not superfluous to ponder this
question.

Cousin Benedict was so much surprised at the abandonment, that he at once
considered the reason for it, and he was soon convinced that the emigration had
been recent.

In fact, he did not wait, but, descending to the lower part of the cone, and
taking the lantern, he commenced to examine the most secret comers of the ant-
hill. He thus discovered what is called the "general storehouse" of the termites,
that is to say, the place where these industrious insects lay up the provisions of
the colony.

It was a cavity hollowed in the wall, not far from the royal cell, which
Hercules's labor had destroyed, along with the cells destined for the young
larvae.

In this store-room Cousin Benedict collected a certain quantity of particles of
gum and the juices of plants, scarcely solidified, which proved that the termites
had lately brought them from without.

"Well, no!" cried he. "No!" as if he were replying to some contradiction,
"No, this ant-hill has not been long abandoned."

"Who says to the contrary, Mr. Benedict?" said Dick Sand. "Recently or not,
the important thing for us is that the termites have left it, because we have to
take their place."

"The important thing," replied Cousin Benedict, "will be to know why they
have left it. Yesterday--this morning, perhaps--these sagacious newroptera were
still here, because, see these liquid juices; and this evening----"

"Well, what do you conclude, Mr. Benedict?" asked Dick Sand.

"That a secret presentiment has caused them to abandon the cone. Not only


have all the termites left their cells, but they have taken care to carry away the
young larvae, of which I cannot find one. Well, I repeat that all this was not done
without a motive, and that these sagacious insects foresaw some near danger."

"They foresaw that we were going to invade their dwelling,” replied
Hercules, laughing.

"Indeed!" replied Cousin Benedict, whom this answer sensibly shocked.
"You think yourself so strong that you would be dangerous to these courageous
insects? A few thousand of these newroptera would quickly reduce you to a
skeleton if they found you dead on the road."

"Dead, certainly," replied Hercules, who would not give up; "but, living, I
could crush masses of them."

"You might crush a hundred thousand, five hundred thousand, a million,"
replied Cousin Benedict, with animation, "but not a thousand millions; and a
thousand millions would devour you, living or dead, to the last morsel."

During this discussion, which was less trifling than might be supposed, Dick
Sand reflected on the observations made by Cousin Benedict. There was no
doubt that the savant knew too much about the habits of the termites to be
mistaken. If he declared that a secret instinct warned them to leave the ant-hill
recently, it was because there was truly peril in remaining in it.

Meanwhile, as it was impossible to abandon this shelter at a moment when
the storm was raging with unparalleled intensity, Dick Sand looked no farther for
an explanation of what seemed to be inexplicable, and he contented himself with
saying:

"Well, Mr. Benedict, if the termites have left their provisions in this ant-hill,
we must not forget that we have brought ours, and let us have supper. To-
morrow, when the storm will be over, we will consult together on our future
plans."

They then occupied themselves in preparing the evening meal, for, great as
their fatigue was, it had not affected the appetite of these vigorous walkers. On
the contrary, the food, which had to last for two more days, was very welcome.
The damp had not reached the biscuits, and for several minutes it could be heard
cracking under the solid teeth of Dick Sand and his companions. Between
Hercules's jaws it was like grain under the miller's grindstone. It did not crackle,
it powdered.

Mrs. Weldon alone scarcely eat, and even Dick Sand's entreaties were vain. It
seemed to him that this brave woman was more preoccupied, more sad than she
had been hitherto. Meanwhile her little Jack suffered less; the fever had not
returned, and at this time he was sleeping, under his mother's eyes, in a cell well
lined with garments. Dick Sand knew not what to think.


It is useless to say that Cousin Benedict did honor to the repast, not that he
paid any attention either to the quality or to the quantity of the food that he
devoured, but because he had found an opportunity to deliver a lecture in
entomology on the termites. Ah! if he had been able to find a termite, a single
one, in the deserted ant hill! But nothing.

"These admirable insects," said he, without taking the trouble to find out if
any one were listening--"these admirable insects belong to the marvelous order
of newroptera, whose horns are longer than the head, the jaws very distinct, and
whose lower wings are generally equal to the upper ones. Five tribes constitute
this order: the Panorpates (scorpion flies), the Myrmileoniens, the Hemerobins,
the Termitines and the Perlides. It is useless to add that the insects which now
interest us, and whose dwelling we occupy, perhaps unduly, are the Termitines."

At this moment Dick Sand listened very attentively to Cousin Benedict. Had
the meeting with these termites excited in him the thought that he was perhaps
on the African continent, without knowing by what chance he had arrived there?
The young novice was very anxious to find out.

The savant, mounted on his favorite hobby, continued to ride it beautifully.

"Now these termitines,"” said he, "are characterized by four joints on the
instep, horned jaws, and remarkable strength. We have the mantispe species, the
raphidie, and the termite species. The last is often known under the term of
white ants, in which we count the deadly termite, the yellow corslet termite, the
termite that shuns the light, the biter, the destroyer--"

"And those that constructed this ant-hill?" asked Dick Sand.

"They are the martial ants," replied Cousin Benedict, who pronounced this
word as if it had been the Macedonians, or some other ancient people brave in
war. "Yes, the warlike ants, and of all sizes. Between Hercules and a dwarf the
difference would be less than between the largest of these insects and the
smallest. Among them are 'workers' of five millimeters in length 'soldiers' of ten,
and males and females of twenty. We find also a kind otherwise very curious: the
sirafous half an inch in length, which have pincers for jaws, and a head larger
than the body, like the sharks. They are the sharks among insects, and in a fight
between some sirafous and a shark, I would bet on the sirafous."

"And where are these sirafous commonly observed?" then asked Dick Sand.

"In Africa," replied Cousin Benedict; "in the central and southern provinces.
Africa is, in fact, the country of ants. You should read what Livingstone says of
them in the last notes reported by Stanley. More fortunate than myself, the doctor
has witnessed a Homeric battle, joined between an army of black ants and an
army of red ants. The latter, which are called ‘drivers,’ and which the natives
name sirafous, were victorious.


"The others, the 'tchoungous,' took flight, carrying their eggs and their
young, not without having bravely defended themselves. Never, according to
Livingstone, never was the spirit of battle carried farther, either among men or
beasts! With their tenacious jaws, which tear out the piece, these sirafous make
the bravest man recoil. The largest animals--even lions and elephants--flee
before them.

"Nothing stops them; neither trees, which they climb to the summit, nor
streams, which they cross by making a suspension bridge of their own bodies,
hooked together. And numerous! Another African traveler--Du Chaillu--has seen
a column of these ants defile past him for twelve hours without stopping on the
road. But why be astonished at the sight of such myriads? The fecundity of these
insects is surprising; and, to return to our fighting termites, it has been proved
that a female deposits as much as sixty thousand eggs in a day! Besides, these
newroptera furnish the natives with a juicy food. Broiled ants, my friends; I
know of nothing better in the world!"

"Have you then eaten them, Mr. Benedict?" asked Hercules.

"Never," replied the wise professor; "but I shall eat some."

"Where?"

"Here."

"Here; we are not in Africa!" said Tom, very quickly.

"No, no!" replied Cousin Benedict; "and, thus far, these warlike termites, and
their villages of ant-hills, have only been observed on the African Continent. Ah!
such travelers. They do not know how to see! Well! all the better, after all. I have
discovered a tsetse in America. To the glory of this, I shall join that of having
found the warlike termites on the same continent! What matter for an article that
will make a sensation in educated Europe, and, perhaps, appear in folio form,
with prints and engravings, besides the text!"

It was evident that the truth had not entered Cousin Benedict's brain. The
poor man and all his companions, Dick Sand and Tom excepted, believed
themselves, and must believe themselves, where they were not! It needed other
incidents, facts still more grave than certain scientific curiosities, to undeceive
them!

It was then nine o'clock in the morning. Cousin Benedict had talked for a
long time. Did he perceive that his auditors, propped up in their cells, had
gradually fallen asleep during his entomological lecture? No; certainly not. He
lectured for himself. Dick Sand no longer questioned him, and remained
motionless, although he did not sleep. As for Hercules, he had resisted longer
than the others; but fatigue soon finished by shutting his eyes, and, with his eyes,
his ears.


For some time longer Cousin Benedict continued to lecture. However, sleep
finally got the best of him, and he mounted to the upper cavity of the cone, in
which he had chosen his domicile.

Deep silence fell on the interior of the cone, while the storm filled space with
noise and fire. Nothing seemed to indicate that the tempest was nearly over.

The lantern had been extinguished. The interior of the ant-hill was plunged
in complete darkness.

No doubt all slept. However, Dick Sand, alone, did not seek in sleep the
repose which was so necessary to him. Thought absorbed him. He dreamed of
his companions, whom he would save at all hazards. The wrecking of the
"Pilgrim" had not been the end of their cruel trials, and others, still more terrible,
threatened them should they fall into the hands of these natives.

And how to avoid this danger, the worst of all, during their return to the
coast. Harris and Negoro had not led them a hundred miles into the interior of
Angola without a secret design to gain possession of them.

But what did this miserable Portuguese intend? Who had merited his hatred?
The young novice repeated to himself, that he alone had incurred it. Then he
passed in review all the incidents that had taken place during the "Pilgrim's"
voyage; the meeting with the wreck and the blacks; the pursuit of the whale; the
disappearance of Captain Hull and his crew.

Dick Sand had found himself, at the age of fifteen, intrusted with the
command of a vessel, the compass and log of which were soon injured by
Negoro's criminal actions. He again saw himself using his authority in the
presence of this insolent cook, threatening to put him in irons, or to blow out his
brains with a pistol shot. Ah, why had he hesitated to do it? Negoro's corpse
would have been thrown overboard, and none of these catastrophes would have
happened.

Such were the young man's various thoughts. Then they dwelt a moment on
the shipwreck which had ended the "Pilgrim's" voyage. The traitor Harris
appeared then, and this province of South America gradually became
transformed. Bolivia changed to the terrible Angola, with its feverish climate, its
savage deer, its natives still more cruel. Could the little party escape during its
return to the coast? This river which he was seeking, which he hoped to find,
would it conduct them to the shore with more safety, and with less fatigue? He
would not doubt it, for he knew well that a march of a hundred miles through
this inhospitable country, in the midst of incessant dangers, was no longer
possible.

"Happily," he said to himself, "Mrs. Weldon and all are ignorant of the
danger of the situation. Old Tom and I, we alone are to know that Negoro has


thrown us on the coast of Africa; and that Harris has led me into the wilds of
Angola."

Dick Sand was thus sunk in overpowering thoughts, when he felt a breath on
his forehead. A hand rested on his shoulder, and a trembling voice murmured
these words in his ear:

"I know all, my poor Dick, but God can yet save us! His will be done!"


CHAPTER VI.

THE DIVING-BELL.

To this unexpected revelation Dick Sand could not reply. Besides, Mrs.
Weldon had gone back at once to her place beside little Jack. She evidently did
not wish to say any more about it, and the young novice had not the courage to
detain her.

Thus Mrs. Weldon knew what to believe. The various incidents, of the way
had enlightened her also, and perhaps, too, that word, "Africa!" so unluckily
pronounced the night before by Cousin Benedict.

"Mrs. Weldon knows everything," repeated Dick Sand to himself. "Well,
perhaps it is better so. The brave woman does not despair. I shall not despair
either."

Dick Sand now longed for day to return, that he might explore the
surroundings of this termite village. He must find a tributary of the Atlantic with
a rapid course to transport all his little troop. He had a presentiment that this
watercourse could not be far distant. Above all, they must avoid an encounter
with the natives, perhaps already sent in pursuit of them under Harris's and
Negoro's direction.

But it was not day yet. No light made its way into the cone through the lower
orifice. Rumblings, rendered low by the thickness of the walls, indicated that the
storm still raged. Listening, Dick Sand also heard the rain falling with violence
at the base of the ant-hill. As the large drops no longer struck a hard soil, he must
conclude that the whole plain was inundated.

It must have been about eleven o'clock. Dick Sand then felt that a kind of
torpor, if not a true sleep, was going to overcome him. It would, however, be
rest. But, just as he was yielding to it, the thought came to him that, by the
settling of the clay, washed in, the lower orifice was likely to be obstructed. All
passage for the outer air would be closed. Within, the respiration of ten persons
would soon vitiate the air by loading it with carbonic acid.

Dick Sand then slipped to the ground, which had been raised by the clay
from the first floor of cells.


That cushion was still perfectly dry, and the orifice entirely free. The air
penetrated freely to the interior of the cone, and with it some flashes of lightning,
and the loud noises of that storm, that a diluvian rain could not extinguish.

Dick Sand saw that all was well. No immediate danger seemed to menace
these human termites, substituted for the colony of newroptera. The young
novice then thought of refreshing himself by a few hours' sleep, as he already
felt its influence. Only with supreme precaution Dick Sand lay on that bed of
clay, at the bottom of the cone, near the narrow edifice.

By this means, if any accident happened outside, he would be the first to
remark it. The rising day would also awaken him, and he would be ready to
begin the exploration of the plain.

Dick Sand lay down then, his head against the wall, his gun under his hand,
and almost immediately he was asleep.

How long this drowsiness lasted he could not tell, when he was awakened by
a lively sensation of coolness.

He rose and recognized, not without great anxiety, that the water was
invading the ant hill, and even so rapidly, that in a few seconds it would reach
the story of cells occupied by Tom and Hercules.

The latter, awakened by Dick Sand, were told about this new complication.

The lighted lantern soon showed the interior of the cone.

The water had stopped at a height of about five feet, and remained stationary.

"What is the matter, Dick?" asked Mrs. Weldon.

"It is nothing," replied the young novice. "The lower part of the cone has
been inundated. It is probably that during this storm a neighboring river has
overflowed on this plain."

"Good!" said Hercules; "that proves the river is there!"

"Yes," replied Dick Sand, "and it will carry us to the coast. Be reassured,
then, Mrs. Weldon; the water cannot reach you, nor little Jack, nor Nan, nor Mr.
Benedict."

Mrs. Weldon did not reply. As to the cousin, he slept like a veritable termite.

Meanwhile the blacks, leaning over this sheet of water, which reflected the
lantern's light, waited for Dick Sand to indicate to them what should be done. He
was measuring the height of the inundation.

After having the provisions and arms put out of the reach of the inundation,
Dick Sand was silent.

"The water has penetrated by the orifice," said Tom.

"Yes," replied Dick Sand, "and now it prevents the interior air from being
renewed."

"Could we not make a hole in the wall above the level of the water?" asked


the old black.

"Doubtless, Tom; but if we have five feet of water within, there are perhaps
six or seven, even more, without."

"You think, Mr. Dick--?"

"T think, Tom, that the water, rising inside the ant-hill, has compressed the air
in the upper part, and that this air now makes an obstacle to prevent the water
from rising higher. But if we pierce a hole in the wall by which the air would
escape, either the water would still rise till it reached the outside level, or if it
passed the hole, it would rise to that point where the compressed air would again
keep it back. We must be here like workmen in a diving-bell."

"What must be done?" asked Tom.

"Reflect well before acting," replied Dick Sand. "An imprudence might cost
us our lives!"

The young novice's observation was very true.

In comparing the cone to a submerged bell, he was right. Only in that
apparatus the air is constantly renewed by means of pumps. The divers breathe
comfortably, and they suffer no other inconveniences than those resulting from a
prolonged sojourn in a compressed atmosphere, no longer at a normal pressure.

But here, beside those inconveniences, space was already reduced a third by
the invasion of the water. As to the air, it would only be renewed if they put it in
communication with the outer atmosphere by means of a hole.

Could they, without running the danger spoken of by Dick Sand, pierce that
hole? Would not the situation be aggravated by it?

What was certain was, that the water now rested at a level which only two
causes could make it exceed, namely: if they pierced a hole, and the level of the
rising waters was higher outside, or if the height of this rising water should still
increase. In either of these cases, only a narrow space would remain inside the
cone, where the air, not renewed, would be still more compressed.

But might not the ant-hill be torn from the ground and overthrown by the
inundation, to the extreme danger of those within it? No, no more than a beaver's
hut, so firmly did it adhere by its base.

Then, the event most to be feared was the persistence of the storm, and,
consequently, the increase of the inundation. Thirty feet of water on the plain
would cover the cone with eighteen feet of water, and bear on the air within with
the pressure of an atmosphere.

Now, after reflecting well upon it, Dick Sand was led to fear that this
inundation might increase considerably.

In fact, it could not be due solely to that deluge poured out by the clouds. It
seemed more probable that a neighboring watercourse, swelled by the storm, had


burst its banks, and was spreading over this plain lying below it. What proof had
they that the ant-hill was not then entirely submerged, and that it was full time to
leave it by the top part, which would not be difficult to demolish?

Dick Sand, now extremely anxious, asked himself what he ought to do. Must
he wait or suddenly announce the probable result of the situation, after
ascertaining the condition of things?

It was then three o'clock in the morning. All, motionless, silent, listened. The
noise from outside came very feebly through the obstructed orifice. All the time
a dull sound, strong and continued, well indicated that the contest of the
elements had not ceased.

At that moment old Tom observed that the water level was gradually rising.

"Yes," replied Dick Sand, "and if it rises, as the air cannot escape from
within, it is because the rising of the waters increases and presses it more and
more."

"Tt is but slight so far," said Tom.

"Without doubt," replied Dick Sand; "but where will this level stop?"

"Mr. Dick," asked Bat, "would you like me to go out of the ant-hill? By
diving, I should try to slip out by the hole."

"Tt will be better for me to try it," replied Dick Sand.

"No, Mr. Dick, no," replied old Tom, quickly; "let my son do it, and trust to
his skill. In case he could not return, your presence is necessary here."

Then, lower:

"Do not forget Mrs. Weldon and little Jack."

"Be it so," replied Dick Sand. "Go, then, Bat. If the ant-hill is submerged, do
not seek to enter it again. We shall try to come out as you will have done. But if
the cone still emerges, strike on its top with the ax that you will take with you.
We will hear you, and it will be the signal for us to demolish the top from our
side. You understand?"

"Yes, Mr. Dick," replied Bat.

"Go, then, boy," added old Tom, pressing his son's hand.

Bat, after laying in a good provision of air by a long aspiration, plunged
under the liquid mass, whose depth then exceeded five feet. It was a rather
difficult task, because he would have to seek the lower orifice, slip through it,
and then rise to the outside surface of the waters.

That must be done quickly.

Nearly half a minute passed away. Dick Sand then thought that Bat had
succeeded in passing outside when the black emerged.

"Well!" exclaimed Dick Sand.

"The hole is stopped up by rubbish!" replied Bat, as soon as he could take


breath.

"Stopped up!" repeated Tom.

"Yes," replied Bat. "The water has probably diluted the clay. I have felt
around the walls with my hand. There is no longer any hole."

Dick Sand shook his head. His companions and he were hermetically
sequestered in this cone, perhaps submerged by the water.

"If there is no longer any hole," then said Hercules, "we must make one."

"Wait," replied the young novice, stopping Hercules, who, hatchet in hand,
was preparing to dive.

Dick Sand reflected for a few moments, and then he said:

"We are going to proceed in another manner. The whole question is to know
whether the water covers the ant-hill or not. If we make a small opening at the
summit of the cone, we shall find out which it is. But in case the ant-hill should
be submerged now, the water would fill it entirely, and we would be lost. Let us
feel our way."

"But quickly," replied Tom.

In fact, the level continued to rise gradually. There were then six feet of
water inside the cone. With the exception of Mrs. Weldon, her son, Cousin
Benedict, and Nan, who had taken refuge in the upper cavities, all were
immersed to the waist.

Then there was a necessity for quick action, as Dick Sand proposed.

It was one foot above the interior level, consequently seven feet from the
ground, that Dick Sand resolved to pierce a hole in the clay wall.

If, by this hole, they were in communication with the outer air, the cone
emerges. If, on the contrary, this hole was pierced below the water level outside,
the air would be driven inward, and in that case they must stop it up at once, or
the water would rise to its orifice. Then they would commence again a foot
higher, and so on. If, at last, at the top, they did not yet find the outer air, it was
because there was a depth of more than fifteen feet of water in the plain, and that
the whole termite village had disappeared under the inundation. Then what
chance had the prisoners in the ant-hill to escape the most terrible of deaths,
death by slow asphyxia?

Dick Sand knew all that, but he did not lose his presence of mind for a
moment. He had closely calculated the consequences of the experiment he
wished to try. Besides, to wait longer was not possible. Asphyxia was
threatening in this narrow space, reduced every moment, in a medium already
saturated with carbonic acid.

The best tool Dick Sand could employ to pierce a hole through the wall was
a ramrod furnished with a screw, intended to draw the wadding from a gun. By


making it turn rapidly, this screw scooped out the clay like an auger, and the hole
was made little by little. Then it would not have a larger diameter than that of the
ramrod, but that would be sufficient. The air could come through very well.

Hercules holding up the lantern lighted Dick Sand. They had some wax
candles to take its place, and they had not to fear lack of light from that source.

A minute after the beginning of the operation, the ramrod went freely
through the wall. At once a rather dull noise was produced, resembling that
made by globules of air escaping through a column of water. The air escaped,
and, at the same moment, the level of the water rose in the cone, and stopped at
the height of the hole. This proved that they had pierced too low--that is to say,
below the liquid mass.

"Begin again," the young novice said, coolly, after rapidly stopping the hole
with a handful of clay.

The water was again stationary in the cone, but the reserved space had
diminished more than eight inches. Respiration became difficult, for the oxygen
was beginning to fail. They saw it also by the lantern's light, which reddened and
lost a part of its brightness.

One foot above the first hole, Dick Sand began at once to pierce a second by
the same process. If the experiment failed, the water would rise still higher
inside the cone--but that risk must be run.

While Dick Sand was working his auger, they heard Cousin Benedict cry out,
suddenly:

"Mercy! look--look--look why!"

Hercules raised his lantern and threw its light on Cousin Benedict, whose
face expressed the most perfect satisfaction.

"Yes," repeated he, "look why those intelligent termites have abandoned the
ant-hill! They had felt the inundation beforehand. Ah! instinct, my friends,
instinct. The termites are wiser than we are, much wiser."

And that was all the moral Cousin Benedict drew from the situation.

At that moment Dick Sand drew out the ramrod, which had penetrated the
wall. A hissing was produced. The water rose another foot inside the cone--the
hole had not reached the open air outside.

The situation was dreadful. Mrs. Weldon, then almost reached by the water,
had raised little Jack in her arms. All were stifling in this narrow space. Their
ears buzzed.

The lantern only threw a faint light.

"Is the cone, then, entirely under water?" murmured Dick Sand.

He must know; and, in order to know, he must pierce a third hole, at the very
top.


But it was asphyxia, it was immediate death, if the result of this last attempt
should prove fruitless. The air remaining inside would escape through the upper
sheet of water, and the water would fill the whole cone.

"Mrs. Weldon," then said Dick Sand, "you know the situation. If we delay,
respirable air will fail us. If the third attempt fails, water will fill all this space.
Our only chance is that the summit of the cone is above the level of the
inundation. We must try this last experiment. Are you willing?"

"Do it, Dick!" replied Mrs. Weldon.

At that moment the lantern went out in that medium already unfit for
combustion. Mrs. Weldon and her companions were plunged in the most
complete darkness.

Dick Sand was perched on Hercules's shoulders. The latter was hanging on
to one of the lateral cavities. Only his head was above the bed of water.

Mrs. Weldon, Jack, and Cousin Benedict were in the last story of cells.

Dick Sand scratched the wall, and his ramrod pierced the clay rapidly. In this
place the wall, being thicker and harder also, was more difficult to penetrate.
Dick Sand hastened, not without terrible anxiety, for by this narrow opening
either life was going to penetrate with the air, or with the water it was death.

Suddenly a sharp hissing was heard. The compressed air escaped--but a ray
of daylight filtered through the wall. The water only rose eight inches, and
stopped, without Dick Sand being obliged to close the hole. The equilibrium was
established between the level within and that outside. The summit of the cone
emerged. Mrs. Weldon and her companions were saved.

At once, after a frantic hurra, in which Hercules's thundering voice prevailed,
the cutlasses were put to work. The summit, quickly attacked, gradually
crumbled. The hole was enlarged, the pure air entered in waves, and with it the
first rays of the rising sun. The top once taken off the cone, it would be easy to
hoist themselves on to its wall, and they would devise means of reaching some
neighboring height, above all inundations.

Dick Sand first mounted to the summit of the cone.

A cry escaped him.

That particular noise, too well known by African travelers, the whizzing of
arrows, passed through the air.

Dick Sand had had time to perceive a camp a hundred feet from the ant-hill,
and ten feet from the cone, on the inundated plain, long boats, filled with natives.

It was from one of those boats that the flight of arrows had come the moment
the young novice's head appeared out of the hole.

Dick Sand, in a word, had told all to his companions. Seizing his gun,
followed by Hercules, Acteon, and Bat, he reappeared at the summit of the cone,


and all fired on one of the boats.

Several natives fell, and yells, accompanied by shots, replied to the
detonation of the firearms.

But what could Dick Sand and his companions do against a hundred
Africans, who surrounded them on all sides?

The ant-hill was assailed. Mrs. Weldon, her child, and Cousin Benedict, all
were brutally snatched from it, and without having had time to speak to each
other or to shake hands for the last time, they saw themselves separated from
each other, doubtless in virtue of orders previously given.

A last boat took away Mrs. Weldon, little Jack and Cousin Benedict. Dick
Sand saw them disappear in the middle of the camp.

As to him, accompanied by Nan, Old Tom, Hercules, Bat, Acteon and
Austin, he was thrown into a second boat, which went toward another point of
the hill.

Twenty natives entered this boat.

It was followed by five others.

Resistance was not possible, and nevertheless, Dick Sand and _ his
companions attempted it. Some soldiers of the caravan were wounded by them,
and certainly they would have paid for this resistance with their lives, if there
had not been a formal order to spare them.

In a few minutes, the passage was made. But just as the boat landed,
Hercules, with an irresistible bound, sprang on the ground. Two natives having
sprung on him, the giant turned his gun like a club, and the natives fell, with
their skulls broken.

A moment after, Hercules disappeared under the cover of the trees, in the
midst of a shower of balls, as Dick Sand and his companions, having been put on
land, were chained like slaves.


CHAPTER VII.

IN CAMP ON THE BANKS OF THE COANZA.

The aspect of the country was entirely changed since the inundation. It had
made a lake of the plain where the termite village stood. The cones of twenty
ant-hills emerged, and formed the only projecting points on this large basin.

The Coanza had overflowed during the night, with the waters of its
tributaries swelled by the storm.

This Coanza, one of the rivers of Angola, flows into the Atlantic, a hundred
miles from the cape where the "Pilgrim" was wrecked. It was this river that
Lieutenant Cameron had to cross some years later, before reaching Benguela.


The Coanza is intended to become the vehicle for the interior transit of this
portion of the Portuguese colony. Already steamers ascend its lower course, and
before ten years elapse, they will ply over its upper bed. Dick Sand had then
acted wisely in seeking some navigable river toward the north. The rivulet he
had followed had just been emptied into the Coanza. Only for this sudden attack,
of which he had had no intimation to put him on his guard, he would have found
the Coanza a mile farther on. His companions and he would have embarked on a
raft, easily constructed, and they would have had a good chance to descend the
stream to the Portuguese villages, where the steamers come into port. There,
their safety would be secured.

It would not be so.

The camp, perceived by Dick Sand, was established on an elevation near the
ant-hill, into which fate had thrown him, as in a trap. At the summit of that
elevation rose an enormous sycamore fig-tree, which would easily shelter five
hundred men under its immense branches. Those who have not seen those giant
trees of Central Africa, can form no idea of them. Their branches form a forest,
and one could be lost in it. Farther on, great banyans, of the kind whose seeds do
not change into fruits, completed the outline of this vast landscape.

It was under the sycamore's shelter, hidden, as in a mysterious asylum, that a
whole caravan--the one whose arrival Harris had announced to Negoro--had just
halted. This numerous procession of natives, snatched from their villages by the
trader Alvez's agents, were going to the Kazounde market. Thence the slaves, as
needed, would be sent either to the barracks of the west coast, or to N'yangwe,
toward the great lake region, to be distributed either in upper Egypt, or in the
factories of Zanzibar.

As soon as they arrived at the camp, Dick Sand and his companions had been
treated as slaves. Old Tom, his son Austin, Acteon, poor Nan, negroes by birth,
though they did not belong to the African race, were treated like captive natives.
After they were disarmed, in spite of the strongest resistance, they were held by
the throat, two by two, by means of a pole six or seven feet long, forked at each
end, and closed by an iron rod. By this means they were forced to march in line,
one behind the other, unable to get away either to the right or to the left. As an
Over precaution, a heavy chain was attached to their waists. They had their arms
free, to carry burdens, their feet free to march, but they could not use them to
flee. Thus they were going to travel hundreds of miles under an overseer's lash.
Placed apart, overcome by the reaction which followed the first moments of their
struggle against the negroes, they no longer made a movement. Why had they
not been able to follow Hercules in his flight? And, meanwhile, what could they
hope for the fugitive? Strong as he was, what would become of him in that


inhospitable country, where hunger, solitude, savage beasts, natives, all were
against him? Would he not soon regret his companion's fate? They, however, had
no pity to expect from the chiefs of the caravan, Arabs or Portuguese, speaking a
language they could not understand. These chiefs only entered into
communication with their prisoners by menacing looks and gestures.

Dick Sand himself was not coupled with any other slave. He was a white
man, and probably they had not dared to inflict the common treatment on him.
Unarmed, he had his feet and hands free, but a driver watched him especially. He
observed the camp, expecting each moment to see Negoro or Harris appear. His
expectation was in vain. He had no doubt, however, that those two miserable
men had directed the attack against the ant-hill.

Thus the thought came to him that Mrs. Weldon, little Jack, and Cousin
Benedict had been led away separately by orders from the American or from the
Portuguese. Seeing neither one nor the other, he said to himself that perhaps the
two accomplices even accompanied their victims. Where were they leading
them? What would they do with them? It was his most cruel care. Dick Sand
forgot his own situation to think only of Mrs. Weldon and hers.

The caravan, camped under the gigantic sycamore, did not count less than
eight hundred persons, say five hundred slaves of both sexes, two hundred
soldiers, porters, marauders, guards, drivers, agents, or chiefs.

These chiefs were of Arab and Portugese origin. It would be difficult to
imagine the cruelties that these inhuman beings inflicted on their captives. They
struck them without relaxation, and those who fell exhausted, not fit to be sold,
were finished with gunshots or the knife. Thus they hold them by terror. But the
result of this system is, that on the arrival of the caravan, fifty out of a hundred
slaves are missing from the trader's list. A few may have escaped, but the bones
of those who died from torture mark out the long routes from the interior to the
coast.

It is supposed that the agents of European origin, Portuguese for the most
part, are only rascals whom their country has rejected, convicts, escaped
prisoners, old slave-drivers whom the authorities have been unable to hang--in a
word, the refuse of humanity. Such was Negoro, such was Harris, now in the
service of one of the greatest contractors of Central Africa, Jose-Antonio Alvez,
well known by the traders of the province, about whom Lieutenant Cameron has
given some curious information.

The soldiers who escort the captives are generally natives in the pay of the
traders. But the latter have not the monopoly of those raids which procure the
slaves for them. The negro kings also make atrocious wars with each other, and
with the same object. Then the vanquished adults, the women and children,


reduced to slavery, are sold by the vanquishers for a few yards of calico, some
powder, a few firearms, pink or red pearls, and often even, as Livingstone says,
in periods of famine, for a few grains of maize.

The soldiers who escorted old Alvez's caravan might give a true idea of what
African armies are.

It was an assemblage of negro bandits, hardly clothed, who brandished long
flint-lock guns, the gun-barrels garnished with a great number of copper rings.
With such an escort, to which are joined marauders who are no better, the agents
often have all they can do. They dispute orders, they insist on their own halting
places and hours, they threaten to desert, and it is not rare for the agents to be
forced to yield to the exactions of this soldiery.

Though the slaves, men or women, are generally subjected to carry burdens
while the caravan is on the march, yet a certain number of porters accompany it.
They are called more particularly "Pagazis," and they carry bundles of precious
objects, principally ivory. Such is the size of these elephants’ teeth sometimes, of
which some weigh as much as one hundred and sixty pounds, that it takes two of
these "Pagazis" to carry them to the factories. Thence this precious merchandise
is exported to the markets of Khartoum, of Zanzibar and Natal.

On arriving, these "Pagazis" are paid the price agreed upon. It consists in
twenty yards of cotton cloth, or of that stuff which bears the name of "Merikani,"
a little powder, a handful of cowry (shells very common in that country, which
serve aS money), a few pearls, or even those of the slaves who would be difficult
to sell. The slaves are paid, when the trader has no other money.

Among the five hundred slaves that the caravan counted, there were few
grown men. That is because, the "Razzia" being finished and the village set on
fire, every native above forty is unmercifully massacred and hung to a
neighboring tree. Only the young adults of both sexes and the children are
intended to furnish the markets. After these men-hunts, hardly a tenth of the
vanquished survive. This explains the frightful depopulation which changes vast
territories of equatorial Africa into deserts.

Here, the children and the adults were hardly clothed with a rag of that bark
stuff, produced by certain trees, and called "mbouzon" in the country. Thus the
state of this troop of human beings, women covered with wounds from the
"havildars™ whips, children ghastly and meager, with bleeding feet, whom their
mothers tried to carry in addition to their burdens, young men closely riveted to
the fork, more torturing than the convict's chain, is the most lamentable that can
be imagined.

Yes, the sight of the miserable people, hardly living, whose voices have no
sound, ebony skeletons according to Livingstone's expression, would touch the


hearts of wild beasts. But so much misery did not touch those hardened Arabs
nor those Portuguese, who, according to Lieutenant Cameron, are still more
cruel. This is what Cameron says: "To obtain these fifty women, of whom Alvez
called himself proprietor, ten villages had been destroyed, ten villages having
each from one hundred to two hundred souls: a total of fifteen hundred
inhabitants. Some had been able to escape, but the greater part--almost all--had
perished in the flames, had been killed in defending their families, or had died of
hunger in the jungle, unless the beasts of prey had terminated their sufferings
more promptly.

"Those crimes, perpetrated in the center of Africa by men who boast of the
name of Christians, and consider themselves Portuguese, would seem incredible
to the inhabitants of civilized countries. It is impossible that the government of
Lisbon knows the atrocities committed by people who boast of being her
subjects." --Tour of the World.

In Portugal there have been very warm protestations against these assertions
of Cameron's.

It need not be said that, during the marches, as during the halts, the prisoners
were very carefully guarded. Thus, Dick Sand soon understood that he must not
even attempt to get away. But then, how find Mrs. Weldon again? That she and
her child had been carried away by Negoro was only too certain. The Portuguese
had separated her from her companions for reasons unknown as yet to the young
novice. But he could not doubt Negoro's intervention, and his heart was breaking
at the thought of the dangers of all kinds which threatened Mrs. Weldon.

"Ah!" he said to himself, "when I think that I have held those two miserable
men, both of them, at the end of my gun, and that I have not killed them!"

This thought was one of those which returned most persistently to Dick
Sand's mind. What misfortunes the death, the just death of Harris and Negoro
might have prevented! What misery, at least, for those whom these brokers in
human flesh were now treating as slaves!

All the horror of Mrs. Weldon's and little Jack's situation now represented
itself to Dick Sand. Neither the mother nor the child could count on Cousin
Benedict. The poor man could hardly take care of himself.

Doubtless they were taking all three to some district remote from the
province of Angola. But who was carrying the still sick child?

"His mother; yes, his mother," Dick Sand repeated to himself. "She will have
recovered strength for him; she will have done what these unhappy female slaves
do, and she will fall like them. Ah! may God put me again in front of her
executioners, and [--"

But he was a prisoner! He counted one head in this live-stock that the


overseers were driving to the interior of Africa. He did not even know whether
Negoro and Harris themselves were directing the convoy of which their victims
made a part. Dingo was no longer there to scent the Portuguese, to announce his
approach. Hercules alone might come to the assistance of the unfortunate Mrs.
Weldon. But was that miracle to be hoped for?

However, Dick Sand fell back again on that idea. He said to himself that the
strong black man was free. Of his devotion there was no doubt. All that a human
being could do, Hercules would do in Mrs. Weldon's interest. Yes, either
Hercules would try to find them and put himself in communication with them; or
if that failed him, he would endeavor to concert with him, Dick Sand, and
perhaps carry him off, deliver him by force. During the night halts, mingling
with these prisoners, black like them, could he not deceive the soldier's
vigilance, reach him, break his bonds, and lead him away into the forest? And
both of them, then free, what would they not do for Mrs. Weldon's safety. A
water course would enable them to descend to the coast. Dick Sand would again
take up that plan so unfortunately prevented by the natives' attack, with new
chances of success and a greater knowledge of the difficulties.

The young novice thus alternated between fear and hope. In fact, he resisted
despair, thanks to his energetic nature, and held himself in readiness to profit by
the least chance that might offer itself to him.

What he most desired to know was to what market the agents were taking the
convoy of slaves. Was it to one of the factories of Angola, and would it be an
affair of a few halting-places only, or would this convoy travel for hundreds of
miles still, across Central Africa? The principal market of the contractors is that
of N'yangwe, in Manyema, on that meridian which divides the African continent
into two almost equal parts, there where extends the country of the great lakes,
that Livingstone was then traversing. But it was far from the camp on the
Coanza to that village. Months of travel would not suffice to reach it.

That was one of Dick Sand's most serious thoughts; for, once at N'yangwe, in
case even Mrs. Weldon, Hercules, the other blacks and he should succeed in
escaping, how difficult it would be, not to say impossible, to return to the
seacoast, in the midst of the dangers of such a long route.

But Dick Sand soon had reason to think that the convoy would soon reach its
destination. Though he did not understand the language employed by the chiefs
of the caravan, sometimes Arab, sometimes the African idiom, he remarked that
the name of an important market of that region was often pronounced. It was the
name Kazounde, and he knew that a very great trade in slaves was carried on
there. He was then naturally led to believe that there the fate of the prisoners
would be decided, whether for the profit of the king of that district or for the


benefit of some rich trader of the country. We know that he was not mistaken.

Now, Dick Sand, being posted in the facts of modern geography, knew very
exactly what is known of Kazounde. The distance from Saint Paul de Loanda to
this city does not exceed four hundred miles, and consequently two hundred and
fifty miles, at the most, separates it from the camp established on the Coanza.
Dick Sand made his calculation approximately, taking the distance traveled by
the little troop under Harris's lead as the base. Now, under ordinary
circumstances, this journey would only require from ten to twelve days.
Doubling that time for the needs of a caravan already exhausted by a long route,
Dick Sand might estimate the length of the journey from the Coanza to
Kazounde at three weeks.

Dick Sand wished very much to impart what he believed he knew to Tom
and his companions. It would be a kind of consolation for them to be assured
that they were not being led to the center of Africa, into those fatal countries
which they could not hope to leave. Now, a few words uttered in passing would
be sufficient to enlighten them. Would he succeed in saying those words?

Tom and Bat--chance had reunited the father and son--Acteon and Austin,
forked two by two, were at the right extremity of the camp. An overseer and a
dozen soldiers watched them.

Dick Sand, free in his movements, resolved to gradually diminish the
distance that separated him from his companions to fifty steps. He then
commenced to maneuver to that end.

Very likely old Tom divined Dick Sand's thought. A word, pronounced in a
low voice, warned his companions to be attentive. They did not stir, but they
kept themselves ready to see, as well as to hear.

Soon, with an indifferent air, Dick Sand had gained fifty steps more. From
the place where he then was, he could have called out, in such a manner as to be
heard, that name Kazounde, and tell them what the probable length of the
journey would be. But to complete his instructions, and confer with them on
their conduct during the journey, would be still better. He then continued to draw
nearer to them. Already his heart was beating with hope; he was only a few steps
from the desired end, when the overseer, as if he had suddenly penetrated his
intention, rushed on him. At the cries of that enraged person, ten soldiers ran to
the spot, and Dick Sand was brutally led back to the rear, while Tom and his
companions were taken to the other extremity of the camp.

Exasperated, Dick Sand had thrown himself upon the overseer. He had ended
by breaking his gun in his hands. He had almost succeeded in snatching it from
him. But seven or eight soldiers assailed him at once, and force was used to
secure him. Furious, they would have massacred him, if one of the chiefs of the


caravan, an Arab of great height and ferocious physiognomy, had not intervened.
This Arab was the chief Ibn Hamis, of whom Harris had spoken. He pronounced
a few words which Dick Sand could not understand, and the soldiers, obliged to
release their prey, went away.

It was, then, very evident, for one thing, that there had been a formal order
not to allow the young novice to communicate with his companions; and for
another, that his life should not be taken.

Who could have given such orders, if not Harris or Negoro?

At that moment--it was nine o'clock in the morning, April 19th--the harsh
sounds from a "condou's" horn (a kind of ruminating animal among the African
deer) burst forth, and the drum was heard. The halt was going to end.

All, chiefs, porters, soldiers, slaves, were immediately on foot. Laden with
their packs, several groups of captives were formed under the leadership of an
overseer, who unfurled a banner of bright colors.

The signal for departure was given. Songs then rose on the air; but they were
the vanquished, not the vanquishers, who sang thus.

This is what they said in these songs--a threatening expression of a simple
faith from the slaves against their oppressors--against their executioners:

"You have sent me to the coast, but I shall be dead; I shall have a yoke no
longer, and I shall return to kill you."


CHAPTER VIII.

SOME OF DICK SAND'S NOTES.

Though the storm of the day before had ceased, the weather was still very
unsettled. It was, besides, the period of the "masika," the second period of the
rainy season, under this zone of the African heaven. The nights in particular
would be rainy during one, two, or three weeks, which could only increase the
misery of the caravan.

It set out that day in cloudy weather, and, after quitting the banks of the
Coanza, made its way almost directly to the east. Fifty soldiers marched at the
head, a hundred on each of the two sides of the convoy, the rest as a rear-guard.
It would be difficult for the prisoners to flee, even if they had not been chained.
Women, children, and men were going pell-mell, and the overseers urged them
on with the whip. There were unfortunate mothers who, nursing one child, held a
second by the hand that was free. Others dragged these little beings along,
without clothing, without shoes, on the sharp grasses of the soil.

The chief of the caravan, that ferocious Ibn Hamis, who had interfered in the
struggle between Dick Sand and his overseer, watched this whole troop, going


backwards and forwards from the head to the foot of the long column. If his
agents and he troubled themselves but little about the sufferings of their captives,
they must reckon more seriously either with the soldiers who claimed some
additional rations, or with the "pagazis" who wanted to halt. Thence discussions;
often even an exchange of brutality. The slaves suffered more from the overseers'
constant irritation. Nothing was heard but threats from one side, and cries of
grief from the other. Those who marched in the last ranks treaded a soil that the
first had stained with their blood.

Dick Sand's companions, always carefully kept in front of the convoy, could
have no communication with him. They advanced in file, the neck held in the
heavy fork, which did not permit a single head-movement. The whips did not
spare them any more than their sad companions in misfortune.

Bat, coupled with his father, marched before him, taxing his ingenuity not to
shake the fork, choosing the best places to step on, because old Tom must pass
after him. From time to time, when the overseer was a little behind, he uttered
various words of encouragement, some of which reached Tom. He even tried to
retard his march, if he felt that Tom was getting tired. It was suffering, for this
good son to be unable to turn his head towards his good father, whom he loved.
Doubtless, Tom had the satisfaction of seeing his son; however, he paid dear for
it. How many times great tears flowed from his eyes when the overseer's whip
fell upon Bat! It was a worse punishment than if it had fallen on his own flesh.

Austin and Acteon marched a few steps behind, tied to each other, and
brutally treated every moment. Ah, how they envied Hercules's fate! Whatever
were the dangers that threatened the latter in that savage country, he could at
least use his strength and defend his life.

During the first moments of their captivity, old Tom had finally made known
the whole truth to his companions. They had learned from him, to their profound
astonishment, that they were in Africa; that Negoro's and Harris's double
treachery had first thrown them there, and then led them away, and that no pity
was to be expected from their masters.

Nan was not better treated. She made part of a group of women who
occupied the middle of the convoy. They had chained her with a young mother
of two children, one at the breast, the other aged three years, who walked with
difficulty. Nan, moved with pity, had burdened herself with the little creature,
and the poor slave had thanked her by a tear. Nan then carried the infant, at the
same time, sparing her the fatigue, to which she would have yielded, and the
blows the overseer would have given her. But it was a heavy burden for old Nan.
She felt that her strength would soon fail her, and then she thought of little Jack.
She pictured him to herself in his mother's arms. Sickness had wasted him very


much, but he must be still heavy for Mrs. Weldon's weakened arms. Where was
she? What would become of her? Would her old servant ever see her again?

Dick Sand had been placed almost in the rear of the convoy. He could neither
perceive Tom, nor his companions, nor Nan. The head of the long caravan was
only visible to him when it was crossing some plain. He walked, a prey, to the
saddest thoughts, from which the agents’ cries hardly drew his attention. He
neither thought of himself, nor the fatigues he must still support, nor of the
tortures probably reserved for him by Negoro. He only thought of Mrs. Weldon.
In rain he sought on the ground, on the brambles by the paths, on the lower
branches of the trees, to find some trace of her passage. She could not have taken
another road, if, as everything indicated, they were leading her to Kazounde.
What would he not give to find some indication of her march to the destination
where they themselves were being led!

Such was the situation of the young novice and his companions in body and
mind. But whatever they might have to fear for themselves, great as was their
own sufferings, pity took possession of them on seeing the frightful misery of
that sad troop of captives, and the revolting brutality of their masters. Alas! they
could do nothing to succor the afflicted, nothing to resist the others.

All the country situated east of the Coanza was only a forest for over an
extent of twenty miles. The trees, however, whether they perish under the biting
of the numerous insects of these countries, or whether troops of elephants beat
them down while they are still young, are less crowded here than in the country
next to the seacoast. The march, then, under the trees, would not present
obstacles. The shrubs might be more troublesome than the trees. There was, in
fact, an abundance of those cotton-trees, seven to eight feet high, the cotton of
which serves to manufacture the black and white striped stuffs used in the
interior of the province.

In certain places, the soil transformed itself into thick jungles, in which the
convoy disappeared. Of all the animals of the country, the elephants and giraffes
alone were taller than those reeds which resemble bamboos, those herbs, the
stalks of which measure an inch in diameter. The agents must know the country
marvelously well, not to be lost in these jungles.

Each day the caravan set out at daybreak, and only halted at midday for an
hour. Some packs containing tapioca were then opened, and this food was
parsimoniously distributed to the slaves. To this potatoes were added, or goat's
meat and veal, when the soldiers had pillaged some village in passing. But the
fatigue had been such, the repose so insufficient, so impossible even during these
rainy nights, that when the hour for the distribution of food arrived the prisoners
could hardly eat. So, eight days after the departure from the Coanza, twenty had


fallen by the way, at the mercy of the beasts that prowled behind the convoy.
Lions, panthers and leopards waited for the victims which could not fail them,
and each evening after sunset their roaring sounded at such a short distance that
one might fear a direct attack.

On hearing those roars, rendered more formidable by the darkness, Dick
Sand thought with terror of the obstacles such encounters would present against
Hercules's enterprise, of the perils that menaced each of his steps. And
meanwhile if he himself should find an opportunity to flee, he would not
hesitate.

Here are some notes taken by Dick Sand during this journey from the
Coanza to Kazounde. Twenty-five "marches" were employed to make this
distance of two hundred and fifty miles, the "march" in the traders’ language
being ten miles, halting by day and night.

From 25th to 27th April.--Saw a village surrounded by walls of reeds, eight
or nine feet high. Fields cultivated with maize, beans, "sorghas" and various
arachides. Two blacks seized and made prisoners. Fifteen killed. Population fled.

The next day crossed an impetuous river, one hundred and fifty yards wide.
Floating bridge, formed of trunks of trees, fastened with lianes. Piles half
broken. Two women, tied to the same fork, precipitated into the water. One was
carrying her little child. The waters are disturbed and become stained with blood.
Crocodiles glide between the parts of the bridge. There is danger of stepping into
their open mouths.

April 28th.--Crossed a forest of bauhiniers. Trees of straight timber--those
which furnish the iron wood for the Portuguese.

Heavy rain. Earth wet. March extremely painful.

Perceived, toward the center of the convoy, poor Nan, carrying a little negro
child in her arms. She drags herself along with difficulty. The slave chained with
her limps, and the blood flows from her shoulder, torn by lashes from the whip.

In the evening camped under an enormous baobab with white flowers and a
light green foliage.

During the night roars of lions and leopards. Shots fired by one of the natives
at a panther. What has become of Hercules?

April 29th and 30th.--First colds of what they call the African winter. Dew
very abundant. End of the rainy season with the month of April; it commences
with the month of November. Plains still largely inundated. East winds which
check perspiration and renders one more liable to take the marsh fevers.

No trace of Mrs. Weldon, nor of Mr. Benedict. Where would they take them,
if not to Kazounde? They must have followed the road of the caravan and
preceded us. I am eaten up with anxiety. Little Jack must be seized again with


the fever in this unhealthy region. But does he still live?

From May 1st to May 6th.--Crossed, with several halting-places, long plains,
which evaporation has not been able to dry up. Water everywhere up to the
waist. Myriads of leeches adhering to the skin. We must march for all that. On
some elevations that emerge are lotus and papyrus. At the bottom, under the
water, other plants, with large cabbage leaves, on which the feet slip, which
occasions numerous falls.

In these waters, considerable quantities of little fish of the silurus species.
The natives catch them by billions in wickers and sell them to the caravans.

Impossible to find a place to camp for the night. We see no limit to the
inundated plain. We must march in the dark. To-morrow many slaves will be
missing from the convoy. What misery! When one falls, why get up again? A
few moments more under these waters, and all would be finished. The overseer's
stick would not reach you in the darkness.

Yes, but Mrs. Weldon and her son! I have not the right to abandon them. I
shall resist to the end. It is my duty.

Dreadful cries are heard in the night. Twenty soldiers have torn some
branches from resinous trees whose branches were above water. Livid lights in
the darkness.

This is the cause of the cries I heard. An attack of crocodiles; twelve or
fifteen of those monsters have thrown themselves in the darkness on the flank of
the caravan.

Women and children have been seized and carried away by the crocodiles to
their "pasture lands"--so Livingstone calls those deep holes where this
amphibious animal deposits its prey, after having drowned it, for it only eats it
when it has reached a certain degree of decomposition.

I have been rudely grazed by the scales of one of these crocodiles. An adult
slave has been seized near me and torn from the fork that held him by the neck.
The fork was broken. What a cry of despair! What a howl of grief! I hear it still!

May 7th and 8th.--The next day they count the victims. Twenty slaves have
disappeared.

At daybreak I look for Tom and his companions. God be praised! they are
living. Alas! ought I to praise God? Is one not happier to be done with all this
misery!

Tom is at the head of the convoy. At a moment when his son Bat made a
turn, the fork was presented obliquely, and Tom was able to see me.

I search in vain for old Nan. Is she in the central group? or has she perished
during that frightful night?

The next day, passed the limit of the inundated plain, after twenty-four hours


in the water. We halt on a hill. The sun dries us a little. We eat, but what
miserable food! A little tapioca, a few handfuls of maize. Nothing but the
troubled water to drink. Prisoners extended on the ground--how many will not
get up!

No! it is not possible that Mrs. Weldon and her son have passed through so
much misery! God would be so gracious to them as to have them led to
Kazounde by another road. The unhappy mother could not resist.

New case of smallpox in the caravan; the "ndoue," as they say. The sick
could not be able to go far. Will they abandon them?

May 9th.--They have begun the march again at sunrise. No laggards. The
overseer's whip has quickly raised those overcome by fatigue or sickness. Those
slaves have a value; they are money. The agents will not leave them behind
while they have strength enough to march.

I am surrounded by living skeletons. They have no longer voice enough to
complain. I have seen old Nan at last. She is a sad sight. The child she was
carrying is no longer in her arms. She is alone, too. That will be less painful for
her; but the chain is still around her waist, and she has been obliged to throw the
end over her shoulder.

By hastening, I have been able to draw near her. One would say that she did
not recognize me. Am I, then, changed to that extent?

"Nan," I said.

The old servant looked at me a long time, and then she exclaimed:

"You, Mr. Dick! I--I--before long I shall be dead!"

"No, no! Courage!" I replied, while my eyes fell so as not to see what was
only the unfortunate woman's bloodless specter.

"Dead!" she continued; "and I shall not see my dear mistress again, nor my
little Jack. My God! my God! have pity on me!"

I wished to support old Nan, whose whole body trembled under her torn
clothing. It would have been a mercy to see myself tied to her, and to carry my
part of that chain, whose whole weight she bore since her companion's death.

A strong arm pushes me back, and the unhappy Nan is thrown back into the
crowd of slaves, lashed by the whips. I wished to throw myself on that brutal----
The Arab chief appears, seizes my arm, and holds me till I find myself again in
the caravan's last rank.

Then, in his turn, he pronounces the name, "Negoro!"

Negoro! It is then by the Portuguese's orders that he acts and treats me
differently from my companions in misfortune?

For what fate am I reserved?

May 10th.--To-day passed near two villages in flames. The stubble burns on


all sides. Dead bodies are hung from the trees the fire has spared. Population
fled.

Fields devastated. The razzie is exercised there. Two hundred murders,
perhaps, to obtain a dozen slaves.

Evening has arrived. Halt for the night. Camp made under great trees. High
shrubs forming a thicket on the border of the forest.

Some prisoners fled the night before, after breaking their forks. They have
been retaken, and treated with unprecedented cruelty. The soldiers’ and
overseers’ watchfulness is redoubled.

Night has come. Roaring of lions and hyenas, distant snorting of
hippopotami. Doubtless some lake or watercourse near.

In spite of my fatigue, I cannot sleep. I think of so many things.

Then, it seems to me that I hear prowling in the high grass. Some animal,
perhaps. Would it dare force an entrance into the camp?

I listen. Nothing! Yes! An animal is passing through the reeds. I am
unarmed! I shall defend myself, nevertheless. My life may be useful to Mrs.
Weldon, to my companions.

I look through the profound darkness. There is no moon. The night is
extremely dark.

Two eyes shine in the darkness, among the papyrus--two eyes of a hyena ora
leopard. They disappear--reappear.

At last there is a rustling of the bushes. An animal springs upon me!

I am going to cry out, to give the alarm. Fortunately, I was able to restrain
myself. I cannot believe my eyes! It is Dingo! Dingo, who is near me! Brave
Dingo! How is it restored to me? How has it been able to find me again? Ah!
instinct! Would instinct be sufficient to explain such miracles of fidelity? It licks
my hands. Ah! good dog, now my only friend, they have not killed you, then!

It understands me.

I return its caresses.

It wants to bark.

I calm it. It must not be heard.

Let it follow the caravan in this way, without being seen, and perhaps----But
what! It rubs its neck obstinately against my hands. It seems to say to me: "Look
for something." I look, and I feel something there, fastened to its neck. A piece
of reed is slipped under the collar, on which are graven those two letters, S.V.,
the mystery of which is still inexplicable to us.

Yes. I have unfastened the reed. I have broken it! There is a letter inside. But
this letter--I cannot read it. I must wait for daylight!--daylight! I should like to
keep Dingo; but the good animal, even while licking my hands, seems in a hurry


to leave me. It understands that its mission is finished. With one bound aside, it
disappears among the bushes without noise. May God spare it from the lions' and
hyenas' teeth!

Dingo has certainly returned to him who sent it to me.

This letter, that I cannot yet read, burns my hands! Who has written it?
Would it come from Mrs. Weldon? Does it come from Hercules? How has the
faithful animal, that we believed dead, met either the one or the other? What is
this letter going to tell me? Is it a plan of escape that it brings me? Or does it
only give me news of those dear to me? Whatever it may be, this incident has
greatly moved me, and has relaxed my misery.

Ah! the day comes so slowly. I watch for the least light on the horizon. I
cannot close my eyes. I still hear the roaring of the animals. My poor Dingo, can
you escape them? At last day is going to appear, and almost without dawn, under
these tropical latitudes.

I settle myself so as not to be seen. I try to read--I cannot yet. At last I have
read. The letter is from Hercules's hand. It is written on a bit of paper, in pencil.
Here is what it says:

"Mrs. Weldon was taken away with little Jack in a kitanda. Harris and
Negoro accompany it. They precede the caravan by three or four marches, with
Cousin Benedict. I have not been able to communicate with her. I have found
Dingo, who must have been wounded by a shot, but cured. Good hope, Mr. Dick.
I only think of you all, and I fled to be more useful to you. HERCULES."

Ah! Mrs. Weldon and her son are living. God be praised! They have not to
suffer the fatigues of these rude halting-places. A kitanda--it is a kind of litter of
dry grass, suspended to a long bamboo, that two men carry on the shoulder. A
stuff curtain covers it over. Mrs. Weldon and her little Jack are in that kitanda.
What does Harris and Negoro want to do with them? Those wretches are
evidently going to Kazounde. Yes, yes, I shall find them again. Ah! in all this
misery it is good news, it is joy that Dingo has brought me!

From May 11th to 15th.--The caravan continues its march. The prisoners
drag themselves along more and more painfully. The majority have marks of
blood under their feet. I calculate that it will take ten days more to reach
Kazounde. How many will have ceased to suffer before then? But I--I must
arrive there, I shall arrive there.

It is atrocious! There are, in the convoy, unfortunate ones whose bodies are
only wounds. The cords that bind them enter into the flesh.

Since yesterday a mother carries in her arms her little infant, dead from
hunger. She will not separate from it.

Our route is strewn with dead bodies. The smallpox rages with new violence.


We have just passed near a tree. To this tree slaves were attached by the
neck. They were left there to die of hunger.

From May 16th to 24th.--I am almost exhausted, but I have no right to give
up. The rains have entirely ceased. We have days of "hard marching." That is
what the traders call the "tirikesa," or afternoon march. We must go faster, and
the ground rises in rather steep ascents.

We pass through high shrubs of a very tough kind. They are the "nyassi," the
branches of which tear the skin off my face, whose sharp seeds penetrate to my
skin, under my dilapidated clothes. My strong boots have fortunately kept good.

The agents have commenced to abandon the slaves too sick to keep up.
Besides, food threatens to fail; soldiers and pagazis would revolt if their rations
were diminished. They dare not retrench from them, and then so much worse for
the captives.

"Let them eat one another!" said the chief.

Then it follows that young slaves, still strong, die without the appearance of
sickness. I remember what Dr. Livingstone has said on that subject: "Those
unfortunates complain of the heart; they put their hands there, and they fall. It is
positively the heart that breaks! That is peculiar to free men, reduced to slavery
unexpectedly!"

To-day, twenty captives who could no longer drag themselves along, have
been massacred with axes, by the havildars! The Arab chief is not opposed to
massacre. The scene has been frightful!

Poor old Nan has fallen under the knife, in this horrible butchery! I strike
against her corpse in passing! I cannot even give her a Christian burial! She is
first of the "Pilgrim's" survivors whom God has called back to him. Poor good
creature! Poor Nan!

I watch for Dingo every night. It returns no more! Has misfortune overtaken
it or Hercules? No! no! I do not want to believe it! This silence, which appears
so long to me, only proves one thing--it is that Hercules has nothing new to tell


me yet. Besides, he must be prudent, and on his guard.
ok


CHAPTER IX.

KAZOUNDE.

ON May 26th, the caravan of slaves arrived at Kazounde. Fifty per cent. of
the prisoners taken in the last raid had fallen on the road. Meanwhile, the
business was still good for the traders; demands were coming in, and the price of
slaves was about to rise in the African markets.


Angola at this period did an immense trade in blacks. The Portuguese
authorities of St. Paul de Loanda, or of Benguela, could not stop it without
difficulty, for the convoys traveled towards the interior of the African continent.
The pens near the coast overflowed with prisoners, the few slavers that
succeeded in eluding the cruisers along the shore not being sufficient to carry all
of them to the Spanish colonies of America.

Kazounde, situated three hundred miles from the mouth of the Coanza, is one
of the principal "lakonis," one of the most important markets of the province. On
its grand square the "tchitoka" business is transacted; there, the slaves are
exposed and sold. It is from this point that the caravans radiate toward the region
of the great lakes.

Kazounde, like all the large towns of Central Africa, is divided into two
distinct parts. One is the quarter of the Arab, Portuguese or native traders, and it
contains their pens; the other is the residence of the negro king, some ferocious
crowned drunkard, who reigns through terror, and lives from supplies furnished
by the contractors.

At Kazounde, the commercial quarter then belonged to that Jose-Antonio
Alvez, of whom Harris and Negoro had spoken, they being simply agents in his
pay. This contractor's principal establishment was there, he had a second at Bihe,
and a third at Cassange, in Benguela, which Lieutenant Cameron visited some
years later.

Imagine a large central street, on each side groups of houses, "tembes,"” with
flat roofs, walls of baked earth, and a square court which served as an enclosure
for cattle. At the end of the street was the vast "tchitoka" surrounded by slave-
pens. Above this collection of buildings rose some enormous banyans, whose
branches swayed with graceful movements. Here and there great palms, with
their heads in the air, drove the dust on the streets like brooms. Twenty birds of
prey watched over the public health. Such is the business quarter of Kazounde.

Near by ran the Louhi, a river whose course, still undetermined, is an
affluent, or at least a sub-affluent, of the Coango, a tributary of the Zoire.

The residence of the King of Kazounde, which borders on the business
quarter, is a confused collection of ill-built hovels, which spread over the space
of a mile square. Of these hovels, some are open, others are inclosed by a
palisade of reeds, or bordered with a hedge of fig-trees. In one particular
enclosure, surrounded by a fence of papyrus, thirty of these huts served us
dwellings for the chief's slaves, in another group lived his wives, and a "tembe,"
still larger and higher, was half hidden in a plantation of cassada. Such was the
residence of the King of Kazounde, a man of fifty--named Moini Loungga; and
already almost deprived of the power of his predecessors. He had not four


thousand of soldiers there, where the principal Portuguese traders could count
twenty thousand, and he could no longer, as in former times, decree the sacrifice
of twenty-five or thirty slaves a day.

This king was, besides, a prematurely-aged man, exhausted by debauch,
crazed by strong drink, a ferocious maniac, mutilating his subjects, his officers
or his ministers, as the whim seized him, cutting the nose and ears off some, and
the foot or the hand from others. His own death, not unlooked for, would be
received without regret.

A single man in all Kazounde might, perhaps, lose by the death of Moini
Loungga. This was the contractor, Jose-Antonio Alvez, who agreed very well
with the drunkard, whose authority was recognized by the whole province. If the
accession of his first wife, Queen Moini, should be contested, the States of
Moini Loungga might be invaded by a neighboring competitor, one of the kings
of Oukonson. The latter, being younger and more active, had already seized
some villages belonging to the Kazounde government. He had in his services
another trader, a rival of Alvez Tipo-Tipo, a black Arab of a pure race, whom
Cameron met at N'yangwe.

What was this Alvez, the real sovereign under the reign of an imbruted
negro, whose vices he had developed and served?

Jose-Antonio Alvez, already advanced in years, was not, as one might
suppose, a "msoungou," that is to say, a man of the white race. There was
nothing Portuguese about him but his name, borrowed, no doubt, for the needs of
commerce. He was a real negro, well known among traders, and called
Kenndele. He was born, in fact, at Donndo, or the borders of the Coanza. He had
commenced by being simply the agent of the slave-brokers, and would have
finished as a famous trader, that is to say, in the skin of an old knave, who called
himself the most honest man in the world.

Cameron met this Alvez in the latter part of 1874, at Kilemmba, the capital
of Kassonngo, chief of Ouroua. He guided Cameron with his caravan to his own
establishment at Bihe, over a route of seven hundred miles. The convoy of
slaves, on arriving at Kazounde, had been conducted to the large square.

It was the 26th of May. Dick Sand's calculations were then verified. The
journey had lasted thirty-eight days from the departure of the army encamped on
the banks of the Coanza. Five weeks of the most fearful miseries that human
beings could support.

It was noon when the train entered Kazounde. The drums were beaten, horns
were blown in the midst of the detonations of firearms. The soldiers guarding the
caravan discharged their guns in the air, and the men employed by Jose-Antonio
Alvez replied with interest. All these bandits were happy at meeting again, after


an absence which had lasted for four months. They were now going to rest and
make up for lost time in excesses and idleness.

The prisoners then formed a total of two hundred and fifty, the majority
being completely exhausted. After having been driven like cattle, they were to be
shut up in pens, which American farmers would not have used for pigs. Twelve
or fifteen hundred other captives awaited them, all of whom would be exposed in
the market at Kazounde on the next day but one. These pens were filled up with
the slaves from the caravan. The heavy forks had been taken off them, but they
were still in chains.

The "pagazis" had stopped on the square after having disposed of their loads
of ivory, which the Kazounde dealers would deliver. Then, being paid with a few
yards of calico or other stuff at the highest price, they would return and join
some other caravan.

Old Tom and his companions had been freed from the iron collar which they
had carried for five weeks. Bat and his father embraced each other, and all shook
hands; but no one ventured to speak. What could they say that would not be an
expression of despair. Bat, Acteon and Austin, all three vigorous, accustomed to
hard work, had been able to resist fatigue; but old Tom, weakened by privations,
was nearly exhausted. A few more days and his corpse would have been left, like
poor Nan's, as food for the beasts of the province.

As soon as they arrived, the four men had been placed in a narrow pen, and
the door had been at once shut upon them. There they had found some food, and
they awaited the trader's visit, with whom, although quite in vain, they intended
to urge the fact that they were Americans.

Dick Sand had remained alone on the square, under the special care of a
keeper.

At length he was at Kazounde, where he did not doubt that Mrs. Weldon,
little Jack, and Cousin Benedict had preceded him. He had looked for them in
crossing the various quarters of the town, even in the depths of the "tembes" that
lined the streets, on this "tchitoka" now almost deserted.

Mrs. Weldon was not there.

"Have they not brought her here?" he asked himself. "But where could she
be? No; Hercules cannot be mistaken. Then, again, he must have learned the
secret designs of Negoro and Harris; yet they, too--I do not see them."

Dick Sand felt the most painful anxiety. He could understand that Mrs.
Weldon, retained a prisoner, would be concealed from him. But Harris and
Negoro, particularly the latter, should hasten to see him, now in their power, if
only to enjoy their triumph--to insult him, torture him, perhaps avenge
themselves. From the fact that they were not there, must he conclude that they


had taken another direction, and that Mrs. Weldon was to be conducted to some
other point of Central Africa? Should the presence of the American and the
Portuguese be the signal for his punishment, Dick Sand impatiently desired it.
Harris and Negoro at Kazounde, was for him the certainty that Mrs. Weldon and
her child were also there.

Dick Sand then told himself that, since the night when Dingo had brought
him Hercules's note, the dog had not been seen. The young man had prepared an
answer at great risks. In it he told Hercules to think only of Mrs. Weldon, not to
lose sight of her, and to keep her informed as well as possible of what happened;
but he had not been able to send it to its destination. If Dingo had been able to
penetrate the ranks of the caravan once, why did not Hercules let him try it a
second time? Had the faithful animal perished in some fruitless attempt? Perhaps
Hercules was following Mrs. Weldon, as Dick Sand would have done in his
place. Followed by Dingo, he might have plunged into the depths of the woody
plateau of Africa, in the hope of reaching one of the interior establishments.

What could Dick Sand imagine if, in fact, neither Mrs. Weldon nor her
enemies were there? He had been so sure, perhaps foolishly, of finding them at
Kazounde, that not to see them there at once gave him a terrible shock. He felt a
sensation of despair that he could not subdue. His life, if it were no longer useful
to those whom he loved, was good for nothing, and he had only to die. But, in
thinking in that manner, Dick Sand mistook his own character. Under the
pressure of these trials, the child became a man, and with him discouragement
could only be an accidental tribute paid to human nature.

A loud concert of trumpet-calls and cries suddenly commenced. Dick Sand,
who had just sunk down in the dust of the "tchitoka," stood up. Every new
incident might put him on the track of those whom he sought.

In despair a moment before, he now no longer despaired.

"Alvez! Alvez!" This name was repeated by a crowd of natives and soldiers
who now invaded the grand square. The man on whom the fate of so many
unfortunate people depended was about to appear. It was possible that his agents,
Harris and Negoro, were with him. Dick Sand stood upright, his eyes open, his
nostrils dilated. The two traitors would find this lad of fifteen years before them,
upright, firm, looking them in the face. It would not be the captain of the
"Pilgrim" who would tremble before the old ship's cook.

A hammock, a kind of "kitanda" covered by an old patched curtain,
discolored, fringed with rags, appeared at the end of the principal street. An old
negro descended. It was the trader, Jose-Antonio Alvez. Several attendants
accompanied him, making strong demonstrations.

Along with Alvez appeared his friend Coimbra, the son of Major Coimbra of


Bihe, and, according to Lieutenant Cameron, the greatest scamp in the province.
He was a dirty creature, his breast was uncovered, his eyes were bloodshot, his
hair was rough and curly, his face yellow; he was dressed in a ragged shirt and a
straw petticoat. He would have been called a horrible old man in his tattered
straw hat. This Coimbra was the confidant, the tool of Alvez, an organizer of
raids, worthy of commanding the trader's bandits.

As for the trader, he might have looked a little less sordid than his attendant.
He wore the dress of an old Turk the day after a carnival. He did not furnish a
very high specimen of the factory chiefs who carry on the trade on a large scale.

To Dick Sand's great disappointment, neither Harris nor Negoro appeared in
the crowd that followed Alvez. Must he, then, renounce all hope of finding them
at Kazounde?

Meanwhile, the chief of the caravan, the Arab, Ibn Hamis, shook hands with
Alvez and Coimbra. He received numerous congratulations. Alvez made a
grimace at the fifty per cent. of slaves failing in the general count, but, on the
whole, the affair was very satisfactory. With what the trader possessed of human
merchandise in his pens, he could satisfy the demands from the interior, and
barter slaves for ivory teeth and those "hannas" of copper, a kind of St. Andrew's
cross, in which form this metal is carried into the center of Africa.

The overseers were also complimented. As for the porters, the trader gave
orders that their salary should be immediately paid them.

Jose-Antonio Alvez and Coimbra spoke a kind of Portuguese mingled with a
native idiom, which a native of Lisbon would scarcely have understood. Dick
Sand could not hear what these merchants were saying. Were they talking of him
and his companions, so treacherously joined to the persons in the convoy? The
young man could not doubt it, when, at a gesture from the Arab, Ibn Hamis, an
overseer, went toward the pen where Tom, Austin, Bat and Acteon had been shut
up.

Almost immediately the four Americans were led before Alvez.

Dick Sand slowly approached. He wished to lose nothing of this scene.

Alvez's face lit up at the sight of these few well-made blacks, to whom rest
and more abundant food had promptly restored their natural vigor. He looked
with contempt at old Tom, whose age would affect his value, but the other three
would sell high at the next Kazounde sale.

Alvez remembered a few English words which some agents, like the
American, Harris, had taught him, and the old monkey thought he would
ironically welcome his new slaves.

Tom understood the trader's words; he at once advanced, and, showing his
companions, said:


"We are free men--citizens of the United States."

Alvez certainly understood him; he replied with a good-humored grimace,
wagging his head:

"Yes, yes, Americans! Welcome, welcome!"

"Welcome," added Coimbra.

He advanced toward Austin, and like a merchant who examines a sample,
after having felt his chest and his shoulders, he wanted to make him open his
mouth, so as to see his teeth.

But at this moment Signor Coimbra received in his face the worst blow that a
major's son had ever caught.

Alvez's confidant staggered under it.

Several soldiers threw themselves on Austin, who would perhaps pay dearly
for this angry action.

Alvez stopped them by a look. He laughed, indeed, at the misfortune of his
friend, Coimbra, who had lost two of the five or six teeth remaining to him.

Alvez did not intend to have his merchandise injured. Then, he was of a gay
disposition, and it was a long time since he had laughed so much.

Meanwhile, he consoled the much discomfited Coimbra, and the latter,
helped to his feet, again took his place near the trader, while throwing a
menacing look at the audacious Austin.

At this moment Dick Sand, driven forward by an overseer, was led before
Alvez.

The latter evidently knew all about the young man, whence he came, and
how he had been taken to the camp on the Coanza.

So he said, after having given him an evil glance:

"The little Yankee!"

"Yes, Yankee!" replied Dick Sand. "What do they wish to do with my
companions and me?"

"Yankee! Yankee! Yankee!" repeated Alvez.

Did he not or would he not understand the question put to him?

A second time Dick Sand asked the question regarding his companions and
himself. He then turned to Coimbra, whose features, degraded as they were by
the abuse of alcoholic liquors, he saw were not of native origin.

Coimbra repeated the menacing gesture already made at Austin, and did not
answer.

During this time Alvez talked rapidly with the Arab, Ibn Hamis, and
evidently of things that concerned Dick Sand and his friends.

No doubt they were to be again separated, and who could tell if another
chance to exchange a few words would ever again be offered them.


"My friends," said Dick, in a low voice, and as if he were only speaking to
himself, "just a few words! I have received, by Dingo, a letter from Hercules. He
has followed the caravan. Harris and Negoro took away Mrs. Weldon, Jack, and
Mr. Benedict. Where? I know not, if they are not here at Kazounde. Patience!
courage! Be ready at any moment. God may yet have pity on us!"

"And Nan?" quickly asked old Tom.

"Nan is dead!"

"The first!"

"And the last!" replied Dick Sand, "for we know well----"

At this moment a hand was laid on his shoulder, and he heard these words,
spoken in the amiable voice which he knew only too well:

"Ah, my young friend, if I am not mistaken! Enchanted to see you again!"

Dick Sand turned.

Harris was before him.

"Where is Mrs. Weldon?" cried Dick Sand, walking toward the American.

"Alas!" replied Harris, pretending a pity that he did not feel, "the poor
mother! How could she survive!"

"Dead!" cried Dick Sand. "And her child?"

"The poor baby!" replied Harris, in the same tone, "how could he outlive
such fatigue!"

So, all whom Dick Sand loved were dead!

What passed within him? An irresistible movement of anger, a desire for
vengeance, which he must satisfy at any price!

Dick Sand jumped upon Harris, seized a dagger from the American's belt,
and plunged it into his heart.

"Curse you!" cried Harris, falling.

Harris was dead.


CHAPTER X.

THE GREAT MARKET DAY.

Dick Sand's action had been so rapid that no one could stop him. A few
natives threw themselves upon him, and he would have been murdered had not
Negoro appeared.

At a sign from the Portuguese, the natives drew back, raised Harris's corpse
and carried it away. Alvez and Coimbra demanded Dick Sand's immediate death,
but Negoro said to them in a low voice that they would lose nothing by waiting.
The order was given to take away the young novice, with a caution not to lose
sight of him for a moment.


Dick Sand had seen Negoro for the first time since their departure from the
coast. He knew that this wretch was alone responsible for the loss of the
"Pilgrim." He ought to hate him still more than his accomplices. And yet, after
having struck the American, he scorned to address a word to Negoro. Harris had
said that Mrs. Weldon and her child had succumbed. Nothing interested him
now, not even what they would do with him. They would send him away.
Where? It did not matter.

Dick Sand, heavily chained, was left on the floor of a pen without a window,
a kind of dungeon where the trader, Alvez, shut up the slaves condemned to
death for rebellion or unlawful acts. There he could no longer have any
communication with the exterior; he no longer dreamed of regretting it. He had
avenged those whom he loved, who no longer lived. Whatever fate awaited him,
he was ready for it.

It will be understood that if Negoro had stopped the natives who were about
to punish Harris's murderer, it was only because he wished to reserve Dick Sand
for one of those terrible torments of which the natives hold the secret. The ship's
cook held in his power the captain of fifteen years. He only wanted Hercules to
make his vengeance complete.

Two days afterward, May 28th, the sale began, the great "lakoni," during
which the traders of the principal factories of the interior would meet the natives
of the neighboring provinces. This market was not specially for the sale of
slaves, but all the products of this fertile Africa would be gathered there with the
producers.

From early morning all was intense animation on the vast "tchitoka" of
Kazounde, and it is difficult to give a proper idea of the scene. It was a
concourse of four or five thousand persons, including Alvez's slaves, among
whom were Tom and his companions. These four men, for the reason that they
belonged to a different race, are all the more valuable to the brokers in human
flesh. Alvez was there, the first among all. Attended by Coimbra, he offered the
slaves in lots. These the traders from the interior would form into caravans.
Among these traders were certain half-breeds from Oujiji, the principal market
of Lake Tanganyika, and some Arabs, who are far superior to the half-breeds in
this kind of trade.

The natives flocked there in great numbers. There were children, men, and
women, the latter being animated traders, who, as regards a genius for
bargaining, could only be compared to their white sisters.

In the markets of large cities, even on a great day of sale, there is never much
noise or confusion. Among the civilized the need of selling exceeds the desire to
buy. Among these African savages offers are made with as much eagerness as


demands.

The "lakoni" is a festival day for the natives of both sexes, and if for good
reasons they do not put on their best clothes, they at least wear their handsomest
ornaments.

Some wear the hair divided in four parts, covered with cushions, and in plaits
tied like a chignon or arranged in pan-handles on the front of the head with
bunches of red feathers. Others have the hair in bent horns sticky with red earth
and oil, like the red lead used to close the joints of machines. In these masses of
real or false hair is worn a bristling assemblage of skewers, iron and ivory pins,
often even, among elegant people, a tattooing-knife is stuck in the crisp mass,
each hair of which is put through a "sofi" or glass bead, thus forming a tapestry
of different-colored grains. Such are the edifices most generally seen on the
heads of the men.

The women prefer to divide their hair in little tufts of the size of a cherry, in
wreaths, in twists the ends of which form designs in relief, and in corkscrews,
worn the length of the face. A few, more simple and perhaps prettier, let their
long hair hang down the back, in the English style, and others wear it cut over
the forehead in a fringe, like the French. Generally they wear on these wigs a
greasy putty, made of red clay or of glossy "ukola," a red substance extracted
from sandal-wood, so that these elegant persons look as if their heads were
dressed with tiles.

It must not be supposed that this luxury of ornamentation is confined to the
hair of the natives. What are ears for if not to pass pins of precious wood
through, also copper rings, charms of plaited maize, which draw them forward,
or little gourds which do for snuff-boxes, and to such an extent that the distended
lobes of these appendages fall sometimes to the shoulders of their owners?

After all, the African savages have no pockets, and how could they have
any? This gives rise to the necessity of placing where they can their knives,
pipes, and other customary objects. As for the neck, arms, wrists, legs, and
ankles, these various parts of the body are undoubtedly destined to carry the
copper and brass bracelets, the horns cut off and decorated with bright buttons,
the rows of red pearls, called same-sames or "talakas," and which were very
fashionable. Besides, with these jewels, worn in profusion, the wealthy people of
the place looked like traveling shrines.

Again, if nature gave the natives teeth, was it not that they could pull out the
upper and lower incisors, file them in points, and curve them in sharp fangs like
the fangs of a rattlesnake? If she has placed nails at the end of the fingers, is it
not that they may grow so immoderately that the use of the hand is rendered
almost impossible? If the skin, black or brown, covers the human frame, is it not


so as to zebra it by "temmbos" or tattooings representing trees, birds, crescents,
full moons, or waving lines, in which Livingstone thought he could trace the
designs of ancient Egypt? This tattooing, done by fathers, is practised by means
of a blue matter introduced into the incisions, and is "stereotyped" point by point
on the bodies of the children, thus establishing to what tribe or to what family
they belong. The coat-of-arms must be engraved on the breast, when it cannot be
painted on the panel of a carriage.

Such are the native fashions in ornament. In regard to garments properly so
called, they are summed up very easily; for the men, an apron of antelope
leather, reaching to the knees, or perhaps a petticoat of a straw material of
brilliant colors; for the women, a belt of pearls, supporting at the hips a green
petticoat, embroidered in silk, ornamented with glass beads or coury; sometimes
they wear garments made of "lambba," a straw material, blue, black, and yellow,
which is much prized by the natives of Zanzibar.

These, of course, are the negroes of the best families. The others, merchants,
and slaves, are seldom clothed. The women generally act as porters, and reach
the market with enormous baskets on their back, which they hold by means of a
leathern strap passed over the forehead. Then, their places being taken, and the
merchandise unpacked, they squat in their empty baskets.

The astonishing fertility of the country causes the choice alimentary
produces to be brought to this "lakoni." There were quantities of the rice which
returns a hundred per cent., of the maize, which, in three crops in eight months,
produces two hundred per cent., the sesamum, the pepper of Ouroua, stronger
than the Cayenne, allspice, tapioca, sorghum, nutmegs, salt, and palm-oil.

Hundreds of goats were gathered there, hogs, sheep without wool, evidently
of Tartar origin, quantities of poultry and fish. Specimens of pottery, very
gracefully tured, attracted the eyes by their violent colors.

Various drinks, which the little natives cried about in a squeaking voice,
enticed the unwary, in the form of plantain wine, "pombe," a liquor in great
demand, "malofou," sweet beer, made from the fruit of the banana-tree and
mead, a limpid mixture of honey and water fermented with malt.

But what made the Kazounde market still more curious was the commerce in
stuffs and ivory.

In the line of stuffs, one might count by thousands of "choukkas" or armfuls,
the "Mericani" unbleached calico, come from Salem, in Massachusetts, the
"kanaki," a blue gingham, thirty-four inches wide, the "sohari," a stuff in blue
and white squares, with a red border, mixed with small blue stripes. It is cheaper
than the "dioulis," a silk from Surat, with a green, red or yellow ground, which is
worth from seventy to eighty dollars for a remnant of three yards when woven


with gold.

As for ivory, it was brought from all parts of Central Africa, being destined
for Khartoum, Zanzibar, or Natal. A large number of merchants are employed
solely in this branch of African commerce.

Imagine how many elephants are killed to furnish the five hundred thousand
kilograms of ivory, which are annually exported to European markets, and
principally to the English! The western coast of Africa alone produces one
hundred and forty tons of this precious substance. The average weight is twenty-
eight pounds for a pair of elephant's tusks, which, in 1874, were valued as high
as fifteen hundred francs; but there are some that weigh one hundred and
seventy-five pounds, and at the Kazounde market, admirers would have found
some admirable ones. They were of an opaque ivory, translucid, soft under the
tool, and with a brown rind, preserving its whiteness and not growing yellow
with time like the ivories of other provinces.

And, now, how are these various business affairs regulated between buyers
and sellers? What is the current coin? As we have said, for the African traders
this money is the slave.

The native pays in glass beads of Venetian manufacture, called
"catchocolos," when they are of a lime white; "bouboulous," when they are
black; "sikounderetches," when they are red. These beads or pearls, strung in ten
rows or "khetes," going twice around the neck, make the "foundo," which is of
great value. The usual measure of the beads is the "frasilah," which weighs
seventy pounds. Livingstone, Cameron, and Stanley were always careful to be
abundantly provided with this money.

In default of glass beads, the "pice," a Zanzibar piece, worth four centimes,
and the "vroungouas," shells peculiar to the eastern coasts, are current in the
markets of the African continent. As for the cannibal tribes, they attach a certain
value to the teeth of the human jaw, and at the "lakoni," these chaplets were to be
seen on the necks of natives, who had no doubt eaten their producers; but these
teeth were ceasing to be used as money.

Such, then, was the appearance of the great market. Toward the middle of the
day the gaiety reached a climax; the noise became deafening. The fury of the
neglected venders, and the anger of the overcharged customers, were beyond
description. Thence frequent quarrels, and, as we know, few guardians of the
peace to quell the fray in this howling crowd.

Toward the middle of the day, Alvez gave orders to bring the slaves, whom
he wished to sell, to the square. The crowd was thus increased by two thousand
unfortunate beings of all ages, whom the trader had kept in pens for several
months. This "stock" was not in a bad condition. Long rest and sufficient food


had improved these slaves so as to look to advantage at the "lakoni." As for the
last arrivals, they could not stand any comparison with them, and, after a month
in the pens, Alvez could certainly have sold them with more profit. The
demands, however, from the eastern coast, were so great that he decided to
expose and sell them as they were.

This was a misfortune for Tom and his three companions. The drivers pushed
them into the crowd that invaded the "tchitoka." They were strongly chained,
and their glances told what horror, what fury and shame overwhelmed them.

"Mr. Dick is not there," Bat said, after some time, during which he had
searched the vast plain with his eyes.

"No," replied Acteon, "they will not put him up for sale."

"He will be killed, if he is not already," added the old black. "As for us, we
have but one hope left, which is, that the same trader will buy us all. It would be
a great consolation not to be separated."

"Ah! to know that you are far away from me, working like a slave, my poor,
old father!" cried Bat, sobbing aloud.

"No," said Tom. "No; they will not separate us, and perhaps we might----"

"If Hercules were here!" cried Austin.

But the giant had not reappeared. Since the news sent to Dick Sand, they had
heard no one mention either Hercules or Dingo. Should they envy him his fate?
Why, yes; for if Hercules were dead, he was saved from the chains of slavery!

Meanwhile, the sale had commenced. Alvez's agents marched the various
lots of men, women and children through the crowd, without caring if they
separated mothers from their infants. May we not call these beings
"unfortunates," who were treated only as domestic animals?

Tom and his companions were thus led from buyers to buyers. An agent
walked before them naming the price adjudged to their lot. Arab or mongrel
brokers, from the central provinces, came to examine them. They did not
discover in them the traits peculiar to the African race, these traits being
modified in America after the second generation. But these vigorous and
intelligent negroes, so very different from the blacks brought from the banks of
the Zambeze or the Loualaba, were all the more valuable. They felt them, turned
them, and looked at their teeth. Horse-dealers thus examine the animals they
wish to buy. Then they threw a stick to a distance, made them run and pick it up,
and thus observed their gait.

This was the method employed for all, and all were submitted to these
humiliating trials. Do not believe that these people are completely indifferent to
this treatment! No, excepting the children, who cannot comprehend the state of
degradation to which they are reduced, all, men or women, were ashamed.


Besides, they were not spared injuries and blows. Coimbra, half drunk, and
Alvez's agents, treated them with extreme brutality, and from their new masters,
who had just paid for them in ivory stuffs and beads, they would receive no
better treatment. Violently separated, a mother from her child, a husband from
his wife, a brother from a sister, they were not allowed a last caress nor a last
kiss, and on the "lakoni" they saw each other for the last time.

In fact, the demands of the trade exacted that the slaves should be sent in
different directions, according to their sex. The traders who buy the men do not
buy women. The latter, in virtue of polygamy, which is legal among the
Mussulmans, are sent to the Arabic countries, where they are exchanged for
ivory. The men, being destined to the hardest labor, go to the factories of the two
coasts, and are exported either to the Spanish colonies or to the markets of
Muscat and Madagascar. This sorting leads to heart-breaking scenes between
those whom the agents separate, and who will die without ever seeing each other
again.

The four companions in turn submitted to the common fate. But, to tell the
truth, they did not fear this event. It was better for them to be exported into a
slave colony. There, at least, they might have a chance to protest. On the
contrary, if sent to the interior, they might renounce all hope of ever regaining
their liberty.

It happened as they wished. They even had the almost unhoped for
consolation of not being separated. They were in brisk demand, being wanted by
several traders. Alvez clapped his hands. The prices rose. It was strange to see
these slaves of unknown value in the Kazounde market, and Alvez had taken
good care to conceal where they came from. Tom and his friends, not speaking
the language of the country, could not protest.

Their master was a rich Arab trader, who in a few days would send them to
Lake Tanganyika, the great thoroughfare for slaves; then, from that point, toward
the factories of Zanzibar.

Would they ever reach there, through the most unhealthy and the most
dangerous countries of Central Africa? Fifteen hundred miles to march under
these conditions, in the midst of frequent wars, raised and carried on between
chiefs, in a murderous climate. Was old Tom strong enough to support such
misery? Would he not fall on the road like old Nan? But the poor men were not
separated. The chain that held them all was lighter to carry. The Arab trader
would evidently take care of merchandise which promised him a large profit in
the Zanzibar market.

Tom, Bat, Acteon, and Austin then left the place. They saw and heard
nothing of the scene which was to end the great "lakoni" of Kazounde.


CHAPTER XI


THE KING OF KAZOUNDE IS OFFERED A PUNCH.

It was four o'clock in the afternoon when a loud noise of drums, cymbals,
and other instruments of African origin resounded at the end of the principal
street. In all corners of the market-place the animation was redoubled. Half a day
of cries and wrestling had neither weakened the voices nor broken the limbs of
these abominable traders. A large number of slaves still remained to be sold. The
traders disputed over the lots with an ardor of which the London Exchange
would give but an imperfect idea, even on a day when stocks were rising.

All business was stopped, and the criers took their breath as soon as the
discordant concert commenced.

The King of Kazounde, Moini Loungga, had come to honor the great
"lakoni" with a visit. A numerous train of women, officers, soldiers and slaves
followed him. Alvez and some other traders went to meet him, and naturally
exaggerated the attention which this crowned brute particularly enjoyed.

Moini Loungga was carried in an old palanquin, and descended, not without
the aid of a dozen arms, in the center of the large square.

This king was fifty years old, but he looked eighty. Imagine a frightful
monkey who had reached extreme old age; on his head a sort of crown,
omamented with leopard's claws, dyed red, and enlarged by tufts of whitish hair;
this was the crown of the sovereigns of Kazounde. From his waist hung two
petticoats made of leather, embroidered with pearls, and harder than a
blacksmith's apron. He had on his breast a quantity of tattooing which bore
witness to the ancient nobility of the king; and, to believe him, the genealogy of
Moini Loungga was lost in the night of time. On the ankles, wrists and arms of
his majesty, bracelets of leather were rolled, and he wore a pair of domestic
shoes with yellow tops, which Alvez had presented him with about twenty years
before.

His majesty carried in his left hand a large stick with a plated knob, and in
his right a small broom to drive away flies, the handle of which was enriched
with pearls.

Over his head was carried one of those old patched umbrellas, which seemed
to have been cut out of a harlequin's dress.

On the monarch's neck and on his nose were the magnifying glass and the
spectacles which had caused Cousin Benedict so much trouble. They had been
hidden in Bat's pocket.


Such is the portrait of his negro majesty, who made the country tremble in a
circumference of a hundred miles.

Moini Loungga, from the fact of occupying a throne, pretended to be of
celestial origin, and had any of his subjects doubted the fact, he would have sent
them into another world to discover it. He said that, being of a divine essence, he
was not subject to terrestrial laws. If he ate, it was because he wished to do so; if
he drank, it was because it gave him pleasure. It was impossible for him to drink
any more. His ministers and his officers, all incurable drunkards, would have
passed before him for sober men.

The court was alcoholized to the last chief, and incessantly imbibed strong
beer, cider, and, above all, a certain drink which Alvez furnished in profusion.

Moini Loungga counted in his harem wives of all ages and of all kinds. The
larger part of them accompanied him in this visit to the "lakoni."

Moini, the first, according to date, was a vixen of forty years, of royal blood,
like her colleagues. She wore a bright tartan, a straw petticoat embroidered with
pearls, and necklaces wherever she could put them. Her hair was dressed so as to
make an enormous framework on her little head. She was, in fact, a monster.

The other wives, who were either the cousins or the sisters of the king, were
less richly dressed, but much younger. They walked behind her, ready to fulfil, at
a sign from their master, their duties as human furniture. These unfortunate
beings were really nothing else. If the king wished to sit down, two of these
women bent toward the earth and served him for a chair, while his feet rested on
the bodies of some others, as if on an ebony carpet.

In Moini Loungga's suite came his officers, his captains, and his magicians.

A remarkable thing about these savages, who staggered like their master, was
that each lacked a part of his body--one an ear, another an eye, this one the nose,
that one the hand. Not one was whole. That is because they apply only two kinds
of punishment in Kazounde--mutilation or death--all at the caprice of the king.
For the least fault, some amputation, and the most cruelly punished are those
whose ears are cut off, because they can no longer wear rings in their ears.

The captains of the kilolos, governors of districts, hereditary or named for
four years, wore hats of zebra skin and red vests for their whole uniform. Their
hands brandished long palm canes, steeped at one end with charmed drugs.

As to the soldiers, they had for offensive and defensive weapons, bows, of
which the wood, twined with the cord, was ornamented with fringes; knives,
whetted with a serpent's tongue; broad and long lances; shields of palm wood,
decorated in arabesque style. For what there was of uniform, properly so called,
it cost his majesty's treasury absolutely nothing.

Finally, the kind's cortege comprised, in the last place, the court magicians


and the instrumentalists.

The sorcerers, the "mganngas," are the doctors of the country. These savages
attach an absolute faith to divinatory services, to incantations, to the fetiches,
clay figures stained with white and red, representing fantastic animals or figures
of men and women cut out of whole wood. For the rest, those magicians were
not less mutilated than the other courtiers, and doubtless the monarch paid them
in this way for the cures that did not succeed.

The instrumentalists, men or women, made sharp rattles whizz, noisy drums
sound or shudder under small sticks terminated by a caoutchouc ball,
"marimehas," kinds of dulcimers formed of two rows of gourds of various
dimensions--the whole very deafening for any one who does not possess a pair
of African ears.

Above this crowd, which composed the royal cortege, waved some flags and
standards, then at the ends of spears the bleached skulls of the rival chiefs whom
Moini Loungga had vanquished.

When the king had quitted his palanquin, acclamations burst forth from all
sides. The soldiers of the caravan discharged their old guns, the low detonations
of which were but little louder than the vociferations of the crowd. The
overseers, after rubbing their black noses with cinnabar powder, which they
carried in a sack, bowed to the ground. Then Alvez, advancing in his turn,
handed the king a supply of fresh tobacco--"soothing herb," as they call it in the
country. Moini Loungga had great need of being soothed, for he was, they did
not know why, in a very bad humor.

At the same time Alvez, Coimbra, Ibn Hamis, and the Arab traders, or
mongrels, came to pay their court to the powerful sovereign of Kazounde.
"Marhaba," said the Arabs, which is their word of welcome in the language of
Central Africa. Others clapped their hands and bowed to the ground. Some
daubed themselves with mud, and gave signs of the greatest servility to this
hideous majesty.

Moini Loungga hardly looked at all these people, and walked, keeping his
limbs apart, as if the ground were rolling and pitching. He walked in this
manner, or rather he rolled in the midst of waves of slaves, and if the traders
feared that he might take a notion to apportion some of the prisoners to himself,
the latter would no less dread falling into the power of such a brute.

Negoro had not left Alvez for a moment, and in his company presented his
homage to the king. Both conversed in the native language, if, however, that
word "converse" can be used of a conversation in which Moini Loungga only
took part by monosyllables that hardly found a passage through his drunken lips.
And still, did he not ask his friend, Alvez, to renew his supply of brandy just


exhausted by large libations?

"King Loungga is welcome to the market of Kazounde," said the trader.

"T am thirsty," replied the monarch.

"He will take his part in the business of the great ‘lakoni,'" added Alvez.

"Drink!" replied Moini Loungga.

"My friend Negoro is happy to see the King of Kazounde again, after such a
long absence."

"Drink!" repeated the drunkard, whose whole person gave forth a disgusting
odor of alcohol.

"Well, some 'pombe'! some mead!" exclaimed Jose-Antonio Alvez, like a
man who well knew what Moini Loungga wanted.

"No, no!" replied the king; "my friend Alvez's brandy, and for each drop of
his fire-water I shall give him----"

"A drop of blood from a white man!" exclaimed Negoro, after making a sign
to Alvez, which the latter understood and approved.

"A white man! Put a white man to death!" repeated Moini Loungga, whose
ferocious instincts were aroused by the Portuguese's proposition.

"One of Alvez's agents has been killed by this white man," returned Negoro.

"Yes, my agent, Harris," replied the trader, "and his death must be avenged!"

"Send that white man to King Massongo, on the Upper Zaire, among the
Assonas. They will cut him in pieces. They will eat him alive. They have not
forgotten the taste of human flesh!" exclaimed Moini Loungga.

He was, in fact, the king of a tribe of man-eaters, that Massongo. It is only
too true that in certain provinces of Central Africa cannibalism is still openly
practised. Livingstone states it in his "Notes of Travel." On the borders of the
Loualaba the Manyemas not only eat the men killed in the wars, but they buy
slaves to devour them, saying that "human flesh is easily salted, and needs little
seasoning." Those cannibals Cameron has found again among the Moene-
Bongga, where they only feast on dead bodies after steeping them for several
days in a running stream. Stanley has also encountered those customs of
cannibalism among the inhabitants of the Oukonson. Cannibalism is evidently
well spread among the tribes of the center.

But, cruel as was the kind of death proposed by the king for Dick Sand, it did
not suit Negoro, who did not care to give up his victim.

"It was here," said he, "that the white man killed our comrade Harris."

"Tt is here that he ought to die!" added Alvez.

"Where you please, Alvez," replied Moini Loungga; "but a drop of fire-water
for a drop of blood!"

"Yes," replied the trader, "fire-water, and you will see that it well merits that


name! We shall make it blaze, this water! Jose-Antonio Alvez will offer a punch
to the King Moini Loungga."

The drunkard shook his friend Alvez's hands. He could not contain his joy.
His wives, his courtiers shared his ecstasy. They had never seen brandy blaze,
and doubtless they counted on drinking it all blazing. Then, after the thirst for
alcohol, the thirst for blood, so imperious among these savages, would be
satisfied also.

Poor Dick Sand! What a horrible punishment awaited him. When we think of
the terrible or grotesque effects of intoxication in civilized countries, we
understand how far it can urge barbarous beings.

We will readily believe that the thought of torturing a white could displease
none of the natives, neither Jose-Antonio Alvez, a negro like themselves, nor
Coimbra, a mongrel of black blood, nor Negoro either, animated with a ferocious
hatred against the whites.

The evening had come, an evening without twilight, that was going to make
day change tonight almost at once, a propitious hour for the blazing of the
brandy.

It was truly a triumphant idea of Alvez's, to offer a punch to this negro
majesty, and to make him love brandy under a new form. Moini Loungga began
to find that fire-water did not sufficiently justify its name. Perhaps, blazing and
burning, it would tickle more agreeably the blunted papillas of his tongue.

The evening's program then comprised a punch first, a punishment
afterwards.

Dick Sand, closely shut up in his dark prison, would only come out to go to
his death. The other slaves, sold or not, had been put back in the barracks. There
only remained at the "tchitoka," the traders, the overseers and the soldiers ready
to take their part of the punch, if the king and his court allowed them.

Jose-Antonio Alvez, advised by Negoro, did the thing well. They brought a
vast copper basin, capable of containing at least two hundred pints, which was
placed in the middle of the great place. Barrels holding alcohol of inferior
quality, but well refined, were emptied into the basin. They spared neither the
cinnamon, nor the allspice, nor any of the ingredients that might improve this
punch for savages.

All had made a circle around the king. Moini Loungga advanced staggering
to the basin. One would say that this vat of brandy fascinated him, and that he
was going to throw himself into it.

Alvez generously held him back and put a lighted match into his hand.

"Fire!" cried he with a cunning grimace of satisfaction.

"Fire!" replied Moini Loungga lashing the liquid with the end of the match.


What a flare and what an effect, when the bluish flames played on the
surface of the basin. Alvez, doubtless to render that alcohol still sharper, had
mingled with it a few handfuls of sea salt. The assistants' faces were then given
that spectral lividness that the imagination ascribes to phantoms.

Those negroes, drunk in advance, began to cry out, to gesticulate, and, taking
each other by the hand, formed an immense circle around the King of Kazounde.

Alvez, furnished with an enormous metal spoon, stirred the liquid, which
threw a great white glare over those delirious monkeys.

Moini Loungga advanced. He seized the spoon from the trader's hands,
plunged it into the basin, then, drawing it out full of punch in flames, he brought
it to his lips.

What a cry the King of Kazounde then gave!

An act of spontaneous combustion had just taken place. The king had taken
fire like a petroleum bonbon. This fire developed little heat, but it devoured none
the less.

At this spectacle the natives' dance was suddenly stopped.

One of Moini Loungga's ministers threw himself on his sovereign to
extinguish him; but, not less alcoholized than his master, he took fire in his turn.

In this way, Moini Loungga's whole court was in peril of burning up.

Alvez and Negoro did not know how to help his majesty. The women,
frightened, had taken flight. As to Coimbra, he took his departure rapidly, well
knowing his inflammable nature.

The king and the minister, who had fallen on the ground, were burning up, a
prey to frightful sufferings.

In bodies so thoroughly alcoholized, combustion only produces a light and
bluish flame, that water cannot extinguish. Even stifled outside, it would still
continue to burn inwardly. When liquor has penetrated all the tissues, there exists
no means of arresting the combustion.

A few minutes after, Moini Loungga and his minister had succumbed, but
they still burned. Soon, in the place where they had fallen, there was nothing left
but a few light coals, one or two pieces of the vertebral column, fingers, toes,
that the fire does not consume, in cases of spontaneous combustion, but which it
covers with an infectious and penetrating soot.

It was all that was left of the King of Kazounde and of his minister.


CHAPTER XII.
A ROYAL BURIAL.
The next day, May 29th, the city of Kazounde presented a strange aspect.


The natives, terrified, kept themselves shut up in their huts. They had never seen
a king, who said he was of divine essence, nor a simple minister, die of this
horrible death. They had already burned some of their fellow-beings, and the
oldest could not forget certain culinary preparations relating to cannibalism.

They knew then how the incineration of a human body takes place with
difficulty, and behold their king and his minister had burnt all alone! That
seemed to them, and indeed ought to seem to them, inexplicable.

Jose-Antonio Alvez kept still in his house. He might fear that he would be
held responsible for the accident. Negoro had informed him of what had passed,
warning him to take care of himself. To charge him with Moini Loungga's death
might be a bad affair, from which he might not be able to extricate himself
without damage.

But Negoro had a good idea. By his means Alvez spread the report that the
death of Kazounde's sovereign was supernatural; that the great Manitou only
reserved it for his elect. The natives, so inclined to superstition, accepted this lie.
The fire that came out of the bodies of the king and his minister became a sacred
fire. They had nothing to do but honor Moini Loungga by obsequies worthy of a
man elevated to the rank of the gods.

These obsequies, with all the ceremonial connected with them among the
African tribes, was an occasion offered to Negoro to make Dick Sand play a
part. What this death of Moini Loungga was going to cost in blood, would be
believed with difficulty, if the Central Africa travelers, Lieutenant Cameron
among others, had not related facts that cannot be doubted.

The King of Kazounde's natural heir was the Queen Moini. In proceeding
without delay with the funeral ceremonies she acted with sovereign authority,
and could thus distance the competitors, among others that King of the
Oukonson, who tended to encroach upon the rights of Kazounde's sovereigns.
Besides, Moini, even by becoming queen, avoided the cruel fate reserved for the
other wives of the deceased; at the same time she would get rid of the youngest
ones, of whom she, first in date, had necessarily to complain. This result would
particularly suit the ferocious temperament of that vixen. So she had it
announced, with deer's horns and other instruments, that the obsequies of the
defunct king would take place the next evening with all the usual ceremony.

No protestation was made, neither at court nor from the natives. Alvez and
the other traders had nothing to fear from the accession of this Queen Moini.
With a few presents, a few flattering remarks, they would easily subject her to
their influence. Thus the royal heritage was transmitted without difficulty. There
was terror only in the harem, and not without reason.

The preparatory labors for the funeral were commenced the same day. At the


end of the principal street of Kazounde flowed a deep and rapid stream, an
affluent of the Coango. The question was to turn this stream aside, so as to leave
its bed dry. It was in that bed that the royal grave must be dug. After the burial
the stream would be restored to its natural channel.

The natives were busily employed in constructing a dam, that forced the
stream to make a provisional bed across the plain of Kazounde. At the last
tableau of this funeral ceremony the barricade would be broken, and the torrent
would take its old bed again.

Negoro intended Dick Sand to complete the number of victims sacrificed on
the king's tomb. He had been a witness of the young novice's irresistible
movement of anger, when Harris had acquainted him with the death of Mrs.
Weldon and little Jack.

Negoro, cowardly rascal, had not exposed himself to the same fate as his
accomplice. But now, before a prisoner firmly fastened by the feet and hands, he
supposed he had nothing to fear, and resolved to pay him a visit. Negoro was one
of those miserable wretches who are not satisfied with torturing their victims;
they must also enjoy their sufferings.

Toward the middle of the day, then, he repaired to the barrack where Dick
Sand was guarded, in sight of an overseer. There, closely bound, was lying the
young novice, almost entirely deprived of food for twenty-four hours, weakened
by past misery, tortured by those bands that entered into his flesh; hardly able to
turn himself, he was waiting for death, no matter how cruel it might be, as a limit
to so many evils.

However, at the sight of Negoro he shuddered from head to foot. He made an
instinctive effort to break the bands that prevented him from throwing himself on
that miserable man and having revenge.

But Hercules himself would not succeed in breaking them. He understood
that it was another kind of contest that was going to take place between the two,
and arming himself with calmness, Dick Sand compelled himself to look Negoro
right in the face, and decided not to honor him with a reply, no matter what he
might say.

"I believed it to be my duty," Negoro said to him it first, "to come to salute
my young captain for the last time, and to let him know how I regret, for his
sake, that he does not command here any longer, as he commanded on board the
‘Pilgrim.

And, seeing that Dick Sand did not reply:

"What, captain, do you no longer recognize your old cook? He comes,
however, to take your orders, and to ask you what he ought to serve for your
breakfast."


At the same time Negoro brutally kicked the young novice, who was lying
on the ground.

"Besides," added he, "I should have another question to address to you, my
young captain. Could you yet explain to me, how, wishing to land on the
American coast, you have ended by arriving in Angola, where you are?"

Certainly, Dick Sand had no more need of the Portuguese's words to
understand what he had truly divined, when he knew at last that the "Pilgrim's"
compass must have been made false by this traitor. But Negoro's question was an
avowal. Still he only replied by a contemptuous silence.

"You will acknowledge, captain," continued Kegoro, "that it was fortunate
for you that there was a seaman on board--a real one, at that. Great God, where
would we be without him? Instead of perishing on some breaker, where the
tempest would have thrown you, you have arrived, thanks to him, in a friendly
port, and if it is to any one that you owe being at last in a safe place, it is to that
seaman whom you have wronged in despising, my young master!"

Speaking thus, Negoro, whose apparent calmness was only the result of an
immense effort, had brought his form near Dick Sand. His face, suddenly
become ferocious, touched him so closely that one would believe that he was
going to devour him. This rascal could no longer contain his fury.

"Every dog has his day!" he exclaimed, in the paroxysm of fury excited in
him by his victim's calmness. "To-day I am captain, I am master! Your life is in
my hands!"

"Take it," Sand replied, without emotion. "But, know there is in heaven a
God, avenger of all crimes, and your punishment is not distant!"

"If God occupies himself with human beings, there is only time for Him to
take care of you!"

"I am ready to appear before the Supreme Judge," replied Dick Sand, coldly,
"and death will not make me afraid."

"We shall see about that!" howled Negoro. "You count on help of some kind,
perhaps--help at Kazounde, where Alvez and I are all-powerful! You are a fool!
You say to yourself, perhaps, that your companions are still there, that old Tom
and the others. Undeceive yourself. It is a long time since they were sold and
sent to Zanzibar--too fortunate if they do not die of fatigue on the way!"

"God has a thousand ways of doing justice," replied Dick Sand. "The
smallest instrument is sufficient for him. Hercules is free."

"Hercules!" exclaimed Negoro, striking the ground with his foot; "he
perished long ago under the lions' and panthers’ teeth. I regret only one thing,
that is, that those ferocious beasts should have forestalled my vengeance!"

"If Hercules is dead," replied Dick Sand, "Dingo is alive. A dog like that,


Negoro, is more than enough to take revenge on a man of your kind. I know you
well, Negoro; you are not brave. Dingo will seek for you; it will know how to
find you again. Some day you will die under his teeth!"

"Miserable boy!" exclaimed the Portuguese, exasperated. "Miserable boy!
Dingo died from a ball that I fired at it. It is dead, like Mrs. Weldon and her son;
dead, as all the survivors of the 'Pilgrim' shall die!"

"And as you yourself shall die before long," replied Dick Sand, whose
tranquil look made the Portuguese grow pale.

Negoro, beside himself, was on the point of passing from words to deeds,
and strangling his unarmed prisoner with his hands. Already he had sprung upon
him, and was shaking him with fury, when a sudden reflection stopped him. He
remembered that he was going to kill his victim, that all would be over, and that
this would spare him the twenty-four hours of torture he intended for him. He
then stood up, said a few words to the overseer, standing impassive, commanded
him to watch closely over the prisoner, and went out of the barrack.

Instead of casting him down, this scene had restored all Dick Sand's moral
force. His physical energy underwent a happy reaction, and at the same time
regained the mastery. In bending over him in his rage, had Negoro slightly
loosened the bands that till then had rendered all movement impossible? It was
probable, for Dick Sand thought that his members had more play than before the
arrival of his executioner. The young novice, feeling solaced, said to himself that
perhaps it would be possible to get his arms free without too much effort.
Guarded as he was, in a prison firmly shut, that would doubtless be only a
torture--only a suffering less; but it was such a moment in life when the smallest
good is invaluable.

Certainly, Dick Sand hoped for nothing. No human succor could come to
him except from outside, and whence could it come to him? He was then
resigned. To tell the truth, he no longer cared to live. He thought of all those who
had met death before him, and he only aspired to join them. Negoro had just
repeated what Harris had told him: "Mrs. Weldon and little Jack had
succumbed." It was, indeed, only too probable that Hercules, exposed to so
many dangers, must have perished also, and from a cruel death. Tom and his
companions were at a distance, forever lost to him--Dick Sand ought to believe
it. To hope for anything but the end of his troubles, by a death that could not be
more terrible than his life, would be signal folly. He then prepared to die, above
all throwing himself upon God, and asking courage from Him to go on to the end
without giving way. But thoughts of God are good and noble thoughts! It is not
in vain that one lifts his soul to Him who can do all, and, when Dick Sand had
offered his whole sacrifice, he found that, if one could penetrate to the bottom of


his heart, he might perhaps discover there a last ray of hope--that glimmer which
a breath from on high can change, in spite of all probabilities, into dazzling light.

The hours passed away. Night came. The rays of light, that penetrated
through the thatch of the barrack, gradually disappeared. The last noises of the
"tchitoka," which, during that day had been very silent, after the frightful uproar
of the night before--those last noises died out. Darkness became very profound
in the interior of the narrow prison. Soon all reposed in the city of Kazounde.

Dick Sand fell into a restoring sleep, that lasted two hours. After that he
awoke, still stronger. He succeeded in freeing one of his arms from their bands--
it was already a little reduced--and it was a delight for him to be able to extend it
and draw it back at will.

The night must be half over. The overseer slept with heavy sleep, due to a
bottle of brandy, the neck of which was still held in his shut hand. The savage
had emptied it to the last drop. Dick Sand's first idea was to take possession of
his jailer's weapons, which might be of great use to him in case of escape; but at
that moment he thought he heard a slight scratching at the lower part of the door
of the barrack. Helping himself with his arms, he succeeded in crawling as far as
the door-sill without wakening the overseer.

Dick Sand was not mistaken. The scratching continued, and in a more
distinct manner. It seemed that from the outside some one was digging the earth
under the door. Was it an animal? Was it a man?

"Hercules! If it were Hercules!" the young novice said to himself.

His eyes were fixed on his guard; he was motionless, and under the influence
of a leaden sleep. Dick Sand, bringing his lips to the door-sill, thought he might
risk murmuring Hercules's name. A moan, like a low and plaintive bark, replied
to him.

"Tt is not Hercules," said Dick to himself, "but it is Dingo. He has scented me
as far as this barrack. Should he bring me another word from Hercules? But if
Dingo is not dead, Negoro has lied, and perhaps--"

At that moment a paw passed under the door. Dick Sand seized it, and
recognized Dingo's paw. But, if it had a letter, that letter could only be attached
to its neck. What to do? Was it possible to make that hole large enough for
Dingo to put in its head? At all events, he must try it.

But hardly had Dick Sand begun to dig the soil with his nails, than barks that
were not Dingo's sounded over the place. The faithful animal had just been
scented by the native dogs, and doubtless could do nothing more than take to
flight. Some detonations burst forth. The overseer half awoke. Dick Sand, no
longer able to think of escaping, because the alarm was given, must then roll
himself up again in his corner, and, after a lovely hope, he saw appear that day


which would be without a to-morrow for him.

During all that day the grave-diggers' labors were pushed on with briskness.
A large number of natives took part, under the direction of Queen Moini's first
minister. All must be ready at the hour named, under penalty of mutilation, for
the new sovereign promised to follow the defunct king's ways, point by point.

The waters of the brook having been turned aside, it was in the dry bed that
the vast ditch was dug, to a depth of ten feet, over an extent of fifty feet long by
ten wide.

Toward the end of the day they began to carpet it, at the bottom and along the
walls, with living women, chosen among Moini Loungga's slaves. Generally
those unfortunates are buried alive. But, on account of this strange and perhaps
miraculous death of Moini Loungga, it had been decided that they should be
drowned near the body of their master.

One cannot imagine what those horrible hecatombs are, when a powerful
chief's memory must be fitly honored among these tribes of Central Africa.
Cameron says that more than a hundred victims were thus sacrificed at the
funeral ceremonies of the King of Kassongo's father.

It is also the custom for the defunct king to be dressed in his most costly
clothes before being laid in his tomb. But this time, as there was nothing left of
the royal person except a few burnt bones, it was necessary to proceed in another
manner. A willow manikin was made, representing Moini Loungga sufficiently
well, perhaps advantageously, and in it they shut up the remains the combustion
had spared. The manikin was then clothed with the royal vestments--we know
that those clothes are not worth much--and they did not forget to ornament it
with Cousin Benedict's famous spectacles. There was something terribly comic
in this masquerade.

The ceremony would take place with torches and with great pomp. The
whole population of Kazounde, native or not, must assist at it.

When the evening had come, a long cortége descended the principal street,
from the tchitoka as far as the burial place. Cries, funeral dances, magicians’
incantations, noises from instruments and detonations from old muskets from the
arsenals--nothing was lacking in it.

Jose-Antonio Alvez, Coimbra, Negoro, the Arab traders and their overseers
had increased the ranks of Kazounde's people. No one had yet left the great
lakoni. Queen Moini would not permit it, and it would not be prudent to disobey
the orders of one who was trying the trade of sovereign.

The body of the king, laid in a palanquin, was carried in the last ranks of the
cortége. It was surrounded by his wives of the second order, some of whom were
going to accompany him beyond this life. Queen Moini, in great state, marched


behind what might be called the catafalque. It was positively night when all the
people arrived on the banks of the brook; but the resin torches, shaken by the
porters, threw great bursts of light over the crowd.

The ditch was seen distinctly. It was carpeted with black, living bodies, for
they moved under the chains that bound them to the ground. Fifty slaves were
waiting there till the torrent should close over them. The majority were young
natives, some resigned and mute, others giving a few groans. The wives all
dressed as for a féte, and who must perish, had been chosen by the queen.

One of these victims, she who bore the title of second wife, was bent on her
hands and knees, to serve as a royal footstool, as she had done in the king's
lifetime. The third wife came to hold up the manikin, while the fourth lay at its
feet, in the guise of a cushion.

Before the manikin, at the end of the ditch, a post, painted red, rose from the
earth. To this post was fastened a white man, who was going to be counted also
among the victims of these bloody obsequies.

That white man was Dick Sand. His body, half naked, bore the marks of the
tortures he had already suffered by Negoro's orders. Tied to this post, he waited
for death like a man who has no hope except in another life.

However, the moment had not yet arrived when the barricade would be
broken.

On a signal from the queen, the fourth wife, she who was placed at the king's
feet, was beheaded by Kazounde's executioner, and her blood flowed into the
ditch. It was the beginning of a frightful scene of butchery. Fifty slaves fell under
the executioner's knife. The bed of the river ran waves of blood.

During half an hour the victims' cries mingled with the assistants’
vociferations, and one would seek in vain in that crowd for a sentiment of
repugnance or of pity.

At last Queen Moini made a gesture, and the barricade that held back the
upper waters gradually opened. By a refinement of cruelty, the current was
allowed to filter down the river, instead of being precipitated by an instantaneous
bursting open of the dam. Slow death instead of quick death!

The water first drowned the carpet of slaves which covered the bottom of the
ditch. Horrible leaps were made by those living creatures, who struggled against
asphyxia. They saw Dick Sand, submerged to the knees, make a last effort to
break his bonds. But the water mounted. The last heads disappeared under the
torrent, that took its course again, and nothing indicated that at the bottom of this
river was dug a tomb, where one hundred victims had just perished in honor of
Kazounde's king.

The pen would refuse to paint such pictures, if regard for the truth did not


impose the duty of describing them in their abominable reality. Man is still there,


in those sad countries. To be ignorant of it is not allowable.
ok


CHAPTER XIII.

THE INTERIOR OF A FACTORY.

Harris and Negoro had told a lie in saying that Mrs. Weldon and little Jack
were dead. She, her son, and Cousin Benedict were then in Kazounde.

After the assault on the ant-hill, they had been taken away beyond the camp
on the Coanza by Harris and Negoro, accompanied by a dozen native soldiers.

A palanquin, the "kitanda" of the country, received Mrs. Weldon and little
Jack. Why such care on the part of such a man as Negoro? Mrs. Weldon was
afraid to explain it to herself.

The journey from the Counza to Kazounde was made rapidly and without
fatigue. Cousin Benedict, on whom trouble seemed to have no effect, walked
with a firm step. As he was allowed to search to the right and to the left, he did
not think of complaining. The little troop, then, arrived at Kazounde eight days
before Ibn Hamis's caravan. Mrs. Weldon was shut up, with her child and Cousin
Benedict, in Alvez's establishment.

Little Jack was much better. On leaving the marshy country, where he had
taken the fever, he gradually became better, and now he was doing well. No
doubt neither he nor his mother could have bore the hardships of the caravan;
but owing to the manner in which they had made this journey, during which they
had been given a certain amount of care, they were in a satisfactory condition,
physically at least.

As to her companions, Mrs. Weldon had heard nothing of them. After having
seen Hercules flee into the forest, she did not know what had become of him. As
to Dick Sand, as Harris and Negoro were no longer there to torture him, she
hoped that his being a white man would perhaps spare him some bad treatment.
As to Nan, Tom, Bat, Austin, and Acteon, they were blacks, and it was too
certain that they would be treated as such. Poor people! who should never have
trodden that land of Africa, and whom treachery had just cast there.

When Ibn Hamis's caravan had arrived at Kazounde, Mrs. Weldon, having no
communication with the outer world, could not know of the fact: neither did the
noises from the lakoni tell her anything. She did not know that Tom and his
friends had been sold to a trader from Oujiji, and that they would soon set out.
She neither knew of Harris's punishment, nor of King Moini Loungga's death,
nor of the royal funeral ceremonies, that had added Dick Sand to so many other


victims. So the unfortunate woman found herself alone at Kazounde, at the
trader's mercy, in Negoro's power, and she could not even think of dying in order
to escape him, because her child was with her.

Mrs. Weldon was absolutely ignorant of the fate that awaited her. Harris and
Negoro had not addressed a word to her during the whole journey from the
Coanza to Kazounde. Since her arrival, she had not seen either of them again,
and she could not leave the enclosure around the rich trader's private
establishment. Is it necessary to say now that Mrs. Weldon had found no help in
her large child, Cousin Benedict? That is understood.

When the worthy savant learned that he was not on the American continent,
as he believed, he was not at all anxious to know how that could have happened.
No! His first movement was a gesture of anger. The insects that he imagined he
had been the first to discover in America, those tsetses and others, were only
mere African hexapodes, found by many naturalists before him, in their native
places. Farewell, then, to the glory of attaching his name to those discoveries! In
fact, as he was in Africa, what could there be astonishing in the circumstance
that Cousin Benedict had collected African insects.

But the first anger over, Cousin Benedict said to himself that the "Land of the
Pharaohs"--so he still called it--possessed incomparable entomological riches,
and that so far as not being in the "Land of the Incas" was concerned, he would
not lose by the change.

"Ah!" he repeated, to himself, and even repeated to Mrs. Weldon, who hardly
listened to him, "this is the country of the manticores, those coleopteres with
long hairy feet, with welded and sharp wing-shells, with enormous mandibles, of
which the most remarkable is the tuberculous manticore. It is the country of the
calosomes with golden ends; of the Goliaths of Guinea and of the Gabon, whose
feet are furnished with thorns; of the sacred Egyptian ateuchus, that the
Egyptians of Upper Egypt venerated as gods. It is here that those sphinxes with
heads of death, now spread over all Europe, belong, and also those 'Idias Bigote,'
whose sting is particularly dreaded by the Senegalians of the coast. Yes; there are
superb things to be found here, and I shall find them, if these honest people will
only let me."

We know who those "honest people" were, of whom Cousin Benedict did not
dream of complaining. Besides, it has been stated, the entomologist had enjoyed
a half liberty in Negoro's and Harris's company, a liberty of which Dick Sand
had absolutely deprived him during the voyage from the coast to the Coanza.
The simple-hearted savant had been very much touched by that condescension.

Finally, Cousin Benedict would be the happiest of entomologists if he had
not suffered a loss to which he was extremely sensitive. He still possessed his tin


box, but his glasses no longer rested on his nose, his magnifying glass no longer
hung from his neck! Now, a naturalist without his magnifying glass and his
spectacles, no longer exists. Cousin Benedict, however, was destined never to
see those two optical attendants again, because they had been buried with the
royal manikin. So, when he found some insect, he was reduced to thrusting it
into his eyes to distinguish its most prominent peculiarities. Ah! it was a great
loss to Cousin Benedict, and he would have paid a high price for a pair of
spectacles, but that article was not current on the lakonis of Kazounde. At all
events, Cousin Benedict could go and come in Jose-Antonio Alvez's
establishment. They knew he was incapable of seeking to flee. Besides, a high
palisade separated the factory from the other quarters of the city, and it would
not be easy to get over it.

But, if it was well enclosed, this enclosure did not measure less than a mile
in circumference. Trees, bushes of a kind peculiar to Africa, great herbs, a few
rivulets, the thatch of the barracks and the huts, were more than necessary to
conceal the continent's rarest insects, and to make Cousin Benedict's happiness,
at least, if not his fortune. In fact, he discovered some hexapodes, and nearly lost
his eyesight in trying to study them without spectacles. But, at least, he added to
his precious collection, and laid the foundation of a great work on African
entomology. If his lucky star would let him discover a new insect, to which he
would attach his name, he would have nothing more to desire in this world!

If Alvez's establishment was sufficiently large for Cousin Benedict's
scientific promenades, it seemed immense to little Jack, who could walk about
there without restraint. But the child took little interest in the pleasures so natural
to his age. He rarely quitted his mother, who did not like to leave him alone, and
always dreaded some misfortune.

Little Jack often spoke of his father, whom he had not seen for so long. He
asked to be taken back to him. He inquired after all, for old Nan, for his friend
Hercules, for Bat, for Austin, for Acteon, and for Dingo, that appeared, indeed,
to have deserted him. He wished to see his comrade, Dick Sand, again. His
young imagination was very much affected, and only lived in those
remembrances. To his questions Mrs. Weldon could only reply by pressing him
to her heart, while covering him with kisses. All that she could do was not to cry
before him.

Meanwhile, Mrs. Weldon had not failed to observe that, if bad treatment had
been spared her during the journey from the Coanza, nothing in Alvez's
establishment indicated that there would be any change of conduct in regard to
her. There were in the factory only the slaves in the trader's service. All the
others, which formed the object of his trade, had been penned up in the barracks


of the tchitoka, then sold to the brokers from the interior.

Now, the storehouses of the establishment were overflowing with stuffs and
ivory. The stuffs were intended to be exchanged in the provinces of the center,
the ivory to be exported from the principal markets of the continent.

In fact, then, there were few people in the factory. Mrs. Weldon and Jack
occupied a hut apart; Cousin Benedict another. They did not communicate with
the trader's servants. They ate together. The food, consisting of goat's flesh or
mutton, vegetables, tapioca, sorgho, and the fruits of the country, was sufficient.

Halima, a young slave, was especially devoted to Mrs. Weldon's service. In
her way, and as she could, she even evinced for her a kind of savage, but
certainty sincere, affection.

Mrs. Weldon hardly saw Jose-Antonio Alvez, who occupied the principal
house of the factory. She did not see Negoro at all, as he lodged outside; but his
absence was quite inexplicable. This absence continued to astonish her, and
make her feel anxious at the same time.

"What does he want? What is he waiting for?" she asked herself. "Why has
he brought us to Kazounde?"

So had passed the eight days that preceded and followed the arrival of Ibn
Hamis's caravan--that is, the two days before the funeral ceremonies, and the six
days that followed.

In the midst of so many anxieties, Mrs. Weldon could not forget that her
husband must be a prey to the most frightful despair, on not seeing either his
wife or his son return to San Francisco. Mr. Weldon could not know that his wife
had adopted that fatal idea of taking passage on board the "Pilgrim," and he
would believe that she had embarked on one of the steamers of the Trans-Pacific
Company. Now, these steamers arrived regularly, and neither Mrs. Weldon, nor
Jack, nor Cousin Benedict were on them. Besides, the "Pilgrim" itself was
already overdue at Sun Francisco. As she did not reappear, James W. Weldon
must now rank her in the category of ships supposed to be lost, because not
heard of.

What a terrible blow for him, when news of the departure of the "Pilgrim"
and the embarkation of Mrs. Weldon should reach him from his correspondents
in Auckland! What had he done? Had he refused to believe that his son and she
had perished at sea? But then, where would he search? Evidently on the isles of
the Pacific, perhaps on the American coast. But never, no never, would the
thought occur to him that she had been thrown on the coast of this fatal Africa!

So thought Mrs. Weldon. But what could she attempt? Flee! How? She was
closely watched. And then to flee was to venture into those thick forests, in the
midst of a thousand dangers, to attempt a journey of more than two hundred


miles to reach the coast. And meanwhile Mrs. Weldon was decided to do it, if no
other means offered themselves for her to recover her liberty. But, first, she
wished to know exactly what Negoro's designs were.

At last she knew them.

On the 6th of June, three days after the burial of Kazounde's king, Negoro
entered the factory, where he had not yet set foot since his return. He went right
to the hut occupied by his prisoner.

Mrs. Weldon was alone. Cousin Benedict was taking one of his scientific
walks. Little Jack, watched by the slave Halima, was walking in the enclosure of
the establishment.

Negoro pushed open the door of the hut without knocking.

"Mrs. Weldon," said he, "Tom and his companions have been sold for the
markets of Oujiji!"

"May God protect them!" said Mrs. "Weldon, shedding tears.

"Nan died on the way, Dick Sand has perished----"

"Nan dead! and Dick!" cried Mrs. Weldon.

"Yes, it is just for your captain of fifteen to pay for Harris's murder with his
life," continued Negoro. "You are alone in Kazounde, mistress; alone, in the
power of the 'Pilgrim's' old cook--absolutely alone, do you understand?"

What Negoro said was only too true, even concerning Tom and his friends.
The old black man, his son Bat, Acteon and Austin had departed the day before
with the trader of Oujiji's caravan, without the consolation of seeing Mrs.
Weldon again, without even knowing that their companion in misery was in
Kazounde, in Alvez's establishment. They had departed for the lake country, a
journey figured by hundreds of miles, that very few accomplish, and from which
very few return.

"Well?" murmured Mrs. Weldon, looking at Negoro without answering.

"Mrs. Weldon," returned the Portuguese, in an abrupt voice, "I could revenge
myself on you for the bad treatment I suffered on board the 'Pilgrim.’ But Dick
Sand's death will satisfy my vengeance. Now, mistress, I become the merchant
again, and behold my projects with regard to you."

Mrs. Weldon looked at him without saying a word.

"You," continued the Portuguese, "your child, and that imbecile who runs
after the flies, you have a commercial value which I intend to utilize. So I am
going to sell you."

"I am of a free race," replied Mrs. Weldon, in a firm tone.

"You are a Slave, if I wish it."

"And who would buy a white woman?"

"A man who will pay for her whatever I shall ask him."


Mrs. Weldon bent her head for a moment, for she knew that anything was
possible in that frightful country.

"You have heard?" continued Negoro.

"Who is this man to whom you will pretend to sell me?" replied Mrs.
Weldon.

"To sell you or to re-sell you. At least, I suppose so!" added the Portuguese,
sneering.

"The name of this man?" asked Mrs. Weldon.

"This man--he is James W. Weldon, your husband."

"My husband!" exclaimed Mrs. Weldon, who could not believe what she had
just heard.

"Himself, Mrs. Weldon--your husband, to whom I do not wish simply to
restore his wife, his child, and his cousin, but to sell them, and, at a high price."

Mrs. Weldon asked herself if Negoro was not setting a trap for her. However,
she believed he was speaking seriously. To a wretch to whom money is
everything, it seems that we can trust, when business is in question. Now, this
was business.

"And when do you propose to make this business operation?" returned Mrs.
Weldon.

"As soon as possible."

"Where?"

"Just here. Certainly James Weldon will not hesitate to come as far as
Kazounde for his wife and son."

"No, he will not hesitate. But who will tell him?"

"I! I shall go to San Francisco to find James Weldon. I have money enough
for this voyage."

"The money stolen from on board the 'Pilgrim?"

"Yes, that, and more besides," replied Negoro, insolently. "But, if I wish to
sell you soon, I also wish to sell you at a high price. I think that James Weldon
will not regard a hundred thousand dollars----"

"He will not regard them, if he can give them,” replied Mrs. Weldon, coldly.
"Only my husband, to whom you will say, doubtless, that I am held a prisoner at
Kazounde, in Central Africa----"

"Precisely!"

"My husband will not believe you without proofs, and he will not be so
imprudent as to come to Kazounde on your word alone."

"He will come here," returned Negoro, "if I bring him a letter written by you,
which will tell him your situation, which will describe me as a faithful servant,
escaped from the hands of these savages."


"My hand shall never write that letter!" Mrs. Weldon replied, in a still colder
manner.

"You refuse?" exclaimed Negoro.

"T refuse!"

The thought of the dangers her husband would pass through in coming as far
as Kazounde, the little dependence that could be placed on the Portuguese's
promises, the facility with which the latter could retain James Weldon, after
taking the ransom agreed upon, all these reasons taken together made Mrs.
Weldon refuse Negoro's proposition flatly and at once. Mrs. Weldon spoke,
thinking only of herself, forgetting her child for the moment.

"You shall write that letter!" continued the Portuguese.

"No!" replied Mrs. Weldon again.

"Ah, take care!" exclaimed Negoro. "You are not alone here! Your child is,
like you, in my power, and I well know how----"

Mrs. Weldon wished to reply that that would be impossible. Her heart was
beating as if it would break; she was voiceless.

"Mrs. Weldon," said Negoro, "you will reflect on the offer I have made you.
In eight days you will have handed me a letter to James Weldon's address, or you
will repent of it.”

That said, the Portuguese retired, without giving vent to his anger; but it was
easy to see that nothing would stop him from constraining Mrs. Weldon to obey
him.


CHAPTER XIV.

SOME NEWS OF DR. LIVINGSTONE.

Left alone, Mrs. Weldon at first only fixed her mind on this thought, that
eight days would pass before Negoro would return for a definite answer. There
was time to reflect and decide on a course of action. There could be no question
of the Portuguese's probity except in his own interest. The "market value" that he
attributed to his prisoner would evidently be a safeguard for her, and protect her
for the time, at least, against any temptation that might put her in danger.
Perhaps she would think of a compromise that would restore her to her husband
without obliging Mr. Weldon to come to Kazounde. On receipt of a letter from
his wife, she well knew that James Weldon would set out. He would brave the
perils of this journey into the most dangerous countries of Africa. But, once at
Kazounde, when Negoro should have that fortune of a hundred thousand dollars
in his hands, what guaranty would James W. Weldon, his wife, his son and
Cousin Benedict have, that they would be allowed to depart? Could not Queen


Moini's caprice prevent them? Would not this "sale" of Mrs. Weldon and hers be
better accomplished if it took place at the coast, at some point agreed upon,
which would spare Mr. Weldon both the dangers of the journey to the interior,
and the difficulties, not to say the impossibilities, of a return?

So reflected Mrs. Weldon. That was why she had refused at once to accede to
Negoro's proposition and give him a letter for her husband. She also thought
that, if Negoro had put off his second visit for eight days, it was because he
needed that time to prepare for his journey. If not, he would return sooner to
force her consent.

"Would he really separate me from my child?" murmured she.

At that moment Jack entered the hut, and, by an instinctive movement, his
mother seized him, as if Negoro were there, ready to snatch him from her.

"You are in great grief, mother?" asked the little boy.

"No, dear Jack," replied Mrs. Weldon; "I was thinking of your papa! You
would be very glad to see him again?"

"Oh! yes, mother! Is he going to come?"

"No! no! He must not come!"

"Then we will go to see him again?"

"Yes, darling Jack!"

"With my friend Dick--and Hercules--and old Tom?"

"Yes! yes!" replied Mrs. Weldon, putting her head down to hide her tears.

"Has papa written to you?" asked little Jack.

"No, my love."

"Then you are going to write to him, mother?"

"Yes--yes--perhaps!" replied Mrs. Weldon.

And without knowing it, little Jack entered directly into his mother's
thoughts. To avoid answering him further, she covered him with kisses.

It must be stated that another motive of some value was joined to the
different reasons that had urged Mrs. Weldon to resist Negoro's injunctions.
Perhaps Mrs. Weldon had a very unexpected chance of being restored to liberty
without her husband's intervention, and even against Negoro's will. It was only a
faint ray of hope, very vague as yet, but it was one.

In fact, a few words of conversation, overheard by her several days before,
made her foresee a possible succor near at hand--one might say a providential
SUCCOT.

Alvez and a mongrel from Oujiji were talking a few steps from the hut
occupied by Mrs. Weldon. It is not astonishing that the slave-trade was the
subject of conversation between those worthy merchants. The two brokers in
human flesh were talking business. They were discussing the future of their


commerce, and were worried about the efforts the English were making to
destroy it--not only on the exterior, by cruisers, but in the interior, by their
missionaries and their travelers.

Jose-Antonio Alvez found that the explorations of these hardy pioneers could
only injure commercial operations. His interlocutor shared his views, and
thought that all these visitors, civil or religious, should be received with
gunshots.

This had been done to some extent. But, to the great displeasure of the
traders, if they killed some of these curious ones, others escaped them. Now,
these latter, on returning to their country, recounted "with exaggerations," Alvez
said, the horrors of the slave-trade, and that injured this commerce immensely--it
being too much diminished already.

The mongrel agreed to that, and deplored it; above all, concerning the
markets of N'yangwe, of Oujiji, of Zanzibar, and of all the great lake regions.
There had come successively Speke, Grant, Livingstone, Stanley, and others. It
was an invasion! Soon all England and all America would occupy the country!

Alvez sincerely pitied his comrade, and he declared that the provinces of
Western Africa had been, till that time, less badly treated--that is to say, less
visited; but the epidemic of travelers was beginning to spread. If Kazounde had
been spared, it was not so with Cassange, and with Bihe, where Alvez owned
factories. It may be remembered, also, that Harris had spoken to Negoro of a
certain Lieutenant Cameron, who might, indeed, have the presumption to cross
Africa from one side to the other, and after entering it by Zanzibar, leave it by
Angola.

In fact, the trader had reason to fear, and we know that, some years after,
Cameron to the south and Stanley to the north, were going to explore these little-
known provinces of the west, describe the permanent monstrosities of the trade,
unveil the guilty complicities of foreign agents, and make the responsibility fall
on the right parties.

Neither Alvez nor the mongrel could know anything yet of this exploration
of Cameron's and of Stanley's; but what they did know, what they said, what
Mrs. Weldon heard, and what was of such great interest to her--in a word, what
had sustained her in her refusal to subscribe at once to Negoro's demands, was
this:

Before long, very probably, Dr. David Livingstone would arrive at
Kazounde.

Now, the arrival of Livingstone with his escort, the influence which the great
traveler enjoyed in Africa, the concourse of Portuguese authorities from Angola
that could not fail to meet him, all that might bring about the deliverance of Mrs.


Weldon and hers, in spite of Negoro, in spite of Alvez. It was perhaps their
restoration to their country within a short time, and without James W. Weldon
risking his life in a journey, the result of which could only be deplorable.

But was there any probability that Dr. Livingstone would soon visit that part
of the continent? Yes, for in following that missionary tour, he was going to
complete the exploration of Central Africa.

We know the heroic life of this son of the tea merchant, who lived in
Blantyre, a village in the county of Lanark. Born on the 13th of March, 1813,
David Livingstone, the second of six children, became, by force of study, both a
theologian and doctor. After making his novitiate in the "London Missionary
Society," he embarked for the Cape in 1840, with the intention of joining the
missionary Moffat in Southern Africa.

From the Cape, the future traveler repaired to the country of the Bechnanas,
which he explored for the first time, returned to Kuruman and married Moffat's
daughter, that brave companion who would be worthy of him. In 1843 he
founded a mission in the valley of the Mabotsa.

Four years later, we find him established at Kolobeng, two hundred and
twenty-five miles to the north of Kuruman, in the country of the Bechnanas.

Two years after, in 1849, Livingstone left Kolobeng with his wife, his three
children and two friends, Messrs. Oswell and Murray. August 1st, of the same
year, he discovered Lake N'gami, and returned to Kolobeng, by descending the
Zouga.

In this journey Livingstone, stopped by the bad will of the natives, had not
passed beyond the N'gami. A second attempt was not more fortunate. A third
must succeed. Then, taking a northern route, again with his family and Mr.
Oswell, after frightful sufferings (for lack of food, for lack of water) that almost
cost him the lives of his children, he reached the country of the Makalolos beside
the Chobe, a branch of the Zambezi. The chief, Sebituane, joined him at
Linyanti. At the end of June, 1851, the Zambezi was discovered, and the doctor
returned to the Cape to bring his family to England.

In fact, the intrepid Livingstone wished to be alone while risking his life in
the daring journey he was going to undertake.

On leaving the Cape this time, the question was to cross Africa obliquely
from the south to the west, so as to reach Saint Paul de Loanda.

On the third of June, 1852, the doctor set out with a few natives. He arrived
at Kuruman and skirted the Desert of Kalahari. The 31st December he entered
Litoubarouba and found the country of the Bechnanas ravaged by the Boers, old
Dutch colonists, who were masters of the Cape before the English took
possession of it.


Livingstone left Litoubarouba on the 15th of January, 1853, penetrated to the
center of the country of the Bamangouatos, and, on May 23d, he arrived at
Linyanti, where the young sovereign of the Makalolos, Sckeletou, received him
with great honor.

There, the doctor held back by the intense fevers, devoted himself to
studying the manners of the country, and, for the first time, he could ascertain the
ravages made by the slave-trade in Africa.

One month after he descended the Chobe, reached the Zambezi, entered
Naniele, visited Katonga and Libonta, arrived at the confluence of the Zambezi
and the Leeba, formed the project of ascending by that watercourse as far as the
Portuguese possessions of the west, and, after nine weeks' absence, returned to
Linyanti to make preparations.

On the 11th of November, 1853, the doctor, accompanied by twenty-seven
Makalolos, left Linyanti, and on the 27th of December he reached the mouth of
the Leeba. This watercourse was ascended as far as the territory of the Balondas,
there where it receives the Makonda, which comes from the east. It was the first
time that a white man penetrated into this region.

January 14th, Livingstone entered Shinte's residence. He was the most
powerful sovereign of the Balondas. He gave Livingstone a good reception, and,
the 26th of the same month, after crossing the Leeba, he arrived at King
Katema's. There, again, a good reception, and thence the departure of the little
troop that on the 20th of February encamped on the borders of Lake Dilolo.

On setting out from this point, a difficult country, exigencies of the natives,
attacks from the tribes, revolt of his companions, threats of death, everything
conspired against Livingstone, and a less energetic man would have abandoned
the party. The doctor persevered, and on the 4th of April, he reached the banks of
the Coango, a large watercourse which forms the eastern boundary of the
Portuguese possessions, and flows northward into the Zaire.

Six days after, Livingstone entered Cassange, where the trader Alvez had
seen him passing through, and on the 31st of May he arrived at Saint Paul de
Loanda. For the first time, and after a journey of two years, Africa had just been
crossed obliquely from the south to the west.

David Livingstone left Loanda, September 24th of the same year. He skirted
the right bank of that Coanza that had been so fatal to Dick Sand and his party,
arrived at the confluence of the Lombe, crossing numerous caravans of slaves,
passed by Cassange again, left it on the 20th of February, crossed the Coango,
and reached the Zambezi at Kawawa. On the 8th of June he discovered Lake
Dilolo again, saw Shinte again, descended the Zambezi, and reentered Linyanti,
which he left on the 3d of November, 1855.


This second part of the journey, which would lead the doctor toward the
eastern coast, would enable him to finish completely this crossing of Africa from
the west to the east.

After having visited the famous Victoria Falls, the "thundering foam," David
Livingstone abandoned the Zambezi to take a northeastern direction. The
passage across the territory of the Batokas (natives who were besotted by the
inhalation of hemp), the visit to Semalembone (the powerful chief of the region),
the crossing of the Kafone, the finding of the Zambezi again, the visit to King
Mbourouma, the sight of the ruins of Zambo (an ancient Portuguese city), the
encounter with the Chief Mpende on the 17th of January, 1856 (then at war with
the Portuguese), the final arrival at Tete, on the border of the Zambezi, on the 2d
of March--such were the principal halting-places of this tour.

The 22d of April Livingstone left that station, formerly a rich one, descended
as far as the delta of the river, and arrived at Quilimane, at its mouth, on the 20th
of May, four years after leaving the Cape. On the 12th of July he embarked for
Maurice, and on the 22d of December he was returning to England, after sixteen
years’ absence.

The prize of the Geographical Society of Paris, the grand medal of the
London Geographical Society, and brilliant receptions greeted the illustrious
traveler. Another would, perhaps, have thought that repose was well earned. The
doctor did not think so, and departed on the 1st of March, 1858, accompanied by
his brother Charles, Captain Bedinfield, the Drs. Kirk and Meller, and by
Messrs. Thornton and Baines. He arrived in May on the coast of Mozambique,
having for an object the exploration of the basin of the Zambezi.

All would not return from this voyage. A little steamer, the "My Robert,"
enabled the explorers to ascend the great river by the Rongone. They arrived at
Tete, September the 8th; thence reconnoissance of the lower course of the
Zambezi and of the Chire, its left branch, in January, 1859; visit to Lake Chirona
in April; exploration of the Manganjas' territory; discovery of Lake Nyassa on
September 10th; return to the Victoria Falls, August 9th, 1860; arrival of Bishop
Mackensie and his missionaries at the mouth of the Zambezi, January 31st,
1861; the exploration of the Rovouma, on the "Pioneer," in March; the return to
Lake Nyassa in September, 1861, and residence there till the end of October;
January 30th, 1862, arrival of Mrs. Livingstone and a second steamer, the "Lady
Nyassa:" such were the events that marked the first years of this new expedition.
At this time, Bishop Mackensie and one of his missionaries had already
succumbed to the unhealthfulness of the climate, and on the 27th of April, Mrs.
Livingstone died in her husband's arms.

In May, the doctor attempted a second reconnoissance of the Rovouma; then,


at the end of November, he entered the Zambezi again, and sailed up the Chire
again. In April, 1863, he lost his companion, Thornton, sent back to Europe his
brother Charles and Dr. Kirk, who were both exhausted by sickness, and
November 10th, for the third time, he saw Nyassa, of which he completed the
hydrography. Three months after he was again at the mouth of the Zambezi,
passed to Zanzibar, and July 20th, 1864, after five years' absence, he arrived in
London, where he published his work entitled: "Exploration of the Zambezi and
its Branches."

January 28th, 1866, Livingstone landed again at Zanzibar. He was beginning
his fourth voyage.

August 8th, after having witnessed the horrible scenes provoked by the
slave-trade in that country, the doctor, taking this time only a few cipayes and a
few negroes, found himself again at Mokalaose, on the banks of the Nyassa. Six
weeks later, the majority of the men forming the escort took flight, returned to
Zanzibar, and there falsely spread the report of Livingstone's death.

He, however, did not draw back. He wished to visit the country comprised
between the Nyassa and Lake Tanganyika. December 10th, guided by some
natives, he traversed the Loangona River, and April 2d, 1867, he discovered
Lake Liemmba. There he remained a month between life and death. Hardly well
again August 30th he reached Lake Moero, of which he visited the northern
shore, and November 21st he entered the town of Cayembe, where he lived forty
days, during which he twice renewed his exploration of Lake Moero.

From Cayembe Livingstone took a northern direction, with the design of
reaching the important town of Oujiji, on the Tanganyika. Surprised by the rising
of the waters, and abandoned by his guides, he was obliged to return to
Cayembe. He redescended to the south June 6th, and six weeks after gained the
great lake Bangoneolo. He remained there till August 9th, and then sought to
reascend toward Lake Tanganyika.

What a journey! On setting out, January 7th, 1869, the heroic doctor's
feebleness was such that be had to be carried. In February he at last reached the
lake and arrived at Oujiji, where he found some articles sent to his address by the
Oriental Company of Calcutta.

Livingstone then had but one idea, to gain the sources of the valley of the
Nile by ascending the Tanganyika. September 21st he was at Bambarre, in the
Manonyema, a cannibal country, and arrived at the Loualaba--that Loualaba that
Cameron was going to suspect, and Stanley to discover, to be only the upper
Zaire, or Congo. At Mamohela the doctor was sick for eighty days. He had only
three servants. July 21st, 1871, he departed again for the Tanganyika, and only
reentered Oujiji October 23d. He was then a mere skeleton.


Meanwhile, before this period, people had been a long time without news of
the traveler. In Europe they believed him to be dead. He himself had almost lost
hope of being ever relieved.

Eleven days after his entrance into Oujiji shots were heard a quarter of a mile
from the lake. The doctor arrives. A man, a white man, is before him. "Doctor
Livingstone, I presume?"

"Yes," replied the latter, raising his cap, with a friendly smile.

Their hands were warmly clasped.

"I thank God," continued the white man, "that He has permitted me to meet
you."

"IT am happy," said Livingstone, "to be here to receive you."

The white man was the American Stanley, a reporter of the New York
Herald, whom Mr. Bennett, the proprietor of that journal, had just sent to find
David Livingstone.

In the month of October, 1870, this American, without hesitation, without a
word, simply as a hero, had embarked at Bombay for Zanzibar, and almost
following Speke and Burton's route, after untold sufferings, his life being
menaced several times, he arrived at Oujiji.

The two travelers, now become fast friends, then made an expedition to the
north of Lake Tanganyika. They embarked, pushed as far as Cape Malaya, and
after a minute exploration, were of the opinion that the great lake had for an
outlet a branch of the Loualaba.

It was what Cameron and Stanley himself were going to determine positively
some years after. December 12th, Livingstone and his companion were returning
to Oujiji.

Stanley prepared to depart. December 27th, after a navigation of eight days,
the doctor and he arrived at Ousimba; then, February 23d, they entered
Kouihara.

March 12th was the day of parting.

"You have accomplished," said the doctor to his companion, "what few men
would have done, and done it much better than certain great travelers. I am very
grateful to you for it. May God lead you, my friend, and may He bless you!"

"May He," said Stanley, taking Livingstone's hand, "bring you back to us
safe and sound, dear doctor!"

Stanley drew back quickly from this embrace, and turned so as to conceal his
tears. "Good-by, doctor, dear friend," he said in a stifled voice.

"Good-by," replied Livingstone, feebly.

Stanley departed, and July 12th, 1872, he landed at Marseilles.

Livingstone was going to return to his discoveries. August 25th, after five


months passed at Konihara, accompanied by his black servants, Souzi, Chouma,
and Amoda, by two other servants, by Jacob Wainwright, and by fifty-six men
sent by Stanley, he went toward the south of the Tanganyika.

A month after, the caravan arrived at M'oura, in the midst of storms, caused
by an extreme drought. Then came the rains, the bad will of the natives, and the
loss of the beasts of burden, from falling under the stings of the tsetse. January
24th, 1873, the little troop was at Tchitounkone. April 27th, after having left
Lake Bangoneolo to the east, the troop was going toward the village of
Tchitambo.

At that place some traders had left Livingstone. This is what Alvez and his
colleague had learned from them. They had good reason to believe that the
doctor, after exploring the south of the lake, would venture across the Loanda,
and come to seek unknown countries in the west. Thence he was to ascend
toward Angola, to visit those regions infested by the slave-trade, to push as far as
Kazounde; the tour seemed to be all marked out, and it was very probable that
Livingstone would follow it.

Mrs. Weldon then could count on the approaching arrival of the great
traveler, because, in the beginning of June, it was already more than two months
since he had reached the south of Lake Bangoneolo.

Now, June 13th, the day before that on which Negoro would come to claim
from Mrs. Weldon the letter that would put one hundred thousand dollars in his
hands, sad news was spread, at which Alvez and the traders only rejoiced.

May 1st, 1873, at dawn, Dr. David Livingstone died. In fact, on April 29th,
the little caravan had reached the village of Tchitambo, to the south of the lake.
The doctor was carried there on a litter. On the 30th, in the night, under the
influence of excessive grief, he moaned out this complaint, that was hardly
heard: "Oh, dear! dear!" and he fell back from drowsiness.

At the end of an hour he called his servant, Souzi, asking for some medicine,
then murmuring in a feeble voice: "It is well. Now you can go."

Toward four o'clock in the morning, Souzi and five men of the escort entered
the doctor's hut. David Livingstone, kneeling near his bed, his head resting on
his hands, seemed to be engaged in prayer. Souzi gently touched his cheek; it
was cold. David Livingstone was no more.

Nine months after, his body, carried by faithful servants at the price of
unheard-of fatigues, arrived at Zanzibar. On April 12th, 1874, it was buried in
Westminster Abbey, among those of her great men, whom England honors
equally with her kings.


CHAPTER XV.

WHERE A MANTICORE MAY LEAD.

To what plank of safety will not an unfortunate being cling? Will not the eyes
of the condemned seek to seize any ray of hope, no matter how vague?

So it had been with Mrs. Weldon. One can understand what she must have
felt when she learned, from Alvez himself, that Dr. Livingstone had just died in a
little Bangoneolo village.

It seemed to her that she was more isolated than ever; that a sort of bond that
attached her to the traveler, and with him to the civilized world, had just been
broken.

The plank of safety sank under her hand, the ray of hope went out before her
eyes. Tom and his companions had left Kazounde for the lake region. Not the
least news of Hercules. Mrs. Weldon was not sure of any one. She must then fall
back on Negoro's proposition, while trying to amend it and secure a definite
result from it.

June 14th, the day fixed by him, Negoro presented himself at Mrs. Weldon's
hut.

The Portuguese was, as always, so he said, perfectly practical. However, he
abated nothing from the amount of the ransom, which his prisoner did not even
discuss. But Mrs. Weldon also showed herself very practical in saying to him:

"If you wish to make an agreement, do not render it impossible by
unacceptable conditions. The exchange of our liberty for the sum you exact may
take place, without my husband coming into a country where you see what can
be done with a white man! Now, I do not wish him to come here at any price!"

After some hesitation Negoro yielded, and Mrs. Weldon finished with the
concession that James Weldon should not venture as far as Kazounde. A ship
would land him at Mossamedes, a little port to the south of Angola, ordinarily
frequented by slave-ships, and well-known by Negoro. It was there that the
Portuguese would conduct James W. Weldon; and at a certain time Alvez's agent
would bring thither Mrs. Weldon, Jack, and Cousin Benedict. The ransom would
be given to those agents on the giving up of the prisoners, and Negoro, who
would play the part of a perfectly honest man with James Weldon, would
disappear on the ship's arrival.

Mrs. Weldon had gained a very important point. She spared her husband the
dangers of a voyage to Kazounde, the risk of being kept there, after paying the
exacted ransom, and the perils of the return. As to the six hundred miles that
separated Kazounde from Mossamedes, by going over them as she had traveled
on leaving the Coanza, Mrs. Weldon would only have a little fatigue to fear.
Besides, it would be to Alvez's interest--for he was in the affair--for the prisoners


to arrive safe and sound.

The conditions being thus settled, Mrs. Weldon wrote to her husband,
leaving to Negoro the care of passing himself off as a devoted servant, who had
escaped from the natives. Negoro took the letter, which did not allow James
Weldon to hesitate about following him as far as Mossamedes, and, the next day,
escorted by twenty blacks, he traveled toward the north.

Why did he take that direction? Was it, then, Negoro's intention to embark on
one of the vessels which frequent the mouths of the Congo, and thus avoid the
Portuguese stations, as well as the penitentiaries in which he had been an
involuntary guest? It was probable. At least, that was the reason he gave Alvez.

After his departure, Mrs. Weldon must try to arrange her existence in such a
manner as to pass the time of her sojourn at Kazounde as happily as possible.
Under the most favorable circumstances, it would last three or four months.
Negoro's going and returning would require at least that time.

Mrs. Weldon's intention was, not to leave the factory. Her child, Cousin
Benedict, and she, were comparatively safe there. Halima's good care softened
the severity of this sequestration a little. Besides, it was probable that the trader
would not permit her to leave the establishment. The great premium that the
prisoner's ransom would procure him, made it well worth while to guard her
carefully.

It was even fortunate that Alvez was not obliged to leave Kazounde to visit
his two other factories of Bihe and Cassange. Coimbra was going to take his
place in the expedition on new razzias or raids. There was no motive for
regretting the presence of that drunkard. Above all, Negoro, before setting out,
had given Alvez the most urgent commands in regard to Mrs. Weldon. It was
necessary to watch her closely. They did not know what had become of
Hercules. If he had not perished in that dreadful province of Kazounde, perhaps
he would attempt to get near the prisoner and snatch her from Alvez's hands. The
trader perfectly understood a situation which ciphered itself out by a good
number of dollars. He would answer for Mrs. Weldon as for his own body.

So the monotonous life of the prisoner during the first days after her arrival
at the factory, was continued. What passed in this enclosure reproduced very
exactly the various acts of native existence outside. Alvez lived like the other
natives of Kazounde. The women of the establishment worked as they would
have done in the town, for the greater comfort of their husbands or their masters.
Their occupations included preparing rice with heavy blows of the pestle in
wooden mortars, to perfect decortication; cleansing and winnowing maize, and
all the manipulations necessary to draw from it a granulous substance which
serves to compose that potage called "mtyelle" in the country; the harvesting of


the sorgho, a kind of large millet, the ripening of which had just been solemnly
celebrated at this time; the extraction of that fragrant oil from the "mpafon"
drupes, kinds of olives, the essence of which forms a perfume sought for by the
natives; spinning of the cotton, the fibers of which are twisted by means of a
spindle a foot and a half long, to which the spinners impart a rapid rotation; the
fabrication of bark stuffs with the mallet; the extraction from the tapioca roots,
and the preparation of the earth for the different products of the country, cassava,
flour that they make from the manioc beans, of which the pods, fifteen inches
long, named "mositsanes," grow on trees twenty feet high; arachides intended to
make oil, perennial peas of a bright blue, known under the name of "tchilobes,"
the flowers of which relieve the slightly insipid taste of the milk of sorgho;
native coffee, sugar canes, the juice of which is reduced to a syrup; onions,
Indian pears, sesamum, cucumbers, the seeds of which are roasted like chestnuts;
the preparation of fermented drinks, the "malofori," made with bananas, the
"pombe" and other liquors; the care of the domestic animals, of those cows that
only allow themselves to be milked in the presence of their little one or of a
stuffed calf; of those heifers of small race, with short horns, some of which have
a hump; of those goats which, in the country where their flesh serves for food,
are an important object of exchange, one might say current money like the slave;
finally, the feeding of the birds, swine, sheep, oxen, and so forth.

This long enumeration shows what rude labors fall on the feeble sex in those
savage regions of the African continent.

During this time the men smoke tobacco or hemp, chase the elephant or the
buffalo, and hire themselves to the traders for the raids. The harvest of maize or
of slaves is always a harvest that takes place in fixed seasons.

Of those various occupations, Mrs. Weldon only saw in Alvez's factory the
part laid on the women. Sometimes she stopped, looking at them, while the
slaves, it must be said, only replied to her by ugly grimaces. A race instinct led
these unfortunates to hate a white woman, and they had no commiseration for
her in their hearts. Halima alone was an exception, and Mrs. Weldon, having
learned certain words of the native language, was soon able to exchange a few
sentences with the young slave.

Little Jack often accompanied his mother when she walked in the inclosure;
but he wished very much to go outside. There was, however, in an enormous
baobab, marabout nests, formed of a few sticks, and "souimangas" nests, birds
with scarlet breasts and throats, which resemble those of the tissirms; then
"widows," that strip the thatch for the benefit of their family; "calaos," whose
song was agreeable, bright gray parrots with red tails, which, in the Manyema,
are called "rouss," and give their name to the chiefs of the tribes; insectivorous


"drougos," similar to gray linnets, with large, red beaks. Here and there also
fluttered hundreds of butterflies of different species, especially in the
neighborhood of the brooks that crossed the factory; but that was rather Cousin
Benedict's affair than little Jack's, and the latter regretted greatly not being taller,
so as to look over the walls. Alas! where was his poor friend, Dick Sand--he who
had brought him so high up in the "Pilgrim's" masts? How he would have
followed him on the branches of those trees, whose tops rose to more than a
hundred feet! What good times they would have had together!

Cousin Benedict always found himself very well where he was, provided
insects were not lacking. Happily, he had discovered in the factory--and he
studied as much as he could without magnifying glass or spectacles--a small bee
which forms its cells among the worm-holes of the wood, and a "sphex" that lays
its eggs in cells that are not its own, as the cuckoo in the nests of other birds.
Mosquitoes were not lacking either, on the banks of the rivulets, and they
tattooed him with bites to the extent of making him unrecognizable. And when
Mrs. Weldon reproached him with letting himself be thus devoured by those
venomous insects: "It is their instinct, Cousin Weldon," he replied to her,
scratching himself till the blood came; "it is their instinct, and we must not have
a grudge against them!"

At last, one day--it was the 17th of June--Cousin Benedict was on the point
of being the happiest of entomologists. But this adventure, which had
unexpected consequences, needs to be related with some minuteness.

It was about eleven o'clock in the morning. An overpowering heat had
obliged the inhabitants of the factory to keep in their huts, and one would not
even meet a single native in the streets of Kazounde.

Mrs. Weldon was dozing near little Jack, who was sleeping soundly. Cousin
Benedict, himself, suffering from the influence of this tropical temperature, had
given up his favorite hunts, which was a great sacrifice for him, for, in those rays
of the midday sun, he heard the rustle of a whole world of insects. He was
sheltered, then, at the end of his hut, and there, sleep began to take possession of
him in this involuntary siesta.

Suddenly, as his eyes half closed, he heard a humming; this is one of those
insupportable buzzings of insects, some of which can give fifteen or sixteen
thousand beats of their wings in a second.

"A hexapode!" exclaimed Cousin Benedict, awakened at once, and passing
from the horizontal to the vertical position.

There was no doubt that it was a hexapode that was buzzing in his hut. But,
if Cousin Benedict was very nearsighted, he had at least very acute hearing, so
acute even that he could recognize one insect from another by the intensity of its


buzz, and it seemed to him that this one was unknown, though it could only be
produced by a giant of the species.

"What is this hexapode?" Cousin Benedict asked himself.

Behold him, seeking to perceive the insect, which was very difficult to his
eyes without glasses, but trying above all to recognize it by the buzzing of its
wings.

His instinct as an entomologist warned him that he had something to
accomplish, and that the insect, so providentially entered into his hut, ought not
to be the first comer.

Cousin Benedict no longer moved. He listened. A few rays of light reached
him. His eyes then discovered a large black point that flew about, but did not
pass near enough for him to recognize it. He held his breath, and if he felt
himself stung in some part of the face or hands, he was determined not to make a
single movement that might put his hexapode to flight. At last the buzzing
insect, after turning around him for a long time, came to rest on his head. Cousin
Benedict's mouth widened for an instant, as if to give a smile--and what a smile!
He felt the light animal running on his hair. An irresistible desire to put his hand
there seized him for a moment; but he resisted it, and did well.

"No, no!" thought he, "I would miss it, or what would be worse, I would
injure it. Let it come more within my reach. See it walking! It descends. I feel its
dear little feet running on my skull! This must be a hexapode of great height. My
God! only grant that it may descend on the end of my nose, and there, by
squinting a little, I might perhaps see it, and determine to what order, genus,
species, or variety it belongs."

So thought Cousin Benedict. But it was a long distance from his skull, which
was rather pointed, to the end of his nose, which was very long. How many other
roads the capricious insect might take, beside his ears, beside his forehead--roads
that would take it to a distance from the savant's eyes--without counting that at
any moment it might retake its flight, leave the hut, and lose itself in those solar
rays where, doubtless, its life was passed, and in the midst of the buzzing of its
congeners that would attract it outside!

Cousin Benedict said all that to himself. Never, in all his life as an
entomologist, had he passed more touching minutes. An African hexapode, of a
new species, or, at least, of a new variety, or even of a new sub-variety, was there
on his head, and he could not recognize it except it deigned to walk at least an
inch from his eyes.

However, Cousin Benedict's prayer must be heard. The insect, after having
traveled over the half-bald head, as on the summit of some wild bush, began to
descend Cousin Benedict's forehead, and the latter might at last conceive the


hope that it would venture to the top of his nose. Once arrived at that top, why
would it not descend to the base?

"In its place, I--I would descend," thought the worthy savant.

What is truer than that, in Cousin Benedict's place, any other would have
struck his forehead violently, so as to crush the enticing insect, or at least to put
it to flight. To feel six feet moving on his skin, without speaking of the fear of
being bitten, and not make a gesture, one will agree that it was the height of
heroism. The Spartan allowing his breast to be devoured by a fox; the Roman
holding burning coals between his fingers, were not more masters of themselves
than Cousin Benedict, who was undoubtedly descended from those two heroes.

After twenty little circuits, the insect arrived at the top of the nose. Then
there was a moment's hesitation that made all Cousin Benedict's blood rush to
his heart. Would the hexapode ascend again beyond the line of the eyes, or
would it descend below?

It descended. Cousin Benedict felt its caterpillar feet coming toward the base
of his nose. The insect turned neither to the right nor to the left. It rested between
its two buzzing wings, on the slightly hooked edge of that learned nose, so well
formed to carry spectacles. It cleared the little furrow produced by the incessant
use of that optical instrument, so much missed by the poor cousin, and it stopped
just at the extremity of his nasal appendage.

It was the best place this haxapode could choose. At that distance, Cousin
Benedict's two eyes, by making their visual rays converge, could, like two lens,
dart their double look on the insect.

"Almighty God!" exclaimed Cousin Benedict, who could not repress a cry,
"the tuberculous manticore."

Now, he must not cry it out, he must only think it. But was it not too much to
ask from the most enthusiastic of entomologists?

To have on the end of his nose a tuberculous manticore, with large elytrums--
an insect of the cicendeletes tribe--a very rare specimen in collections--one that
seems peculiar to those southern parts of Africa, and yet not utter a cry of
admiration; that is beyond human strength.

Unfortunately the manticore heard this cry, which was almost immediately
followed by a sneeze, that shook the appendage on which it rested. Cousin
Benedict wished to take possession of it, extended his hand, shut it violently, and
only succeeded in seizing the end of his own nose.

"Malediction!" exclaimed he. But then he showed a remarkable coolness.

He knew that the tuberculous manticore only flutters about, so to say, that it
walks rather than flies. He then knelt, and succeeded in perceiving, at less than
ten inches from his eyes, the black point that was gliding rapidly in a ray of light.


Evidently it was better to study it in this independent attitude. Only he must
not lose sight of it.

"To seize the manticore would be to risk crushing it," Cousin Benedict said
to himself. "No; I shall follow it! I shall admire it! I have time enough to take it!"

Was Cousin Benedict wrong? However that may be, see him now on all
fours, his nose to the ground like a dog that smells a scent, and following seven
or eight inches behind the superb hexapode. One moment after he was outside
his hut, under the midday sun, and a few minutes later at the foot of the palisade
that shut in Alvez's establishment.

At this place was the manticore going to clear the enclosure with a bound,
and put a wall between its adorer and itself? No, that was not in its nature, and
Cousin Benedict knew it well. So he was always there, crawling like a snake, too
far off to recognize the insect entomologically--besides, that was done--but near
enough to perceive that large, moving point traveling over the ground.

The manticore, arrived near the palisade, had met the large entrance of a
mole-hill that opened at the foot of the enclosure. There, without hesitating, it
entered this subterranean gallery, for it is in the habit of seeking those obscure
passages. Cousin Benedict believed that he was going to lose sight of it. But, to
his great surprise, the passage was at least two feet high, and the mole-hill
formed a gallery where his long, thin body could enter. Besides, he put the ardor
of a ferret into his pursuit, and did not even perceive that in "earthing" himself
thus, he was passing outside the palisade.

In fact, the mole-hill established a natural communication between the inside
and the outside. In half a minute Cousin Benedict was outside of the factory.
That did not trouble him. He was absorbed in admiration of the elegant insect
that was leading him on. But the latter, doubtless, had enough of this long walk.
Its elytrums turned aside, its wings spread out. Cousin Benedict felt the danger,
and, with his curved hand, he was going to make a provisional prison for the
manticore, when--f-r-r-r-r!--it flew away!

What despair! But the manticore could not go far. Cousin Benedict rose; he
looked, he darted forward, his two hands stretched out and open. The insect flew
above his head, and he only perceived a large black point, without appreciable
form to him.

Would the manticore come to the ground again to rest, after having traced a
few capricious circles around Cousin Benedict's bald head? All the probabilities
were in favor of its doing so.

Unfortunately for the unhappy savant, this part of Alvez's establishment,
which was situated at the northern extremity of the town, bordered on a vast
forest, which covered the territory of Kazounde for a space of several square


miles. If the manticore gained the cover of the trees, and if there, it should flutter
from branch to branch, he must renounce all hope of making it figure in that
famous tin box, in which it would be the most precious jewel.

Alas! that was what happened. The manticore had rested again on the
ground. Cousin Benedict, having the unexpected hope of seeing it again, threw
himself on the ground at once. But the manticore no longer walked: it proceeded
by little jumps.

Cousin Benedict, exhausted, his knees and hands bleeding, jumped also. His
two arms, his hands open, were extended to the right, to the left, according as the
black point bounded here or there. It might be said that he was drawing his body
over that burning soil, as a swimmer does on the surface of the water.

Useless trouble! His two hands always closed on nothing. The insect escaped
him while playing with him, and soon, arrived under the fresh branches, it arose,
after throwing into Cousin Benedict's ear, which it touched lightly, the most
intense but also the most ironical buzzing of its coleopter wings.

"Malediction!" exclaimed Cousin Benedict, a second time. "It escapes me.
Ungrateful hexapode! Thou to whom I reserved a place of honor in my
collection! Well, no, I shall not give thee up! I shall follow thee till I reach thee!"

He forgot, this discomfited cousin, that his nearsighted eyes would not
enable him to perceive the manticore among the foliage. But he was no longer
master of himself. Vexation, anger, made him a fool. It was himself, and only
himself, that he must blame for his loss. If he had taken possession of the insect
at first, instead of following it "in its independent ways," nothing of all that
would have happened, and he would possess that admirable specimen of African
manticores, the name of which is that of a fabulous animal, having a man's head
and a lion's body.

Cousin Benedict had lost his head. He little thought that the most unforeseen
of circumstances had just restored him to liberty. He did not dream that the ant-
hill, into which he had just entered, had opened to him an escape, and that he had
just left Alvez's establishment. The forest was there, and under the trees was his
manticore, flying away! At any price, he wanted to see it again.

See him, then, running across the thick forest, no longer conscious even of
what he was doing, always imagining he saw the precious insect, beating the air
with his long arms like a gigantic field-spider. Where he was going, how he
would return, and if he should return, he did not even ask himself, and for a good
mile he made his way thus, at the risk of being met by some native, or attacked
by some beast.

Suddenly, as he passed near a thicket, a gigantic being sprang out and threw
himself on him. Then, as Cousin Benedict would have done with the manticore,


that being seized him with one hand by the nape of the neck, with the other by
the lower part of the back, and before he had time to know what was happening,
he was carried across the forest.

Truly, Cousin Benedict had that day lost a fine occasion of being able to


proclaim himself the happiest entomologist of the five parts of the world.
ok


CHAPTER XVI.

A MAGICIAN.

When Mrs. Weldon, on the 17th of the month, did not see Cousin Benedict
reappear at the accustomed hour, she was seized with the greatest uneasiness.
She could not imagine what had become of her big baby. That he had succeeded
in escaping from the factory, the enclosure of which was absolutely impassable,
was not admissible. Besides, Mrs. Weldon knew her cousin. Had one proposed
to this original to flee, abandoning his tin box and his collection of African
insects, he would have refused without the shadow of hesitation. Now, the box
was there in the hut, intact, containing all that the savant had been able to collect
since his arrival on the continent. To suppose that he was voluntarily separated
from his entomological treasures, was inadmissible.

Nevertheless, Cousin Benedict was no longer in Jose-Antonio Alvez's
establishment.

During all that day Mrs. Weldon looked for him persistently. Little Jack and
the slave Halima joined her. It was useless.

Mrs. Weldon was then forced to adopt this sad hypothesis: the prisoner had
been carried away by the trader's orders, for motives that she could not fathom.
But then, what had Alvez done with him? Had he incarcerated him in one of the
barracks of the large square? Why this carrying away, coming after the
agreement made between Mrs. Weldon and Negoro, an agreement which
included Cousin Benedict in the number of the prisoners whom the trader would
conduct to Mossamedes, to be placed in James W. Weldon's hands for a ransom?

If Mrs. Weldon had been a witness of Alvez's anger, when the latter learned
of the prisoner's disappearance, she would have understood that this
disappearance was indeed made against his will. But then, if Cousin Benedict
had escaped voluntarily, why had he not let her into the secret of his escape?

However, the search of Alvez and his servants, which was made with the
greatest care, led to the discovery of that mole-hill, which put the factory in
direct communication with the neighboring forest. The trader no longer doubted
that the "fly-hunter" had fled by that narrow opening. One may then judge of his


fury, when he said to himself that this flight would doubtless be put to account,
and would diminish the prize that the affair would bring him.

"That imbecile is not worth much," thought he, "nevertheless, I shall be
compelled to pay dear for him. Ah! if I take him again!"

But notwithstanding the searchings that were made inside, and though the
woods were beaten over a large radius, it was impossible to find any trace of the
fugitive.

Mrs. Weldon must resign herself to the loss of her cousin, and Alvez mourn
over his prisoner. As it could not be admitted that the latter had established
communications with the outside, it appeared evident that chance alone had
made him discover the existence of the mole-hill, and that he had taken flight
without thinking any more of those he left behind than if they had never existed.

Mrs. Weldon was forced to allow that it must be so, but she did not dream of
blaming the poor man, so perfectly unconscious of his actions.

"The unfortunate! what will become of him?" she asked herself.

It is needless to say that the mole-hill had been closed up the same day, and
with the greatest care, and that the watch was doubled inside as well as outside
the factory.

The monotonous life of the prisoners then continued for Mrs. Weldon and
her child.

Meanwhile, a climatic fact, very rare at that period of the year, was produced
in the province. Persistent rains began about the 19th of June, though the masika
period, that finishes in April, was passed. In fact, the sky was covered, and
continual showers inundated the territory of Kazounde.

What was only a vexation for Mrs. Weldon, because she must renounce her
walks inside the factory, became a public misfortune for the natives. The low
lands, covered with harvests already ripe, were entirely submerged. The
inhabitants of the province, to whom the crop suddenly failed, soon found
themselves in distress. All the labors of the season were compromised, and
Queen Moini, any more than her ministers, did not know how to face the
catastrophe.

They then had recourse to the magicians, but not to those whose profession is
to heal the sick by their incantations and sorceries, or who predict success to the
natives. There was a public misfortune on hand, and the best "mganngas," who
have the privilege of provoking or stopping the rains, were prayed to, to conjure
away the peril.

Their labor was in vain. It was in vain that they intoned their monotonous
chant, rang their little bells and hand-bells, employed their most precious
amulets, and more particularly, a horn full of mud and bark, the point of which


was terminated by three little horns. The spirits were exorcised by throwing little
balls of dung, or in spitting in the faces of the most august personages of the
court; but they did not succeed in chasing away the bad spirits that presided over
the formation of the clouds.

Now, things were going from bad to worse, when Queen Moini thought of
inviting a celebrated magician, then in the north of Angola. He was a magician
of the first order, whose power was the more marvelous because they had never
tested it in this country where he had never come. But there was no question of
its success among the Masikas.

It was on the 25th of June, in the morning, that the new magician suddenly
announced his arrival at Kazounde with great ringing of bells.

This sorcerer came straight to the "tchitoka," and immediately the crowd of
natives rushed toward him. The sky was a little less rainy, the wind indicated a
tendency to change, and those signs of calm, coinciding with the arrival of the
magician, predisposed the minds of the natives in his favor.

Besides, he was a superb man--a black of the finest water. He was at least six
feet high, and must be extraordinarily strong. This prestige already influenced
the crowd.

Generally, the sorcerers were in bands of three, four, or five when they went
through the villages, and a certain number of acolytes, or companions, made
their cortege. This magician was alone. His whole breast was zebraed with white
marks, done with pipe clay. The lower part of his body disappeared under an
ample skirt of grass stuff, the "train" of which would not have disgraced a
modern elegant. A collar of birds' skulls was round his neck; on his head was a
sort of leathern helmet, with plumes ornamented with pearls; around his loins a
copper belt, to which hung several hundred bells, noisier than the sonorous
harness of a Spanish mule: thus this magnificent specimen of the corporation of
native wizards was dressed.

All the material of his art was comprised in a kind of basket, of which a
calebash formed the bottom, and which was filled with shells, amulets, little
wooden idols, and other fetiches, plus a notable quantity of dung balls, important
accessories to the incantations and divinatory practises of the center of Africa.

One peculiarity was soon discovered by the crowd. This magician was dumb.
But this infirmity could only increase the consideration with which they were
disposed to surround him. He only made a guttural sound, low and languid,
which had no signification. The more reason for being well skilled in the
mysteries of witchcraft.

The magician first made the tour of the great place, executing a kind of
dance which put in motion all his chime of bells. The crowd followed, imitating


his movements--it might be said, as a troop of monkeys following a gigantic,
four-handed animal. Then, suddenly, the sorcerer, treading the principal street of
Kazounde, went toward the royal residence.

As soon as Queen Moini had been informed of the arrival of the new wizard,
she appeared, followed by her courtiers.

The magician bowed to the ground, and lifted up his head again, showing his
superb height. His arms were then extended toward the sky, which was rapidly
furrowed by masses of clouds. The sorcerer pointed to those clouds with his
hand; he imitated their movements in an animated pantomime. He showed them
fleeing to the west, but returning to the east by a rotary movement that no power
could stop.

Then, suddenly, to the great surprise of the town and the court, this sorcerer
took the redoubtable sovereign of Kazounde by the hand. A few courtiers wished
to oppose this act, which was contrary to all etiquette; but the strong magician,
seizing the nearest by the nape of the neck, sent him staggering fifteen paces off.

The queen did not appear to disapprove of this proud manner of acting. A
sort of grimace, which ought to be a smile, was addressed to the wizard, who
drew the queen on with rapid steps, while the crowd rushed after him.

This time it was toward Alvez's establishment that the sorcerer directed his
steps. He soon reached the door, which was shut. A simple blow from his
shoulder threw it to the ground, and he led the conquered queen into the interior
of the factory.

The trader, his soldiers and his slaves, ran to punish the daring being who
took it upon himself to throw down doors without waiting for them to be opened
to him. Suddenly, seeing that their sovereign did not protest, they stood still, in a
respectful attitude.

No doubt Alvez was about to ask the queen why he was honored by her visit,
but the magician did not give him time. Making the crowd recede so as to leave
a large space free around him, he recommenced his pantomime with still greater
animation. He pointed to the clouds, he threatened them, he exorcised them; he
made a sign as if he could first stop them, and then scatter them. His enormous
cheeks were puffed out, and he blew on this mass of heavy vapors as if he had
the strength to disperse them. Then, standing upright, he seemed to intend
stopping them in their course, and one would have said that, owing to his
gigantic height, he could have seized them.

The superstitious Moini, "overcome" by the acting of this tall comedian,
could no longer control herself. Cries escaped her. She raved in her turn, and
instinctively repeated the magician's gestures. The courtiers and the crowd
followed her example, and the mute's guttural sounds were lost amid those


songs; cries, and yells which the native language furnishes with so much
prodigality.


Did the clouds cease to rise on the eastern horizon and veil the tropical sun?
Did they vanish before the exorcisms of this new wizard? No. And just at this
moment, when the queen and her people imagined that they had appeased the
evil spirits that had watered them with so many showers, the sky, somewhat clear
since daybreak, became darker than ever. Large drops of rain fell pattering on the
ground.

Then a sudden change took place in the crowd. They then saw that this
sorcerer was worth no more than the others. The queen's brows were frowning.
They understood that he at least was in danger of losing his ears. The natives had
contracted the circle around him; fists threatened him, and they were about to
punish him, when an unforeseen incident changed the object of their evil
intentions.

The magician, who overlooked the whole yelling crowd, stretched his arms
toward one spot in the enclosure. The gesture was so imperious that all turned to
look at it.

Mrs. Weldon and little Jack, attracted by the noise and the clamor, had just
left their hut. The magician, with an angry gesture, had pointed to them with his
left hand, while his right was raised toward the sky.

They! it was they'! It was this white woman--it was her child--they were
causing all this evil. They had brought these clouds from their rainy country, to
inundate the territories of Kazounde.

It was at once understood. Queen Moini, pointing to Mrs. Weldon, made a
threatening gesture. The natives, uttering still more terrible cries, rushed toward
her.

Mrs. Weldon thought herself lost, and clasping her son in her arms, she stood
motionless as a statue before this overexcited crowd.

The magician went toward her. The natives stood aside in the presence of
this wizard, who, with the cause of the evil, seemed to have found the remedy.

The trader, Alvez, knowing that the life of the prisoner was precious, now
approached, not being sure of what he ought to do.

The magician had seized little Jack, and snatching him from his mother's
arms, he held him toward the sky. It seemed as if he were about to dash the child
to the earth, so as to appease the gods.

With a terrible cry, Mrs. Weldon fell to the ground insensible.

But the magician, after having made a sign to the queen, which no doubt
reassured her as to his intentions, raised the unhappy mother, and while the
crowd, completely subdued, parted to give him space, he carried her away with
her child.

Alvez was furious, not expecting this result. After having lost one of the


three prisoners, to see the prize confided to his care thus escape, and, with the
prize, the large bribe promised him by Negoro! Never! not if the whole territory
of Kazounde were submerged by a new deluge! He tried to oppose this
abduction.

The natives now began to mutter against him. The queen had him seized by
her guards, and, knowing what it might cost him, the trader was forced to keep
quiet, while cursing the stupid credulity of Queen Moini's subjects.

The savages, in fact, expected to see the clouds disappear with those who
had brought them, and they did not doubt that the magician would destroy the
scourge, from which they suffered so much, in the blood of the strangers.

Meanwhile, the magician carried off his victims as a lion would a couple of
kids which did not satisfy his powerful appetite. Little Jack was terrified, his
mother was unconscious. The crowd, roused to the highest degree of fury,
escorted the magician with yells; but he left the enclosure, crossed Kazounde,
and reentered the forest, walking nearly three miles, without resting for a
moment. Finally he was alone, the natives having understood that he did not
wish to be followed. He arrived at the bank of a river, whose rapid current
flowed toward the north.

There, at the end of a large opening, behind the long, drooping branches of a
thicket which hid the steep bank, was moored a canoe, covered by a sort of
thatch.

The magician lowered his double burden into the boat, and following
himself, shoved out from the bank, and the current rapidly carried them down
the stream. The next minute he said, in a very distinct voice:

"Captain, here are Mrs. Weldon and little Jack; I present them to you.


Forward. And may all the clouds in heaven fall on those idiots of Kazounde!"
ok


CHAPTER XVII.

DRIFTING.

It was Hercules, not easily recognized in his magician's attire, who was
speaking thus, and it was Dick Sand whom he was addressing--Dick Sand, still
feeble enough, to lean on Cousin Benedict, near whom Dingo was lying.

Mrs. Weldon, who had regained consciousness, could only pronounce these
words:

"You! Dick! You!"

The young novice rose, but already Mrs. Weldon was pressing him in her
arms, and Jack was lavishing caresses on him.


"My friend Dick! my friend Dick!" repeated the little boy. Then, turning to
Hercules: "And I," he added, "I did not know you!"

"Hey! what a disguise!" replied Hercules, rubbing his breast to efface the
variety of colors that striped it.

"You were too ugly!" said little Jack.

"Bless me! I was the devil, and the devil is not handsome."

"Hercules!" said Mrs. Weldon, holding out her hand to the brave black.

"He has delivered you," added Dick Sand, "as he has saved me, though he
will not allow it."

"Saved! saved! We are not saved yet!" replied Hercules. "And besides,
without Mr. Benedict, who came to tell us where you were, Mrs. Weldon, we
could not have done anything."

In fact, it was Hercules who, five days before, had jumped upon the savant at
the moment when, having been led two miles from the factory, the latter was
running in pursuit of his precious manticore. Without this incident, neither Dick
Sand nor the black would have known Mrs. Weldon's retreat, and Hercules
would not have ventured to Kazounde in a magician's dress.

While the boat drifted with rapidity in this narrow part of the river, Hercules
related what had passed since his flight from the camp on the Coanza; how,
without being seen, he had followed the kitanda in which Mrs. Weldon and her
son were; how he had found Dingo wounded; how the two had arrived in the
neighborhood of Kazounde; how a note from Hercules, carried by the dog, told
Dick Sand what had become of Mrs. Weldon; how, after the unexpected arrival
of Cousin Benedict, he had vainly tried to make his way into the factory, more
carefully guarded than ever; how, at last, he had found this opportunity of
snatching the prisoner from that horrible Jose-Antonio Alvez. Now, this
opportunity had offered itself that same day. A mgannga, or magician, on his
witchcraft circuit, that celebrated magician so impatiently expected, was passing
through the forest in which Hercules roamed every night, watching, waiting,
ready for anything.

To spring upon the magician, despoil him of his baggage, and of his
magician's vestments, to fasten him to the foot of a tree with liane knots that the
Davenports themselves could not have untied, to paint his body, taking the
sorcerer's for a model, and to act out his character in charming and controlling
the rains, had been the work of several hours. Still, the incredible credulity of the
natives was necessary for his success.

During this recital, given rapidly by Hercules, nothing concerning Dick Sand
had been mentioned.

"And you, Dick!" asked Mrs. Weldon.


"I, Mrs. Weldon!" replied the young man. "I can tell you nothing. My last
thought was for you, for Jack! I tried in vain to break the cords that fastened me
to the stake. The water rose over my head. I lost consciousness. When I came to
myself, I was sheltered in a hole, concealed by the papyrus of this bank, and
Hercules was on his knees beside me, lavishing his care upon me."

"Well! that is because I am a physician," replied Hercules; "a diviner, a
sorcerer, a magician, a fortuneteller!"

"Hercules," said Mrs. Weldon, "tell me, how did you save Dick Sand?"

"Did I do it, Mrs. Weldon?" replied Hercules; "Might not the current have
broken the stake to which our captain was tied, and in the middle of the night,
carried him half-dead on this beam, to the place where I received him? Besides,
in the darkness, there was no difficulty in gliding among the victims that
carpeted the ditch, waiting for the bursting of the dam, diving under water, and,
with a little strength, pulling up our captain and the stake to which these
scoundrels had bound him! There was nothing very extraordinary in all that! The
first-comer could have done as much. Mr. Benedict himself, or even Dingo! In
fact, might it not have been Dingo?"

A yelping was heard; and Jack, taking hold of the dog's large head, gave him
several little friendly taps.

"Dingo," he asked, "did you save our friend Dick?"

At the same time he turned the dog's head from right to left.

"He says, no, Hercules!" said Jack. "You see that it was not he. Dingo, did
Hercules save our captain?"

The little boy forced Dingo's good head to move up and down, five or six
times.

"He says, yes, Hercules! he says, yes!" cried little Jack. "You see then that it
was you!"

"Friend Dingo," replied Hercules, caressing the dog, "that is wrong. You
promised me not to betray me."

Yes, it was indeed Hercules, who had risked his life to save Dick Sand. But
he had done it, and his modesty would not allow him to agree to the fact.
Besides, he thought it a very simple thing, and he repeated that any one of his
companions would have done the same under the circumstances.

This led Mrs. Weldon to speak of old Tom, of his son, of Acteon and Bat, his
unfortunate companions.

They had started for the lake region. Hercules had seen them pass with the
caravan of slaves. He had followed them, but no opportunity to communicate
with them had presented itself. They were gone! they were lost!

Hercules had been laughing heartily, but now he shed tears which he did not


try to restrain.

"Do not cry, my friend," Mrs. Weldon said to him. "God may be merciful,
and allow us to meet them again."

In a few words she informed Dick Sand of all that had happened during her
stay in Alvez's factory.

"Perhaps," she added, "it would have been better to have remained at
Kazounde."

"What a fool I was!" cried Hercules.

"No, Hercules, no!" said Dick Sand. "These wretches would have found
means to draw Mr. Weldon into some new trap. Let us flee together, and without
delay. We shall reach the coast before Negoro can return to Mossamedes. There,
the Portuguese authorities will give us aid and protection; and when Alvez
comes to take his one hundred thousand dollars--"

"A hundred thousand blows on the old scoundrel's skull!" cried Hercules;
"and I will undertake to keep the count."

However, here was a new complication, although it was very evident that
Mrs. Weldon would not dream of returning to Kazounde. The point now was to
anticipate Negoro. All Dick Sand's projects must tend toward that end.

Dick Sand was now putting in practise the plan which he had long
contemplated, of gaining the coast by utilizing the current of a river or a stream.
Now, the watercourse was there; its direction was northward, and it was possible
that it emptied into the Zaire. In that case, instead of reaching St. Paul de
Loanda, it would be at the mouth of the great river that Mrs. Weldon and her
companions would arrive. This was not important, because help would not fail
them in the colonies of Lower Guinea.

Having decided to descend the current of this river, Dick Sand's first idea
was to embark on one of the herbaceous rafts, a kind of floating isle (of which
Cameron has often spoken), which drifts in large numbers on the surface of
African rivers.

But Hercules, while roaming at night on the bank, had been fortunate enough
to find a drifting boat. Dick Sand could not hope for anything better, and chance
had served him kindly. In fact, it was not one of those narrow boats which the
natives generally use.

The perogue found by Hercules was one of those whose length exceeds thirty
feet, and the width four--and they are carried rapidly on the waters of the great
lakes by the aid of numerous paddles. Mrs. Weldon and her companions could
install themselves comfortably in it, and it was sufficient to keep it in the stream
by means of an oar to descend the current of the river.

At first, Dick Sand, wishing to pass unseen, had formed a project to travel


only at night. But to drift twelve hours out of the twenty-four, was to double the
length of a journey which might be quite long. Happily, Dick Sand had taken a
fancy to cover the perogue with a roof of long grasses, sustained on a rod, which
projected fore and aft. This, when on the water, concealed even the long oar. One
would have said that it was a pile of herbs which drifted down stream, in the
midst of floating islets. Such was the ingenious arrangement of the thatch, that
the birds were deceived, and, seeing there some grains to pilfer, red-beaked
gulls, "arrhinisgas" of black plumage, and gray and white halcyons frequently
came to rest upon it.

Besides, this green roof formed a shelter from the heat of the sun. A voyage
made under these conditions might then be accomplished almost without fatigue,
but not without danger.

In fact, the journey would be a long one, and it would be necessary to
procure food each day. Hence the risk of hunting on the banks if fishing would
not suffice, and Dick Sand had no firearms but the gun carried off by Hercules
after the attack on the ant-hill; but he counted on every shot. Perhaps even by
passing his gun through the thatch of the boat he might fire with surety, like a
butter through the holes in his hut.

Meanwhile, the perogue drifted with the force of the current a distance not
less than two miles an hour, as near as Dick Sand could estimate it.

He hoped to make, thus, fifty miles a day. But, on account of this very
rapidity of the current, continual care was necessary to avoid obstacles--rocks,
trunks of trees, and the high bottoms of the river. Besides, it was to be feared that
this current would change to rapids, or to cataracts, a frequent occurrence on the
rivers of Africa.

The joy of seeing Mrs. Weldon and her child had restored all Dick Sand's
strength, and he had posted himself in the fore-part of the boat. Across the long
grasses, his glance observed the downward course, and, either by voice or
gesture, he indicated to Hercules, whose vigorous hands held the oar, what was
necessary so as to keep in the right direction.

Mrs. Weldon reclined on a bed of dry leaves in the center of the boat, and
grew absorbed in her own thoughts. Cousin Benedict was taciturn, frowning at
the sight of Hercules, whom he had not forgiven for his intervention in the affair
of the manticore. He dreamed of his lost collection, of his entomological notes,
the value of which would not be appreciated by the natives of Kazounde. So he
sat, his limbs stretched out, and his arms crossed on his breast, and at times he
instinctively made a gesture of raising to his forehead the glasses which his nose
did not support. As for little Jack, he understood that he must not make a noise;
but, as motion was not forbidden, he imitated his friend Dingo, and ran on his


hands and feet from one end of the boat to the other.

During the first two days Mrs. Weldon and her companions used the food
that Hercules had been able to obtain before they started. Dick Sand only
stopped for a few hours in the night, so as to gain rest. But he did not leave the
boat, not wishing to do it except when obliged by the necessity of renewing their
provisions.

No incident marked the beginning of the voyage on this unknown river,
which measured, at least, more than a hundred and fifty feet in width. Several
islets drifted on the surface, and moved with the same rapidity as the boat. So
there was no danger of running upon them, unless some obstacle stopped them.

The banks, besides, seemed to be deserted. Evidently these portions of the
territory of Kazounde were little frequented by the natives.

Numerous wild plants covered the banks, and relieved them with a profusion
of the most brilliant colors. Swallow-wort, iris, lilies, clematis, balsams,
umbrella-shaped flowers, aloes, tree-ferns, and spicy shrubs formed a border of
incomparable brilliancy. Several forests came to bathe their borders in these
rapid waters. Copal-trees, acacias, "bauhinias" of ironwood, the trunks covered
with a dross of lichens on the side exposed to the coldest winds, fig-trees which
rose above roots arranged in rows like mangroves, and other trees of magnificent
growth, overhung the river. Their high tops, joining a hundred feet above,
formed a bower which the solar rays could not penetrate. Often, also, a bridge of
lianes was thrown from one bank to the other, and during the 27th little Jack, to
his intense admiration, saw a band of monkeys cross one of these vegetable
passes, holding each other's tail, lest the bridge should break under their weight.

These monkeys are a kind of small chimpanzee, which in Central Africa has
received the name of "sokos." They have low foreheads, clear yellow faces, and
high-set ears, and are very ugly examples of the simiesque race. They live in
bands of a dozen, bark like dogs, and are feared by the natives, whose children
they often carry off to scratch or bite.

In passing the liane bridge they never suspected that, beneath that mass of
herbs which the current bore onward, there was a little boy who would have
exactly served to amuse them. The preparations, designed by Dick Sand, were
very well conceived, because these clear-sighted beasts were deceived by them.

Twenty miles farther on, that same day, the boat was suddenly stopped in its
progress.

"What is the matter?" asked Hercules, always posted at his oar.

"A barrier," replied Dick Sand; "but a natural barrier."

"Tt must be broken, Mr. Dick."

"Yes, Hercules, and with a hatchet. Several islets have drifted upon it, and it


is quite strong."

"To work, captain! to work!" replied Hercules, who came and stood in the
fore-part of the perogue.

This barricade was formed by the interlacing of a sticky plant with glossy
leaves, which twists as it is pressed together, and becomes very resisting. They
call it "tikatika," and it will allow people to cross watercourses dry-shod, if they
are not afraid to plunge twelve inches into its green apron. Magnificent
ramifications of the lotus covered the surface of this barrier.

It was already dark. Hercules could, without imprudence, quit the boat, and
he managed his hatchet so skilfully that two hours afterward the barrier had
given way, the current turned up the broken pieces on the banks, and the boat
again took the channel.

Must it be confessed! That great child of a Cousin Benedict had hoped for a
moment that they would not be able to pass. Such a voyage seemed to him
unnecessary. He regretted Alvez's factory and the hut that contained his precious
entomologist's box. His chagrin was real, and indeed it was pitiful to see the poor
man. Not an insect; no, not one to preserve!

What, then, was his joy when Hercules, "his pupil" after all, brought him a
horrible little beast which he had found on a sprig of the tikatika. Singularly
enough the brave black seemed a little confused in presenting it to him.

But what exclamations Cousin Benedict uttered when he had brought this
insect, which he held between his index finger and his thumb, as near as possible
to his short-sighted eyes, which neither glasses nor microscope could now assist.

"Hercules!" he cried, "Hercules! Ah! see what will gain your pardon! Cousin
Weldon! Dick! a hexapode, unique in its species, and of African origin! This, at
least, they will not dispute with me, and it shall quit me only with my life!"

"It is, then, very precious?" asked Mrs. Weldon.

"Precious!" cried Cousin Benedict. "An insect which is neither a coleopter,
nor a neuropteran, nor a hymenopter; which does not belong to any of the ten
orders recognized by savants, and which they will be rather tempted to rank in
the second section of the arachnides. A sort of spider, which would be a spider if
it had eight legs, and is, however, a hexapode, because it has but six. Ah! my
friends, Heaven owed me this joy; and at length I shall give my name to a
scientific discovery! That insect shall be the 'Hexapodes Benedictus.""

The enthusiastic savant was so happy--he forgot so many miseries past and
to come in riding his favorite hobby--that neither Mrs. Weldon nor Dick Sand
grudged him his felicitations.

All this time the perogue moved on the dark waters of the river. The silence
of night was only disturbed by the clattering scales of the crocodiles, or the


snorting of the hippopotami that sported on the banks.

Then, through the sprigs of the thatch, the moon appeared behind the tops of
the trees, throwing its soft light to the interior of the boat.

Suddenly, on the right bank, was heard a distant hubbub, then a dull noise as
if giant pumps were working in the dark.

It was several hundred elephants, that, satiated by the woody roots which
they had devoured during the day, came to quench their thirst before the hour of
repose. One would really have supposed that all these trunks, lowered and raised
by the same automatic movement, would have drained the river dry.


CHAPTER XVIII.

VARIOUS INCIDENTS.

For eight days the boat drifted, carried by the current under the conditions
already described. No incident of any importance occurred. For a space of many
miles the river bathed the borders of superb forests; then the country, shorn of
these fine trees, spread in jungles to the limits of the horizon.

If there were no natives in this country--a fact which Dick Sand did not
dream of regretting--the animals at least abounded there. Zebras sported on the
banks, elks, and "caamas," a species of antelope which were extremely graceful,
and they disappeared at night to give place to the leopards, whose growls could
be heard, and even to the lions which bounded in the tall grasses. Thus far the
fugitives had not suffered from these ferocious creatures, whether in the forests
or in the river.

Meanwhile, each day, generally in the afternoon, Dick Sand neared one bank
or the other, moored the boat, disembarked, and explored the shore for a short
distance.

In fact, it was necessary to renew their daily food. Now, in this country,
barren of all cultivation, they could not depend upon the tapioca, the sorgho, the
maize, and the fruits, which formed the vegetable food of the native tribes. These
plants only grew in a wild state, and were not eatable. Dick Sand was thus forced
to hunt, although the firing of his gun might bring about an unpleasant meeting.

They made a fire by rubbing a little stick against a piece of the wild fig-tree,
native fashion, or even simiesque style, for it is affirmed that certain of the
gorillas procure a fire by this means. Then, for several days, they cooked a little
elk or antelope flesh. During the 4th of July Dick Sand succeeded in killing, with
a single ball, a "pokou," which gave them a good supply of venison. This animal,
was five feet long; it had long horns provided with rings, a yellowish red skin,
dotted with brilliant spots, and white on the stomach; and the flesh was found to


be excellent.

It followed then, taking into account these almost daily landings and the
hours of repose that were necessary at night, that the distance on the 8th of July
could hot be estimated as more than one hundred miles. This was considerable,
however, and already Dick Sand asked himself where this interminable river
ended. Its course absorbed some small tributaries and did not sensibly enlarge.
As for the general direction, after having been north for a long time, it took a
bend toward the northwest.

However, this river furnished its share of food. Long lianes, armed with
thorns, which served as fishhooks, caught several of those delicately-flavored
"sandjikas", which, once smoked, are easily carried in this region; black
"usakas" were also caught, and some "mormdes," with large heads, the genciva
of which have teeth like the hairs of a brush, and some little "dagalas," the
friends of running waters, belonging to the clupe species, and resembling the
whitebait of the Thames.

During the 9th of July, Dick Sand had to give proof of extreme coolness. He
was alone on the shore, carrying off a "caama," the horns of which showed
above the thicket. He had just shot it, and now there bounded, thirty feet off, a
formidable hunter, that no doubt came to claim its prey, and was not in a humor
to give it up. It was a lion of great height, one of those which the natives call
"karamos," and not one of the kind without a mane, named "lion of the Nyassi."
This one measured five feet in height--a formidable beast. With one bound the
lion had fallen on the "caama," which Dick Sand's ball had just thrown to the
ground, and, still full of life, it shook and cried under the paw of the powerful
animal.

Dick Sand was disarmed, not having had time to slide a second cartridge into
his gun.

Dick Sand, in front, lowering his voice, gave directions to avoid striking
against these rotten constructions. The night was clear. They saw well to direct
the boat, but they could also be seen.

Then came a terrible moment. Two natives, who talked in loud tones, were
squatting close to the water on the piles, between which the current carried the
boat, and the direction could not be changed for a narrower pass. Now, would
they not see it, and at their cries might not the whole village be alarmed?

A space of a hundred feet at most remained to be passed, when Dick Sand
heard the two natives call more quickly to each other. One showed the other the
mass of drifting herbs, which threatened to break the long liane ropes which they
were occupied in stretching at that moment.

Rising hastily, they called out for help. Five or six other blacks ran at once


along the piles and posted themselves on the cross-beams which supported them,
uttering loud exclamations which the listeners could not understand.

In the boat, on the contrary, was absolute silence, except for the few orders
given by Dick Sand in a low voice, and complete repose, except the movement
of Hercules's right arm moving the oar; at times a low growl from Dingo, whose
jaws Jack held together with his little hands; outside, the murmur of the water
which broke against the piles, then above, the cries of the ferocious cannibals.

The natives, meanwhile, rapidly drew up their ropes. If they were raised in
time the boat would pass, otherwise it would be caught, and all would be over
with those who drifted in it! As for slackening or stopping its progress, Dick
Sand could do neither, for the current, stronger under this narrow construction,
carried it forward more rapidly.

In half a minute the boat was caught between the piles. By an unheard-of
piece of fortune, the last effort made by the natives had raised the ropes.

But in passing, as Dick Sand had feared, the boat was deprived of a part of
the grasses which now floated at its right.

One of the natives uttered a cry. Had he had time to recognize what the roof
covered, and was he going to alarm his comrades? It was more than probable.

Dick Sand and his friends were already out of reach, and in a few moments,
under the impetus of this current, now changed into a kind of rapid, they had lost
sight of the lacustrine village.

"To the left bank!" Dick Sand ordered, as being more prudent. "The stream is
again navigable."

"To the left bank!" replied Hercules, giving the oar a vigorous stroke.

Dick Sand stood beside him and looked at the surface of the water, which the
moon lit up. He saw nothing suspicious. Not a boat had started in pursuit.
Perhaps these savages had none; and at daybreak not a native appeared, either on
the bank or on the water. After that, increasing their precautions, the boat kept
close to the left bank.

During the four following days, from the 11th to the 14th of July, Mrs.
Weldon and her companions remarked that this portion of the territory had
decidedly changed. It was no longer a deserted country; it was also a desert, and
they might have compared it to that Kalahari explored by Livingstone on his first
voyage.

The arid soil recalled nothing of the fertile fields of the upper country.

And always this interminable stream, to which might be given the name of
river, as it seemed that it could only end at the Atlantic Ocean.

The question of food, in this desert country, became a problem. Nothing
remained of their former stock. Fishing gave little; hunting was no longer of any


use. Elks, antelopes, pokous, and other animals, could find nothing to live on in
this desert, and with them had also disappeared the carnivorous animals.

The nights no longer echoed the accustomed roarings. Nothing broke the
silence but the concert of frogs, which Cameron compares with the noise of
calkers calking a ship; with riveters who rivet, and the drillers who drill, in a
shipbuilder's yard.

The country on the two banks was flat and destitute of trees as far as the
most distant hills that bounded it on the east and west. The spurges grew alone
and in profusion--not the euphosbium which produces cassava or tapioca flour,
but those from which they draw an oil which does not serve as food.

Meantime it is necessary to provide some nourishment.

Dick Sand knew not what to do, and Hercules reminded him that the natives
often eat the young shoots of the ferns and the pith which the papyrus leaf
contains. He himself, while following the caravan of Ibn Ilamis across the desert,
had been more than once reduced to this expedient to satisfy his hunger. Happily,
the ferns and the papyrus grew in profusion along the banks, and the marrow or
pith, which has a sweet flavor, was appreciated by all, particularly by little Jack.

This was not a very cheering prospect; the food was not strengthening, but
the next day, thanks to Cousin Benedict, they were better served. Since the
discovery of the "Hexapodus Benedictus," which was to immortalize his name,
Cousin Benedict had recovered his usual manners. The insect was put in a safe
place, that is to say, stuck in the crown of his hat, and the savant had
recommenced his search whenever they were on shore. During that day, while
hunting in the high grass, he started a bird whose warbling attracted him.

Dick Sand was going to shoot it, when Cousin Benedict cried out:

"Don't fire, Dick! Don't fire! A bird among five persons would not be
enough."

"It will be enough for Jack," replied Dick Sand, taking aim at the bird, which
was in no hurry to fly away.

"No, no!" said Cousin Benedict, "do not fire! It is an indicator, and it will
bring us honey in abundance."

Dick Sand lowered his gun, realizing that a few pounds of honey were worth
more than one bird; and Cousin Benedict and he followed the bird, which rose
and flew away, inviting them to go with it.

They had not far to go, and a few minutes after, some old trunks, hidden in
between the spurges, appeared in the midst of an intense buzzing of bees.

Cousin Benedict would have preferred not to have robbed these industrious
hymenopters of the "fruit of their labors," as he expressed it. But Dick Sand did
not understand it in that way. He smoked out the bees with some dry herbs and


obtained a considerable quantity of honey. Then leaving to the indicator the
cakes of wax, which made its share of the profit, Cousin Benedict and he
returned to the boat.

The honey was well received, but it was but little, and, in fact, all would
have suffered cruelly from hunger, if, during the day of the 12th, the boat had not
stopped near a creek where some locusts swarmed. They covered the ground and
the shrubs in myriads, two or three deep. Now, Cousin Benedict not failing to
say that the natives frequently eat these orthopters--which was perfectly true--
they took possession of this manna. There was enough to fill the boat ten times,
and broiled over a mild fire, these edible locusts would have seemed excellent
even to less famished people. Cousin Benedict, for his part, eat a notable
quantity of them, sighing, it is true--still, he eat them.

Nevertheless, it was time for this long series of moral and physical trials to
come to an end. Although drifting on this rapid river was not so fatiguing as had
been the walking through the first forests near the coast, still, the excessive heat
of the day, the damp mists at night, and the incessant attacks of the mosquitoes,
made this descent of the watercourse very painful. It was time to arrive
somewhere, and yet Dick Sand could see no limit to the journey. Would it last
eight days or a month? Nothing indicated an answer. Had the river flowed
directly to the west, they would have already reached the northern coast of
Angola; but the general direction had been rather to the north, and they could
travel thus a long time before reaching the coast.

Dick Sand was, therefore, extremely anxious, when a sudden change of
direction took place on the morning of the 14th of July.

Little Jack was in the front of the boat, and he was gazing through the thatch,
when a large expanse of water appeared on the horizon.

"The sea!" he shouted.

At this word Dick Sand trembled, and came close to little Jack.

"The sea?" he replied. "No, not yet; but at least a river which flows toward
the west, and of which this stream is only a tributary. Perhaps it is the Zaire
itself."

"May God grant that is!" replied Mrs. Weldon.

Yes; for if this were the Zaire or Congo, which Stanley was to discover a few
years later, they had only to descend its course so as to reach the Portuguese
settlements at its mouth. Dick Sand hoped that it might be so, and he was
inclined to believe it.

During the 15th, 16th, 17th and 18th of July, in the midst of a more fertile
country, the boat drifted on the silvery waters of the river. They still took the
same precautions, and it was always a mass of herbs that the current seemed to


carry on its surface.

A few days more, and no doubt the survivors of the "Pilgrim" would see the
termination of their miseries. Self-sacrifice had been shared in by all, and if the
young novice would not claim the greater part of it, Mrs. Weldon would demand
its recognition for him.

But on the 18th of July, during the night, an incident took place which
compromised the safety of the party. Toward three o'clock in the morning a
distant noise, still very low, was heard in the west. Dick Sand, very anxious,
wished to know what caused it. While Mrs. Weldon, Jack, and Cousin Benedict
slept in the bottom of the boat, he called Hercules to the front, and told him to
listen with the greatest attention. The night was calm. Not a breeze stirred the
atmosphere.

"Tt is the noise of the sea," said Hercules, whose eyes shone with joy.

"No," replied Dick Sand, holding down his head.

"What is it then?" asked Hercules.

"Wait until day; but we must watch with the greatest care."

At this answer, Hercules returned to his post.

Dick Sand stood in front, listening all the time. The noise increased. It was
soon like distant roaring.

Day broke almost without dawn. About half a mile down the river, just above
the water, a sort of cloud floated in the atmosphere. But it was not a mass of
vapor, and this became only too evident, when, under the first solar rays, which
broke in piercing it, a beautiful rainbow spread from one bank to the other.

"To the shore!" cried Dick Sand, whose voice awoke Mrs. Weldon. "It is a
cataract! Those clouds are spray! To the shore, Hercules!"

Dick Sand was not mistaken. Before them, the bed of the river broke in a
descent of more than a hundred feet, and the waters rushed down with superb but
irresistible impetuosity. Another half mile, and the boat would have been
engulfed in the abyss.


CHAPTER XIX.

S. V.

With a vigorous plow of the oar, Hercules had pushed toward the left bank.
Besides, the current was not more rapid in that place, and the bed of the river
kept its normal declivity to the falls. As has been said, it was the sudden sinking
of the ground, and the attraction was only felt three or four hundred feet above
the cataract.

On the left bank were large and very thick trees. No light penetrated their


impenetrable curtain. It was not without terror that Dick Sand looked at this
territory, inhabited by the cannibals of the Lower Congo, which he must now
cross, because the boat could no longer follow the stream. He could not dream of
carrying it below the falls. It was a terrible blow for these poor people, on the
eve perhaps of reaching the Portuguese villages at its mouth. They were well
aided, however. Would not Heaven come to their assistance?

The boat soon reached the left bank of the river. As it drew near, Dingo gave
strange marks of impatience and grief at the same time.

Dick Sand, who was watching the animal--for all was danger--asked himself
if some beast or some native was not concealed in the high papyrus of the bank.
But he soon saw that the animal was not agitated by a sentiment of anger.

"One would say that Dingo was crying!" exclaimed little Jack, clasping
Dingo in his two arms.

Dingo escaped from him, and, springing into the water, when the boat was
only twenty feet from the bank, reached the shore and disappeared among the
bushes.

Neither Mrs. Weldon, nor Dick Sand, nor Hercules, knew what to think.

They landed a few moments after in the middle of a foam green with
hairweed and other aquatic plants. Some kingfishers, giving a sharp whistle, and
some little herons, white as snow, immediately flew away. Hercules fastened the
boat firmly to a mangrove stump, and all climbed up the steep bank overhung by
large trees.

There was no path in this forest. However, faint traces on the ground
indicated that this place had been recently visited by natives or animals.

Dick Sand, with loaded gun, and Hercules, with his hatchet in his hand, had
not gone ten steps before they found Dingo again. The dog, nose to the ground,
was following a scent, barking all the time. A first inexplicable presentiment had
drawn the animal to this part of the shore, a second led it into the depths of the
wood. That was clearly visible to all.

"Attention!" said Dick Sand. "Mrs. Weldon, Mr. Benedict, Jack, do not leave
us! Attention, Hercules!"

At this moment Dingo raised its head, and, by little bounds, invited them to
follow.

A moment after Mrs. Weldon and her companions rejoined it at the foot of an
old sycamore, lost in the thickest part of the wood.

There was a dilapidated hut, with disjoined boards, before which Dingo was
barking lamentably.

"Who can be there?" exclaimed Dick Sand.

He entered the hut.


Mrs. Weldon and the others followed him.

The ground was scattered with bones, already bleached under the discoloring
action of the atmosphere.

"A man died in that hut!" said Mrs. Weldon.

"And Dingo knew that man!" replied Dick Sand. "It was, it must have been,
his master! Ah, see!"

Dick Sand pointed to the naked trunk of the sycamore at the end of the hut.

There appeared two large red letters, already almost effaced, but which could
be still distinguished.

Dingo had rested its right paw on the tree, and it seemed to indicate them.

"S. V.!" exclaimed Dick Sand. "Those letters which Dingo knew among all
others! Those initials that it carries on its collar!"

He did not finish, and stooping, he picked up a little copper box, all
oxydized, which lay in a corner of the hut.

That box was opened, and a morsel of paper fell from it, on which Dick Sand
read these few words:

"Assassinated--robbed by my guide, Negoro--3d December, 1871--here--120
miles from the coast--Dingo!--with me!

"S. VERNON."

The note told everything. Samuel Vernon set out with his dog, Dingo, to
explore the center of Africa, guided by Negoro. The money which he carried had
excited the wretch's cupidity, and he resolved to take possession of it. The
French traveler, arrived at this point of the Congo's banks, had established his
camp in this hut. There he was mortally wounded, robbed, abandoned. The
murder accomplished, no doubt Negoro took to flight, and it was then that he fell
into the hands of the Portuguese. Recognized as one of the trader Alvez's agents,
conducted to Saint Paul de Loanda, he was condemned to finish his days in one
of the penitentiaries of the colony. We know that he succeeded in escaping, in
reaching New Zealand, and how he embarked on the "Pilgrim" to the misfortune
of those who had taken passage on it. But what happened after the crime?
Nothing but what was easy to understand! The unfortunate Vernon, before dying,
had evidently had time to write the note which, with the date and the motive of
the assassination, gave the name of the assassin. This note he had shut up in that
box where, doubtless, the stolen money was, and, in a last effort, his bloody
finger had traced like an epitaph the initials of his name. Before those two red
letters, Dingo must have remained for many days! He had learned to know them!
He could no longer forget them! Then, returned to the coast, the dog had been
picked up by the captain of the "Waldeck," and finally, on board the "Pilgrim,"
found itself again with Negoro. During this time, the bones of the traveler were


whitening in the depths of this lost forest of Central Africa, and he no longer
lived except in the remembrance of his dog.

Yes, such must have been the way the events had happened. As Dick Sand
and Hercules prepared to give a Christian burial to the remains of Samuel
Yernon, Dingo, this time giving a howl of rage, dashed out of the hut.

Almost at once horrible cries were heard at a short distance. Evidently a man
was struggling with the powerful animal.

Hercules did what Dingo had done. In his turn he sprang out of the hut, and
Dick Sand, Mrs. Weldon, Jack, Benedict, following his steps, saw him throw
himself on a man, who fell to the ground, held at the neck by the dog's
formidable teeth.

It was Negoro.

In going to the mouth of the Zaire, so as to embark for America, this rascal,
leaving his escort behind, had come to the very place where he had assassinated
the traveler who had trusted himself to him.

But there was a reason for it, and all understood it when they perceived some
handfuls of French gold which glittered in a recently-dug hole at the foot of a
tree. So it was evident that after the murder, and before falling into the hands of
the Portuguese, Negoro had hidden the product of his crime, with the intention
of returning some day to get it. He was going to take possession of this gold
when Dingo scented him and sprang at his throat. The wretch, surprised, had
drawn his cutlass and struck the dog at the moment when Hercules threw himself
on him, crying:

"Ah, villain! Iam going to strangle you at last!"

There was nothing more to do. The Portuguese gave no sign of life, struck, it
maybe said, by divine justice, and on the very spot where the crime had been
committed. But the faithful dog had received a mortal blow, and dragging itself
to the hut, it came to die there--where Samuel Vernon had died.

Hercules buried deep the traveler's remains, and Dingo, lamented by all, was
put in the same grave as its master.

Negoro was no more, but the natives who accompanied him from Kazounde
could not be far away. On not seeing him return, they would certainly seek him
along the river. This was a very serious danger.

Dick Sand and Mrs. Weldon took counsel as to what they should do, and do
without losing an instant.

One fact acquired was that this stream was the Congo, which the natives call
Kwango, or Ikoutouya Kongo, and which is the Zaire under one longitude, the
Loualaba under another. It was indeed that great artery of Central Africa, to
which the heroic Stanley has given the glorious name of "Livingstone," but


which the geographers should perhaps replace by his own.

But, if there was no longer any doubt that this was the Congo, the French
traveler's note indicated that its mouth was still one hundred and twenty miles
from this point, and, unfortunately, at this place it was no longer navigable. High
falls--very likely the falls of Ntamo--forbid the descent of any boat. Thus it was
necessary to follow one or the other bank, at least to a point below the cataracts,
either one or two miles, when they could make a raft, and trust themselves again
to the current.

"It remains, then," said Dick Sand, in conclusion, "to decide if we shall
descend the left bank, where we are, or the right bank of the river. Both, Mrs.
Weldon, appear dangerous to me, and the natives are formidable. However, it
seems as if we risk more on this bank, because we have the fear of meeting
Negoro's escort."

"Let us pass over to the other bank," replied Mrs. Weldon.

"Is it practicable?" observed Dick Sand. "The road to the Congo's mouths is
rather on the left bank, as Negoro was following it. Never mind. We must not
hesitate. But before crossing the river with you, Mrs. Weldon, I must know if we
can descend it below the falls."

That was prudent, and Dick Sand wished to put his project into execution on
the instant.

The river at this place was not more than three or four hundred feet wide, and
to cross it was easy for the young novice, accustomed to handling the oar. Mrs.
Weldon, Jack, and Cousin Benedict would remain under Hercules's care till his
return.

These arrangements made, Dick Sand was going to set out, when Mrs.
Weldon said to him:

"You do not fear being carried away by the falls, Dick?"

"No, Mrs. Weldon. I shall cross four hundred feet above."

"But on the other bank--"

"T shall not land if I see the least danger."

"Take your gun."

"Yes, but do not be uneasy about me."

"Perhaps it would be better for us not to separate, Dick," added Mrs. Weldon,
as if urged by some presentiment.

"No--let me go alone," replied Dick Sand. "I must act for the security of all.
Before one hour I shall be back. Watch well, Hercules."

On this reply the boat, unfastened, carried Dick Sand to the other side of the
Zaire.

Mrs. Weldon and Hercules, lying in the papyrus thickets, followed him with


their eyes.

Dick Sand soon reached the middle of the stream. The current, without being
very strong, was a little accentuated there by the attraction of the falls. Four
hundred feet below, the imposing roaring of the waters filled the space, and some
spray, carried by the western wind, reached the young novice. He shuddered at
the thought that the boat, if it had been less carefully watched during the last
night, would have been lost over those cataracts, that would only have restored
dead bodies. But that was no longer to be feared, and, at that moment, the oar
skilfully handled sufficed to maintain it in a direction a little oblique to the
current.

A quarter of an hour after, Dick Sand had reached the opposite shore, and
was preparing to spring on the bank.

At that moment cries were heard, and ten natives rushed on the mass of
plants that still hid the boat.

They were the cannibals from the lake village. For eight days they had
followed the right bank of the river. Under that thatch, which was torn by the
stakes of their village, they had discovered the fugitives, that is to say, a sure
prey for them, because the barrier of the falls would sooner or later oblige those
unfortunate ones to land on one or the other side of the river.

Dick Sand saw that he was lost, but he asked himself if the sacrifice of his
life might not save his companions. Master of himself, standing in the front of
the boat, his gun pointed, he held the cannibals in check.

Meanwhile, they snatched away the thatch, under which they expected to
find other victims. When they saw that the young novice alone had fallen into
their hands, they betrayed their disappointment by frightful cries. A boy of
fifteen among ten!

But, then, one of those natives stood up, his arm stretched toward the left
bank, and pointed to Mrs. Weldon and her companions, who, having seen all and
not knowing what to do, had just climbed up the bank!

Dick Sand, not even dreaming of himself, waited for an inspiration from
Heaven that might save them.

The boat was going to be pushed out into the stream. The cannibals were
going to cross the river. They did not budge before the gun aimed at them,
knowing the effect of firearms. But one of them had seized the oar; he managed
it like a man who knew how to use it, and the boat crossed the river obliquely.
Soon it was not more than a hundred feet from the left bank.

"Flee!" cried Dick Sand to Mrs. Weldon. "Flee!"

Neither Mrs. Weldon nor Hercules stirred. One would say that their feet were
fastened to the ground.


Flee! Besides, what good would it do? In less than an hour they would fall
into the hands of the cannibals!

Dick Sand understood it. But, then, that supreme inspiration which he asked
from Heaven was sent him. He saw the possibility of saving all those whom he
loved by making the sacrifice of his own life! He did not hesitate to do it.

"May God protect them!" murmured he, "and in His infinite goodness may
He have pity on me!"

At the same instant Dick Sand pointed his gun at the native who was steering
the boat, and the oar, broken by a ball, flew into fragments.

The cannibals gave a cry of terror.

In fact, the boat, no longer directed by the oar, went with the stream. The
current bore it along with increasing swiftness, and, in a few moments, it was
only a hundred feet from the falls.

Mrs. Weldon and Hercules understood all. Dick Sand attempted to save them
by precipitating the cannibals, with himself, into the abyss. Little Jack and his
mother, kneeling on the bank, sent him a last farewell. Hercules's powerless hand
was stretched out to him.

At that moment the natives, wishing to gain the left bank by swimming,
threw themselves out of the boat, which they capsized.

Dick Sand had lost none of his coolness in the presence of the death which
menaced him. A last thought then came to him. It was that this boat, even
because it was floating keel upward, might serve to save him.

In fact, two dangers were to be feared when Dick Sand should be going over
the cataract: asphyxia by the water, and asphyxia by the air. Now, this overturned
hull was like a box, in which he might, perhaps, keep his head out of the water,
at the same time that he would be sheltered from the exterior air, which would
certainly have stifled him in the rapidity of his fall. In these conditions, it seems
that a man would have some chance of escaping the double asphyxia, even in
descending the cataracts of a Niagara.

Dick Sand saw all that like lightning. By a last instinct he clung to the seat
which united the two sides of the boat, and, his head out of the water, under the
capsized hull, he felt the irresistible current carrying him away, and the almost
perpendicular fall taking place.

The boat sank into the abyss hollowed out by the waters at the foot of the
cataract, and, after plunging deep, returned to the surface of the river.

Dick Sand, a good swimmer, understood that his safety now depended on the
vigor of his arms.

A quarter of an hour after he reached the left bank, and there found Mrs.
Weldon, little Jack, and Cousin Benedict, whom Hercules had led there in all


haste.

But already the cannibals had disappeared in the tumult of the waters. They,
whom the capsized boat had not protected, had ceased to live even before
reaching the last depths of the abyss, and their bodies were going to be torn to
pieces on those sharp rocks on which the under-current of the stream dashed
itself.


CHAPTER XX.

CONCLUSION.

Two days after, the 20th of July, Mrs. Weldon and her companions met a
caravan going toward Emboma, at the mouth of the Congo. These were not slave
merchants, but honest Portuguese traders, who dealt in ivory. They made the
fugitives welcome, and the latter part of the journey was accomplished under
more agreeable conditions.

The meeting with this caravan was really a blessing from Heaven. Dick Sand
would never have been able to descend the Zaire on a raft. From the Falls of
Ntamo, as far as Yellala, the stream was a succession of rapids and cataracts.
Stanley counted seventy-two, and no boat could undertake to pass them. It was
at the mouth of the Congo that the intrepid traveler, four years later, fought the
last of the thirty-two combats which he waged with the natives. Lower down, in
the cataracts of Mbelo, he escaped death by a miracle.

On the 11th of August, Mrs. Weldon, Dick Sand, Jack, Hercules, and Cousin
Benedict arrived at Emboma. Messrs. Motta Viega and Harrison received them
with generous hospitality. A steamer was about sailing for the Isthmus of
Panama. Mrs. Weldon and her companions took passage in it, and happily
reached the American coast.

A despatch sent to San Francisco informed Mr. Weldon of the unlooked-for
return of his wife and his child. He had vainly searched for tidings of them at
every place where he thought the "Pilgrim" might have been wrecked.

Finally, on the 25th of August, the survivors of the shipwreck reached the
capital of California. Ah! if old Tom and his companions had only been with
them!

What shall we say of Dick Sand and of Hercules? One became the son, the
other the friend, of the family. James Weldon knew how much he owed to the
young novice, how much to the brave black. He was happy; and it was fortunate
for him that Negoro had not reached him, for he would have paid the ransom of
his wife and child with his whole fortune. He would have started for the African
coast, and, once there, who can tell to what dangers, to what treachery, he would


have been exposed?

A single word about Cousin Benedict. The very day of his arrival the worthy
savant, after having shaken hands with Mr. Weldon, shut himself up in his study
and set to work, as if finishing a sentence interrupted the day before. He
meditated an enormous work on the "Hexapodes Benedictus," one of the
desiderata of entomological science.

There, in his study, lined with insects, Cousin Benedict's first action was to
find a microscope and a pair of glasses. Great heaven! What a cry of despair he
uttered the first time he used them to study the single specimen furnished by the
African entomology!

The "Hexapodes Benedictus" was not a hexapode! It was a common spider!
And if it had but six legs, instead of eight, it was simply because the two front
legs were missing! And if they were missing, these two legs, it was because, in
taking it, Hercules had, unfortunately, broken them off! Now, this mutilation
reduced the pretended "Hexapodes Benedictus" to the condition of an invalid,
and placed it in the most ordinary class of spiders--a fact which Cousin
Benedict's near-sightedness had prevented him from discovering sooner. It gave
him a fit of sickness, from which, however, he happily recovered.

Three years after, little Jack was eight years old, and Dick Sand made him
repeat his lessons, while working faithfully at his own studies. In fact, hardly
was he at home when, realizing how ignorant he was, he had commenced to
study with a kind of remorse--like a man who, for want of knowledge, finds
himself unequal to his task.

"Yes," he often repeated; "if, on board of the 'Pilgrim,' I had known all that a
sailor should know, what misfortunes we would have escaped!"

Thus spoke Dick Sand. At the age of eighteen he finished with distinction his
hydrographical studies, and, honored with a brevet by special favor, he took
command of one of Mr. Weldon's vessels.

See what the little orphan, rescued on the beach at Sandy Hook, had obtained
by his work and conduct. He was, in spite of his youth, surrounded by the
esteem, one might say the respect, of all who knew him; but his simplicity and
modesty were so natural to him, that he was not aware of it. He did not even
suspect--although no one could attribute to him what are called brilliant exploits-
-that the firmness, courage, and fidelity displayed in so many trials had made of
him a sort of hero.

Meanwhile, one thought oppressed him. In his rare leisure hours he always
dreamed of old Tom, of Bat, of Austin, and of Acteon, and of the misfortune for
which he held himself responsible. It was also a subject of real grief to Mrs.
Weldon, the actual situation of her former companions in misery. Mr. Weldon,


Dick Sand, and Hercules moved heaven and earth to find traces of them. Finally
they succeeded--thanks to the correspondents which the rich shipowner had in
different parts of the world. It was at Madagascar--where, however, slavery was
soon to be abolished--that Tom and his companions had been sold. Dick Sand
wished to consecrate his little savings to ransom them, but Mr. Weldon would
not hear of it. One of his correspondents arranged the affair, and one day, the
15th of November, 1877, four blacks rang the bell of his house.

They were old Tom, Bat, Acteon, and Austin. The brave men, after escaping
so many dangers, came near being stifled, on that day, by their delighted friends.

Only poor Nan was missing from those whom the "Pilgrim" had thrown on
the fatal coast of Africa. But the old servant could not be recalled to life, and
neither could Dingo be restored to them. Certainly it was miraculous that these
two alone had succumbed amid such adventures.

It is unnecessary to say that on that occasion they had a festival at the house
of the California merchant. The best toast, which all applauded, was that given
by Mrs. Weldon to Dick Sand, "To the Captain at Fifteen!"

THE END.


End of the Voyage Extraordinaire


EIGHT HUNDRED LEAGUES ON THE AMAZON


By Jules Verne


PART I. THE GIANT RAFT


CHAPTER I. A CAPTAIN OF THE WOODS

"Phyjslyddqfdzxgasgzzqqehxgkfndrxujuglocytdxv
ksbxhhuypohdvyrymhuhpuydkjoxphetozlsletnpmvffo
vpdpajxhyynojyggaymeqynfugqlnmvlyfgsuzmqIztlbqq
yugsqeubvnrcredgruzblrmxyuhqhpzdrrgcrohepqxufl
vvrplphonthvddgqfhqsntzhhhnfepmqkyuuexktogzgkyu
umfvIjdqdpzjqsykrpIlxhxqrymvklohhhotozvdksppsuvj
hd."

THE MAN who held in his hand the document of which this strange
assemblage of letters formed the concluding paragraph remained for some
moments lost in thought.

It contained about a hundred of these lines, with the letters at even distances,
and undivided into words. It seemed to have been written many years before,
and time had already laid his tawny finger on the sheet of good stout paper
which was covered with the hieroglyphics.

On what principle had these letters been arranged? He who held the paper
was alone able to tell. With such cipher language it is as with the locks of some
of our iron safes--in either case the protection is the same. The combinations
which they lead to can be counted by millions, and no calculator's life would
suffice to express them. Some particular "word" has to be known before the lock
of the safe will act, and some "cipher" is necessary before that cryptogram can
be read.

He who had just reperused the document was but a simple "captain of the
woods." Under the name of "Capitaes do Mato" are known in Brazil those
individuals who are engaged in the recapture of fugitive slaves. The institution
dates from 1722. At that period anti-slavery ideas had entered the minds of a few
philanthropists, and more than a century had to elapse before the mass of the
people grasped and applied them. That freedom was a right, that the very first of
the natural rights of man was to be free and to belong only to himself, would
seem to be self-evident, and yet thousands of years had to pass before the
glorious thought was generally accepted, and the nations of the earth had the
courage to proclaim it.

In 1852, the year in which our story opens, there were still slaves in Brazil,


and as a natural consequence, captains of the woods to pursue them. For certain
reasons of political economy the hour of general emancipation had been delayed,
but the black had at this date the right to ransom himself, the children which
were born to him were bor free. The day was not far distant when the
magnificent country, into which could be put three-quarters of the continent of
Europe, would no longer count a single slave among its ten millions of
inhabitants.

The occupation of the captains of the woods was doomed, and at the period
we speak of the advantages obtainable from the capture of fugitives were rapidly
diminishing. While, however, the calling continued sufficiently profitable, the
captains of the woods formed a peculiar class of adventurers, principally
composed of freedmen and deserters--of not very enviable reputation. The slave
hunters in fact belonged to the dregs of society, and we shall not be far wrong in
assuming that the man with the cryptogram was a fitting comrade for his fellow
"capitaes do mato." Torres--for that was his name--unlike the majority of his
companions, was neither half-breed, Indian, nor negro. He was a white of
Brazilian origin, and had received a better education than befitted his present
condition. One of those unclassed men who are found so frequently in the distant
countries of the New World, at a time when the Brazilian law still excluded
mulattoes and others of mixed blood from certain employments, it was evident
that if such exclusion had affected him, it had done so on account of his
worthless character, and not because of his birth.

Torres at the present moment was not, however, in Brazil. He had just passed
the frontier, and was wandering in the forests of Peru, from which issue the
waters of the Upper Amazon.

He was a man of about thirty years of age, on whom the fatigues of a
precarious existence seemed, thanks to an exceptional temperament and an iron
constitution, to have had no effect. Of middle height, broad shoulders, regular
features, and decided gait, his face was tanned with the scorching air of the
tropics. He had a thick black beard, and eyes lost under contracting eyebrows,
giving that swift but hard glance so characteristic of insolent natures. Clothed as
backwoodsmen are generally clothed, not over elaborately, his garments bore
witness to long and roughish wear. On his head, stuck jauntily on one side, was a
leather hat with a large brim. Trousers he had of coarse wool, which were tucked
into the tops of the thick, heavy boots which formed the most substantial part of
his attire, and over all, and hiding all, was a faded yellowish poncho.

But if Torres was a captain of the woods it was evident that he was not now
employed in that capacity, his means of attack and defense being obviously
insufficient for any one engaged in the pursuit of the blacks. No firearms--


neither gun nor revolver. In his belt only one of those weapons, more sword than
hunting-knife, called a "manchetta," and in addition he had an "enchada," which
is a sort of hoe, specially employed in the pursuit of the tatous and agoutis which
abound in the forests of the Upper Amazon, where there is generally little to fear
from wild beasts.

On the 4th of May, 1852, it happened, then, that our adventurer was deeply
absorbed in the reading of the document on which his eyes were fixed, and,
accustomed as he was to live in the forests of South America, he was perfectly
indifferent to their splendors. Nothing could distract his attention; neither the
constant cry of the howling monkeys, which St. Hillaire has graphically
compared to the ax of the woodman as he strikes the branches of the trees, nor
the sharp jingle of the rings of the rattlesnake (not an aggressive reptile, it is true,
but one of the most venomous); neither the bawling voice of the horned toad, the
most hideous of its kind, nor even the solemn and sonorous croak of the
bellowing frog, which, though it cannot equal the bull in size, can surpass him in
noise.

Torres heard nothing of all these sounds, which form, as it were, the complex
voice of the forests of the New World. Reclining at the foot of a magnificent
tree, he did not even admire the lofty boughs of that "pao ferro," or iron wood,
with its somber bark, hard as the metal which it replaces in the weapon and
utensil of the Indian savage. No. Lost in thought, the captain of the woods turned
the curious paper again and again between his fingers. With the cipher, of which
he had the secret, he assigned to each letter its true value. He read, he verified
the sense of those lines, unintelligible to all but him, and then he smiled--and a
most unpleasant smile it was.

Then he murmured some phrases in an undertone which none in the solitude
of the Peruvian forests could hear, and which no one, had he been anywhere else,
would have heard.

"Yes," said he, at length, "here are a hundred lines very neatly written, which,
for some one that I know, have an importance that is undoubted. That somebody
is rich. It is a question of life or death for him, and looked at in every way it will
cost him something." And, scrutinizing the paper with greedy eyes, "At a conto
(1) only for each word of this last sentence it will amount to a considerable sum,
and it is this sentence which fixes the price. It sums up the entire document. It
gives their true names to true personages; but before trying to understand it I
ought to begin by counting the number of words it contains, and even when this
is done its true meaning may be missed."

In saying this Torres began to count mentally.

"There are fifty-eight words, and that makes fifty-eight contos. With nothing


but that one could live in Brazil, in America, wherever one wished, and even live
without doing anything! And what would it be, then, if all the words of this
document were paid for at the same price? It would be necessary to count by
hundreds of contos. Ah! there is quite a fortune here for me to realize if I am not
the greatest of duffers!"

It seemed as though the hands of Torres felt the enormous sum, and were
already closing over the rolls of gold. Suddenly his thoughts took another turn.

"At length," he cried, "I see land; and I do not regret the voyage which has
led me from the coast of the Atlantic to the Upper Amazon. But this man may
quit America and go beyond the seas, and then how can I touch him? But no! he
is there, and if I climb to the top of this tree I can see the roof under which he
lives with his family!" Then seizing the paper and shaking it with terrible
meaning: "Before to-morrow I will be in his presence; before to-morrow he will
know that his honor and his life are contained in these lines. And when he
wishes to see the cipher which permits him to read them, he--well, he will pay
for it. He will pay, if I wish it, with all his fortune, as he ought to pay with all his
blood! Ah! My worthy comrade, who gave me this cipher, who told me where I
could find his old colleague, and the name under which he has been hiding
himself for so many years, hardly suspects that he has made my fortune!"

For the last time Torres glanced over the yellow paper, and then, after
carefully folding it, put it away into a little copper box which he used for a purse.
This box was about as big as a cigar case, and if what was in it was all Torres
possessed he would nowhere have been considered a wealthy man. He had a few
of all the coins of the neighboring States--ten double-condors in gold of the
United States of Colombia, worth about a hundred francs; Brazilian reis, worth
about as much; golden sols of Peru, worth, say, double; some Chilian escudos,
worth fifty francs or more, and some smaller coins; but the lot would not amount
to more than five hundred francs, and Torres would have been somewhat
embarrassed had he been asked how or where he had got them. One thing was
certain, that for some months, after having suddenly abandoned the trade of the
slave hunter, which he carried on in the province of Para, Torres had ascended
the basin of the Amazon, crossed the Brazilian frontier, and come into Peruvian
territory. To such a man the necessaries of life were but few; expenses he had
none--nothing for his lodging, nothing for his clothes. The forest provided his
food, which in the backwoods cost him naught. A few reis were enough for his
tobacco, which he bought at the mission stations or in the villages, and for a
trifle more he filled his flask with liquor. With little he could go far.

When he had pushed the paper into the metal box, of which the lid shut
tightly with a snap, Torres, instead of putting it into the pocket of his under-vest,


thought to be extra careful, and placed it near him in a hollow of a root of the
tree beneath which he was sitting. This proceeding, as it turned out, might have
cost him dear.

It was very warm; the air was oppressive. If the church of the nearest village
had possessed a clock, the clock would have struck two, and, coming with the
wind, Torres would have heard it, for it was not more than a couple of miles off.
But he cared not as to time. Accustomed to regulate his proceedings by the
height of the sun, calculated with more or less accuracy, he could scarcely be
supposed to conduct himself with military precision. He breakfasted or dined
when he pleased or when he could; he slept when and where sleep overtook him.
If his table was not always spread, his bed was always ready at the foot of some
tree in the open forest. And in other respects Torres was not difficult to please.
He had traveled during most of the morning, and having already eaten a little, he
began to feel the want of a snooze. Two or three hours’ rest would, he thought,
put him in a state to continue his road, and so he laid himself down on the grass
as comfortably as he could, and waited for sleep beneath the ironwood-tree.

Torres was not one of those people who drop off to sleep without certain
preliminaries. HE was in the habit of drinking a drop or two of strong liquor, and
of then smoking a pipe; the spirits, he said, overexcited the brain, and the
tobacco smoke agreeably mingled with the general haziness of his reverie.

Torres commenced, then, by applying to his lips a flask which he carried at
his side; it contained the liquor generally known under the name of "chica" in
Peru, and more particularly under that of "caysuma" in the Upper Amazon, to
which fermented distillation of the root of the sweet manioc the captain had
added a good dose of "tafia" or native rum.

When Torres had drunk a little of this mixture he shook the flask, and
discovered, not without regret, that it was nearly empty.

"Must get some more," he said very quietly.

Then taking out a short wooden pipe, he filled it with the coarse and bitter
tobacco of Brazil, of which the leaves belong to that old "petun" introduced into
France by Nicot, to whom we owe the popularization of the most productive and
widespread of the solanaceae.

This native tobacco had little in common with the fine qualities of our
present manufacturers; but Torres was not more difficult to please in this matter
than in others, and so, having filled his pipe, he struck a match and applied the
flame to a piece of that stick substance which is the secretion of certain of the
hymenoptera, and is known as "ants' amadou." With the amadou he lighted up,
and after about a dozen whiffs his eyes closed, his pipe escaped from his fingers,
and he fell asleep.


(1) One thousand reis are equal to three francs, and a conto of reis is worth
three thousand francs.


CHAPTER IT. ROBBER AND ROBBED

TORRES SLEPT for about half an hour, and then there was a noise among
the trees--a sound of light footsteps, as though some visitor was walking with
naked feet, and taking all the precaution he could lest he should be heard. To
have put himself on guard against any suspicious approach would have been the
first care of our adventurer had his eyes been open at the time. But he had not
then awoke, and what advanced was able to arrive in his presence, at ten paces
from the tree, without being perceived.

It was not a man at all, it was a "guariba."

Of all the prehensile-tailed monkeys which haunt the forests of the Upper
Amazon--graceful sahuis, horned sapajous, gray-coated monos, sagouins which
seem to wear a mask on their grimacing faces--the guariba is without doubt the
most eccentric. Of sociable disposition, and not very savage, differing therein
very greatly from the mucura, who is as ferocious as he is foul, he delights in
company, and generally travels in troops. It was he whose presence had been
signaled from afar by the monotonous concert of voices, so like the psalm-
singing of some church choir. But if nature has not made him vicious, it is none
the less necessary to attack him with caution, and under any circumstances a
sleeping traveler ought not to leave himself exposed, lest a guariba should
surprise him when he is not in a position to defend himself.

This monkey, which is also known in Brazil as the "barbado," was of large
size. The suppleness and stoutness of his limbs proclaimed him a powerful
creature, as fit to fight on the ground as to leap from branch to branch at the tops
of the giants of the forest.

He advanced then cautiously, and with short steps. He glanced to the right
and to the left, and rapidly swung his tail. To these representatives of the monkey
tribe nature has not been content to give four hands--she has shown herself more
generous, and added a fifth, for the extremity of their caudal appendage
possesses a perfect power of prehension.

The guariba noiselessly approached, brandishing a study cudgel, which,
wielded by his muscular arm, would have proved a formidable weapon. For
some minutes he had seen the man at the foot of the tree, but the sleeper did not
move, and this doubtless induced him to come and look at him a little nearer. He
came forward then, not without hesitation, and stopped at last about three paces
off.


On his bearded face was pictured a grin, which showed his sharp-edged
teeth, white as ivory, and the cudgel began to move about in a way that was not
very reassuring for the captain of the woods.

Unmistakably the sight of Torres did not inspire the guariba with friendly
thoughts. Had he then particular reasons for wishing evil to this defenseless
specimen of the human race which chance had delivered over to him? Perhaps!
We know how certain animals retain the memory of the bad treatment they have
received, and it is possible that against backwoodsmen in general he bore some
special grudge.

In fact Indians especially make more fuss about the monkey than any other
kind of game, and, no matter to what species it belongs, follow its chase with the
ardor of Nimrods, not only for the pleasure of hunting it, but for the pleasure of
eating it.

Whatever it was, the guariba did not seen disinclined to change characters
this time, and if he did not quite forget that nature had made him but a simple
herbivore, and longed to devour the captain of the woods, he seemed at least to
have made up his mind to get rid of one of his natural enemies.

After looking at him for some minutes the guariba began to move round the
tree. He stepped slowly, holding his breath, and getting nearer and nearer. His
attitude was threatening, his countenance ferocious. Nothing could have seemed
easier to him than to have crushed this motionless man at a single blow, and
assuredly at that moment the life of Torres hung by a thread.

In truth, the guariba stopped a second time close up to the tree, placed
himself at the side, so as to command the head of the sleeper, and lifted his stick
to give the blow.

But if Torres had been imprudent in putting near him in the crevice of the
root the little case which contained his document and his fortune, it was this
imprudence which saved his life.

A sunbeam shooting between the branches just glinted on the case, the
polished metal of which lighted up like a looking-glass. The monkey, with the
frivolity peculiar to his species, instantly had his attention distracted. His ideas,
if such an animal could have ideas, took another direction. He stopped, caught
hold of the case, jumped back a pace or two, and, raising it to the level of his
eyes, looked at it not without surprise as he moved it about and used it like a
mirror. He was if anything still more astonished when he heard the rattle of the
gold pieces it contained. The music enchanted him. It was like a rattle in the
hands of a child. He carried it to his mouth, and his teeth grated against the
metal, but made no impression on it.

Doubtless the guariba thought he had found some fruit of a new kind, a sort


of huge almost brilliant all over, and with a kernel playing freely in its shell. But
if he soon discovered his mistake he did not consider it a reason for throwing the
case away; on the contrary, he grasped it more tightly in his left hand, and
dropped the cudgel, which broke off a dry twig in its fall.

At this noise Torres woke, and with the quickness of those who are always
on the watch, with whom there is no transition from the sleeping to the waking
state, was immediately on his legs.

In an instant Torres had recognized with whom he had to deal.

"A guariba!" he cried.

And his hand seizing his manchetta, he put himself into a posture of defense.

The monkey, alarmed, jumped back at once, and not so brave before a
waking man as a Sleeping one, performed a rapid caper, and glided under the
trees.

"It was time!" said Torres; "the rogue would have settled me without any
ceremony!"

Of a sudden, between the hands of the monkey, who had stopped at about
twenty paces, and was watching him with violent grimaces, as if he would like to
snap his fingers at him, he caught sight of his precious case.

"The beggar!" he said. "If he has not killed me, he has done what is almost as
bad. He has robbed me!"

The thought that the case held his money was not however, what then
concerned him. But that which made him jump was the recollection that it
contained the precious document, the loss of which was irreparable, as it carried
with it that of all his hopes.

"Botheration!" said he.

And at the moment, cost what it might to recapture his case, Torres threw
himself in pursuit of the guariba.

He knew that to reach such an active animal was not easy. On the ground he
could get away too fast, in the branches he could get away too far. A well-aimed
gunshot could alone stop him as he ran or climbed, but Torres possessed no
firearm. His sword-knife and hoe were useless unless he could get near enough
to hit him.

It soon became evident that the monkey could not be reached unless by
surprise. Hence Torres found it necessary to employ cunning in dealing with the
mischievous animal. To stop, to hide himself behind some tree trunk, to
disappear under a bush, might induce the guariba to pull up and retrace his steps,
and there was nothing else for Torres to try. This was what he did, and the
pursuit commenced under these conditions; but when the captain of the woods
disappeared, the monkey patiently waited until he came into sight again, and at


this game Torres fatigued himself without result.

"Confound the guariba!" he shouted at length. "There will be no end to this,
and he will lead me back to the Brazilian frontier. If only he would let go of my
case! But no! The jingling of the money amuses him. Oh, you thief! If I could
only get hold of you!"

And Torres recommenced the pursuit, and the monkey scuttled off with
renewed vigor.

An hour passed in this way without any result. Torres showed a persistency
which was quite natural. How without this document could he get his money?

And then anger seized him. He swore, he stamped, he threatened the guariba.
That annoying animal only responded by a chuckling which was enough to put
him beside himself.

And then Torres gave himself up to the chase. He ran at top speed,
entangling himself in the high undergrowth, among those thick brambles and
interlacing creepers, across which the guariba passed like a steeplechaser. Big
roots hidden beneath the grass lay often in the way. He stumbled over them and
again started in pursuit. At length, to his astonishment, he found himself
shouting:

"Come here! come here! you robber!" as if he could make him understand
him.

His strength gave out, breath failed him, and he was obliged to stop.
"Confound it!" said he, "when I am after runaway slaves across the jungle they
never give me such trouble as this! But I will have you, you wretched monkey! I
will go, yes, I will go as far as my legs will carry me, and we shall see!"

The guariba had remained motionless when he saw that the adventurer had
ceased to pursue him. He rested also, for he had nearly reached that degree of
exhaustion which had forbidden all movement on the part of Torres.

He remained like this during ten minutes, nibbling away at two or three
roots, which he picked off the ground, and from time to time he rattled the case
at his ear.

Torres, driven to distraction, picked up the stones within his reach, and threw
them at him, but did no harm at such a distance.

But he hesitated to make a fresh start. On one hand, to keep on in chase of
the monkey with so little chance of reaching him was madness. On the other, to
accept as definite this accidental interruption to all his plans, to be not only
conquered, but cheated and hoaxed by a dumb animal, was maddening. And in
the meantime Torres had begun to think that when the night came the robber
would disappear without trouble, and he, the robbed one, would find a difficulty
in retracing his way through the dense forest. In fact, the pursuit had taken him


many miles from the bank of the river, and he would even now find it difficult to
return to it.

Torres hesitated; he tried to resume his thoughts with coolness, and finally,
after giving vent to a last imprecation, he was about to abandon all idea of
regaining possession of his case, when once more, in spite of himself, there
flashed across him the thought of his document, the remembrance of all that
scaffolding on which his future hopes depended, on which he had counted so
much; and he resolved to make another effort.

Then he got up.

The guariba got up too.

He made several steps in advance.

The monkey made as many in the rear, but this time, instead of plunging
more deeply into the forest, he stopped at the foot of an enormous ficus--the tree
of which the different kinds are so numerous all over the Upper Amazon basin.

To seize the trunk with his four hands, to climb with the agility of a clown
who is acting the monkey, to hook on with his prehensile tail to the first
branches, which stretched away horizontally at forty feet from the ground, and to
hoist himself to the top of the tree, to the point where the higher branches just
bent beneath its weight, was only sport to the active guariba, and the work of but
a few seconds.

Up there, installed at his ease, he resumed his interrupted repast, and
gathered the fruits which were within his reach. Torres, like him, was much in
want of something to eat and drink, but it was impossible! His pouch was flat,
his flask was empty.

However, instead of retracing his steps he directed them toward the tree,
although the position taken up by the monkey was still more unfavorable for
him. He could not dream for one instant of climbing the ficus, which the thief
would have quickly abandoned for another.

And all the time the miserable case rattled at his ear.

Then in his fury, in his folly, Torres apostrophized the guariba. It would be
impossible for us to tell the series of invectives in which he indulged. Not only
did he call him a half-breed, which is the greatest of insults in the mouth of a
Brazilian of white descent, but "curiboca"--that is to say, half-breed negro and
Indian, and of all the insults that one man can hurl at another in this equatorial
latitude "curiboca" is the cruelest.

But the monkey, who was only a humble quadruman, was simply amused at
what would have revolted a representative of humanity.

Then Torres began to throw stones at him again, and bits of roots and
everything he could get hold of that would do for a missile. Had he the hope to


seriously hurt the monkey? No! he no longer knew what he was about. To tell
the truth, anger at his powerlessness had deprived him of his wits. Perhaps he
hoped that in one of the movements which the guariba would make in passing
from branch to branch the case might escape him, perhaps he thought that if he
continued to worry the monkey he might throw it at his head. But no! the
monkey did not part with the case, and, holding it with one hand, he had still
three left with which to move.

Torres, in despair, was just about to abandon the chase for good, and to
return toward the Amazon, when he heard the sound of voices. Yes! the sound of
human voices.

Those were speaking at about twenty paces to the right of him.

The first care of Torres was to hide himself in a dense thicket. Like a prudent
man, he did not wish to show himself without at least knowing with whom he
might have to deal. Panting, puzzled, his ears on the stretch, he waited, when
suddenly the sharp report of a gun rang through the woods.

A cry followed, and the monkey, mortally wounded, fell heavily on the
ground, still holding Torres' case.

"By Jove!" he muttered, "that bullet came at the right time!"

And then, without fearing to be seen, he came out of the thicket, and two
young gentlemen appeared from under the trees.

They were Brazilians clothed as hunters, with leather boots, light palm-leaf
hats, waistcoats, or rather tunics, buckled in at the waist, and more convenient
than the national poncho. By their features and their complexion they were at
once recognizable as of Portuguese descent.

Each of them was armed with one of those long guns of Spanish make which
slightly remind us of the arms of the Arabs, guns of long range and considerable
precision, which the dwellers in the forest of the upper Amazon handle with
success.

What had just happened was a proof of this. At an angular distance of more
than eighty paces the quadruman had been shot full in the head.

The two young men carried in addition, in their belts, a sort of dagger-knife,
which is known in Brazil as a "foca," and which hunters do not hesitate to use
when attacking the ounce and other wild animals which, if not very formidable,
are pretty numerous in these forests.

Torres had obviously little to fear from this meeting, and so he went on
running toward the monkey's corpse.

But the young men, who were taking the same direction, had less ground to
cover, and coming forward a few paces, found themselves face to face with
Torres.


The latter had recovered his presence of mind.

"Many thanks, gentlemen," said he gayly, as he raised the brim of his hat; "in
killing this wretched animal you have just done me a great service!"

The hunters looked at him inquiringly, not knowing what value to attach to
his thanks.

Torres explained matters in a few words.

"You thought you had killed a monkey," said he, "but as it happens you have
killed a thief!"

"If we have been of use to you," said the youngest of the two, "it was by
accident, but we are none the less pleased to find that we have done some good."

And taking several steps to the rear, he bent over the guariba, and, not
without an effort, withdrew the case from his stiffened hand.

"Doubtless that, sir, is what belongs to you?"

"The very thing,” said Torres briskly, catching hold of the case and failing to
repress a huge sigh of relief.

"Whom ought I to thank, gentlemen," said he, "for the service you have
rendered me?"

"My friend, Manoel, assistant surgeon, Brazilian army," replied the young
man.

"If it was I who shot the monkey, Benito," said Manoel, "it was you that
pointed him out to me."

"In that case, sirs," replied Torres, "I am under an obligation to you both, as
well to you, Mr. Manoel, as to you, Mr. ----"

"Benito Garral," replied Manoel.

The captain of the woods required great command over himself to avoid
giving a jump when he heard this name, and more especially when the young
man obligingly continued:

"My father, Joam Garral, has his farm about three miles from here. If you
would like, Mr. ----"

"Torres," replied the adventurer.

"If you would like to accompany us there, Mr. Torres, you will be hospitably
received."

"I do not know that I can," said Torres, who, surprised by this unexpected
meeting, hesitated to make a start. "I fear in truth that I am not able to accept
your offer. The occurrence I have just related to you has caused me to lose time.
It is necessary for me to return at once to the Amazon--as I purpose descending
thence to Para."

"Very well, Mr. Torres," replied Benito, "it is not unlikely that we shall see
you again in our travels, for before a month has passed my father and all his


family will have taken the same road as you."

"Ah!" said Torres sharply, "your father is thinking of recrossing the Brazilian
frontier?"

"Yes, for a voyage of some months," replied Benito. "At least we hope to
make him decide so. Don't we, Manoel?"

Manoel nodded affirmatively.

"Well, gentlemen," replied Torres, "it is very probable that we shall meet
again on the road. But I cannot, much to my regret, accept your offer now. I
thank you, nevertheless, and I consider myself as twice your debtor."

And having said so, Torres saluted the young men, who in turn saluted him,
and set out on their way to the farm.

As for Torres he looked after them as they got further and further away, and
when he had lost sight of them--

"Ah! he is about to recross the frontier!" said he, with a deep voice. "Let him
recross it! and he will be still more at my mercy! Pleasant journey to you, Joam
Garral!"

And having uttered these words the captain of the woods, making for the
south so as to regain the left bank of the river by the shortest road, disappeared
into the dense forest.


CHAPTER II. THE GARRAL FAMILY

THE VILLAGE of Iquitos is situated on the left bank of the Amazon, near
the seventy-fourth meridian, on that portion of the great river which still bears
the name of the Maranon, and of which the bed separates Peru from the republic
of Ecuador. It is about fifty-five leagues to the west of the Brazilian frontier.

Iquitos, like every other collection of huts, hamlet, or village met with in the
basin of the Upper Amazon, was founded by the missionaries. Up to the
seventeenth year of the century the Iquito Indians, who then formed the entire
population, were settled in the interior of the province at some distance from the
river. But one day the springs in their territory all dried up under the influence of
a volcanic eruption, and they were obliged to come and take up their abode on
the left of the Maranon. The race soon altered through the alliances which were
entered into with the riverine Indians, Ticunas, or Omaguas, mixed descent with
a few Spaniards, and to-day Iquitos has a population of two or three families of
half-breeds.

The village is most picturesquely grouped on a kind of esplanade, and runs
along at about sixty feet from the river. It consists of some forty miserable huts,
whose thatched roofs only just render them worthy of the name of cottages. A


stairway made of crossed trunks of trees leads up to the village, which lies
hidden from the traveler's eyes until the steps have been ascended. Once at the
top he finds himself before an inclosure admitting of slight defense, and
consisting of many different shrubs and arborescent plants, attached to each
other by festoons of lianas, which here and there have made their way abgove
the summits of the graceful palms and banana-trees.

At the time we speak of the Indians of Iquitos went about in almost a state of
nudity. The Spaniards and half-breeds alone were clothed, and much as they
scorned their indigenous fellow-citizens, wore only a simple shirt, light cotton
trousers, and a straw hat. All lived cheerlessly enough in the village, mixing little
together, and if they did meet occasionally, it was only at such times as the bell
of the mission called them to the dilapidated cottage which served them for a
church.

But if existence in the village of Iquitos, as in most of the hamlets of the
Upper Amazon, was almost in a rudimentary stage, it was only necessary to
journey a league further down the river to find on the same bank a wealthy
settlement, with all the elements of comfortable life.

This was the farm of Joam Garral, toward which our two young friends
returned after their meeting with the captain of the woods.

There, on a bend of the stream, at the junction of the River Nanay, which is
here about five hundred feet across, there had been established for many years
this farm, homestead, or, to use the expression of the country, "fazenda," then in
the height of its prosperity. The Nanay with its left bank bounded it to the north
for about a mile, and for nearly the same distance to the east it ran along the
bank of the larger river. To the west some small rivulets, tributaries of the Nanay,
and some lagoons of small extent, separated it from the savannah and the fields
devoted to the pasturage of the cattle.

It was here that Joam Garral, in 1826, twenty-six years before the date when
our story opens, was received by the proprietor of the fazenda.

This Portuguese, whose name was Magalhaés, followed the trade of timber-
felling, and his settlement, then recently formed, extended for about half a mile
along the bank of the river.

There, hospitable as he was, like all the Portuguese of the old race,
Magalhaés lived with his daughter Yaquita, who after the death of her mother
had taken charge of his household. Magalhaés was an excellent worker, inured to
fatigue, but lacking education. If he understood the management of the few
slaves whom he owned, and the dozen Indians whom he hired, he showed
himself much less apt in the various external requirements of his trade. In truth,
the establishment at Iquitos was not prospering, and the affairs of the Portuguese


were getting somewhat embarrassed.

It was under these circumstances that Joam Garral, then twenty-two years
old, found himself one day in the presence of Magalhaés. He had arrived in the
country at the limit both of his strength and his resources. Magalhaés had found
him half-dead with hunger and fatigue in the neighboring forest. The Portuguese
had an excellent heart; he did not ask the unknown where he came from, but
what he wanted. The noble, high-spirited look which Joam Garral bore in spite
of his exhaustion had touched him. He received him, restored him, and, for
several days to begin with, offered him a hospitality which lasted for his life.

Under such conditions it was that Joam Garral was introduced to the farm at
Iquitos.

Brazilian by birth, Joam Garral was without family or fortune. Trouble, he
said, had obliged him to quit his country and abandon all thoughts of return. He
asked his host to excuse his entering on his past misfortunes--misfortunes as
serious as they were unmerited. What he sought, and what he wished, was a new
life, a life of labor. He had started on his travels with some slight thought of
entering a fazenda in the interior. He was educated, intelligent. He had in all his
bearing that inexpressible something which tells you that the man is genuine and
of frank and upright character. Magalhaés, quite taken with him, asked him to
remain at the farm, where he would, in a measure, supply that which was
wanting in the worthy farmer.

Joam Garral accepted the offer without hesitation. His intention had been to
join a "seringal," or caoutchouc concern, in which in those days a good
workman could earn from five to six piastres a day, and could hope to become a
master if he had any luck; but Magalhaés very truly observed that if the pay was
good, work was only found in the seringals at harvest time--that is to say, during
only a few months of the year--and this would not constitute the permanent
position that a young man ought to wish for.

The Portuguese was right. Joam Garral saw it, and entered resolutely into the
service of the fazenda, deciding to devote to it all his powers.

Magalhaés had no cause to regret his generous action. His business
recovered. His wood trade, which extended by means of the Amazon up to Para,
was soon considerably extended under the impulse of Joam Garral. The fazenda
began to grow in proportion, and to spread out along the bank of the river up to
its junction with the Nanay. A delightful residence was made of the house; it was
raised a story, surrounded by a veranda, and half hidden under beautiful trees--
mimosas, fig-sycamores, bauhinias, and paullinias, whose trunks were invisible
beneath a network of scarlet-flowered bromelias and passion-flowers.

At a distance, behind huge bushes and a dense mass of arborescent plants,


were concealed the buildings in which the staff of the fazenda were
accommodated--the servants' offices, the cabins of the blacks, and the huts of the
Indians. From the bank of the river, bordered with reeds and aquatic plants, the
tree-encircled house was alone visible.

A vast meadow, laboriously cleared along the lagoons, offered excellent
pasturage. Cattle abounded--a new source of profit in these fertile countries,
where a herd doubles in four years, and where ten per cent. interest is earned by
nothing more than the skins and the hides of the animals killed for the
consumption of those who raise them! A few "sitios," or manioc and coffee
plantations, were started in parts of the woods which were cleared. Fields of
sugar-canes soon required the construction of a mill to crush the sacchariferous
stalks destined to be used hereafter in the manufacture of molasses, tafia, and
rum. In short, ten years after the arrival of Joam Garral at the farm at Iquitos the
fazenda had become one of the richest establishments on the Upper Amazon.
Thanks to the good management exercised by the young clerk over the works at
home and the business abroad, its prosperity daily increased.

The Portuguese did not wait so long to acknowledge what he owed to Joam
Garral. In order to recompense him in proportion to his merits he had from the
first given him an interest in the profits of his business, and four years after his
arrival he had made him a partner on the same footing as himself, and with equal
shares.

But there was more that he had in store for him. Yaquita, his daughter, had,
in this silent young man, so gentle to others, so stern to himself, recognized the
sterling qualities which her father had done. She was in love with him, but
though on his side Joam had not remained insensible to the merits and the beauty
of this excellent girl, he was too proud and reserved to dream of asking her to
marry him.

A serious incident hastened the solution.

Magalhaés was one day superintending a clearance and was mortally
wounded by the fall of a tree. Carried home helpless to the farm, and feeling
himself lost, he raised up Yaquita, who was weeping by his side, took her hand,
and put it into that of Joam Garral, making him swear to take her for his wife.

"You have made my fortune," he said, "and I shall not die in peace unless by
this union I know that the fortune of my daughter is assured."

"I can continue her devoted servant, her brother, her protector, without being
her husband," Joam Garral had at first replied. "I owe you all, Magalhaés. I will
never forget it, but the price you would pay for my endeavors is out of all
proportion to what they are worth."

The old man insisted. Death would not allow him to wait; he demanded the


promise, and it was made to him.

Yaquita was then twenty-two years old, Joam was twenty-six. They loved
each other and they were married some hours before the death of Magalhaés,
who had just strength left to bless their union.

It was under these circumstances that in 1830 Joam Garral became the new
fazender of Iquitos, to the immense satisfaction of all those who composed the
staff of the farm.

The prosperity of the setthkement could not do otherwise than grow when
these two minds were thus united.

A year after her marriage Yaquita presented her husband with a son, and, two
years after, a daughter. Benito and Minha, the grandchildren of the old
Portuguese, became worthy of their grandfather, children worthy of Joam and
Yaquita.

The daughter grew to be one of the most charming of girls. She never left the
fazenda. Brought up in pure and healthy surroundings, in the midst of the
beauteous nature of the tropics, the education given to her by her mother, and the
instruction received by her from her father, were ample. What more could she
have learned in a convent at Manaos or Belem? Where would she have found
better examples of the domestic virtues? Would her mind and feelings have been
more delicately formed away from her home? If it was ordained that she was not
to succeed her mother in the management of the fazenda, she was equal to any
other position to which she might be called.

With Benito it was another thing. His father very wisely wished him to
receive as solid and complete an education as could then be obtained in the large
towns of Brazil. There was nothing which the rich fazender refused his son.
Benito was possessed of a cheerful disposition, an active mind, a lively
intelligence, and qualities of heart equal to those of his head. At the age of
twelve he was sent into Para, to Belem, and there, under the direction of
excellent professors, he acquired the elements of an education which could not
but eventually make him a distinguished man. Nothing in literature, in the
sciences, in the arts, was a stranger to him. He studied as if the fortune of his
father would not allow him to remain idle. He was not among such as imagine
that riches exempt men from work--he was one of those noble characters,
resolute and just, who believe that nothing should diminish our natural
obligation in this respect if we wish to be worthy of the name of men.

During the first years of his residence at Belem, Benito had made the
acquaintance of Manoel Valdez. This young man, the son of a merchant in Para,
was pursuing his studies in the same institution as Benito. The conformity of
their characters and their tastes proved no barrier to their uniting in the closest of


friendships, and they became inseparable companions.

Manoel, born in 1832, was one year older than Benito. He had only a mother,
and she lived on the modest fortune which her husband had left her. When
Manoel's preliminary studies were finished, he had taken up the subject of
medicine. He had a passionate taste for that noble profession, and his intention
was to enter the army, toward which he felt himself attracted.

At the time that we saw him with his friend Benito, Manoel Valdez had
already obtained his first step, and he had come away on leave for some months
to the fazenda, where he was accustomed to pass his holidays. Well-built, and of
distinguished bearing, with a certain native pride which became him well, the
young man was treated by Joam and Yaquita as another son. But if this quality of
son made him the brother of Benito, the title was scarcely appreciated by him
when Minha was concerned, for he soon became attached to the young girl by a
bond more intimate than could exist between brother and sister.

In the year 1852--of which four months had already passed before the
commencement of this history--Joam Garral attained the age of forty-eight years.
In that sultry climate, which wears men away so quickly, he had known how, by
sobriety, self-denial, suitable living, and constant work, to remain untouched
where others had prematurely succumbed. His hair, which he wore short, and his
beard, which was full, had already grown gray, and gave him the look of a
Puritan. The proverbial honesty of the Brazilian merchants and fazenders
showed itself in his features, of which straightforwardness was the leading
characteristic. His calm temperament seemed to indicate an interior fire, kept
well under control. The fearlessness of his look denoted a deep-rooted strength,
to which, when danger threatened, he could never appeal in vain.

But, notwithstanding one could not help remarking about this quiet man of
vigorous health, with whom all things had succeeded in life, a depth of sadness
which even the tenderness of Yaquita had not been able to subdue.

Respected by all, placed in all the conditions that would seem necessary to
happiness, why was not this just man more cheerful and less reserved? Why did
he seem to be happy for others and not for himself? Was this disposition
attributable to some secret grief? Herein was a constant source of anxiety to his
wife.

Yaquita was now forty-four. In that tropical country where women are
already old at thirty she had learned the secret of resisting the climate's
destructive influences, and her features, a little sharpened but still beautiful,
retained the haughty outline of the Portuguese type, in which nobility of face
unites so naturally with dignity of mind.

Benito and Minha responded with an affection unbounded and unceasing for


the love which their parents bore them.

Benito was now aged twenty-one, and quick, brave, and sympathetic,
contrasted outwardly with his friend Manoel, who was more serious and
reflective. It was a great treat for Benito, after quite a year passed at Belem, so
far from the fazenda, to return with his young friend to his home to see once
more his father, his mother, his sister, and to find himself, enthusiastic hunter as
he was, in the midst of these superb forests of the Upper Amazon, some of
whose secrets remained after so many centuries still unsolved by man.

Minha was twenty years old. A lovely girl, brunette, and with large blue
eyes, eyes which seemed to open into her very soul; of middle height, good
figure, and winning grace, in every way the very image of Yaquita. A little more
serious than her brother, affable, good-natured, and charitable, she was beloved
by all. On this subject you could fearlessly interrogate the humblest servants of
the fazenda. It was unnecessary to ask her brother's friend, Manoel Valdez, what
he thought of her. He was too much interested in the question to have replied
without a certain amount of partiality.

This sketch of the Garral family would not be complete, and would lack
some of its features, were we not to mention the numerous staff of the fazenda.

In the first place, then, it behooves us to name an old negress, of some sixty
years, called Cybele, free through the will of her master, a slave through her
affection for him and his, and who had been the nurse of Yaquita. She was one of
the family. She thee-ed and thou-ed both daughter and mother. The whole of this
good creature's life was passed in these fields, in the middle of these forests, on
that bank of the river which bounded the horizon of the farm. Coming as a child
to Iquitos in the slave-trading times, she had never quitted the village; she was
married there, and early a widow, had lost her only son, and remained in the
service of Magalhaés. Of the Amazon she knew no more than what flowed
before her eyes.

With her, and more specially attached to the service of Minha, was a pretty,
laughing mulatto, of the same age as her mistress, to whom she was completely
devoted. She was called Lina. One of those gentle creatures, a little spoiled,
perhaps, to whom a good deal of familiarity is allowed, but who in return adore
their mistresses. Quick, restless, coaxing, and lazy, she could do what she
pleased in the house.

As for servants they were of two kinds--Indians, of whom there were about a
hundred, employed always for the works of the fazenda, and blacks to about
double the number, who were not yet free, but whose children were not born
slaves. Joam Garral had herein preceded the Brazilian government. In this
country, moreover, the negroes coming from Benguela, the Congo, or the Gold


Coast were always treated with kindness, and it was not at the fazenda of Iquitos
that one would look for those sad examples of cruelty which were so frequent on
foreign plantations.


CHAPTER IV. HESITATION

MANOEL WAS in love with the sister of his friend Benito, and she was in
love with him. Each was sensible of the other's worth, and each was worthy of
the other.

When he was no longer able to mistake the state of his feelings toward
Minha, Manoel had opened his heart to Benito.

"Manoel, my friend," had immediately answered the enthusiastic young
fellow, "you could not do better than wish to marry my sister. Leave it to me! I
will commence by speaking to the mother, and I think I can promise that you
will not have to wait long for her consent."

Half an hour afterward he had done so.

Benito had nothing to tell his mother which she did not know; Yaquita had
already divined the young people's secret.

Before ten minutes had elapsed Benito was in the presence of Minha. They
had but to agree; there was no need for much eloquence. At the first words the
head of the gentle girl was laid on her brother's shoulder, and the confession, "I
am so happy!" was whispered from her heart.

The answer almost came before the question; that was obvious. Benito did
not ask for more.

There could be little doubt as to Joam Garral's consent. But if Yaquita and
her children did not at once speak to him about the marriage, it was because they
wished at the same time to touch on a question which might be more difficult to
solve. That question was, Where should the wedding take place?

Where should it be celebrated? In the humble cottage which served for the
village church? Why not? Joam and Yaquita had there received the nuptial
benediction of the Padre Passanha, who was then the curate of Iquitos parish. At
that time, as now, there was no distinction in Brazil between the civil and
religious acts, and the registers of the mission were sufficient testimony to a
ceremony which no officer of the civil power was intrusted to attend to.

Joam Garral would probably wish the marriage to take place at Iquitos, with
grand ceremonies and the attendance of the whole staff of the fazenda, but if
such was to be his idea he would have to withstand a vigorous attack concerning
it.

"Manoel," Minha said to her betrothed, "if I was consulted in the matter we


should not be married here, but at Para. Madame Valdez is an invalid; she cannot
visit Iquitos, and I should not like to become her daughter without knowing and
being known by her. My mother agrees with me in thinking so. We should like to
persuade my father to take us to Belem. Do you not think so?"

To this proposition Manoel had replied by pressing Minha's hand. He also
had a great wish for his mother to be present at his marriage. Benito had
approved the scheme without hesitation, and it was only necessary to persuade
Joam Garral. And hence on this day the young men had gone out hunting in the
woods, so as to leave Yaquita alone with her husband.

In the afternoon these two were in the large room of the house. Joam Garral,
who had just come in, was half-reclining on a couch of plaited bamboos, when
Yaquita, a little anxious, came and seated herself beside him.

To tell Joam of the feelings which Manoel entertained toward his daughter
was not what troubled her. The happiness of Minha could not but be assured by
the marriage, and Joam would be glad to welcome to his arms the new son
whose sterling qualities he recognized and appreciated. But to persuade her
husband to leave the fazenda Yaquita felt to be a very serious matter.

In fact, since Joam Garral, then a young man, had arrived in the country, he
had never left it for a day. Though the sight of the Amazon, with its waters
gently flowing to the east, invited him to follow its course; though Joam every
year sent rafts of wood to Manaos, to Belem, and the seacoast of Para; though he
had seen each year Benito leave after his holidays to return to his studies, yet the
thought seemed never to have occurred to him to go with him.

The products of the farm, of the forest, and of the fields, the fazender sold on
the spot. He had no wish, either with thought or look, to go beyond the horizon
which bounded his Eden.

From this it followed that for twenty-five years Joam Garral had never
crossed the Brazilian frontier, his wife and daughter had never set foot on
Brazilian soil. The longing to see something of that beautiful country of which
Benito was often talking was not wanting, nevertheless. Two or three times
Yaquita had sounded her husband in the matter. But she had noticed that the
thought of leaving the fazenda, if only for a few weeks, brought an increase of
sadness to his face. His eyes would close, and in a tone of mild reproach he
would answer:

"Why leave our home? Are we not comfortable here?"

And Yaquita, in the presence of the man whose active kindness and
unchangeable tenderness rendered her so happy, had not the courage to persist.

This time, however, there was a serious reason to make it worth while. The
marriage of Minha afforded an excellent opportunity, it being so natural for them


to accompany her to Belem, where she was going to live with her husband. She
would there see and learn to love the mother of Manoel Valdez. How could Joam
Garral hesitate in the face of so praiseworthy a desire? Why, on the other hand,
did he not participate in this desire to become acquainted with her who was to be
the second mother of his child?

Yaquita took her husband's hand, and with that gentle voice which had been
to him all the music of his life:

"Joam," she said, "I am going to talk to you about something which we
ardently wish, and which will make you as happy as we are."

"What is it about, Yaquita?" asked Joam.

"Manoel loves your daughter, he is loved by her, and in this union they will
find the happiness----"

At the first words of Yaquita Joam Garral had risen, without being able to
control a sudden start. His eyes were immediately cast down, and he seemed to
designedly avoid the look of his wife.

"What is the matter with you?" asked she.

"Minha? To get married!" murmured Joam.

"My dear," said Yaquita, feeling somewhat hurt, "have you any objection to
make to the marriage? Have you not for some time noticed the feelings which
Manoel has entertained toward our daughter?"

"Yes; and a year since----"

And Joam sat down without finishing his thoughts. By an effort of his will he
had again become master of himself. The unaccountable impression which had
been made upon him disappeared. Gradually his eyes returned to meet those of
Yaquita, and he remained thoughtfully looking at her.

Yaquita took his hand.

"Joam," she said, "have I been deceived? Had you no idea that this marriage
would one day take place, and that it would give her every chance of
happiness?"

"Yes," answered Joam. "All! Certainly. But, Yaquita, this wedding--this
wedding that we are both thinking of--when is it coming off? Shortly?"

"Tt will come off when you choose, Joam."

"And it will take place here--at Iquitos?"

This question obliged Yaquita to enter on the other matter which she had at
heart. She did not do so, however, without some hesitation, which was quite
intelligible.

"Joam," said she, after a moment's silence, "listen to me. Regarding this
wedding, I have got a proposal which I hope you will approve of. Two or three
times during the last twenty years I have asked you to take me and my daughter


to the provinces of the Lower Amazon, and to Para, where we have never been.
The cares of the fazenda, the works which have required your presence, have not
allowed you to grant our request. To absent yourself even for a few days would
then have injured your business. But now everything has been successful beyond
your dreams, and if the hour of repose has not yet come for you, you can at least
for a few weeks get away from your work."

Joam Garral did not answer, but Yaquita felt his hand tremble in hers, as
though under the shock of some sorrowful recollection. At the same time a half-
smile came to her husband's lips--a mute invitation for her to finish what she had
begun.

"Joam," she continued, "here is an occasion which we shall never see again
in this life. Minha is going to be married away from us, and is going to leave us!
It is the first sorrow which our daughter has caused us, and my heart quails when
I think of the separation which is so near! But I should be content if I could
accompany her to Belem! Does it not seem right to you, even in other respects
that we should know her husband's mother, who is to replace me, and to whom
we are about to entrust her? Added to this, Minha does not wish to grieve
Madame Valdez by getting married at a distance from her. When we were
married, Joam, if your mother had been alive, would you not have liked her to be
present at your wedding?"

At these words of Yaquita Joam made a movement which he could not
repress.

"My dear,” continued Yaquita, "with Minha, with our two sons, Benito and
Manoel, with you, how I should like to see Brazil, and to journey down this
splendid river, even to the provinces on the seacoast through which it runs! It
seems to me that the separation would be so much less cruel! As we came back
we should revisit our daughter in her house with her second mother. I would not
think of her as gone I knew not where. I would fancy myself much less a
stranger to the doings of her life."

This time Joam had fixed his eyes on his wife and looked at her for some
time without saying anything.

What ailed him? Why this hesitation to grant a request which was so just in
itself--to say "Yes," when it would give such pleasure to all who belonged to
him? His business affairs could not afford a sufficient reason. A few weeks of
absence would not compromise matters to such a degree. His manager would be
able to take his place without any hitch in the fazenda. And yet all this time he
hesitated.

Yaquita had taken both her husband's hands in hers, and pressed them
tenderly.


"Joam," she said, "it is not a mere whim that I am asking you to grant. No!
For a long time I have thought over the proposition I have just made to you; and
if you consent, it will be the realization of my most cherished desire. Our
children know why I am now talking to you. Minha, Benito, Manoel, all ask this
favor, that we should accompany them. We would all rather have the wedding at
Belem than at Iquitos. It will be better for your daughter, for her establishment,
for the position which she will take at Belem, that she should arrive with her
people, and appear less of a stranger in the town in which she will spend most of
her life."

Joam Garral leaned on his elbows. For a moment he hid his face in his hands,
like a man who had to collect his thoughts before he made answer. There was
evidently some hesitation which he was anxious to overcome, even some trouble
which his wife felt but could not explain. A secret battle was being fought under
that thoughtful brow. Yaquita got anxious, and almost reproached herself for
raising the question. Anyhow, she was resigned to what Joam should decide. If
the expedition would cost too much, she would silence her wishes; she would
never more speak of leaving the fazenda, and never ask the reason for the
inexplicable refusal.

Some minutes passed. Joam Garral rose. He went to the door, and did not
return. Then he seemed to give a last look on that glorious nature, on that corner
of the world where for twenty years of his life he had met with all his happiness.

Then with slow steps he returned to his wife. His face bore a new expression,
that of a man who had taken a last decision, and with whom irresolution had
ceased.

"You are right," he said, in a firm voice. "The journey is necessary. When
shall we start?"

"Ah! Joam! my Joam!" cried Yaquita, in her joy. "Thank you for me! Thank
you for them!"

And tears of affection came to her eyes as her husband clasped her to his
heart.

At this moment happy voices were heard outside at the door of the house.

Manoel and Benito appeared an instant after at the threshold, almost at the
same moment as Minha entered the room.

"Children! your father consents!" cried Yaquita. '"We are going to Belem!"

With a grave face, and without speaking a word, Joam Garral received the
congratulations of his son and the kisses of his daughter.

"And what date, father," asked Benito, "have you fixed for the wedding?"

"Date?" answered Joam. "Date? We shall see. We will fix it at Belem."

"Tam so happy! I am so happy!" repeated Minha, as she had done on the day


when she had first known of Manoel's request. "We shall now see the Amazon in
all its glory throughout its course through the provinces of Brazil! Thanks,
father!"

And the young enthusiast, whose imagination was already stirred, continued
to her brother and to Manoel:

"Let us be off to the library! Let us get hold of every book and every map
that we can find which will tell us anything about this magnificent river system!
Don't let us travel like blind folks! I want to see everything and know everything
about this king of the rivers of the earth!"


CHAPTER V. THE AMAZON

"THE LARGEST river in the whole world!" said Benito to Manoel Valdez,
on the morrow.

They were sitting on the bank which formed the southern boundary of the
fazenda, and looking at the liquid molecules passing slowly by, which, coming
from the enormous range of the Andes, were on their road to lose themselves in
the Atlantic Ocean eight hundred leagues away.

"And the river which carries to the sea the largest volume of water," replied
Manoel.

"A volume so considerable," added Benito, "that it freshens the sea water for
an immense distance from its mouth, and the force of whose current is felt by
ships at eight leagues from the coast."

"A river whose course is developed over more than thirty degrees of
latitude."

"And in a basin which from south to north does not comprise less than
twenty-five degrees."

"A basin!" exclaimed Benito. "Can you call it a basin, the vast plain through
which it runs, the savannah which on all sides stretches out of sight, without a
hill to give a gradient, without a mountain to bound the horizon?"

"And along its whole extent,” continued Manoel, "like the thousand tentacles
of some gigantic polyp, two hundred tributaries, flowing from north or south,
themselves fed by smaller affluents without number, by the side of which the
large rivers of Europe are but petty streamlets."

"And in its course five hundred and sixty islands, without counting islets,
drifting or stationary, forming a kind of archipelago, and yielding of themselves
the wealth of a kingdom!"

"And along its flanks canals, lagoons, and lakes, such as cannot be met with
even in Switzerland, Lombardy, Scotland, or Canada."


"A river which, fed by its myriad tributaries, discharges into the Atlantic over
two hundred and fifty millions of cubic meters of water every hour."

"A river whose course serves as the boundary of two republics, and sweeps
majestically across the largest empire of South America, as if it were, in very
truth, the Pacific Ocean itself flowing out along its own canal into the Atlantic."

"And what a mouth! An arm of the sea in which one island, Marajo, has a
circumference of more than five hundred leagues!"

"And whose waters the ocean does not pond back without raising in a strife
which is phenomenal, a tide-race, or 'pororoca,' to which the ebbs, the bores, and
the eddies of other rivers are but tiny ripples fanned up by the breeze."

"A river which three names are scarcely enough to distinguish, and which
ships of heavy tonnage, without any change in their cargoes, can ascend for more
than three thousand miles from its mouth."

"A river which, by itself, its affluents, and subsidiary streams, opens a
navigable commercial route across the whole of the south of the continent,
passing from the Magdalena to the Ortequazza, from the Ortequazza to the
Caqueta, from the Caqueta to the Putumayo, from the Putumayo to the Amazon!
Four thousand miles of waterway, which only require a few canals to make the
network of navigation complete!"

"In short, the biggest and most admirable river system which we have in the
world."

The two young men were speaking in a kind of frenzy of their incomparable
river. They were themselves children of this great Amazon, whose affluents, well
worthy of itself, from the highways which penetrate Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, New
Grenada, Venezuela, and the four Guianas--English, French, Dutch and
Brazilian.

What nations, what races, has it seen whose origin is lost in the far-distant
past! It is one of the largest rivers of the globe. Its true source still baffles our
explorers. Numbers of States still claim the honor of giving it birth. The Amazon
was not likely to escape the inevitable fate, and Peru, Ecuador, and Colombia
have for years disputed as to the honor of its glorious paternity.

To-day, however, there seems to be little doubt but that the Amazon rises in
Peru, in the district of Huaraco, in the department of Tarma, and that it starts
from the Lake of Lauricocha, which is situated between the eleventh and twelfth
degree of south latitude.

Those who make the river rise in Bolivia, and descend form the mountains of
Titicaca, have to prove that the true Amazon is the Ucayali, which is formed by
the junction of the Paro and the Apurimac--an assertion which is now generally
rejected.


At its departure from Lake Lauricocha the youthful river starts toward the
northeast for a distance of five hundred and sixty miles, and does not strike to
the west until it has received an important tributary--the Panta. It is called the
Marafion in its journey through Colombia and Peru up to the Brazilian frontier--
or, rather, the Maranhao, for Marafion is only the French rendering of the
Portuguese name.

From the frontier of Brazil to Manaos, where the superb Rio Negro joins it, it
takes the name of the Solimaés, or Solimoens, from the name of the Indian tribe
Solimao, of which survivors are still found in the neighboring provinces. And,
finally, from Manaos to the sea it is the Amasenas, or river of the Amazons, a
name given it by the old Spaniards, the descendants of the adventurous Orellana,
whose vague but enthusiastic stories went to show that there existed a tribe of
female warriors on the Rio Nhamunda, one of the middle-sized affluents of the
great river.

From its commencement the Amazon is recognizable as destined to become
a magnificent stream. There are neither rapids nor obstacles of any sort until it
reaches a defile where its course is slightly narrowed between two picturesque
and unequal precipices. No falls are met with until this point is reached, where it
curves to the eastward, and passes through the intermediary chain of the Andes.
Hereabouts are a few waterfalls, were it not for which the river would be
navigable from its mouth to its source. As it is, however, according the
Humboldt, the Amazon is free for five-sixths of its length.

And from its first starting there is no lack of tributaries, which are
themselves fed by subsidiary streams. There is the Chinchipa, coming from the
northeast, on its left. On its right it is joined by the Chachapoyas, coming from
the northeast. On the left we have the Marona and the Pastuca; and the Guallaga
comes in from the right near the mission station of Laguna. On the left there
comes the Chambyra and the Tigré, flowing from the northeast; and on the right
the Huallaga, which joins the main stream twenty-eight hundred miles from the
Atlantic, and can be ascended by steamboats for over two hundred miles into the
very heart of Peru. To the right, again, near the mission of San Joachim
d'Omaguas, just where the upper basin terminates, and after flowing majestically
across the pampas of Sacramento, it receives the magnificent Ucayali, the great
artery which, fed by numerous affluents, descends from Lake Chucuito, in the
northeast of Arica.

Such are the principal branches above the village of Iquitos. Down the
stream the tributaries become so considerable that the beds of most European
rivers would fail to contain them. But the mouths of these auxiliary waters Joam
Garral and his people will pass as they journey down the Amazon.


To the beauties of this unrivaled river, which waters the finest country in the
world, and keeps along its whole course at a few degrees to the south of the
equator, there is to be added another quality, possessed by neither the Nile, the
Mississippi, nor the Livingstone--or, in other words, the old Congo-Zaira-
Lualaba--and that is (although some ill-informed travelers have stated to the
contrary) that the Amazon crosses a most healthy part of South America. Its
basin is constantly swept by westerly winds. It is not a narrow valley surrounded
by high mountains which border its banks, but a huge plain, measuring three
hundred and fifty leagues from north to south, scarcely varied with a few knolls,
whose whole extent the atmospheric currents can traverse unchecked.

Professor Agassiz very properly protested against the pretended
unhealthiness o the climate of a country which is destined to become one of the
most active of the world's producers. According to him, "a soft and gentle breeze
is constantly observable, and produces an evaporation, thanks to which the
temperature is kept down, and the sun does not give out heat unchecked. The
constancy of this refreshing breeze renders the climate of the river Amazon
agreeable, and even delightful."

The Abbé Durand has likewise testified that if the temperature does not drop
below 25 degrees Centigrade, it never rises above 33 degrees, and this gives for
the year a mean temperature of from 28 degrees to 29 degrees, with a range of
only 8 degrees.

After such statements we are safe in affirming that the basin of the Amazon
has none of the burning heats of countries like Asia and Africa, which are
crossed by the same parallels.

The vast plain which serves for its valley is accessible over its whole extent
to the generous breezes which come from off the Atlantic.

And the provinces to which the river has given its name have acknowledged
right to call themselves the healthiest of a country which is one of the finest on
the earth.

And how can we say that the hydrographical system of the Amazon is not
known?

In the sixteenth century Orellana, the lieutenant of one of the brothers
Pizarro, descended the Rio Negro, arrived on the main river in 1540, ventured
without a guide across the unknown district, and, after eighteen months of a
navigation of which is record is most marvelous, reached the mouth.

In 1636 and 1637 the Portuguese Pedro Texeira ascended the Amazon to
Napo, with a fleet of forty-seven pirogues.

In 1743 La Condamine, after having measured an arc of the meridian at the
equator, left his companions Bouguer and Godin des Odonais, embarked on the


Chinchipe, descended it to its junction with the Marafion, reached the mouth at
Napo on the 31st of July, just in time to observe an emersion of the first satellite
of Jupiter--which allowed this "Humboldt of the eighteenth century" to
accurately determine the latitude and longitude of the spot--visited the villages
on both banks, and on the 6th of September arrived in front of the fort of Para.
This immense journey had important results--not only was the course of the
Amazon made out in scientific fashion, but it seemed almost certain that it
communicated with the Orinoco.

Fifty-five years later Humboldt and Bonpland completed the valuable work
of La Condamine, and drew up the map of the Manajfion as far as Napo.

Since this period the Amazon itself and all its principal tributaries have been
frequently visited.

In 1827 Lister-Maw, in 1834 and 1835 Smyth, in 1844 the French lieutenant
in command of the "Boulonnaise," the Brazilian Valdez in 1840, the French
"Paul Marcoy" from 1848 to 1860, the whimsical painter Biard in 1859,
Professor Agassiz in 1865 and 1866, in 1967 the Brazilian engineer Franz
Keller-Linzenger, and lastly, in 1879 Doctor Crevaux, have explored the course
of the river, ascended many of its tributaries, and ascertained the navigability of
its principal affluents.

But what has won the greatest honor for the Brazilian government is that on
the 31st of July, 1857, after numerous frontier disputes between France and
Brazil, about the Guiana boundary, the course of the Amazon was declared to be
free and open to all flags; and, to make practice harmonize with theory, Brazil
entered into negotiations with the neighboring powers for the exploration of
every river-road in the basin of the Amazon.

To-day lines of well-found steamboats, which correspond direct with
Liverpool, are plying on the river from its mouth up to Manaos; others ascend to
Iquitos; others by way of the Tapajoz, the Madeira, the Rio Negro, or the Purus,
make their way into the center of Peru and Bolivia.

One can easily imagine the progress which commerce will one day make in
this immense and wealthy area, which is without a rival in the world.

But to this medal of the future there is a reverse. No progress can be
accomplished without detriment to the indigenous races.

In face, on the Upper Amazon many Indian tribes have already disappeared,
among others the Curicicurus and the Sorimaos. On the Putumayo, if a few Yuris
are still met with, the Yahuas have abandoned the district to take refuge among
some of the distant tributaries, and the Maoos have quitted its banks to wander in
their diminished numbers among the forests of Japura.

The Tunantins is almost depopulated, and there are only a few families of


wandering Indians at the mouth of the Jurua. The Teffé is almost deserted, and
near the sources of the Japur there remained but the fragments of the great nation
of the Umaiia. The Coari is forsaken. There are but few Muras Indians on the
banks of the Purus. Of the ancient Manaos one can count but a wandering party
or two. On the banks of the Rio Negro there are only a few half-breeds,
Portuguese and natives, where a few years ago twenty-four different nations had
their homes.

Such is the law of progress. The Indians will disappear. Before the Anglo-
Saxon race Australians and Tasmanians have vanished. Before the conquerors of
the Far West the North American Indians have been wiped out. One day perhaps
the Arabs will be annihilated by the colonization of the French.

But we must return to 1852. The means of communication, so numerous
now, did not then exist, and the journey of Joam Garral would require not less
than four months, owing to the conditions under which it was made.

Hence this observation of Benito, while the two friends were watching the
river as it gently flowed at their feet:

"Manoel, my friend, if there is very little interval between our arrival at
Belem and the moment of our separation, the time will appear to you to be very
short."

"Yes, Benito," said Manoel, "and very long as well, for Minha cannot by my
wife until the end of the voyage."


CHAPTER VI. AFOREST ON THE GROUND

THE GARRAL family were in high glee. The magnificent journey on the
Amazon was to be undertaken under conditions as agreeable as possible. Not
only were the fazender and his family to start on a voyage for several months,
but, as we shall see, he was to be accompanied by a part of the staff of the farm.

In beholding every one happy around him, Joam forgot the anxieties which
appeared to trouble his life. From the day his decision was taken he had been
another man, and when he busied himself about the preparations for the
expedition he regained his former activity. His people rejoiced exceedingly at
seeing him again at work. His moral self reacted against his physical self, and
Joam again became the active, energetic man of his earlier years, and moved
about once more as though he had spent his life in the open air, under the
invigorating influences of forests, fields, and running waters.

Moreover, the few weeks that were to precede his departure had been well
employed.

At this period, as we have just remarked, the course of the Amazon was not


yet furrowed by the numberless steam vessels, which companies were only then
thinking of putting into the river. The service was worked by individuals on their
own account alone, and often the boats were only employed in the business of
the riverside establishments.

These boats were either "ubas," canoes made from the trunk of a tree,
hollowed out by fire, and finished with the ax, pointed and light in front, and
heavy and broad in the stern, able to carry from one to a dozen paddlers, and of
three or four tons burden: "egariteas," constructed on a larger scale, of broader
design, and leaving on each side a gangway for the rowers: or "jangada," rafts of
no particular shape, propelled by a triangular sail, and surmounted by a cabin of
mud and straw, which served the Indian and his family for a floating home.

These three kinds of craft formed the lesser flotilla of the Amazon, and were
only suited for a moderate traffic of passengers or merchandise.

Larger vessels, however, existed, either "vigilingas," ranging from eight up
to ten tons, with three masts rigged with red sails, and which in calm weather
were rowed by four long paddles not at all easy to work against the stream; or
"cobertas," of twenty tons burden, a kind of junk with a poop behind and a cabin
down below, with two masts and square sails of unequal size, and propelled,
when the wind fell, by six long sweeps which Indians worked from a forecastle.

But neither of these vessels satisfied Joam Garral. From the moment that he
had resolved to descend the Amazon he had thought of making the most of the
voyage by carrying a huge convoy of goods into Para. From this point of view
there was no necessity to descend the river in a hurry. And the determination to
which he had come pleased every one, excepting, perhaps, Manoel, who would
for very good reasons have preferred some rapid steamboat.

But though the means of transport devised by Joam were primitive in the
extreme, he was going to take with him a numerous following and abandon
himself to the stream under exceptional conditions of comfort and security.

It would be, in truth, as if a part of the fazenda of Iquitos had been cut away
from the bank and carried down the Amazon with all that composed the family
of the fazender--masters and servants, in their dwellings, their cottages, and their
huts.

The settlement of Iquitos included a part of those magnificent forests which,
in the central districts of South America, are practically inexhaustible.

Joam Garral thoroughly understood the management of these woods, which
were rich in the most precious and diverse species adapted for joinery, cabinet
work, ship building, and carpentry, and from them he annually drew
considerable profits.

The river was there in front of him, and could it not be as safely and


v


economically used as a railway if one existed? So every year Joam Garral felled
some hundreds of trees from his stock and formed immense rafts of floating
wood, of joists, beams, and slightly squared trunks, which were taken to Para in
charge of capable pilots who were thoroughly acquainted with the depths of the
river and the direction of its currents.

This year Joam Garral decided to do as he had done in preceding years. Only,
when the raft was made up, he was going to leave to Benito all the detail of the
trading part of the business. But there was no time to lose. The beginning of June
was the best season to start, for the waters, increased by the floods of the upper
basin, would gradually and gradually subside until the month of October.

The first steps had thus to be taken without delay, for the raft was to be of
unusual proportions. It would be necessary to fell a half-mile square of the forest
which was situated at the junction of the Nanay and the Amazon--that is to say,
the whole river side of the fazenda, to form the enormous mass, for such were
the jangadas, or river rafts, which attained the dimensions of a small island.

It was in this jangada, safer than any other vessel of the country, larger than
a hundred egariteas or vigilingas coupled together, that Joam Garral proposed to
embark with his family, his servants, and his merchandise.

"Excellent idea!" had cried Minha, clapping her hands, when she learned her
father's scheme.

"Yes," said Yaquita, "and in that way we shall reach Belem without danger or
fatigue."

"And during the stoppages we can have some hunting in the forests which
line the banks," added Benito.

"Won't it take rather long?" observed Manoel; "could we not hit upon some
quicker way of descending the Amazon?"

It would take some time, obviously, but the interested observation of the
young doctor received no attention from any one.

Joam Garral then called in an Indian who was the principal manager of the
fazenda.

"In a month," he said to him, "the jangada must be built and ready to
launch."

"We'll set to work this very day, sir."

It was a heavy task. There were about a hundred Indians and blacks, and
during the first fortnight in May they did wonders. Some people unaccustomed
to these great tree massacres would perhaps have groaned to see giants many
hundred years old fall in a few hours beneath the axes of the woodmen; but there
was such a quantity on the banks of the river, up stream and down stream, even
to the most distant points of the horizon, that the felling of this half-mile of


forest would scarcely leave an appreciable void.

The superintendent of the men, after receiving the instructions of Joam
Garral, had first cleared the ground of the creepers, brushwood, weeds, and
arborescent plants which obstructed it. Before taking to the saw and the ax they
had armed themselves with a felling-sword, that indispensable tool of every one
who desires to penetrate the Amazonian forests, a large blade slightly curved,
wide and flat, and two or three feet long, and strongly handled, which the natives
wield with consummate address. In a few hours, with the help of the felling-
sword, they had cleared the ground, cut down the underwood, and opened large
gaps into the densest portions of the wood.

In this way the work progressed. The ground was cleared in front of the
woodmen. The old trunks were divested of their clothing of creepers, cacti,
ferns, mosses, and bromelias. They were stripped naked to the bark, until such
time as the bark itself was stripped from off them.

Then the whole of the workers, before whom fled an innumerable crowd of
monkeys who were hardly their superiors in agility, slung themselves into the
upper branches, sawing off the heavier boughs and cutting down the topmost
limbs, which had to be cleared away on the spot. Very soon there remained only
a doomed forest, with long bare stems, bereft of their crowns, through which the
sun luxuriantly rayed on to the humid soil which perhaps its shots had never
before caressed.

There was not a single tree which could not be used for some work of skill,
either in carpentry or cabinet-work. There, shooting up like columns of ivory
ringed with brown, were wax-palms one hundred and twenty feet high, and four
feet thick at their base; white chestnuts, which yield the three-cornered nuts;
"murichis," unexcelled for building purposes; "barrigudos," measuring a couple
of yards at the swelling, which is found at a few feet above the earth, trees with
shining russet bark dotted with gray tubercles, each pointed stem of which
supports a horizontal parasol; and "bombax" of superb stature, with its straight
and smooth white stem. Among these magnificent specimens of the Amazonian
flora there fell many "quatibos" whose rosy canopies towered above the
neighboring trees, whose fruits are like little cups with rows of chestnuts ranged
within, and whose wood of clear violet is specially in demand for shipbuilding.
And besides there was the ironwood; and more particularly the "ibiriratea,"
nearly black in its skin, and so close grained that of it the Indians make their
battle-axes; "jacarandas," more precious than mahogany; "cesalpinas," only
now found in the depths of the old forests which have escaped the woodman's
ax; "sapucaias," one hundred and fifty feet high, buttressed by natural arches,
which, starting from three yards from their base, rejoin the tree some thirty feet


up the stem, twining themselves round the trunk like the filatures of a twisted
column, whose head expands in a bouquet of vegetable fireworks made up of the
yellow, purple, and snowy white of the parasitic plants.

Three weeks after the work was begun not one was standing of all the trees
which had covered the angle of the Amazon and the Nanay. The clearance was
complete. Joam Garral had not even had to bestir himself in the demolition of a
forest which it would take twenty or thirty years to replace. Not a stick of young
or old wood was left to mark the boundary of a future clearing, not even an angle
to mark the limit of the denudation. It was indeed a clean sweep; the trees were
cut to the level of the earth, to wait the day when their roots would be got out,
over which the coming spring would still spread its verdant cloak.

This square space, washed on its sides by the waters of the river and its
tributary, was destined to be cleared, plowed, planted, and sown, and the
following year fields of manioc, coffee-shrubs, sugar-canes, arrowroot, maize,
and peanuts would occupy the ground so recently covered by the trees.

The last week of the month had not arrived when the trunks, classified
according to their varieties and specific gravity, were symmetrically arranged on
the bank of the Amazon, at the spot where the immense jangada was to be guilt--
which, with the different habitations for the accommodation of the crew, would
become a veritable floating village--to wait the time when the waters of the river,
swollen by the floods, would raise it and carry it for hundreds of leagues to the
Atlantic coast.

The whole time the work was going on Joam Garral had been engaged in
superintending it. From the clearing to the bank of the fazenda he had formed a
large mound on which the portions of the raft were disposed, and to this matter
he had attended entirely himself.

Yaquita was occupied with Cybele with the preparations for the departure,
though the old negress could not be made to understand why they wanted to go
or what they hoped to see.

"But you will see things that you never saw before," Yaquita kept saying to
her.

"Will they be better than what I see now?" was Cybele's invariable reply.

Minha and her favorite for their part took care of what more particularly
concerned them. They were not preparing for a simple voyage; for them it was a
permanent departure, and there were a thousand details to look after for settling
in the other country in which the young mulatto was to live with the mistress to
whom she was so devotedly attached. Minha was a trifle sorrowful, but the
joyous Lina was quite unaffected at leaving Iquitos. Minha Valdez would be the
same to her as Minha Garral, and to check her spirits she would have to be


separated from her mistress, and that was never thought of.

Benito had actively assisted his father in the work, which was on the point of
completion. He commenced his apprenticeship to the trade of a fazender, which
would probably one day become his own, as he was about to do that of a
merchant on their descent of the river.

As for Manoel, he divided his time between the house, where Yaquita and
her daughter were as busy as possible, and the clearing, to which Benito fetched
him rather oftener than he thought convenient, and on the whole the division was
very unequal, as may well be imagined.


CHAPTER VII. FOLLOWING A LIANA

IT WAS a Sunday, the 26th of May, and the young people had made up their
minds to take a holiday. The weather was splendid, the heat being tempered by
the refreshing breezes which blew from off the Cordilleras, and everything
invited them out for an excursion into the country.

Benito and Manoel had offered to accompany Minha through the thick
woods which bordered the right bank of the Amazon opposite the fazenda.

It was, in a manner, a farewell visit to the charming environs of Iquitos. The
young men went equipped for the chase, but as sportsmen who had no intention
of going far from their companions in pursuit of any game. Manoel could be
trusted for that, and the girls--for Lina could not leave her mistress--went
prepared for a walk, an excursion of two or three leagues being not too long to
frighten them.

Neither Joam Garral nor Yaquita had time to go with them. For one reason
the plan of the jangada was not yet complete, and it was necessary that its
construction should not be interrupted for a day, and another was that Yaquita
and Cybele, well seconded as they were by the domestics of the fazenda, had not
an hour to lose.

Minha had accepted the offer with much pleasure, and so, after breakfast on
the day we speak of, at about eleven o'clock, the two young men and the two
girls met on the bank at the angle where the two streams joined. One of the
blacks went with them. They all embarked in one of the ubas used in the service
of the farm, and after having passed between the islands of Iquitos and Parianta,
they reached the right bank of the Amazon.

They landed at a clump of superb tree-ferns, which were crowned, at a height
of some thirty feet with a sort of halo made of the dainty branches of green
velvet and the delicate lacework of the drooping fronds.

"Well, Manoel," said Minha, "it is for me to do the honors of the forest; you


are only a stranger in these regions of the Upper Amazon. We are at home here,
and you must allow me to do my duty, as mistress of the house."

"Dearest Minha," replied the young man, "you will be none the less mistress
of your house in our town of Belem than at the fazenda of Iquitos, and there as
here----"

"Now, then," interrupted Benito, "you did not come here to exchange loving
speeches, I imagine. Just forget for a few hours that you are engaged."

"Not for an hour--not for an instant!" said Manoel.

"Perhaps you will if Minha orders you?"

"Minha will not order me."

"Who knows?" said Lina, laughing.

"Lina is right," answered Minha, who held out her hand to Manoel. "Try to
forget! Forget! my brother requires it. All is broken off! As long as this walk
lasts we are not engaged: I am no more than the sister of Benito! You are only
my friend!"

"To be sure," said Benito.

"Bravo! bravo! there are only strangers here," said the young mulatto,
clapping her hands.

"Strangers who see each other for the first time," added the girl; "who meet,
bow to----"

"Mademoiselle!" said Manoel, turning to Minha.

"To whom have I the honor to speak, sir?" said she in the most serious
manner possible.

"To Manoel Valdez, who will be glad if your brother will introduce me."

"Oh, away with your nonsense!" cried Benito. "Stupid idea that I had! Be
engaged, my friends--be it as much as you like! Be it always!"

"Always!" said Minha, from whom the word escaped so naturally that Lina's
peals of laughter redoubled.

A grateful glance from Manoel repaid Minha for the imprudence of her
tongue.

"Come along," said Benito, so as to get his sister out of her embarrassment;
"if we walk on we shall not talk so much."

"One moment, brother," she said. "You have seen how ready I am to obey
you. You wished to oblige Manoel and me to forget each other, so as not to spoil
your walk. Very well; and now I am going to ask a sacrifice from you so that you
shall not spoil mine. Whether it pleases you or not, Benito, you must promise me
to forget----"

"Forget what?"

"That you are a sportsman!"


"What! you forbid me to----"

"I forbid you to fire at any of these charming birds--any of the parrots,
caciques, or curucus which are flying about so happily among the trees! And the
same interdiction with regard to the smaller game with which we shall have to
do to-day. If any ounce, jaguar, or such thing comes too near, well----"

"But----" said Benito.

"Tf not, I will take Manoel's arm, and we shall save or lose ourselves, and
you will be obliged to run after us."

"Would you not like me to refuse, eh?" asked Benito, looking at Manoel.

"T think I should!" replied the young man.

"Well then--no!" said Benito; "I do not refuse; I will obey and annoy you.
Come on!"

And so the four, followed by the black, struck under the splendid trees,
whose thick foliage prevented the sun's rays from every reaching the soil.

There is nothing more magnificent than this part of the right bank of the
Amazon. There, in such picturesque confusion, so many different trees shoot up
that it is possible to count more than a hundred different species in a square mile.
A forester could easily see that no woodman had been there with his hatchet or
ax, for the effects of a clearing are visible for many centuries afterward. If the
new trees are even a hundred years old, the general aspect still differs from what
it was originally, for the lianas and other parasitic plants alter, and signs remain
which no native can misunderstand.

The happy group moved then into the tall herbage, across the thickets and
under the bushes, chatting and laughing. In front, when the brambles were too
thick, the negro, felling-sword in hand, cleared the way, and put thousands of
birds to flight.

Minha was right to intercede for the little winged world which flew about in
the higher foliage, for the finest representations of tropical ornithology were
there to be seen--green parrots and clamorous parakeets, which seemed to be the
natural fruit of these gigantic trees; humming-birds in all their varieties, light-
blue and ruby red; "tisauras" with long scissors-like tails, looking like detached
flowers which the wind blew from branch to branch; blackbirds, with orange
plumage bound with brown; golden-edged beccaficos; and "sabias," black as
crows; all united in a deafening concert of shrieks and whistles. The long beak of
the toucan stood out against the golden clusters of the "quiriris," and the
treepeckers or woodpeckers of Brazil wagged their little heads, speckled all over
with their purple spots. It was truly a scene of enchantment.

But all were silent and went into hiding when above the tops of the trees
there grated like a rusty weathercock the "alma de gato" or "soul of the cat," a


kind of light fawn-colored sparrow-hawk. If he proudly hooted, displaying in the
air the long white plumes of his tail, he in his turn meekly took to flight when in
the loftier heights there appeared the "gaviao," the large white-headed eagle, the
terror of the whole winged population of these woods.

Minha made Manoel admire the natural wonders which could not be found in
their simplicity in the more civilized provinces of the east. He listened to her
more with his eyes than his ears, for the cries and the songs of these thousands of
birds were every now and then so penetrating that he was not able to hear what
she said. The noisy laughter of Lina was alone sufficiently shrill to ring out with
its joyous note above every kind of clucking, chirping, hooting, whistling, and
cooing.

At the end of an hour they had scarcely gone a mile. As they left the river the
trees assumed another aspect, and the animal life was no longer met with near
the ground, but at from sixty to eighty feet above, where troops of monkeys
chased each other along the higher branches. Here and there a few cones of the
solar rays shot down into the underwood. In fact, in these tropical forests light
does not seem to be necessary for their existence. The air is enough for the
vegetable growth, whether it be large or small, tree or plant, and all the heat
required for the development of their sap is derived not from the surrounding
atmosphere, but from the bosom of the soil itself, where it is stored up as in an
enormous stove.

And on the bromelias, grass plantains, orchids, cacti, and in short all the
parasites which formed a little forest beneath the large one, many marvelous
insects were they tempted to pluck as though they had been genuine blossoms--
nestors with blue wings like shimmering watered silk, leilu butterflies reflexed
with gold and striped with fringes of green, agrippina moths, ten inches long,
with leaves for wings, maribunda bees, like living emeralds set in sockets of
gold, and legions of lampyrons or pyrophorus coleopters, valagumas with
breastplates of bronze, and green elytre, with yellow light pouring from their
eyes, who, when the night comes, illuminate the forest with their many-colored
scintillations.

"What wonders!" repeated the enthusiastic girl.

"You are at home, Minha, or at least you say so," said Benito, "and that is the
way you talk of your riches!"

"Sneer away, little brother!" replied Minha; "such beautiful things are only
lent to us; is it not so, Manoel? They come from the hand of the Almighty and
belong to the world!"

"Let Benito laugh on, Minha," said Manoel. "He hides it very well, but he is
a poet himself when his time comes, and he admires as much as we do all these


beauties of nature. Only when his gun is on his arm, good-by to poetry!"

"Then be a poet now,” replied the girl.

"I am a poet," said Benito. "O! Nature-enchanting, etc."

We may confess, however, that in forbidding him to use his gun Minha had
imposed on him a genuine privation. There was no lack of game in the woods,
and several magnificent opportunities he had declined with regret.

In some of the less wooded parts, in places where the breaks were tolerably
spacious, they saw several pairs of ostriches, of the species known as "naudus,"
from four to five feet high, accompanied by their inseparable "seriemas," a sort
of turkey, infinitely better from an edible point of view than the huge birds they
escort.

"See what that wretched promise costs me," sighed Benito, as, at a gesture
from his sister, he replaced under his arm the gun which had instinctively gone
up to his shoulder.

"We ought to respect the seriemas," said Manoel, "for they are great
destroyers of the snakes."

"Just as we ought to respect the snakes," replied Benito, "because they eat
the noxious insects, and just as we ought the insects because they live on smaller
insects more offensive still. At that rate we ought to respect everything."

But the instinct of the young sportsman was about to be put to a still more
rigorous trial. The woods became of a sudden full of game. Swift stags and
graceful roebucks scampered off beneath the bushes, and a well-aimed bullet
would assuredly have stopped them. Here and there turkeys showed themselves
with their milk and coffee-colored plumage; and peccaries, a sort of wild pig
highly appreciated by lovers of venison, and agouties, which are the hares and
rabbits of Central America; and tatous belonging to the order of edentates, with
their scaly shells of patterns of mosaic.

And truly Benito showed more than virtue, and even genuine heroism, when
he came across some tapirs, called "antas" in Brazil, diminutives of the elephant,
already nearly undiscoverable on the banks of the Upper Amazon and its
tributaries, pachyderms so dear to the hunters for their rarity, so appreciated by
the gourmands for their meat, superior far to beef, and above all for the
protuberance on the nape of the neck, which is a morsel fit for a king.

His gun almost burned his fingers, but faithful to his promise he kept it quiet.

But yet--and he cautioned his sister about this--the gun would go off in spite
of him, and probably register a master-stroke in sporting annals, if within range
there should come a "tamandoa assa," a kind of large and very curious ant-eater.

Happily the big ant-eater did not show himself, neither did any panthers,
leopards, jaguars, guepars, or cougars, called indifferently ounces in South


America, and to whom it is not advisable to get too near.

"After all," said Benito, who stopped for an instant, "to walk is very well, but
to walk without an object----"

"Without an object!" replied his sister; "but our object is to see, to admire, to
visit for the last time these forests of Central America, which we shall not find
again in Para, and to bid them a fast farewell."

"Ah! an idea!"

It was Lina who spoke.

"An idea of Lina's can be no other than a silly one," said Benito, shaking his
head.

"It is unkind, brother," said Minha, "to make fun of Lina when she has been
thinking how to give our walk the object which you have just regretted it lacks."

"Besides, Mr. Benito, I am sure my idea will please you," replied the
mulatto.

"Well, what is it?" asked Minha.

"You see that liana?"

And Lina pointed to a liana of the "cipos" kind, twisted round a gigantic
sensitive mimosa, whose leaves, light as feathers, shut up at the least
disturbance.

"Well?" said Benito.

"I proposed," replied Minha, "that we try to follow that liana to its very end."

"Tt is an idea, and it is an object!" observed Benito, "to follow this liana, no
matter what may be the obstacles, thickets, underwood, rocks, brooks, torrents,
to let nothing stop us, not even----"

"Certainly, you are right, brother!" said Minha; "Lina is a trifle absurd."

"Come on, then!" replied her brother; "you say that Lina is absurd so as to
say that Benito is absurd to approve of it!"

"Well, both of you are absurd, if that will amuse you," returned Minha. "Let
us follow the liana!"

"You are not afraid?" said Manoel.

"Still objections!" shouted Benito.

"Ah, Manoel! you would not speak like that if you were already on your way
and Minha was waiting for you at the end."

"I am silent," replied Manoel; "I have no more to say. I obey. Let us follow
the liana!"

And off they went as happy as children home for their holidays.

This vegetable might take them far if they determined to follow it to its
extremity, like the thread of Ariadne, as far almost as that which the heiress of
Minos used to lead her from the labyrinth, and perhaps entangle them more


deeply.

It was in fact a creeper of the salses family, one of the cipos known under the
name of the red "japicanga," whose length sometimes measures several miles.
But, after all, they could leave it when they liked.

The cipo passed from one tree to another without breaking its continuity,
sometimes twisting round the trunks, sometimes garlanding the branches, here
jumping form a dragon-tree to a rosewood, then from a gigantic chestnut, the
"Bertholletia excelsa," to some of the wine palms, "baccabas," whose branches
have been appropriately compared by Agassiz to long sticks of coral flecked
with green. Here round "tucumas," or ficuses, capriciously twisted like
centenarian olive-trees, and of which Brazil had fifty-four varieties; here round
the kinds of euphorbias, which produce caoutchouc, "gualtes," noble palm-trees,
with slender, graceful, and glossy stems; and cacao-trees, which shoot up of their
own accord on the banks of the Amazon and its tributaries, having different
melastomas, some with red flowers and others ornamented with panicles of
whitish berries.

But the halts! the shouts of cheating! when the happy company thought they
had lost their guiding thread! For it was necessary to go back and disentangle it
from the knot of parasitic plants.

"There it is!" said Lina, "I see it!"

"You are wrong," replied Minha; "that is not it, that is a liana of another
kind."

"No, Lina is right!" said Benito.

"No, Lina is wrong!" Manoel would naturally return.

Hence highly serious, long-continued discussions, in which no one would
give in.

Then the black on one side and Benito on the other would rush at the trees
and clamber up to the branches encircled by the cipo so as to arrive at the true
direction.

Now nothing was assuredly less easy in that jumble of knots, among which
twisted the liana in the middle of bromelias, "karatas," armed with their sharp
prickles, orchids with rosy flowers and violet lips the size of gloves, and
oncidiums more tangled than a skein of worsted between a kitten's paws.

And then when the liana ran down again to the ground the difficulty of
picking it out under the mass of lycopods, large-leaved heliconias, rosy-tasseled
calliandras, rhipsalas encircling it like the thread on an electric reel, between the
knots of the large white ipomas, under the fleshy stems of the vanilla, and in the
midst of the shoots and branchlets of the grenadilla and the vine.

And when the cipo was found again what shouts of joy, and how they


resumed the walk for an instant interrupted!

For an hour the young people had already been advancing, and nothing had
happened to warn them that they were approaching the end.

They shook the liana with vigor, but it would not give, and the birds flew
away in hundreds, and the monkeys fled from tree to tree, so as to point out the
way.

If a thicket barred the road the felling-sword cut a deep gap, and the group
passed in. If it was a high rock, carpeted with verdure, over which the liana
twisted like a serpent, they climbed it and passed on.

A large break now appeared. There, in the more open air, which is as
necessary to it as the light of the sun, the tree of the tropics, par excellence,
which, according to Humboldt, “accompanies man in the infancy of his
civilization," the great provider of the inhabitant of the torrid zones, a banana-
tree, was standing alone. The long festoon of the liana curled round its higher
branches, moving away to the other side of the clearing, and disappeared again
into the forest.

"Shall we stop soon?" asked Manoel.

"No; a thousand times no!" cried Benito, "not without having reached the
end of it!"

"Perhaps," observed Minha, "it will soon be time to think of returning."

"Oh, dearest mistress, let us go on again!" replied Lina.

"On forever!" added Benito.

And they plunged more deeply into the forest, which, becoming clearer,
allowed them to advance more easily.

Besides, the cipo bore away to the north, and toward the river. It became less
inconvenient to follow, seeing that they approached the right bank, and it would
be easy to get back afterward.

A quarter of an hour later they all stopped at the foot of a ravine in front of a
small tributary of the Amazon. But a bridge of lianas, made of "bejucos," twined
together by their interlacing branches, crossed the stream. The cipo, dividing into
two strings, served for a handrail, and passed from one bank to the other.

Benito, all the time in front, had already stepped on the swinging floor of this
vegetable bridge.

Manoel wished to keep his sister back.

"Stay--stay, Minha!" he said, "Benito may go further if he likes, but let us
remain here."

"No! Come on, come on, dear mistress!" said Lina. "Don't be afraid, the liana
is getting thinner; we shall get the better of it, and find out its end!"

And, without hesitation, the young mulatto boldly ventured toward Benito.


"What children they are!" replied Minha. "Come along, Manoel, we must
follow."

And they all cleared the bridge, which swayed above the ravine like a swing,
and plunged again beneath the mighty trees.

But they had not proceeded for ten minutes along the interminable cipo, in
the direction of the river, when they stopped, and this time not without cause.

"Have we got to the end of the liana?" asked Minha.

"No," replied Benito; "but we had better advance with care. Look!" and
Benito pointed to the cipo which, lost in the branches of a high ficus, was
agitated by violent shakings.

"What causes that?" asked Manoel.

"Perhaps some animal that we had better approach with a little
circumspection!"

And Benito, cocking his gun, motioned them to let him go on a bit, and
stepped about ten paces to the front.

Manoel, the two girls, and the black remained motionless where they were.

Suddenly Benito raised a shout, and they saw him rush toward a tree; they all
ran as well.

Sight the most unforeseen, and little adapted to gratify the eyes!

A man, hanging by the neck, struggled at the end of the liana, which, supple
as a cord, had formed into a slipknot, and the shakings came from the jerks into
which he still agitated it in the last convulsions of his agony!

Benito threw himself on the unfortunate fellow, and with a cut of his
hunting-knife severed the cipo.

The man slipped on to the ground. Manoel leaned over him, to try and recall
him to life, if it was not too late.

"Poor man!" murmured Minha.

"Mr. Manoel! Mr. Manoel!" cried Lina. "He breathes again! His heart beats;
you must save him."

"True," said Manoel, "but I think it was about time that we came up."

He was about thirty years old, a white, clothed badly enough, much
emaciated, and he seemed to have suffered a good deal.

At his feet were an empty flask, thrown on the ground, and a cup and ball in
palm wood, of which the ball, made of the head of a tortoise, was tied on with a
fiber.

"To hang himself! to hang himself!" repeated Lina, "and young still! What
could have driven him to do such a thing?"

But the attempts of Manoel had not been long in bringing the luckless wight
to life again, and he opened his eyes and gave an "ahem!" so vigorous and


unexpected that Lina, frightened, replied to his cry with another.

"Who are you, my friend?" Benito asked him.

"An ex-hanger-on, as far as I see."

"But your name?"

"Wait a minute and I will recall myself," said he, passing his hand over his
forehead. "I am known as Fragoso, at your service; and I am still able to curl and
cut your hair, to shave you, and to make you comfortable according to all the
rules of my art. I am a barber, so to speak more truly, the most desperate of
Figaros."

"And what made you think of----"

"What would you have, my gallant sir?" replied Fragoso, with a smile; "a
moment of despair, which I would have duly regretted had the regrets been in
another world! But eight hundred leagues of country to traverse, and not a coin
in my pouch, was not very comforting! I had lost courage obviously."

To conclude, Fragoso had a good and pleasing figure, and as he recovered it
was evident that he was of a lively disposition. He was one of those wandering
barbers who travel on the banks of the Upper Amazon, going from village to
village, and putting the resources of their art at the service of negroes, negresses,
Indians and Indian women, who appreciate them very much.

But poor Fragoso, abandoned and miserable, having eaten nothing for forty
hours, astray in the forest, had for an instant lost his head, and we know the rest.

"My friend," said Benito to him, "you will go back with us to the fazenda of
Iquitos?"

"With pleasure," replied Fragoso; "you cut me down and I belong to you. I
must somehow be dependent."

"Well, dear mistress, don't you think we did well to continue our walk?"
asked Lina.

"That I do," returned the girl.

"Never mind," said Benito; "I never thought that we should finish by finding
a man at the end of the cipo."

"And, above all, a barber in difficulties, and on the road to hang himself!"
replied Fragoso.

The poor fellow, who was now wide awake, was told about what had passed.
He warmly thanked Lina for the good idea she had had of following the liana,
and they all started on the road to the fazenda, where Fragoso was received in a
way that gave him neither wish nor want to try his wretched task again.


CHAPTER VII. THE JANGADA


THE HALF-MILE square of forest was cleared. With the carpenters
remained the task of arranging in the form of a raft the many venerable trees
which were lying on the strand.

And an easy task it was. Under the direction of Joam Garral the Indians
displayed their incomparable ingenuity. In everything connected with house-
building or shipbuilding these natives are, it must be admitted, astonishing
workmen. They have only an ax and a saw, and they work on woods so hard that
the edge of their tools gets absolutely jagged; yet they square up trunks, shape
beams out of enormous stems, and get out of them joists and planking without
the aid of any machinery whatever, and, endowed with prodigious natural ability,
do all these things easily with their skilled and patient hands.

The trees had not been launched into the Amazon to begin with; Joam Garral
was accustomed to proceed in a different way. The whole mass of trunks was
symmetrically arranged on a flat part of the bank, which he had already leveled
up at the junction of the Nanay with the great river.

There it was that the jangada was to be built; thence it was that the Amazon
was to float it when the time came for it to start for its destination.

And here an explanatory note is necessary in regard to the geography of this
immense body of water, and more especially as relating to a singular
phenomenon which the riverside inhabitants describe from personal observation.

The two rivers which are, perhaps, more extensive than the great artery of
Brazil, the Nile and the Missouri-Mississippi, flow one from south to north
across the African continent, the other from north to south through North
America. They cross districts of many different latitudes, and consequently of
many different climates.

The Amazon, on the contrary, is entirely comprised--at least it is from the
point where it turns to the east, on the frontiers of Ecuador and Peru--between
the second and fourth parallels of south latitude. Hence this immense river
system is under the same climatic conditions during the whole of its course.

In these parts there are two distinct seasons during which rain falls. In the
north of Brazil the rainy season is in September; in the south it occurs in March.
Consequently the right-hand tributaries and the left-hand tributaries bring down
their floods at half-yearly intervals, and hence the level of the Amazon, after
reaching its maximum in June, gradually falls until October.

This Joam Garral knew by experience, and he intended to profit by the
phenomenon to launch the jangada, after having built it in comfort on the river
bank. In fact, between the mean and the higher level the height of the Amazon
could vary as much as forty feet, and between the mean and the lower level as
much as thirty feet. A difference of seventy feet like this gave the fazender all he


required.

The building was commenced without delay. Along the huge bank the trunks
were got into place according to their sizes and floating power, which of course
had to be taken into account, as among these thick and heavy woods there were
many whose specific gravity was but little below that of water.

The first layer was entirely composed of trunks laid side by side. A little
interval had to be left between them, and they were bound together by transverse
beams, which assured the solidity of the whole. "Pia¢gaba" ropes strapped them
together as firmly as any chain cables could have done. This material, which
consists of the ramicles of a certain palm-tree growing very abundantly on the
river banks, is in universal use in the district. Piagaba floats, resists immersion,
and is cheaply made--very good reasons for causing it to be valuable, and
making it even an article of commerce with the Old World.

Above this double row of trunks and beams were disposed the joists and
planks which formed the floor of the jangada, and rose about thirty inches above
the load water-line. The bulk was enormous, as we must confess when it is
considered that the raft measured a thousand feet long and sixty broad, and thus
had a superificies of sixty thousand square feet. They were, in fact, about to
commit a whole forest to the Amazon.

The work of building was conducted under the immediate direction of Joam
Garral. But when that part was finished the question of arrangement was
submitted to the discussion of all, including even the gallant Fragoso.

Just a word as to what he was doing in his new situation at the fazenda.

The barber had never been so happy as since the day when he had been
received by the hospitable family. Joam Garral had offered to take him to Para,
on the road to which he was when the liana, according to his account, had seized
him by the neck and brought him up with a round turn. Fragoso had accepted the
offer, thanked him from the bottom of his heart, and ever since had sought to
make himself useful in a thousand ways. He was a very intelligent fellow--what
one might call a "double right-hander"--that is to say, he could do everything,
and could do everything well. As merry as Lina, always singing, and always
ready with some good-natured joke, he was not long in being liked by all.

But it was with the young mulatto that he claimed to have contracted the
heaviest obligation.

"A famous idea that of yours, Miss Lina," he was constantly saying, "to play
at ‘following the liana!’ It is a capital game even if you do not always find a poor
chap of a barber at the end!"

"Quite a chance, Mr. Fragoso," would laughingly reply Lina; "I assure you,
you owe me nothing!"


"What! nothing! I owe you my life, and I want it prolonged for a hundred
years, and that my recollection of the fact may endure even longer! You see, it is
not my trade to be hanged! If I tried my hand at it, it was through necessity. But,
on consideration, I would rather die of hunger, and before quite going off I
should try a little pasturage with the brutes! As for this liana, it is a lien between
us, and so you will see!"

The conversation generally took a joking turn, but at the bottom Fragoso was
very grateful to the mulatto for having taken the initiative in his rescue, and Lina
was not insensible to the attentions of the brave fellow, who was as
straightforward, frank, and good-looking as she was. Their friendship gave rise
to many a pleasant, "Ah, ah!" on the part of Benito, old Cybele, and others.

To return to the Jangada. After some discussion it was decided, as the voyage
was to be of some months' duration, to make it as complete and comfortable as
possible. The Garral family, comprising the father, mother, daughter, Benito,
Manoel, and the servants, Cybele and Lina, were to live in a separate house. In
addition to these, there were to go forty Indians, forty blacks, Fragoso, and the
pilot who was to take charge of the navigation of the raft.

Though the crew was large, it was not more than sufficient for the service on
board. To work the jangada along the windings of the river and between the
hundreds of islands and islets which lay in its course required fully as many as
were taken, for if the current furnished the motive power, it had nothing to do
with the steering, and the hundred and sixty arms were no more than were
necessary to work the long boathooks by which the giant raft was to be kept in
mid-stream.

In the first place, then, in the hinder part of the jangada they built the
master's house. It was arranged to contain several bedrooms and a large dining-
hall. One of the rooms was destined for Joam and his wife, another for Lina and
Cybele near those of their mistresses, and a third room for Benito and Manoel.
Minha had a room away from the others, which was not by any means the least
comfortably designed.

This, the principal house, was carefully made of weather-boarding, saturated
with boiling resin, and thus rendered water-tight throughout. It was capitally
lighted with windows on all sides. In front, the entrance-door gave immediate
access to the common room. A light veranda, resting on slender bamboos,
protected the exterior from the direct action of the solar rays. The whole was
painted a light-ocher color, which reflected the heat instead of absorbing it, and
kept down the temperature of the interior.

But when the heavy work, so to speak, had been completed, Minha
intervened with:


"Father, now your care has inclosed and covered us, you must allow us to
arrange our dwelling to please ourselves. The outside belongs to you, the inside
to us. Mother and I would like it to be as though our house at the fazenda went
with us on the journey, so as to make you fancy that we had never left Iquitos!"

"Do just as you like, Minha," replied Joam Garral, smiling in the sad way he
often did.

"That will be nice!"

"T leave everything to your good taste."

"And that will do us honor, father. It ought to, for the sake of the splendid
country we are going through--which is yours, by the way, and into which you
are to enter after so many years’ absence."

"Yes, Minha; yes," replied Joam. "It is rather as if we were returning from
exile--voluntary exile! Do your best; I approve beforehand of what you do."

On Minha and Lina, to whom were added of their own free will Manoel on
the one side and Fragoso on the other, devolved the care of decorating the inside
of the house. With some imagination and a little artistic feeling the result was
highly satisfactory.

The best furniture of the fazenda naturally found its place within, as after
arriving in Para they could easily return it by one of the igariteos. Tables,
bamboo easy-chairs, cane sofas, carved wood shelves, everything that
constituted the charming furniture of the tropics, was disposed with taste about
the floating home. No one is likely to imagine that the walls remained bare. The
boards were hidden beneath hangings of most agreeable variety. These hangings
were made of valuable bark, that of the "tuturis," which is raised up in large
folds like the brocades and damasks and softest and richest materials of our
modern looms. On the floors of the rooms were jaguar skins, with wonderful
spots, and thick monkey furs of exquisite fleeciness. Light curtains of the russet
silk, produced by the "sumauma," hung from the windows. The beds, enveloped
in mosquito curtains, had their pillows, mattresses, and bolsters filled with that
fresh and elastic substance which in the Upper Amazon is yielded by the
bombax.

Throughout on the shelves and side-tables were little odds and ends, brought
from Rio Janeiro or Belem, those most precious to Minha being such as had
come from Manoel. What could be more pleasing in her eyes than the
knickknacks given by a loving hand which spoke to her without saying
anything?

In a few days the interior was completed, and it looked just like the interior
of the fazenda. A stationary house under a lovely clump of trees on the borders
of some beautiful river! Until it descended between the banks of the larger


stream it would not be out of keeping with the picturesque landscape which
stretched away on each side of it.

We may add that the exterior of the house was no less charming than the
interior.

In fact, on the outside the young fellows had given free scope to their taste
and imagination.

From the basement to the roof it was literally covered with foliage. A
confused mass of orchids, bromelias, and climbing plants, all in flower, rooted in
boxes of excellent soil hidden beneath masses of verdure. The trunk of some
ficus or mimosa was never covered by a more startlingly tropical attire. What
whimsical climbers--ruby red and golden yellow, with variegated clusters and
tangled twigs--turned over the brackets, under the ridges, on the rafters of the
roof, and across the lintels of the doors! They had brought them wholesale from
the woods in the neighborhood of the fazenda. A huge liana bound all the
parasites together; several times it made the round of the house, clinging on to
every angle, encircling every projection, forking, uniting, it everywhere threw
out its irregular branchlets, and allowed not a bit of the house to be seen beneath
its enormous clusters of bloom.

As a delicate piece of attention, the author of which can be easily recognized,
the end of the cipo spread out before the very window of the young mulatto, as
though a long arm was forever holding a bouquet of fresh flowers across the
blind.

To sum up, it was as charming as could be; and as Yaquita, her daughter, and
Lina were content, we need say no more about it.

"Tt would not take much to make us plant trees on the jangada," said Benito.

"Oh, trees!" ejaculated Minha.

"Why not?" replied Manoel. "Transported on to this solid platform, with
some good soil, I am sure they would do well, and we would have no change of
climate to fear for them, as the Amazon flows all the time along the same
parallel."

"Besides," said Benito, "every day islets of verdure, torn from the banks, go
drifting down the river. Do they not pass along with their trees, bushes, thickets,
rocks, and fields, to lose themselves in the Atlantic eight hundred leagues away?
Why, then, should we not transform our raft into a floating garden?"

"Would you like a forest, miss?" said Fragoso, who stopped at nothing.

"Yes, a forest!" cried the young mulatto; "a forest with its birds and its
monkeys----"

"Its snakes, its jaguars!" continued Benito.

"Its Indians, its nomadic tribes," added Manoel, "and even its cannibals!"


"But where are you going to, Fragoso?" said Minha, seeing the active barber
making a rush at the bank.

"To look after the forest!" replied Fragoso.

"Useless, my friend," answered the smiling Minha. "Manoel has given me a
nosegay and I am quite content. It is true," she added, pointing to the house
hidden beneath the flowers, "that he has hidden our house in his betrothal
bouquet!"


CHAPTER IX. THE EVENING OF THE FIFTH OF JUNE

WHILE THE master's house was being constructed, Joam Garral was also
busied in the arrangement of the out-buildings, comprising the kitchen, and
offices in which provisions of all kinds were intended to be stored.

In the first place, there was an important stock of the roots of that little tree,
some six or ten feet in height, which yields the manioc, and which form the
principal food of the inhabitants of these inter-tropical countries. The root, very
much like a long black radish, grows in clumps like potatoes. If it is not
poisonous in Africa, it is certain that in South America it contains a more
noxious juice, which it is necessary to previously get rid of by pressure. When
this result is obtained, the root is reduced to flour, and is then used in many
ways, even in the form of tapioca, according to the fancy of the natives.

On board the jangada there was a huge pile of this useful product destined
for general consumption.

As for preserved meats, not forgetting a whole flock of sheep, kept in a
special stable built in the front, they consisted principally of a quantity of the
"presunto" hams of the district, which are of first-class quality; but the guns of
the young fellows and of some of the Indians were reckoned on for additional
supplies, excellent hunters as they were, to whom there was likely to be no lack
of game on the islands and in the forests bordering on the stream. The river was
expected to furnish its daily quota; prawns, which ought rather to be called
crawfish; "tambagus," the finest fish in the district, of a flavor superior to that of
salmon, to which it is often compared; "pirarucus" with red scales, as large as
sturgeons, which when salted are used in great quantities throughout Brazil;
"candirus," awkward to capture, but good to eat; "piranhas," or devil-fish,
striped with red bands, and thirty inches long; turtles large and small, which are
counted by millions, and form so large a part of the food of the natives; some of
every one of these things it was hoped would figure in turn on the tables of the
master and his men.

And so each day shooting and fishing were to be regularly indulged in.


For beverages they had a good store of the best that country produced;
"caysuma" or "machachera," from the Upper and Lower Amazon, an agreeable
liquor of slightly acidulated taste, which is distilled from the boiled root of the
sweet manioc; "beiju," from Brazil, a sort of national brandy, the "chica" of
Peru; the "mazato" of the Ucayali, extracted from the boiled fruits of the banana-
tree, pressed and fermented; "guarana," a kind of paste made from the double
almond of the "paulliniasorbilis," a genuine tablet of chocolate so far as its color
goes, which is reduced to a fine powder, and with the addition of water yields an
excellent drink.

And this was not all. There is in these countries a species of dark violet wine,
which is got from the juice of the palm, and the aromatic flavor of this "assais"
is greatly appreciated by the Brazilans, and of it there were on board a
respectable number of frasques (each holding a little more than half a gallon),
which would probably be emptied before they arrived at Para.

The special cellar of the jangada did honor to Benito, who had been
appointed its commander-in-chief. Several hundred bottles of sherry, port, and
letubal recalled names dear to the earlier conquerors of South America. In
addition, the young butler had stored away certain demijohns, holding half a
dozen gallons each, of excellent "tafia," a sugared brandy a trifle more
pronounced in taste than the national beiju.

As far as tobacco was concerned, there was none of that coarse kind which
usually contents the natives of the Amazonian basin. It all came direct from Villa
Bella da Imperatriz--or, in other words, fro the district in which is grown the best
tobacco in Central America.

The principal habitation, with its annexes--kitchen, offices, and cellars--was
placed in the rear--or, let us say, stern of the craft--and formed a part reserved for
the Garral family and their personal servants.

In the center the huts for the Indians and the blacks had been erected. The
staff were thus placed under the same conditions as at the fazenda of Iquitos, and
would always be able to work under the direction of the pilot.

To house the crew a good many huts were required, and these gave to the
jangada the appearance of a small village got adrift, and, to tell the truth, it was a
better built and better peopled village than many of those on the Upper Amazon.

For the Indians Joam Garral had designed regular cabins--huts without walls,
with only light poles supporting the roof of foliage. The air circulated freely
throughout these open constructions and swung the hammock suspended in the
interior, and the natives, among whom were three or four complete families, with
women and children, were lodged as if they were on shore.

The blacks here found their customary sheds. They differed from the cabins


by being closed in on their four faces, of which only one gave access to the
interior. The Indians, accustomed to live in the open air, free and untrammeled,
were not able to accustom themselves to the imprisonment of the ajoupas, which
agreed better with the life of the blacks.

In the bow regular warehouses had arisen, containing the goods which Joam
Garral was carrying to Belem at the same time as the products of his forests.

There, in vast storerooms, under the direction of Benito, the rich cargo had
been placed with as much order as if it had been carefully stowed away in a
ship's hold.

In the first place, seven thousand arrobas of caoutchouc, each of about thirty
pounds, composed the most precious part of the cargo, for every pound of it was
worth from three to four francs. The jangada also took fifty hundredweight of
sarsaparilla, a smilax which forms an important branch of foreign trade
throughout the Amazon districts, and is getting rarer and rarer along the banks of
the river, so that the natives are very careful to spare the stems when they gather
them. Tonquin bans, known in Brazil under the name of "cumarus," and used in
the manufacture of certain essential oils; sassafras, from which is extracted a
precious balsam for wounds; bales of dyeing plants, cases of several gums, and a
quantity of precious woods, completed a well-adapted cargo for lucrative and
easy sale in the provinces of Para.

Some may feel astonished that the number of Indians and negroes embarked
were only sufficient to work the raft, and that a larger number were not taken in
case of an attack by the riverside Indians.

Such would have been useless. The natives of Central America are not to be
feared in the least, and the times are quite changed since it was necessary to
provide against their aggressions. The Indians along the river belong to
peaceable tribes, and the fiercest of them have retired before the advancing
civilization, and drawn further and further away from the river and its tributaries.
Negro deserters, escaped from the penal colonies of Brazil, England, Holland, or
France, are alone to be feared. But there are only a small number of these
fugitives, they only move in isolated groups across the savannahs or the woods,
and the jangada was, in a measure, secured from any attack on the parts of the
backwoodsmen.

On the other hand, there were a number of settlements on the river--towns,
villages, and missions. The immense stream no longer traverses a desert, but a
basin which is being colonized day by day. Danger was not taken into
consideration. There were no precautions against attacks.

To conclude our description of the jangada, we have only to speak of one or
two erections of different kinds which gave it a very picturesque aspect.


In the bow was the cabin of the pilot--we say in the bow, and not at the stern,
where the helmsman is generally found. In navigating under such circumstances
a rudder is of no use. Long oars have no effect on a raft of such dimensions, even
when worked with a hundred sturdy arms. It was from the sides, by means of
long boathooks or props thrust against the bed of the stream, that the jangada
was kept in the current, and had its direction altered when going astray. By this
means they could range alongside either bank, if they wished for any reason to
come to a halt. Three or four ubas, and two pirogues, with the necessary rigging,
were carried on board, and afforded easy communications with the banks. The
pilot had to look after the channels of the river, the deviations of the current, the
eddies which it was necessary to avoid, the creeks or bays which afforded
favorable anchorage, and to do this he had to be in the bow.

If the pilot was the material director of this immense machine--for can we
not justly call it so?--another personage was its spiritual director; this was Padre
Passanha, who had charge of the mission at Iquitos.

A religious family, like that of Joam Garral's, had availed themselves
enthusiastically of this occasion of taking him with them.

Padre Passanha, then aged seventy, was a man of great worth, full of
evangelical fervor, charitable and good, and in countries where the
representatives of religion are not always examples of the virtues, he stood out as
the accomplished type of those great missionaries who have done so much for
civilization in the interior of the most savage regions of the world.

For fifty years Padre Passanha had lived at Iquitos, in the mission of which
he was the chief. He was loved by all, and worthily so. The Garral family held
him in great esteem; it was he who had married the daughter of Farmer
Magalhaés to the clerk who had been received at the fazenda. He had known the
children from birth; he had baptized them, educated them, and hoped to give
each of them the nuptial blessing.

The age of the padre did not allow of his exercising his important ministry
any longer. The horn of retreat for him had sounded; he was about to be replaced
at Iquitos by a younger missionary, and he was preparing to return to Para, to
end his days in one of those convents which are reserved for the old servants of
God.

What better occasion could offer than that of descending the river with the
family which was as his own? They had proposed it to him, and he had accepted,
and when arrived at Belem he was to marry the young couple, Minha and
Manoel.

But if Padre Passanha during the course of the voyage was to take his meals
with the family, Joam Garral desired to build for him a dwelling apart, and


heaven knows what care Yaquita and her daughter took to make him
comfortable! Assuredly the good old priest had never been so lodged in his
modest parsonage!

The parsonage was not enough for Padre Passanha; he ought to have a
chapel.

The chapel then was built in the center of the jangada, and a little bell
surmounted it.

It was small enough, undoubtedly, and it could not hold the whole of the
crew, but it was richly decorated, and if Joam Garral found his own house on the
raft, Padre Passanha had no cause to regret the poverty-stricken church of
Iquitos.

Such was the wonderful structure which was going down the Amazon. It was
then on the bank waiting till the flood came to carry it away. From the
observation and calculation of the rising it would seem as though there was not
much longer to wait.

All was ready to date, the 5th of June.

The pilot arrived the evening before. He was a man about fifty, well up in his
profession, but rather fond of drink. Such as he was, Joam Garral in large matters
at different times had employed him to take his rafts to Belem, and he had never
had cause to repent it.

It is as well to add that Araujo--that was his name--never saw better than
when he had imbibed a few glasses of tafia; and he never did any work at all
without a certain demijohn of that liquor, to which he paid frequent court.

The rise of the flood had clearly manifested itself for several days. From
minute to minute the level of the river rose, and during the twenty-four hours
which preceded the maximum the waters covered the bank on which the raft
rested, but did not lift the raft.

As soon as the movement was assured, and there could be no error as to the
height to which the flood would rise, all those interested in the undertaking were
seized with no little excitement. For if through some inexplicable cause the
waters of the Amazon did not rise sufficiently to flood the jangada, it would all
have to be built over again. But as the fall of the river would be very rapid it
would take long months before similar conditions recurred.

On the 5th of June, toward the evening, the future passengers of the jangada
were collected on a plateau which was about a hundred feet above the bank, and
waited for the hour with an anxiety quite intelligible.

There were Yaquita, her daughter, Manoel Valdez, Padre Passanha, Benito,
Lina, Fragoso, Cybele, and some of the servants, Indian or negro, of the fazenda.

Fragoso could not keep himself still; he went and he came, he ran down the


bank and ran up the plateau, he noted the points of the river gauge, and shouted
"Hurrah!" as the water crept up.

"It will swim, it will swim!" he shouted. "The raft which is to take us to
Belem! It will float if all the cataracts of the sky have to open to flood the
Amazon!"

Joam Garral was on the raft with the pilot and some of the crew. It was for
him to take all the necessary measures at the critical moment. The jangada was
moored to the bank with solid cables, so that it could not be carried away by the
current when it floated off.

Quite a tribe from one hundred and fifty to two hundred Indians, without
counting the population of the village, had come to assist at the interesting
spectacle.

They were all keenly on the watch, and silence reigned over the
impressionable crowd.

Toward five o'clock in the evening the water had reached a level higher than
that of the night before--by more than a foot--and the bank had already entirely
disappeared beneath the liquid covering.

A certain groaning arose among the planks of the enormous structure, but
there was still wanting a few inches before it was quite lifted and detached from
the ground.

For an hour the groanings increased. The joists grated on all sides. A struggle
was going on in which little by little the trunks were being dragged from their
sandy bed.

Toward half-past six cries of joy arose. The jangada floated at last, and the
current took it toward the middle of the river, but, in obedience to the cables, it
quietly took up its position near the bank at the moment that Padre Passanha
gave it his blessing, as if it were a vessel launched into the sea whose destinies
are in the hands of the Most High!


CHAPTER X. FROM IQUITOS TO PEVAS

ON THE 6th of June, the very next day, Joam Garral and his people bade
good-by to the superintendent and the Indians and negroes who were to stay
behind at the fazenda. At six o'clock in the morning the jangada received all its
passengers, or rather inhabitants, and each of them took possession of his cabin,
or perhaps we had better say his house.

The moment of departure had come. Araujo, the pilot, got into his place at
the bow, and the crew, armed with their long poles, went to their proper quarters.

Joam Garral, assisted by Benito and Manoel, superintended the unmooring.


At the command of the pilot the ropes were eased off, and the poles applied
to the bank so as to give the jangada a start. The current was not long in seizing
it, and coasting the left bank, the islands of Iquitos and Parianta were passed on
the right.

The voyage had commenced--where would it finish? In Para, at Belem, eight
hundred leagues from this little Peruvian village, if nothing happened to modify
the route. How would it finish? That was the secret of the future.

The weather was magnificent. A pleasant "pampero" tempered the ardor of
the sun--one of those winds which in June or July come from off the Cordilleras,
many hundred leagues away, after having swept across the huge plain of the
Sacramento. Had the raft been provided with masts and sails she would have felt
the effects of the breeze, and her speed would have been greater; but owing to
the sinuosities of the river and its abrupt changes, which they were bound to
follow, they had had to renounce such assistance.

In a flat district like that through which the Amazon flows, which is almost a
boundless plain, the gradient of the river bed is scarcely perceptible. It has been
calculated that between Tabatinga on the Brazilian frontier, and the source of this
huge body of water, the difference of level does not exceed a decimeter in each
league. There is no other river in the world whose inclination is so slight.

It follows from this that the average speed of the current cannot be estimated
at more than two leagues in twenty-four hours, and sometimes, while the
droughts are on, it is even less. However, during the period of the floods it has
been known to increase to between thirty and forty kilometers.

Happily, it was under these latter conditions that the jangada was to proceed;
but, cumbrous in its movements, it could not keep up to the speed of the current
which ran past it. There are also to be taken into account the stoppages
occasioned by the bends in the river, the numerous islands which had to be
rounded, the shoals which had to be avoided, and the hours of halting, which
were necessarily lost when the night was too dark to advance securely, so that we
cannot allow more than twenty-five kilometers for each twenty-four hours.

In addition, the surface of the water is far from being completely clear. Trees
still green, vegetable remains, islets of plants constantly torn from the banks,
formed quite a flotilla of fragments carried on by the currents, and were so many
obstacles to speedy navigation.

The mouth of the Nanay was soon passed, and lost to sight behind a point on
the left bank, which, with its carpet of russet grasses tinted by the sun, formed a
ruddy relief to the green forests on the horizon.

The jangada took the center of the stream between the numerous picturesque
islands, of which there are a dozen between Iquitos and Pucalppa.


Araujo, who did not forget to clear his vision and his memory by an
occasional application to his demijohn, maneuvered very ably when passing
through this archipelago. At his word of command fifty poles from each side of
the raft were raised in the air, and struck the water with an automatic movement
very curious to behold.

While this was going on, Yaquita, aided by Lina and Cybele, was getting
everything in order, and the Indian cooks were preparing the breakfast.

As for the two young fellows and Minha, they were walking up and down in
company with Padre Passanha, and from time to time the lady stopped and
watered the plants which were placed about the base of the dwelling-house.

"Well, padre," said Benito, "do you know a more agreeable way of
traveling?"

"No, my dear boy," replied the padre; "it is truly traveling with all one's
belongings."

"And without any fatigue," added Manoel; "we might do hundreds of
thousands of miles in this way."

"And," said Minha, "you do not repent having taken passage with us? Does it
not seem to you as if we were afloat on an island drifted quietly away from the
bed of the river with its prairies and its trees? Only----"

"Only?" repeated the padre.

"Only we have made the island with our own hands; it belongs to us, and I
prefer it to all the islands of the Amazon. I have a right to be proud of it."

"Yes, my daughter; and I absolve you from your pride. Besides, I am not
allowed to scold you in the presence of Manoel!"

"But, on the other hand," replied she, gayly, "you should teach Manoel to
scold me when I deserve it. He is a great deal too indulgent to my little self."

"Well, then, dear Minha," said Manoel, "I shall profit by that permission to
remind you----"

"Of what?"

"That you were very busy in the library at the fazenda, and that you promised
to make me very learned about everything connected with the Upper Amazon.
We know very little about it in Para, and here we have been passing several
islands and you have not even told me their names!"

"What is the good of that?" said she.

"Yes; what is the good of it?" repeated Benito. "What can be the use of
remembering the hundreds of names in the "Tupi' dialect with which these
islands are dressed out? It is enough to know them. The Americans are much
more practical with their Mississippi islands; they number them----"

"As they number the avenues and streets of their towns," replied Manoel.


"Frankly, I don't care much for that numerical system; it conveys nothing to the
imagination--Sixty-fourth Island or Sixty-fifth Island, any more than Sixth Street
or Third Avenue. Don't you agree with me, Minha?"

"Yes, Manoel; though I am of somewhat the same way of thinking as my
brother. But even if we do not know their names, the islands of our great river
are truly splendid! See how they rest under the shadows of those gigantic palm-
trees with their drooping leaves! And the girdle of reeds which encircles them
through which a pirogue can with difficulty make its way! And the mangrove
trees, whose fantastic roots buttress them to the bank like the claws of some
gigantic crab! Yes, the islands are beautiful, but, beautiful as they are, they
cannot equal the one we have made our own!"

"My little Minha is enthusiastic to-day," said the padre.

"Ah, padre! I am so happy to see everybody happy around me!"

At this moment the voice of Yaquita was heard calling Minha into the house.

The young girl smilingly ran off.

"You will have an amiable companion," said the padre. "All the joy of the
house goes away with you, my friend."

"Brave little sister!" said Benito, "we shall miss her greatly, and the padre is
right. However, if you do not marry her, Manoel--there is still time--she will stay
with us."

"She will stay with you, Benito," replied Manoel. "Believe me, I have a
presentiment that we shall all be reunited!"

The first day passed capitally; breakfast, dinner, siesta, walks, all took place
as if Joam Garral and his people were still in the comfortable fazenda of Iquitos.

During these twenty-four hours the mouths of the rivers Bacali, Chochio,
Pucalppa, on the left of the stream, and those of the rivers Itinicari, Maniti,
Moyoc, Tucuya, and the islands of this name on the right, were passed without
accident. The night, lighted by the moon, allowed them to save a halt, and the
giant raft glided peacefully on along the surface of the Amazon.

On the morrow, the 7th of June, the jangada breasted the banks of the village
of Pucalppa, named also New Oran. Old Oran, situated fifteen leagues down
stream on the same left bank of the river, is almost abandoned for the new
settlement, whose population consists of Indians belonging to the Mayoruna and
Orejone tribes. Nothing can be more picturesque than this village with its ruddy-
colored banks, its unfinished church, its cottages, whose chimneys are hidden
amid the palms, and its two or three ubas half-stranded on the shore.

During the whole of the 7th of June the jangada continued to follow the left
bank of the river, passing several unknown tributaries of no importance. For a
moment there was a chance of her grounding on the easterly shore of the island


of Sinicure; but the pilot, well served by the crew, warded off the danger and
remained in the flow of the stream.

In the evening they arrived alongside a narrow island, called Napo Island,
from the name of the river which here comes in from the north-northwest, and
mingles its waters with those of the Amazon through a mouth about eight
hundred yards across, after having watered the territories of the Coto and
Orejone Indians.

It was on the morning of the 7th of June that the jangada was abreast the
little island of Mango, which causes the Napo to split into two streams before
falling into the Amazon.

Several years later a French traveler, Paul Marcoy, went out to examine the
color of the waters of this tributary, which has been graphically compared to the
cloudy greenish opal of absinthe. At the same time he corrected some of the
measurements of La Condamine. But then the mouth of the Napo was sensibly
increased by the floods and it was with a good deal of rapidity that its current,
coming from the eastern slopes of Cotopaxi, hurried fiercely to mingle itself
with the tawny waters of the Amazon.

A few Indians had wandered to the mouth of this river. They were robust in
build, of tall stature, with shaggy hair, and had their noses pierced with a rod of
palm, and the lobes of their ears lengthened to their shoulders by the weight of
heavy rings of precious wood. Some women were with them. None of them
showed any intention of coming on board. It is asserted that these natives are
cannibals; but if that is true--and it is said of many of the riverine tribes--there
must have been more evidence for the cannibalism than we get to-day.

Some hours later the village of Bella Vista, situated on a somewhat lower
bank, appeared, with its cluster of magnificent trees, towering above a few huts
roofed with straw, over which there drooped the large leaves of some medium-
sized banana-trees, like the waters overflowing from a tazza.

Then the pilot, so as to follow a better current, which turned off from the
bank, directed the raft toward the right side of the river, which he had not yet
approached. The maneuver was not accomplished without certain difficulties,
which were successfully overcome after a good many resorts to the demijohn.

This allowed them to notice in passing some of those numerous lagoons with
black waters, which are distributed along the course of the Amazon, and which
often have no communication with the river. One of these, bearing the name of
the Lagoon of Oran, is of fair size, and receives the water by a large strait. In the
middle of the stream are scattered several islands and two or three islets
curiously grouped; and on the opposite bank Benito recognized the site of the
ancient Oran, of which they could only see a few uncertain traces.


During two days the jangada traveled sometimes under the left bank,
sometimes under the right, according to the condition of the current, without
giving the least sign of grounding.

The passengers had already become used to this new life. Joam Garral,
leaving to his son everything that referred to the commercial side of the
expedition, kept himself principally to his room, thinking and writing. What he
was writing about he told to nobody, not even Yaquita, and it seemed to have
already assumed the importance of a veritable essay.

Benito, all observation, chatted with the pilot and acted as manager. Yaquita,
her daughter, and Manoel, nearly always formed a group apart, discussing their
future projects just as they had walked and done in the park of the fazenda. The
life was, in fact, the same. Not quite, perhaps, to Benito, who had not yet found
occasion to participate in the pleasures of the chase. If, however, the forests of
Iquitos failed him with their wild beasts, agoutis, peccaries, and cabiais, the birds
flew in flocks from the banks of the river and fearlessly perched on the jangada.
When they were of such quality as to figure fairly on the table, Benito shot them;
and, in the interest of all, his sister raised no objection; but if he came across any
gray or yellow herons, or red or white ibises, which haunt the sides, he spared
them through love for Minha. One single species of grebe, which is uneatable,
found no grace in the eyes of the young merchant; this was the "caiarara," as
quick to dive as to swim or fly; a bird with a disagreeable cry, but whose down
bears a high price in the different markets of the Amazonian basin.

At length, after having passed the village of Omaguas and the mouth of the
Ambiacu, the jangada arrived at Pevas on the evening of the 11th of June, and
was moored to the bank.

As it was to remain here for some hours before nightfall, Benito
disembarked, taking with him the ever-ready Fragoso, and the two sportsmen
started off to beat the thickets in the environs of the little place. An agouti and a
cabiai, not to mention a dozen partridges, enriched the larder after this fortunate
excursion. At Pevas, where there is a population of two hundred and sixty
inhabitants, Benito would perhaps have done some trade with the lay brothers of
the mission, who are at the same time wholesale merchants, but these had just
sent away some bales of sarsaparilla and arrobas of caoutchouc toward the
Lower Amazon, and their stores were empty.

The jangada departed at daybreak, and passed the little archipelago of the
Iatio and Cochiquinas islands, after having left the village of the latter name on
the right. Several mouths of smaller unnamed affluents showed themselves on
the right of the river through the spaces between the islands.

Many natives, with shaved heads, tattooed cheeks and foreheads, carrying


plates of metal in the lobes of their ears, noses, and lower lips, appeared for an
instant on the shore. They were armed with arrows and blow tubes, but made no
use of them, and did not even attempt to communicate with the jangada.


CHAPTER XI. FROM PEVAS TO THE FRONTIER

DURING THE FEW days which followed nothing occurred worthy of note.
The nights were so fine that the long raft went on its way with the stream
without even a halt. The two picturesque banks of the river seemed to change
like the panoramas of the theaters which unroll from one wing to another. By a
kind of optical illusion it appeared as though the raft was motionless between
two moving pathways.

Benito had no shooting on the banks, for no halt was made, but game was
very advantageously replaced by the results of the fishing.

A great variety of excellent fish were taken--_"pacos," "surubis,"
"gamitanas," of exquisite flavor, and several of those large rays called
"duridaris,"_ with rose-colored stomachs and black backs armed with highly
poisonous darts. There were also collected by thousands those "candirus," a kind
of small silurus, of which many are microscopic, and which so frequently make
a pincushion of the calves of the bather when he imprudently ventures into their
haunts.

The rich waters of the Amazon were also frequented by many other aquatic
animals, which escorted the jangada through its waves for whole hours together.

There were the gigantic _"pria-rucus,"_ ten and twelve feet long, cuirassed
with large scales with scarlet borders, whose flesh was not much appreciated by
the natives. Neither did they care to capture many of the graceful dolphins which
played about in hundreds, striking with their tails the planks of the raft,
gamboling at the bow and stern, and making the water alive with colored
reflections and spurts of spray, which the refracted light converted into so many
rainbows.

On the 16th of June the jangada, after fortunately clearing several shallows
in approaching the banks, arrived near the large island of San Pablo, and the
following evening she stopped at the village of Moromoros, which is situated on
the left side of the Amazon. Twenty-four hours afterward, passing the mouths of
the Atacoari or Cocha--or rather the _"furo,"_ or canal, which communicates
with the lake of Cabello-Cocha on the right bank--she put in at the rising ground
of the mission of Cocha. This was the country of the Marahua Indians, whose
long floating hair, and mouths opening in the middle of a kind of fan made of the
spines of palm-trees, six inches long, give them a cat-like look--their endeavor


being, according to Paul Marcoy, to resemble the tiger, whose boldness, strength,
and cunning they admire above everything. Several women came with these
Marahuas, smoking cigars, but holding the lighted ends in their teeth. All of
them, like the king of the Amazonian forests, go about almost naked.

The mission of Cocha was then in charge of a Franciscan monk, who was
anxious to visit Padre Passanha.

Joam Garral received him with a warm welcome, and offered him a seat at
the dinner-table.

On that day was given a dinner which did honor to the Indian cook. The
traditional soup of fragrant herbs; cake, so often made to replace bread in Brazil,
composed of the flour of the manioc thoroughly impregnated with the gravy of
meat and tomato jelly; poultry with rice, swimming in a sharp sauce made of
vinegar and _"malagueta;"_ a dish of spiced herbs, and cold cake sprinkled with
cinnamon, formed enough to tempt a poor monk reduced to the ordinary meager
fare of his parish. They tried all they could to detain him, and Yaquita and her
daughter did their utmost in persuasion. But the Franciscan had to visit on that
evening an Indian who was lying ill at Cocha, and he heartily thanked the
hospitable family and departed, not without taking a few presents, which would
be well received by the neophytes of the mission.

For two days Araujo was very busy. The bed of the river gradually enlarged,
but the islands became more numerous, and the current, embarrassed by these
obstacles, increased in strength. Great care was necessary in passing between the
islands of Cabello-Cocha, Tarapote, and Cacao. Many stoppages had to be made,
and occasionally they were obliged to pole off the jangada, which now and then
threatened to run aground. Every one assisted in the work, and it was under these
difficult circumstances that, on the evening of the 20th of June, they found
themselves at Nuestra-Senora-di-Loreto.

Loreto is the last Peruvian town situated on the left bank of the river before
arriving at the Brazilian frontier. It is only a little village, composed of about
twenty houses, grouped on a slightly undulating bank, formed of ocherous earth
and clay.

It was in 1770 that this mission was founded by the Jesuit missionaries. The
Ticuma Indians, who inhabit the territories on the north of the river, are natives
with ruddy skins, bushy hair, and striped designs on their faces, making them
look like the lacquer on a Chinese table. Both men and women are simply
clothed, with cotton bands bound round their thighs and stomachs. They are now
not more than two hundred in number, and on the banks of the Atacoari are
found the last traces of a nation which was formerly so powerful under its
famous chiefs.


At Loreto there also live a few Peruvian soldiers and two or three Portuguese
merchants, trading in cotton stuffs, salt fish, and sarsaparilla.

Benito went ashore, to buy, if possible, a few bales of this smilax, which is
always so much in demand in the markets of the Amazon. Joam Garral, occupied
all the time in the work which gave him not a moment's rest, did not stir.
Yaquita, her daughter, and Manoel also remained on board. The mosquitoes of
Loreto have a deserved reputation for driving away such visitors as do not care
to leave much of their blood with the redoubtable diptera.

Manoel had a few appropriate words to say about these insects, and they
were not of a nature to encourage an inclination to brave their stings.

"They say that all the new species which infest the banks of the Amazon
collect at the village of Loreto. I believe it, but do not wish to confirm it. There,
Minha, you can take your choice between the gray mosquito, the hairy mosquito,
the white-clawed mosquito, the dwarf mosquito, the trumpeter, the little fifer, the
urtiquis, the harlequin, the big black, and the red of the woods; or rather they
make take their choice of you for a little repast, and you will come back hardly
recognizable! I fancy these bloodthirsty diptera guard the Brazilian frontier
considerably better than the poverty-stricken soldiers we see on the bank."

"But if everything is of use in nature," asked Minha, "what is the use of
mosquitoes?"

"They minister to the happiness of entomologists," replied Manoel; "and I
should be much embarrassed to find a better explanation."

What Manoel had said of the Loreto mosquitoes was only too true. When
Benito had finished his business and returned on board, his face and hands were
tattooed with thousands of red points, without counting some chigoes, which, in
spite of the leather of his boots, had introduced themselves beneath his toes.

"Let us set off this very instant," said Benito, "or these wretched insects will
invade us, and the jangada will become uninhabitable!"

"And we shall take them into Para," said Manoel, "where there are already
quite enough for its own needs.”

And so, in order not to pass even the night near the banks, the jangada
pushed off into the stream.

On leaving Loreto the Amazon turns slightly toward the southwest, between
the islands of Arava, Cuyari, and Urucutea. The jangada then glided along the
black waters of the Cajaru, as they mingled with the white stream of the
Amazon. After having passed this tributary on the left, it peacefully arrived
during the evening of the 23d of June alongside the large island of Jahuma.

The setting of the sun on a clear horizon, free from all haze, announced one
of those beautiful tropical nights which are unknown in the temperate zones. A


light breeze freshened the air; the moon arose in the constellated depths of the
sky, and for several hours took the place of the twilight which is absent from
these latitudes. But even during this period the stars shone with unequaled purity.
The immense plain seemed to stretch into the infinite like a sea, and at the
extremity of the axis, which measures more than two hundred thousand millions
of leagues, there appeared on the north the single diamond of the pole star, on
the south the four brilliants of the Southern Cross.

The trees on the left bank and on the island of Jahuma stood up in sharp
black outline. There were recognizable in the undecided _silhouettes_ the trunks,
or rather columns, of "copahus,"” which spread out in umbrellas, groups of
"sandis," from which is extracted the thick and sugared milk, intoxicating as
wine itself, and "vignaticos" eighty feet high, whose summits shake at the
passage of the lightest currents of air. "What a magnificent sermon are these
forests of the Amazon!" has been justly said. Yes; and we might add, "What a
magnificent hymn there is in the nights of the tropics!"

The birds were giving forth their last evening notes--_"bentivis," who hang
their nests on the bank-side reeds; "niambus," a kind of partridge, whose song is
composed of four notes, in perfect accord; "kamichis," with their plaintive
melody; kingfishers, whose call responds like a signal to the last cry of their
congeners; "canindes," with their sonorous trumpets; and red macaws, who fold
their wings in the foliage of the "jaquetibas,"_ when night comes on to dim their
glowing colors.

On the jangada every one was at his post, in the attitude of repose. The pilot
alone, standing in the bow, showed his tall stature, scarcely defined in the earlier
shadows. The watch, with his long pole on his shoulder, reminded one of an
encampment of Tartar horsemen. The Brazilian flag hung from the top of the
staff in the bow, and the breeze was scarcely strong enough to lift the bunting.

At eight o'clock the three first tinklings of the Angelus escaped from the bell
of the little chapel. The three tinklings of the second and third verses sounded in
their turn, and the salutation was completed in the series of more rapid strokes of
the little bell.

However, the family after this July day remained sitting under the veranda to
breathe the fresh air from the open.

It had been so each evening, and while Joam Garral, always silent, was
contented to listen, the young people gayly chatted away till bedtime.

"Ah! our splendid river! our magnificent Amazon!" exclaimed the young
girl, whose enthusiasm for the immense stream never failed.

"Unequaled river, in very truth," said Manoel; "and I do not understand all its
sublime beauties. We are going down it, however, like Orellana and La


Condamine did so many centuries ago, and I am not at all surprised at their
marvelous descriptions."

"A little fabulous," replied Benito.

"Now, brother," said Minha seriously, "say no evil of our Amazon."

"To remind you that it has its legends, my sister, is to say no ill of it."

"Yes, that is true; and it has some marvelous ones," replied Minha.

"What legends?" asked Manoel. "I dare avow that they have not yet found
their way into Para--or rather that, for my part, I am not acquainted with them."

"What, then do you learn in the Belem colleges?" laughingly asked Minha.

"I begin to perceive that they teach us nothing," replied Manoel.

"What, sir!" replied Minha, with a pleasant seriousness, "you do not know,
among other fables, that an enormous reptile called the _'minhocao,'_ sometimes
visits the Amazon, and that the waters of the river rise or fall according as this
serpent plunges in or quits them, so gigantic is he?"

"But have you ever seen this phenomenal minhocao?"

"Alas, no!" replied Lina.

"What a pity!" Fragoso thought it proper to add.

"And the 'Mae d'Aqua,” continued the girl--"that proud and redoubtable
woman whose look fascinates and drags beneath the waters of the river the
imprudent ones who gaze a her."

"Oh, as for the 'Mae d'Aqua,' she exists!" cried the naive Lina; "they say that
she still walks on the banks, but disappears like a water sprite as soon as you
approach her."

"Very well, Lina," said Benito; "the first time you see her just let me know."

"So that she may seize you and take you to the bottom of the river? Never,
Mr. Benito!"


"She believes it!" shouted Minha.

"There are people who believe in the trunk of Manaos," said Fragoso, always
ready to intervene on behalf of Lina.

"The 'trunk of Manaos"?" asked Manoel. "What about the trunk of Manaos?"

"Mr. Manoel," answered Fragoso, with comic gravity, "it appears that there
is--or rather formerly was--a trunk of 'turuma,' which every year at the same
time descended the Rio Negro, stopping several days at Manaos, and going on
into Para, halting at every port, where the natives ornamented it with little flags.
Arrived at Belem, it came to a halt, turned back on its road, remounted the
Amazon to the Rio Negro, and returned to the forest from which it had
mysteriously started. One day somebody tried to drag it ashore, but the river rose
in anger, and the attempt had to be given up. And on another occasion the
captain of a ship harpooned it and tried to tow it along. This time again the river,
in anger, broke off the ropes, and the trunk mysteriously escaped."

"What became of it?" asked the mulatto.

"It appears that on its last voyage, Miss Lina," replied Fragoso, "it mistook
the way, and instead of going up the Negro it continued in the Amazon, and it
has never been seen again."

"Oh, if we could only meet it!" said Lina.

"If we meet it," answered Benito, "we will put you on it! It will take you
back to the mysterious forest, and you will likewise pass into the state of a
legendary mind!"

"And why not?" asked the mulatto.

"So much for your legends," said Manoel; "and I think your river is worthy
of them. But it has also its histories, which are worth something more. I know
one, and if I were not afraid of grieving you--for it is a very sad one--I would
relate it."

"Oh! tell it, by all means, Mr. Manoel,” exclaimed Lina; "I like stories which
make you cry!"

"What, do you cry, Lina?" said Benito.

"Yes, Mr. Benito; but I cry when laughing."

"Oh, well! let us save it, Manoel!"

"It is the history of a Frenchwoman whose sorrows rendered these banks
memorable in the eighteenth century."

"We are listening,” said Minha.

"Here goes, then," said Manoel. "In 1741, at the time of the expedition of the
two Frenchmen, Bouguer and La Condamine, who were sent to measure a
terrestrial degree on the equator, they were accompanied by a very distinguished
astronomer, Godin des Odonais. Godin des Odonais set out then, but he did not


set out alone, for the New World; he took with him his young wife, his children,
his father-in-law, and his brother-in-law. The travelers arrived at Quito in good
health. There commenced a series of misfortunes for Madame Odonais; in a few
months she lost some of her children. When Godin des Odonais had completed
his work, toward the end of the year 1759, he left Quito and started for Cayenne.
Once arrived in this town he wanted his family to come to him, but war had been
declared, and he was obliged to ask the Portuguese government for permission
for a free passage for Madame Odonais and her people. What do you think?
Many years passed before the permission could be given. In 1765 Godin des
Odonais, maddened by the delay, resolved to ascend the Amazon in search of his
wife at Quito; but at the moment of his departure a sudden illness stopped him,
and he could not carry out his intention. However, his application had not been
useless, and Madame des Odonais learned at last that the king of Portugal had
given the necessary permission, and prepared to embark and descend the river to
her husband. At the same time an escort was ordered to be ready in the missions
of the Upper Amazon. Madame des Odonais was a woman of great courage, as
you will see presently; she never hesitated, and notwithstanding the dangers of
such a voyage across the continent, she started."

"Tt was her duty to her husband, Manoel," said Yaquita, "and I would have
done the same."

"Madame des Odonais," continued Manoel, "came to Rio Bamba, at the
south of Quito, bringing her brother-in-law, her children, and a French doctor.
Their endeavor was to reach the missions on the Brazilian frontier, where they
hoped to find a ship and the escort. The voyage at first was favorable; it was
made down the tributaries of the Amazon in a canoe. The difficulties, however,
gradually increased with the dangers and fatigues of a country decimated by the
smallpox. Of several guides who offered their services, the most part
disappeared after a few days; one of them, the last who remained faithful to the
travelers, was drowned in the Bobonasa, in endeavoring to help the French
doctor. At length the canoe, damaged by rocks and floating trees, became
useless. It was therefore necessary to get on shore, and there at the edge of the
impenetrable forest they built a few huts of foliage. The doctor offered to go on
in front with a negro who had never wished to leave Madame des Odonais. The
two went off; they waited for them several days, but in vain. They never
returned.

"In the meantime the victuals were getting exhausted. The forsaken ones in
vain endeavored to descend the Bobonasa on a raft. They had to again take to the
forest, and make their way on foot through the almost impenetrable
undergrowth. The fatigues were too much for the poor folks! They died off one


by one in spite of the cares of the noble Frenchwoman. At the end of a few days
children, relations, and servants, were all dead!"

"What an unfortunate woman!" said Lina.

"Madame des Odonais alone remained," continued Manoel. "There she was,
at a thousand leagues from the ocean which she was trying to reach! It was no
longer a mother who continued her journey toward the river--the mother had lost
her shildren; she had buried them with her own hands! It was a wife who wished
to see her husband once again! She traveled night and day, and at length regained
the Bobonasa. She was there received by some kind-hearted Indians, who took
her to the missions, where the escort was waiting. But she arrived alone, and
behind her the stages of the route were marked with graves! Madame des
Odonais reached Loreto, where we were a few days back. From this Peruvian
village she descended the Amazon, as we are doing at this moment, and at length
she rejoined her husband after a separation of nineteen years."

"Poor lady!" said Minha.

"Above all, poor mother!" answered Yaquita.

At this moment Araujo, the pilot, came aft and said:

"Joam Garral, we are off the Ronde Island. We are passing the frontier!"

"The frontier!" replied Joam.

And rising, he went to the side of the jangada, and looked long and earnestly
at the Ronde Island, with the waves breaking up against it. Then his hand sought
his forehead, as if to rid himself of some remembrance.

"The frontier!" murmured he, bowing his head by an involuntary movement.

But an instant after his head was raised, and his expression was that of a man
resolved to do his duty to the last.


CHAPTER XII. FRAGOSO AT WORK

"BRAZA" (burning embers) is a word found in the Spanish language as far
back as the twelfth century. It has been used to make the word "brazil," as
descriptive of certain woods which yield a reddish dye. From this has come the
name "Brazil," given to that vast district of South America which is crossed by
the equator, and in which these products are so frequently met with. In very early
days these woods were the object of considerable trade. Although correctly
called "ibirapitunga," from the place of production, the name of "brazil" stuck to
them, and it has become that of the country, which seems like an immense heap
of embers lighted by the rays of the tropical sun.

Brazil was from the first occupied by the Portuguese. About the
commencement of the sixteenth century, Alvarez Cabral, the pilot, took


possession of it, and although France and Holland partially established
themselves there, it has remained Portuguese, and possesses all the qualities
which distinguish that gallant little nation. It is to-day the largest state of South
America, and has at its head the intelligent artist-king Dom Pedro.

"What is your privilege in the tribe?" asked Montaigne of an Indian whom he
met at Havre.

"The privilege of marching first to battle!" innocently answered the Indian.

War, we know, was for a long time the surest and most rapid vehicle of
civilization. The Brazilians did what this Indian did: they fought, they defended
their conquests, they enlarged them, and we see them marching in the first rank
of the civilizing advance.

It was in 1824, sixteen years after the foundation of the Portugo-Brazilian
Empire, that Brazil proclaimed its independence by the voice of Don Juan,
whom the French armies had chased from Portugal.

It remained only to define the frontier between the new empire and that of its
neighbor, Peru. This was no easy matter.

If Brazil wished to extend to the Rio Napo in the west, Peru attempted to
reach eight degrees further, as far as the Lake of Ega.

But in the meantime Brazil had to interfere to hinder the kidnaping of the
Indians from the Amazon, a practice which was engaged in much to the profit of
the Hispano-Brazilian missions. There was no better method of checking this
trade than that of fortifying the Island of the Ronde, a little above Tabatinga, and
there establishing a post.

This afforded the solution, and from that time the frontier of the two
countries passed through the middle of this island.

Above, the river is Peruvian, and is called the Maranon, as has been said.
Below, it is Brazilian, and takes the name of the Amazon.

It was on the evening of the 25th of June that the jangada stopped before
Tabatinga, the first Brazilian town situated on the left bank, at the entrance of the
river of which it bears the name, and belonging to the parish of St. Paul,
established on the right a little further down stream.

Joam Garral had decided to pass thirty-six hours here, so as to give a little
rest to the crew. They would not start, therefore, until the morning of the 27th.

On this occasion Yaquita and her children, less likely, perhaps, than at
Iquitos to be fed upon by the native mosquitoes, had announced their intention of
going on ashore and visiting the town.

The population of Tabatinga is estimated at four hundred, nearly all Indians,
comprising, no doubt, many of those wandering families who are never settled at
particular spots on the banks of the Amazon or its smaller tributaries.


The post at the island of the Ronde has been abandoned for some years, and
transferred to Tabatinga. It can thus be called a garrison town, but the garrison is
only composed of nine soldiers, nearly all Indians, and a sergeant, who is the
actual commandant of the place.

A bank about thirty feet high, in which are cut the steps of a not very solid
Staircase, forms here the curtain of the esplanade which carries the pigmy fort.
The house of the commandant consists of a couple of huts placed in a square,
and the soldiers occupy an oblong building a hundred feet away, at the foot of a
large tree.

The collection of cabins exactly resembles all the villages and hamlets which
are scattered along the banks of the river, although in them a flagstaff carrying
the Brazilian colors does not rise above a sentry-box, forever destitute of its
sentinel, nor are four small mortars present to cannonade on an emergency any
vessel which does not come in when ordered.

As for the village properly so called, it is situated below, at the base of the
plateau. A road, which is but a ravine shaded by ficuses and miritis, leads to it in
a few minutes. There, on a half-cracked hill of clay, stand a dozen houses,
covered with the leaves of the "boiassu" palm placed round a central space.

All this is not very curious, but the environs of Tabatinga are charming,
particularly at the mouth of the Javary, which is of sufficient extent to contain
the Archipelago of the Aramasa Islands. Hereabouts are grouped many fine
trees, and among them a large number of the palms, whose supple fibers are used
in the fabrication of hammocks and fishing-nets, and are the cause of some trade.
To conclude, the place is one of the most picturesque on the Upper Amazon.

Tabatinga is destined to become before long a station of some importance,
and will no doubt rapidly develop, for there will stop the Brazilian steamers
which ascend the river, and the Peruvian steamers which descend it. There they
will tranship passengers and cargoes. It does not require much for an English or
American village to become in a few years the center of considerable commerce.

The river is very beautiful along this part of its course. The influence of
ordinary tides is not perceptible at Tabatinga, which is more than six hundred
leagues from the Atlantic. But it is not so with the "pororoca," that species of
eddy which for three days in the height of the syzygies raises the waters of the
Amazon, and turns them back at the rate of seventeen kilometers per hour. They
say that the effects of this bore are felt up to the Brazilian frontier.

On the morrow, the 26th of June, the Garral family prepared to go off and
visit the village. Though Joam, Benito, and Manoel had already set foot in a
Brazilian town, it was otherwise with Yaquita and her daughter; for them it was,
so to speak, a taking possession. It is conceivable, therefore, that Yaquita and


Minha should attach some importance to the event.

If, on his part, Fragoso, in his capacity of wandering barber, had already run
through the different provinces of South America, Lina, like her young mistress,
had never been on Brazilian soil.

But before leaving the jangada Fragoso had sought Joam Garral, and had the
following conversation with him.

"Mr. Garral," said he, "from the day when you received me at the fazenda of
Iquitos, lodged, clothed, fed--in a word, took me in so hospitably--I have owed
you----"

"You owe me absolutely nothing, my friend," answered Joam, "so do not
insist----"

"Oh, do not be alarmed!" exclaimed Fragoso, "I am not going to pay it off!
Let me add, that you took me on board the jangada and gave me the means of
descending the river. But here we are, on the soil of Brazil, which, according to
all probability, I ought never to have seen again. Without that liana----"

"It is to Lina, and to Lina alone, that you should tender your thanks," said
Joam.

"I know," said Fragoso, "and I will never forget what I owe here, any more
than what I owe you."

"They tell me, Fragoso," continued Joam, "that you are going to say good-by,
and intend to remain at Tabatinga."

"By no means, Mr. Garral, since you have allowed me to accompany you to
Belem, where I hope at the least to be able to resume my old trade."

"Well, if that is your intention--what were you going to ask me?"

"I was going to ask if you saw any inconvenience in my working at my
profession on our route. There is no necessity for my hand to rust; and, besides, a
few handfuls of reis would not be so bad at the bottom of my pocket, more
particularly if I had earned them. You know, Mr. Garral, that a barber who is also
a hairdresser--and I hardly like to say a doctor, out of respect to Mr. Manoel--
always finds customers in these Upper Amazon villages."

"Particularly among the Brazilians," answered Joam. "As for the natives----"

"I beg pardon," replied Fragoso, "particularly among the natives. Ah!
although there is no beard to trim--for nature has been very stingy toward them
in that way--there are always some heads of hair to be dressed in the latest
fashion. They are very fond of it, these savages, both the men and the women! I
shall not be installed ten minutes in the square at Tabatinga, with my cup and
ball in hand--the cup and ball I have brought on board, and which I can manage
with pretty pleasantly--before a circle of braves and squaws will have formed
around me. They will struggle for my favors. I could remain here for a month,


and the whole tribe of the Ticunas would come to me to have their hair looked
after! They won't hesitate to make the acquaintance of ‘curling tongs'--that is
what they will call me--if I revisit the walls of Tabatinga! I have already had two
tries here, and my scissors and comb have done marvels! It does not do to return
too often on the same track. The Indian ladies don't have their hair curled every
day, like the beauties of our Brazilian cities. No; when it is done, it is done for
year, and during the twelvemonth they will take every care not to endanger the
edifice which I have raised--with what talent I dare not say. Now it is nearly a
year since I was at Tabatinga; I go to find my monuments in ruin! And if it is not
objectionable to you, Mr. Garral, I would render myself again worthy of the
reputation which I have acquired in these parts, the question of reis, and not that
of conceit, being, you understand, the principal."

"Go on, then, friend," replied Joam Garral laughingly; "but be quick! we can
only remain a day at Tabatinga, and we shall start tomorrow at dawn."

"IT will not lose a minute," answered Fragoso--"just time to take the tools of
my profession, and I am off."

"Off you go, Fragoso," said Joam, "and may the reis rain into your pocket!"

"Yes, and that is a proper sort of rain, and there can never be too much of it
for your obedient servant."

And so saying Fragoso rapidly moved away.

A moment afterward the family, with the exception of Joam, went ashore.
The jangada was able to approach near enough to the bank for the landing to
take place without much trouble. A staircase, in a miserable state, cut in the cliff,
allowed the visitors to arrive on the crest of the plateau.

Yaquita and her party were received by the commandant of the fort, a poor
fellow who, however, knew the laws of hospitality, and offered them some
breakfast in his cottage. Here and there passed and repassed several soldiers on
guard, while on the threshold of the barrack appeared a few children, with their
mothers of Ticuna blood, affording very poor specimens of the mixed race.

In place of accepting the breakfast of the sergeant, Yaquita invited the
commandant and his wife to come and have theirs on board the jangada.

The commandant did not wait for a second invitation, and an appointment
was made for eleven o'clock. In the meantime Yaquita, her daughter, and the
young mulatto, accompanied by Manoel, went for a walk in the neighborhood,
leaving Benito to settle with the commandant about the tolls--he being chief of
the custom-house as well as of the military establishment.

That done, Benito, as was his wont, strolled off with his gun into the
adjoining woods. On this occasion Manoel had declined to accompany him.
Fragoso had left the jangada, but instead of mounting to the fort he had made for


the village, crossing the ravine which led off from the right on the level of the
bank. He reckoned more on the native custom of Tabatinga than on that of the
garrison. Doubtless the soldiers' wives would not have wished better than to
have been put under his hands, but the husbands scarcely cared to part with a
few reis for the sake of gratifying the whims of their coquettish partners.

Among the natives it was quite the reverse. Husbands and wives, the jolly
barber knew them well, and he knew they would give him a better reception.

Behold, then, Fragoso on the road, coming up the shady lane beneath the
ficuses, and arriving in the central square of Tabatinga!

As soon as he set foot in the place the famous barber was signaled,
recognized, surrounded. Fragoso had no big box, nor drum, nor cornet to attract
the attention of his clients--not even a carriage of shining copper, with
resplendent lamps and ornamented glass panels, nor a huge parasol, no anything
whatever to impress the public, as they generally have at fairs. No; but Fragoso
had his cup and ball, and how that cup and ball were manipulated between his
fingers! With what address did he receive the turtle's head, which did for the
ball, on the pointed end of the stick! With what grace did he make the ball
describe some learned curve of which mathematicians have not yet calculated
the value--even those who have determined the wondrous curve of "the dog who
follows his master!"

Every native was there--men, women, the old and the young, in their nearly
primitive costume, looking on with all their eyes, listening with all their ears.
The smiling entertainer, half in Portuguese, half in Ticunian, favored them with
his customary oration in a tone of the most rollicking good humor. What he said
was what is said by all the charlatans who place their services at the public
disposal, whether they be Spanish Figaros or French perrugiers. At the bottom
the same self-possession, the same knowledge of human weakness, the same
description of threadbare witticisms, the same amusing dexterity, and, on the part
of the natives, the same wide-mouth astonishment, the same curiosity, the same
credulity as the simple folk of the civilized world.

It followed, then, that ten minutes later the public were completely won, and
crowded round Fragoso, who was installed in a "loja" of the place, a sort of
serving-bar to the inn.

The loja belonged to a Brazilian settled at Tabatinga. There, for a few
vatems, which are the sols of the country, and worth about twenty reis, or half a
dozen centimes each, the natives could get drinks of the crudest, and particularly
assai, a liquor half-sold, half-liquid, made of the fruit of the palm-tree, and drunk
from a "coui" or half-calabash in general use in this district of the Amazon.

And then men and women, with equal eagemess, took their places on the


barber's stool. The scissors of Fragoso had little to do, for it was not a question
of cutting these wealthy heads of hair, nearly all remarkable for their softness
and their quality, but the use to which he could put his comb and the tongs,
which were kept warming in the corner in a brasier.

And then the encouragements of the artist to the crowd!

"Look here! look here!" said he; "how will that do, my friends--if you don't
sleep on the top of it! There you are, for a twelvemonth! and these are the latest
novelties from Belem and Rio de Janeiro! The queen's maids of honor are not
more cleverly decked out; and observe, I am not stingy with the pomade!"

No, he was not stingy with it. True, it was only a little grease, with which he
had mixed some of the juices of a few flowers, but he plastered it on like
cement!

And as to the names of the capillary edifices--for the monuments reared by
the hands of Fragoso were of every order of architecture--buckles, rings, clubs,
tresses, crimpings, rolls, corkscrews, curls, everything found there a place.
Nothing false; no towers, no chignons, no shams! These head were not enfeebled
by cuttings nor thinned by fallings-off, but were forests in all their native
virginity! Fragoso, however, was not above adding a few natural flowers, two or
three long fish-bones, and some fine bone or copper ornaments, which were
brought him by the dandies of the district. Assuredly, the exquisites of the
Directory would have envied the arrangement of these high-art coiffures, three
and four stories high, and the great Leonard himself would have bowed before
his transatlantic rival.

And then the vatems, the handfuls of reis--the only coins for which the
natives of the Amazon exchange their goods--which rained into the pocket of
Fragoso, and which he collected with evident satisfaction. But assuredly night
would come before he could satisfy the demands of the customers, who were so
constantly renewed. It was not only the population of Tabatinga which crowded
to the door of the loja. The news of the arrival of Fragoso was not slow to get
abroad; natives came to him from all sides: Ticunas from the left bank of the
river, Mayorunas from the right bank, as well as those who live on the Cajuru
and those who come from the villages of the Javary.

A long array of anxious ones formed itself in the square. The happy ones
coming from the hands of Fragoso went proudly from one house to another,
showed themselves off without daring to shake themselves, like the big children
that they were.

It thus happened that when noon came the much-occupied barber had not had
time to return on board, but had had to content himself with a little assai, some
manioc flour, and turtle eggs, which he rapidly devoured between two


applications of the curling-tongs.

But it was a great harvest for the innkeeper, as all the operations could not be
conducted without a large absorption of liquors drawn from the cellars of the
inn. In fact, it was an event for the town of Tabatinga, this visit of the celebrated
Fragoso, barber in ordinary and extraordinary to the tribes of the Upper
Amazon!


CHAPTER XIII. TORRES

AT FIVE O'CLOCK in the evening Fragoso was still there, and was asking
himself if he would have to pass the night on the spot to satisfy the expectant
crowd, when a stranger arrived in the square, and seeing all this native gathering,
advanced toward the inn.

For some minutes the stranger eyed Fragoso attentively with some
circumspection. The examination was obviously satisfactory, for he entered the
loja.

He was a man about thirty-five years of age. He was dressed in a somewhat
elegant traveling costume, which added much to his personal appearance. But
his strong black beard, which the scissors had not touched for some time, and his
hair, a trifle long, imperiously required the good offices of a barber.

"Good-day, friend, good-day!" said he, lightly striking Fragoso on the
shoulder.

Fragoso turned round when he heard the words pronounced in pure
Brazilian, and not in the mixed idiom of the natives.

"A compatriot?” he asked, without stopping the twisting of the refractory
mouth of a Mayouma head.

"Yes," answered the stranger. "A compatriot who has need of your services."

"To be sure! In a minute," said Fragoso. "Wait till I have finished with this
lady!"

And this was done in a couple of strokes with the curling-tongs.

Although he was the last comer, and had no right to the vacant place, he sat
down on the stool without causing any expostulation on the part of the natives
who lost a turn.

Fragoso put down the irons for the scissors, and, after the manner of his
brethren, said:

"What can I do for you, sir?"

"Cut my beard and my hair," answered the stranger.

"All right!" said Fragoso, inserting his comb into the mass of hair.

And then the scissors to do their work.


"And you come from far?" asked Fragoso, who could not work without a
good deal to say.

"I have come from the neighborhood of Iquitos."

"So have I!" exclaimed Fragoso. "I have come down the Amazon from
Iquitos to Tabatinga. May I ask your name?"

"No objection at all," replied the stranger. "My name is Torres."

When the hair was cut in the latest style Fragoso began to thin his beard, but
at this moment, as he was looking straight into his face, he stopped, then began
again, and then:

"Eh! Mr. Torres," said he; "I seem to know you. We must have seen each
other somewhere?"

"I do not think so," quickly answered Torres.

"IT am always wrong!" replied Fragoso, and he hurried on to finish his task.

A moment after Torres continued the conversation which this question of
Fragoso had interrupted, with:

"How did you come from Iquitos?"

"From Iquitos to Tabatinga?"

"Yes."

"On board a raft, on which I was given a passage by a worthy fazender who
is going down the Amazon with his family."

"A friend indeed!" replied Torres. "That is a chance, and if your fazender
would take me----"

"Do you intend, then, to go down the river?"

"Precisely."

"Into Para?"

"No, only to Manaos, where I have business."

"Well, my host is very kind, and I think he would cheerfully oblige you."

"Do you think so?"

"I might almost say I am sure."

"And what is the name of this fazender?" asked Torres carelessly.

"Joam Garral," answered Fragoso.

And at the same time he muttered to himself:

"I certainly have seen this fellow somewhere!"

Torres was not the man to allow a conversation to drop which was likely to
interest him, and for very good reasons.

"And so you think Joam Garral would give me a passage?"

"I do not doubt it," replied Fragoso. "What he would do for a poor chap like
me he would not refuse to do for a compatriot like you."

"Is he alone on board the jangada?"


"No," replied Fragoso. "I was going to tell you that he is traveling with all
his family--and jolly people they are, I assure you. He is accompanied by a crew
of Indians and negroes, who form part of the staff at the fazenda."

"Is he rich?"

"Oh, certainly!" answered Fragoso--"very rich. Even the timber which forms
the jangada, and the cargo it carries, constitute a fortune!"

"The Joam Garral and his whole family have just passed the Brazilian
frontier?"

"Yes," said Fragoso; "his wife, his son, his daughter, and Miss Minha's
betrothed."

"Ah! he has a daughter?" said Torres.

"A charming girl!"

"Going to get married?"

"Yes, to a brave young fellow," replied Fragoso--"an army surgeon in
garrison at Belem, and the wedding is to take place as soon as we get to the end
of the voyage."

"Good!" said the smiling Torres; "it is what you might call a betrothal
journey."

"A voyage of betrothal, of pleasure, and of business!" said Fragoso.
"Madame Yaquita and her daughter have never set foot on Brazilian ground; and
as for Joam Garral, it is the first time he has crossed the frontier since he went to
the farm of old Magalhaés."

"I suppose," asked Torres, "that there are some servants with the family?"

"Of course," replied Fragoso--"old Cybele, on the farm for the last fifty
years, and a pretty mulatto, Miss Lina, who is more of a companion than a
servant to her mistress. Ah, what an amiable disposition! What a heart, and what
eyes! And the ideas she has about everything, particularly about lianas--"
Fragoso, started on this subject, would not have been able to stop himself, and
Lina would have been the object of a good many enthusiastic declarations, had
Torres not quitted the chair for another customer.

"What do I owe you?" asked he of the barber.

"Nothing," answered Fragoso. "Between compatriots, when they meet on the
frontier, there can be no question of that sort."

"But," replied Torres, "I want to----"

"Very well, we will settle that later on, on board the jangada."

"But I do not know that, and I do not like to ask Joam Garral to allow me----"

"Do not hesitate!" exclaimed Fragoso; "I will speak to him if you would like
it better, and he will be very happy to be of use to you under the circumstances."

And at that instant Manoel and Benito, coming into the town after dinner,


appeared at the door of the loja, wishing to see Fragoso at work.

Torres turned toward them and suddenly said: "There are two gentlemen I
know--or rather I remember."

"You remember them!" asked Fragoso, surprised.

"Yes, undoubtedly! A month ago, in the forest of Iquitos, they got me out of
a considerable difficulty."

"But they are Benito Garral and Manoel Valdez."

"I know. They told me their names, but I never expected to see them here."

Torres advanced toward the two young men, who looked at him without
recognizing him.

"You do not remember me, gentlemen?" he asked.

"Wait a little," answered Benito; "Mr. Torres, if I remember aright; it was you
who, in the forest of Iquitos, got into difficulties with a guariba?"

"Quite true, gentlemen," replied Torres. "For six weeks I have been traveling
down the Amazon, and I have just crossed the frontier at the same time as you
have."

"Very pleased to see you again," said Benito; "but you have not forgotten that
you promised to come to the fazenda to my father?"

"T have not forgotten it," answered Torres.

"And you would have done better to have accepted my offer; it would have
allowed you to have waited for our departure, rested from you fatigues, and
descended with us to the frontier; so many days of walking saved."

"To be sure!" answered Torres.

"Our compatriot is not going to stop at the frontier," said Fragoso, "he is
going on to Manaos."

"Well, then," replied Benito, "if you will come on board the jangada you will
be well received, and I am sure my father will give you a passage."

"Willingly," said Torres; "and you will allow me to thank you in advance."

Manoel took no part in the conversation; he let Benito make the offer of his
services, and attentively watched Torres, whose face he scarcely remembered.
There was an entire want of frankness in the eyes, whose look changed
unceasingly, as if he was afraid to fix them anywhere. But Manoel kept this
impression to himself, not wishing to injure a compatriot whom they were about
to oblige.

"Gentlemen," said Torres, "if you like, I am ready to follow you to the
landing-place."

"Come, then," answered Benito.

A quarter of an hour afterward Torres was on board the jangada. Benito
introduced him to Joam Garral, acquainting him with the circumstances under


which they had previously met him, and asked him to give him a passage down
to Manaos.

"I am happy, sir, to be able to oblige you," replied Joam.

"Thank you," said Torres, who at the moment of putting forth his hand kept it
back in spite of himself.

"We shall be off at daybreak tomorrow," added Joam Garral, "so you had
better get your things on board."

"Oh, that will not take me long!" answered Torres; "there is only myself and
nothing else!"

"Make yourself at home," said Joam Garral.

That evening Torres took possession of a cabin near to that of the barber. It
was not till eight o'clock that the latter returned to the raft, and gave the young
mulatto an account of his exploits, and repeated, with no little vanity, that the
renown of the illustrious Fragoso was increasing in the basin of the Upper
Amazon.


CHAPTER XIV. STILL DESCENDING

AT DAYBREAK on the morrow, the 27th of June, the cables were cast off,
and the raft continued its journey down the river.

An extra passenger was on board. Whence came this Torres? No one exactly
knew. Where was he going to? "To Manaos," he said. Torres was careful to let no
suspicion of his past life escape him, nor of the profession that he had followed
till within the last two months, and no one would have thought that the jangada
had given refuge to an old captain of the woods. Joam Garral did not wish to mar
the service he was rendering by questions of too pressing a nature.

In taking him on board the fazender had obeyed a sentiment of humanity. In
the midst of these vast Amazonian deserts, more especially at the time when the
steamers had not begun to furrow the waters, it was very difficult to find means
of safe and rapid transit. Boats did not ply regularly, and in most cases the
traveler was obliged to walk across the forests. This is what Torres had done, and
what he would continue to have done, and it was for him unexpected good luck
to have got a passage on the raft.

From the moment that Benito had explained under what conditions he had
met Torres the introduction was complete, and he was able to consider himself as
a passenger on an Atlantic steamer, who is free to take part in the general life if
he cares, or free to keep himself a little apart if of an unsociable disposition.

It was noticed, at least during the first few days, that Torres did not try to
become intimate with the Garral family. He maintained a good deal of reserve,


answering if addressed, but never provoking a reply.

If he appeared more open with any one, it was with Fragoso. Did he not owe
to this gay companion the idea of taking passage on board the raft? Many times
he asked him about the position of the Garrals at Iquitos, the sentiments of the
daughter for Manoel Valdez, and always discreetly. Generally, when he was not
walking alone in the bow of the jangada, he kept to his cabin.

He breakfasted and dined with Joam Garral and his family, but he took little
part in their conversation, and retired when the repast was finished.

During the morning the raft passed by the picturesque group of islands
situated in the vast estuary of the Javary. This important affluent of the Amazon
comes from the southwest, and from source to mouth has not a single island, nor
a single rapid, to check its course. The mouth is about three thousand feet in
width, and the river comes in some miles above the site formerly occupied by
the town of the same name, whose possession was disputed for so long by
Spaniards and Portuguese.

Up to the morning of the 30th of June there had been nothing particular to
distinguish the voyage. Occasionally they met a few vessels gliding along by the
banks attached one to another in such a way that a single Indian could manage
the whole--_"navigar de bubina,"_ as this kind of navigation is called by the
people of the country, that is to say, "confidence navigation."

They had passed the island of Araria, the Archipelago of the Calderon
islands, the island of Capiatu, and many others whose names have not yet come
to the knowledge of geographers.

On the 30th of June the pilot signaled on the right the little village of
Jurupari-Tapera, where they halted for two or three hours.

Manoel and Benito had gone shooting in the neighborhood, and brought back
some feathered game, which was well received in the larder. At the same time
they had got an animal of whom a naturalist would have made more than did the
cook.

It was a creature of a dark color, something like a large Newfoundland dog.

"A great ant-eater!" exclaimed Benito, as he threw it on the deck of the
jangada.

"And a magnificent specimen which would not disgrace the collection of a
museum!" added Manoel.

"Did you take much trouble to catch the curious animal?" asked Minha.

"Yes, little sister," replied Benito, "and you were not there to ask for mercy!
These dogs die hard, and no less than three bullets were necessary to bring this
fellow down."

The ant-eater looked superb, with his long tail and grizzly hair; with his


pointed snout, which is plunged into the ant-hills whose insects form its
principal food; and his long, thin paws, armed with sharp nails, five inches long,
and which can shut up like the fingers of one's hand. But what a hand was this
hand of the ant-eater! When it has got hold of anything you have to cut it off to
make it let go! It is of this hand that the traveler, Emile Carrey, has so justly
observed: "The tiger himself would perish in its grasp."

On the 2d of July, in the morning, the jangada arrived at the foot of San
Pablo d'Olivenga, after having floated through the midst of numerous islands
which in all seasons are clad with verdure and shaded with magnificent trees,
and the chief of which bear the names of Jurupari, Rita, Maracanatena, and
Cururu Sapo. Many times they passed by the mouths of iguarapes, or little
affluents, with black waters.

The coloration of these waters is a very curious phenomenon. It is peculiar to
a certain number of these tributaries of the Amazon, which differ greatly in
importance.

Manoel remarked how thick the cloudiness was, for it could be clearly seen
on the surface of the whitish waters of the river.

"They have tried to explain this coloring in many ways," said he, "but I do
not think the most learned have yet arrived at a satisfactory explanation."

"The waters are really black with a magnificent reflection of gold," replied
Minha, showing a light, reddish-brown cloth, which was floating level with the
jangada.

"Yes," said Manoel, "and Humboldt has already observed the curious
reflection that you have; but on looking at it attentively you will see that it is
rather the color of sepia which pervades the whole."

"Good!" exclaimed Benito. "Another phenomenon on which the _savants_
are not agreed."

"Perhaps," said Fragoso, "they might ask the opinions of the caymans,
dolphins, and manatees, for they certainly prefer the black waters to the others to
enjoy themselves in."

"They are particularly attractive to those animals," replied Manoel, "but why
it is rather embarrassing to say. For instance, is the coloration due to the
hydrocarbons which the waters hold in solution, or is it because they flow
through districts of peat, coal, and anthracite; or should we not rather attribute it
to the enormous quantity of minute plants which they bear along? There is
nothing certain in the matter. Under any circumstances, they are excellent to
drink, of a freshness quite enviable for the climate, and without after-taste, and
perfectly harmless. Take a little of the water, Minha, and drink it; you will find it
all right."


The water is in truth limpid and fresh, and would advantageously replace
many of the table-waters used in Europe. They drew several frasques for kitchen
use.

It has been said that in the morning of the 2d of July the jangada had arrived
at San Pablo d'Olivenga, where they turn out in thousands those long strings of
beads which are made from the scales of the "coco de piassaba." This trade is
here extensively followed. It may, perhaps, seem singular that the ancient lords
of the country, Tupinambas and Tupiniquis, should find their principal
occupation in making objects for the Catholic religion. But, after all, why not?
These Indians are no longer the Indians of days gone by. Instead of being clothed
in the national fashion, with a frontlet of macaw feathers, bow, and blow-tube,
have they not adopted the American costume of white cotton trousers, and a
cotton poncho woven by their wives, who have become thorough adepts in its
manufacture?

San Pablo d'Olivencga, a town of some importance, has not less than two
thousand inhabitants, derived from all the neighboring tribes. At present the
capital of the Upper Amazon, it began as a simple Mission, founded by the
Portuguese Carmelites about 1692, and afterward acquired by the Jesuit
missionaries.

From the beginning it has been the country of the Omaguas, whose name
means "flat-heads," and is derived from the barbarous custom of the native
mothers of squeezing the heads of their newborn children between two plates, so
as to give them an oblong skull, which was then the fashion. Like everything
else, that has changed; heads have re-taken their natural form, and there is not
the slightest trace of the ancient deformity in the skulls of the chaplet-makers.

Every one, with the exception of Joam Garral, went ashore. Torres also
remained on board, and showed no desire to visit San Pablo d'Olivenga, which
he did not, however, seem to be acquainted with.

Assuredly if the adventurer was taciturn he was not inquisitive.

Benito had no difficulty in doing a little bartering, and adding slightly to the
cargo of the jangada. He and the family received an excellent reception from the
principal authorities of the town, the commandant of the place, and the chief of
the custom-house, whose functions did not in the least prevent them from
engaging in trade. They even intrusted the young merchant with a few products
of the country for him to dispose of on their account at Manaos and Belem.

The town is composed of some sixty houses, arranged on the plain which
hereabouts crowns the river-bank. Some of the huts are covered with tiles--a
very rare thing in these countries; but, on the other hand, the humble church,
dedicated to St. Peter and St. Paul, has only a roof of straw, rather more


appropriate for a stable of Bethlehem than for an edifice consecrated to religion
in one of the most Catholic countries of the world.

The commandant, his lieutenant, and the head of the police accepted an
invitation to dine with the family, and they were received by Joam Garral with
the respect due to their rank.

During dinner Torres showed himself more talkative than usual. He spoke
about some of his excursions into the interior of Brazil like a man who knew the
country. But in speaking of these travels Torres did not neglect to ask the
commandant if he knew Manaos, if his colleague would be there at this time, and
if the judge, the first magistrate of the province, was accustomed to absent
himself at this period of the hot season. It seemed that in putting this series of
questions Torres looked at Joam Garral. It was marked enough for even Benito
to notice it, not without surprise, and he observed that his father gave particular
attention to the questions so curiously propounded by Torres.

The commandant of San Pablo d'Olivenga assured the adventurer that the
authorities were not now absent from Manaos, and he even asked Joam Garral to
convey to them his compliments. In all probability the raft would arrive before
the town in seven weeks, or a little later, say about the 20th or the 25th of
August.

The guests of the fazender took leave of the Garral family toward the
evening, and the following morning, that of the 3d of July, the jangada
recommenced its descent of the river.

At noon they passed on the left the mouth of the Yacurupa. This tributary,
properly speaking, is a true canal, for it discharges its waters into the Iga, which
is itself an affluent of the Amazon.

A peculiar phenomenon, for the river displaces itself to feed its own
tributaries!

Toward three o'clock in the afternoon the giant raft passed the mouth of the
Jandiatuba, which brings its magnificent black waters from the southwest, and
discharges them into the main artery by a mouth of four hundred meters in
extent, after having watered the territories of the Culino Indians.

A number of islands were breasted--Pimaicaira, Caturia, Chico, Motachina;
some inhabited, others deserted, but all covered with superb vegetation, which
forms an unbroken garland of green from one end of the Amazon to the other.


CHAPTER XV. THE CONTINUED DESCENT
ON THE EVENING of the 5th of July, the atmosphere had been oppressive
since the moming and threatened approaching storms. Large bats of ruddy color


skimmed with their huge wings the current of the Amazon. Among them could
be distinguished the "perros voladors," somber brown above and light-colored
beneath, for which Minha, and particularly the young mulatto, felt an instinctive
aversion.

These were, in fact, the horrible vampires which suck the blood of the cattle,
and even attack man if he is imprudent enough to sleep out in the fields.

"Oh, the dreadful creatures!" cried Lina, hiding her eyes; "they fill me with
horror!"

"And they are really formidable," added Minha; "are they not, Manoel?"

"To be sure--very formidable," answered he. "These vampires have a
particular instinct which leads them to bleed you in the places where the blood
most easily comes, and principally behind the ear. During the operation the
continue to move their wings, and cause an agreeable freshness which renders
the sleep of the sleeper more profound. They tell of people, unconsciously
submitted to this hemorrhage for many hours, who have never awoke!"

"Talk no more of things like that, Manoel," said Yaquita, "or neither Minha
nor Lina will dare sleep to-night."

"Never fear!" replied Manoel; "if necessary we will watch over them as they
sleep."

"Silence!" said Benito.

"What is the matter?" asked Manoel.

"Do you not hear a very curious noise on that side?" continued Benito,
pointing to the right bank.

"Certainly," answered Yaquita.

"What causes the noise?" asked Minha. "One would think it was shingle
rolling on the beach of the islands."

"Good! I know what it is," answered Benito. "Tomorrow, at daybreak, there
will be a rare treat for those who like fresh turtle eggs and little turtles!"

He was not deceived; the noise was produced by innumerable chelonians of
all sizes, who were attracted to the islands to lay their eggs.

It is in the sand of the beach that these amphibians choose the most
convenient places to deposit their eggs. The operation commences with sunset
and finishes with the dawn.

At this moment the chief turtle had left the bed of the river to reconnoiter for
a favorable spot; the others, collected in thousands, were soon after occupied in
digging with their hind paddles a trench six hundred feet long, a dozen wide, and
six deep. After laying their eggs they cover them with a bed of sand, which they
beat down with their carapaces as if they were rammers.

This egg-laying operation is a grand affair for the riverine Indians of the


Amazon and its tributaries. They watch for the arrival of the chelonians, and
proceed to the extraction of the eggs to the sound of the drum; and the harvest is
divided into three parts--one to the watchers, another to the Indians, a third to the
state, represented by the captains of the shore, who, in their capacity of police,
have to superintend the collection of the dues. To certain beaches which the
decrease of the waters has left uncovered, and which have the privilege of
attracting the greater number of turtles, there has been given the name of "royal
beaches." When the harvest is gathered it is a holiday for the Indians, who give
themselves up to games, dancing, and drinking; and it is also a holiday for the
alligators of the river, who hold high revelry on the remains of the amphibians.

Turtles, or turtle eggs, are an object of very considerable trade throughout the
Amazonian basin. It is these chelonians whom they "turn"--that is to say, put on
their backs--when they come from laying their eggs, and whom they preserve
alive, keeping them in palisaded pools like fish-pools, or attaching them to a
stake by a cord just long enough to allow them to go and come on the land or
under the water. In this way they always have the meat of these animals fresh.

They proceed differently with the little turtles which are just hatched. There
is no need to pack them or tie them up. Their shell is still soft, their flesh
extremely tender, and after they have cooked them they eat them just like
oysters. In this form large quantities are consumed.

However, this is not the most general use to which the chelonian eggs are put
in the provinces of Amazones and Para. The manufacture of "manteigna de
tartaruga," or turtle butter, which will bear comparison with the best products of
Normandy or Brittany, does not take less every year that from two hundred and
fifty to three hundred millions of eggs. But the turtles are innumerable all along
the river, and they deposit their eggs on the sands of the beach in incalculable
quantities. However, on account of the destruction caused not only by the
natives, but by the water-fowl from the side, the urubus in the air, and the
alligators in the river, their number has been so diminished that for every little
turtle a Brazilian pataque, or about a franc, has to be paid.

On the morrow, at daybreak, Benito, Fragoso, and a few Indians took a
pirogue and landed on the beach of one of the large islands which they had
passed during the night. It was not necessary for the jangada to halt. They knew
they could catch her up.

On the shore they saw the little hillocks which indicated the places where,
that very night, each packet of eggs had been deposited in the trench in groups of
from one hundred and sixty to one hundred and ninety. These there was no wish
to get out. But an earlier laying had taken place two months before, the eggs had
hatched under the action of the heat stored in the sand, and already several


thousands of little turtles were running about the beach.

The hunters were therefore in luck. The pirogue was filled with these
interesting amphibians, and they arrived just in time for breakfast. The booty
was divided between the passengers and crew of the jangada, and if any lasted
till the evening it did not last any longer.

In the morning of the 7th of July they were before San Jose de Matura, a
town situated near a small river filled up with long grass, and on the borders of
which a legend says that Indians with tails once existed.

In the morning of the 8th of July they caught sight of the village of San
Antonio, two or three little houses lost in the trees at the mouth of the Ica, or
Putumayo, which is about nine hundred meters wide.

The Putumayo is one of the most important affluents of the Amazon. Here in
the sixteenth century missions were founded by the Spaniards, which were
afterward destroyed by the Portuguese, and not a trace of them now remains.

Representatives of different tribes of Indians are found in the neighborhood,
which are easily recognizable by the differences in their tattoo marks.

The Iga is a body of water coming from the east of the Pasto Mountains to
the northeast of Quito, through the finest forests of wild cacao-trees. Navigable
for a distance of a hundred and forty leagues for steamers of not greater draught
than six feet, it may one day become one of the chief waterways in the west of
America.

The bad weather was at last met with. It did not show itself in continual
rains, but in frequent storms. These could not hinder the progress of the raft,
which offered little resistance to the wind. Its great length rendered it almost
insensible to the swell of the Amazon, but during the torrential showers the
Garral family had to keep indoors. They had to occupy profitably these hours of
leisure. They chatted together, communicated their observations, and their
tongues were seldom idle.

It was under these circumstances that little by little Torres had begun to take
a more active part in the conversation. The details of his many voyages
throughout the whole north of Brazil afforded him numerous subjects to talk
about. The man had certainly seen a great deal, but his observations were those
of a skeptic, and he often shocked the straightforward people who were listening
to him. It should be said that he showed himself much impressed toward Minha.
But these attentions, although they were displeasing to Manoel, were not
sufficiently marked for him to interfere. On the other hand, Minha felt for him an
instinctive repulsion which she was at no pains to conceal.

On the 5th of July the mouth of the Tunantins appeared on the left bank,
forming an estuary of some four hundred feet across, in which it pours its


blackish waters, coming from the west-northwest, after having watered the
territories of the Cacena Indians. At this spot the Amazon appears under a truly
grandiose aspect, but its course is more than ever encumbered with islands and
islets. It required all the address of the pilot to steer through the archipelago,
going from one bank to another, avoiding the shallows, shirking the eddies, and
maintaining the advance.

They might have taken the Ahuaty Parana, a sort of natural canal, which
goes off a little below the mouth of the Tunantins, and re-enters the principal
stream a hundred an twenty miles further on by the Rio Japura; but if the larger
portion of this measures a hundred and fifty feet across, the narrowest is only
sixty feet, and the raft would there have met with a difficulty.

On the 13th of July, after having touched at the island of Capuro, passed the
mouth of the Jutahy, which, coming from the east-southeast, brings in its black
waters by a mouth five hundred feet wide, and admired the legions of monkeys,
sulphur-white in color, with cinnabar-red faces, who are insatiable lovers of the
nuts produced by the palm-trees from which the river derives its name, the
travelers arrived on the 18th of July before the little village of Fonteboa.

At this place the jangada halted for twelve hours, so as to give a rest to the
crew.

Fonteboa, like most of the mission villages of the Amazon, has not escaped
the capricious fate which, during a lengthened period, moves them about from
one place to the other. Probably the hamlet has now finished with its nomadic
existence, and has definitely become stationary. So much the better; for it is a
charming place, with its thirty houses covered with foliage, and its church
dedicated to Notre Dame de Guadaloupe, the Black Virgin of Mexico. Fonteboa
has one thousand inhabitants, drawn from the Indians on both banks, who rear
numerous cattle in the fields in the neighborhood. These occupations do not end
here, for they are intrepid hunters, or, if they prefer it, intrepid fishers for the
manatee.

On the morning of their arrival the young fellows assisted at a very
interesting expedition of this nature. Two of these herbivorous cetaceans had just
been signaled in the black waters of the Cayaratu, which comes in at Fonteboa.
Six brown points were seen moving along the surface, and these were the two
pointed snouts and four pinions of the lamantins.

Inexperienced fishermen would at first have taken these moving points for
floating wreckage, but the natives of Fonteboa were not to be so deceived.
Besides, very soon loud blowings indicated that the spouting animals were
vigorously ejecting the air which had become useless for their breathing
purposes.


Two ubas, each carrying three fishermen, set off from the bank and
approached the manatees, who soon took flight. The black points at first traced a
long furrow on the top of the water, and then disappeared for a time.

The fishermen continued their cautious advance. One of them, armed with a
very primitive harpoon--a long nail at the end of a stick--kept himself in the bow
of the boat, while the other two noiselessly paddled on. They waited till the
necessity of breathing would bring the manatees up again. In ten minutes or
thereabouts the animals would certainly appear in a circle more or less confined.

In fact, this time had scarcely elapsed before the black points emerged at a
little distance, and two jets of air mingled with vapor were noiselessly shot forth.

The ubas approached, the harpoons were thrown at the same instant; one
missed its mark, but the other struck one of the cetaceans near his tail.

It was only necessary to stun the animal, who rarely defends himself when
touched by the iron of the harpoon. In a few pulls the cord brought him
alongside the uba, and he was towed to the beach at the foot of the village.

It was not a manatee of any size, for it only measured about three feet long.
These poor cetaceans have been so hunted that they have become very rare in the
Amazon and its affluents, and so little time is left them to grow that the giants of
the species do not now exceed seven feet. What are these, after manatees twelve
and fifteen feet long, which still abound in the rivers and lakes of Africa?

But it would be difficult to hinder their destruction. The flesh of the manatee
is excellent, superior even to that of pork, and the oil furnished by its lard, which
is three inches thick, is a product of great value. When the meat is smoke-dried it
keeps for a long time, and is capital food. If to this is added that the animal is
easily caught, it is not to be wondered at that the species is on its way to
complete destruction.

On the 19th of July, at sunrise, the jangada left Fonteboa, and entered
between the two completely deserted banks of the river, and breasted some
islands shaded with the grand forests of cacao-trees. The sky was heavily
charged with electric cumuli, warning them of renewed storms.

The Rio Jurua, coming from the southwest, soon joins the river on the left. A
vessel can go up it into Peru without encountering insurmountable obstacles
among its white waters, which are fed by a great number of petty affluents.

"It is perhaps in these parts," said Manoel, "that we ought to look for those
female warriors who so much astonished Orellana. But we ought to say that, like
their predecessors, they do nor form separate tribes; they are simply the wives
who accompany their husbands to the fight, and who, among the Juruas, have a
great reputation for bravery."

The jangada continued to descend; but what a labyrinth the Amazon now


appeared! The Rio Japura, whose mouth was forty-eight miles on ahead, and
which is one of its largest tributaries, runs almost parallel with the river.

Between them were canals, iguarapes, lagoons, temporary lakes, an
inextricable network which renders the hydrography of this country so difficult.

But if Araujo had no map to guide him, his experience served him more
surely, and it was wonderful to see him unraveling the chaos, without ever
turning aside from the main river.

In fact, he did so well that on the 25th of July, in the afternoon, after having
passed before the village of Parani-Tapera, the raft was anchored at the entrance
of the Lake of Ego, or Teffe, which it was useless to enter, for they would not
have been able to get out of it again into the Amazon.

But the town of Ega is of some importance; it was worthy of a halt to visit it.
It was arranged, therefore, that the jangada should remain on this spot till the
27th of July, and that on the morrow the large pirogue should take the whole
family to Ega. This would give a rest, which was deservedly due to the hard-
working crew of the raft.

The night passed at the moorings near a slightly rising shore, and nothing
disturbed the quiet. A little sheet-lightning was observable on the horizon, but it
came from a distant storm which did not reach the entrance to the lake.


CHAPTER XVI. EGA

AT SIX o'clock in the morning of the 20th of July, Yaquita, Minha, Lina, and
the two young men prepared to leave the jangada.

Joam Garral, who had shown no intention of putting his foot on shore, had
decided this time, at the request of the ladies of his family, to leave his absorbing
daily work and accompany them on their excursion. Torres had evinced no desire
to visit Ega, to the great satisfaction of Manoel, who had taken a great dislike to
the man and only waited for an opportunity to declare it.

As to Fragoso, he could not have the same reason for going to Ega as had
taken him to Tabatinga, which is a place of little importance compared to this.

Ega is a chief town with fifteen hundred inhabitants, and in it reside all those
authorities which compose the administration of a considerable city--
considerable for the country; that is to say, the military commandant, the chief of
the police, the judges, the schoolmaster, and troops under the command of
officers of all ranks.

With so many functionaries living in a town, with their wives and children, it
is easy to see that hairdressers would be in demand. Such was the case, and
Fragoso would not have paid his expenses.


Doubtless, however, the jolly fellow, who could do no business in Ega, had
thought to be of the party if Lina went with her mistress, but, just as they were
leaving the raft, he resolved to remain, at the request of Lina herself.

"Mr. Fragoso!" she said to him, after taking him aside.

"Miss Lina?" answered Fragoso.

"T do not think that your friend Torres intends to go with us to Ega."

"Certainly not, he is going to stay on board, Miss Lina, but you wold oblige
me by not calling him my friend!"

"But you undertook to ask a passage for him before he had shown any
intention of doing so."

"Yes, and on that occasion, if you would like to know what I think, I made a
fool of myself!"

"Quite so! and if you would like to know what I think, I do not like the man
at all, Mr. Fragoso."

"Neither do I, Miss Lina, and I have all the time an idea that I have seen him
somewhere before. But the remembrance is too vague; the impression, however,
is far from being a pleasant one!"

"Where and when could you have met him? Cannot you call it to mind? It
might be useful to know who he is and what he has been."

"No--I try all I can. How long was it ago? In what country? Under what
circumstances? And I cannot hit upon it."

"Mr. Fragoso!"

"Miss Lina!"

"Stay on board and keep watch on Torres during our absence!"

"What? Not go with you to Ega, and remain a whole day without seeing
you?"

"I ask you to do so!"

"Is it an order?"

"It is an entreaty!"

"T will remain!"

"Mr. Fragoso!"

"Miss Lina!"

"T thank you!"

"Thank me, then, with a good shake of the hand," replied Fragoso; "that is
worth something."

Lina held out her hand, and Fragoso kept it for a few moments while he
looked into her face. And that is the reason why he did not take his place in the
pirogue, and became, without appearing to be, the guard upon Torres.

Did the latter notice the feelings of aversion with which he was regarded?


Perhaps, but doubtless he had his reasons for taking no account of them.

A distance of four leagues separated the mooring-place from the town of
Ega. Eight leagues, there and back, in a pirogue containing six persons, besides
two negroes as rowers, would take some hours, not to mention the fatigue caused
by the high temperature, though the sky was veiled with clouds.

Fortunately a lovely breeze blew from the northwest, and if it held would be
favorable for crossing Lake Teffe. They could go to Ega and return rapidly
without having to tack.

So the lateen sail was hoisted on the mast of the pirogue. Benito took the
tiller, and off they went, after a last gesture from Lina to Fragoso to keep his
eyes open.

The southern shore of the lake had to be followed to get to Ega.

After two hours the pirogue arrived at the port of this ancient mission
founded by the Carmelites, which became a town in 1759, and which General
Gama placed forever under Brazilian rule.

The passengers landed on a flat beach, on which were to be found not only
boats from the interior, but a few of those little schooners which are used in the
coasting-trade on the Atlantic seaboard.

When the two girls entered Ega they were at first much astonished.

"What a large town!" said Minha.

"What houses! what people!" replied Lina, whose eyes seemed to have
expanded so that she might see better.

"Rather!" said Benito laughingly. "More than fifteen hundred inhabitants!
Two hundred houses at the very least! Some of them with a first floor! And two
or three streets! Genuine streets!"

"My dear Manoel!" said Minha, "do protect us against my brother! He is
making fun of us, and only because he had already been in the finest towns in
Amazones and Para!"

"Quite so, and he is also poking fun at his mother," added Yaquita, "for I
confess I never saw anything equal to this!"

"Then, mother and sister, you must take great care that you do not fall into a
trance when you get to Manaos, and vanish altogether when you reach Belem!"

"Never fear," answered Manoel; "the ladies will have been gently prepared
for these grand wonders by visiting the principal cities of the Upper Amazon!"

"Now, Manoel," said Minha, "you are talking just like my brother! Are you
making fun of us, too?”

"No, Minha, I assure you."

"Laugh on, gentlemen," said Lina, "and let us look around, my dear mistress,
for it is very fine!"


Very fine! A collection of houses, built of mud, whitewashed, and principally
covered with thatch or palm-leaves; a few built of stone or wood, with verandas,
doors, and shutters painted a bright green, standing in the middle of a small
orchard of orange-trees in flower. But there were two or three public buildings, a
barrack, and a church dedicated to St. Theresa, which was a cathedral by the side
of the modest chapel at Iquitos. On looking toward the lake a beautiful panorama
unfolded itself, bordered by a frame of cocoanut-trees and assais, which ended at
the edge of the liquid level, and showed beyond the picturesque village of
Nogueira, with its few small houses lost in the mass of the old olive-trees on the
beach.

But for the two girls there was another cause of wonderment, quite feminine
wonderment too, in the fashions of the fair Egans, not the primitive costume of
the natives, converted Omaas or Muas, but the dress of true Brazilian ladies. The
wives and daughters of the principal functionaries and merchants o the town
pretentiously showed off their Parisian toilettes, a little out of date perhaps, for
Ega is five hundred leagues away from Para, and this is itself many thousands of
miles from Paris.

"Just look at those fine ladies in their fine clothes!"

"Lina will go mad!" exclaimed Benito.

"If those dresses were worn properly," said Minha, "they might not be so
ridiculous!"

"My dear Minha," said Manoel, "with your simple gown and straw hat, you
are better dressed than any one of these Brazilians, with their headgear and
flying petticoats, which are foreign to their country and their race."

"If it pleases you to think so," answered Minha, "I do not envy any of them."

But they had come to see. They walked through the streets, which contained
more stalls than shops; they strolled about the market-place, the rendezvous of
the fashionable, who were nearly stifled in their European clothes; they even
breakfasted at an hotel--it was scarcely an inn--whose cookery caused them to
deeply regret the excellent service on the raft.

After dinner, at which only turtle flesh, served up in different forms,
appeared, the Garral family went for the last time to admire the borders of the
lake as the setting sun gilded it with its rays; then they rejoined their pirogue,
somewhat disillusioned perhaps as to the magnificence of a town which one hour
would give time enough to visit, and a little tired with walking about its stifling
streets which were not nearly so pleasant as the shady pathways of Iquitos. The
inquisitive Lina's enthusiasm alone had not been damped.

They all took their places in the pirogue. The wind remained in the
northwest, and had freshened with the evening. The sail was hoisted. They took


the same course as in the morning, across the lake fed by the black waters of the
Rio Teffe, which, according to the Indians, is navigable toward the southwest for
forty days' journey. At eight o'clock the priogue regained the mooring-place and
hailed the jangada.

As soon as Lina could get Fragoso aside--

"Have you seen anything suspicious?" she inquired.

"Nothing, Miss Lina," he replied; "Torres has scarcely left his cabin, where
he has been reading and writing."

"He did not get into the house or the dining-room, as I feared?"

"No, all the time he was not in his cabin he was in the bow of the raft."

"And what was he doing?"

"Holding an old piece of paper in his hand, consulting it with great attention,
and muttering a lot of incomprehensible words."

"All that is not so unimportant as you think, Mr. Fragoso. These readings and
writings and old papers have their interest! He is neither a professor nor a
lawyer, this reader and writer!"

"You are right!"

"Still watch him, Mr. Fragoso!"

"T will watch him always, Miss Lina," replied Fragoso.

On the morrow, the 27th of July, at daybreak, Benito gave the pilot the signal
to start.

Away between the islands, in the Bay of Arenapo, the mouth of the Japura,
six thousand six hundred feet wide, was seen for an instant. This large tributary
comes into the Amazon through eight mouths, as if it were pouring into some
gulf or ocean. But its waters come from afar, and it is the mountains of the
republic of Ecuador which start them on a course that there are no falls to break
until two hundred and ten leagues from its junction with the main stream.

All this day was spent in descending to the island of Yapura, after which the
river, less interfered with, makes navigation much easier. The current is not so
rapid and the islets are easily avoided, so that there were no touchings or
groundings.

The next day the jangada coasted along by vast beaches formed by
undulating high domes, which served as the barriers of immense pasture
grounds, in which the whole of the cattle in Europe could be raised and fed.
These sand banks are considered to be the richest turtle grounds in the basin of
the Upper Amazon.

On the evening of the 29th of July they were securely moored off the island
of Catua, so as to pass the night, which promised to be dark.

On this island, as soon as the sun rose above the horizon, there appeared a


party of Muras Indians, the remains of that ancient and powerful tribe, which
formerly occupied more than a hundred leagues of the river bank between the
Teffe and the Madeira.

These Indians went and came, watching the raft, which remained stationary.
There were about a hundred of them armed with blow-tubes formed of a reed
peculiar to these parts, and which is strengthened outside by the stem of a dwarf
palm from which the pith has been extracted.

Joam Garral quitted for an instant the work which took up all his time, to
warn his people to keep a good guard and not to provoke these Indians.

In truth the sides were not well matched. The Muras are remarkably clever at
sending through their blow-tubes arrows which cause incurable wounds, even at
a range of three hundred paces.

These arrows, made of the leaf of the "coucourite" palm, are feathered with
cotton, and nine or ten inches long, with a point like a needle, and poisoned with
"curare.""

Curare, or "wourah," the liquor "which kills in a whisper," as the Indians say,
is prepared from the sap of one of the euphorbiacee and the juice of a bulbous
strychnos, not to mention the paste of venomous ants and poisonous serpent
fangs which they mix with it.

"It is indeed a terrible poison," said Manoel. "It attacks at once those nerves
by which the movements are subordinated to the will. But the heart is not
touched, and it does not cease to beat until the extinction of the vital functions,
and besides no antidote is known to the poison, which commences by numbness
of the limbs."

Very fortunately, these Muras made no hostile demonstrations, although they
entertain a profound hatred toward the whites. They have, in truth, no longer the
courage of their ancestors.

At nightfall a five-holed flute was heard behind the trees in the island,
playing several airs in a minor key. Another flute answered. This interchange of
musical phrases lasted for two or three minutes, and the Muras disappeared.

Fragoso, in an exuberant moment, had tried to reply by a song in his own
fashion, but Lina had clapped her hand on his mouth, and prevented his showing
off his insignificant singing talents, which he was so willingly lavish of.

On the 2d of August, at three o'clock in the afternoon, the raft arrived twenty
leagues away from there at Lake Apoara, which is fed by the black waters of the
river of the same name, and two days afterward, about five o'clock, it stopped at
the entrance into Lake Coary.

This lake is one of the largest which communicates with the Amazon, and it
serves as a reservoir for different rivers. Five or six affluents run into it, and


there are stored and mixed up, and emerge by a narrow channel into the main
stream.

After catching a glimpse of the hamlet of Tahua-Miri, mounted on its piles as
on stilts, as a protection against inundation from the floods, which often sweep
up over these low sand banks, the raft was moored for the night.

The stoppage was made in sight of the village of Coary, a dozen houses,
considerably dilapidated, built in the midst of a thick mass of orange and
calabash trees.

Nothing can be more changeable than the aspect of this village, for according
to the rise or fall of the water the lake stretches away on all sides of it, or is
reduced to a narrow canal, scarcely deep enough to communicate with the
Amazon.

On the following morning, that of the 5th of August, they started at dawn,
passing the canal of Yucura, belonging to the tangled system of lakes and furos
of the Rio Zapura, and on the morning of the 6th of August they reached the
entrance to Lake Miana.

No fresh incident occurred in the life on board, which proceeded with almost
methodical regularity.

Fragoso, urged on by Lina, did not cease to watch Torres.

Many times he tried to get him to talk about his past life, but the adventurer
eluded all conversation on the subject, and ended by maintaining a strict reserve
toward the barber.

After catching a glimpse of the hamlet of Tahua-Miri, mounted on its piles as
on stilts, as a protection against inundation from the floods, which often sweep
up and over these low sand banks, the raft was moored for the night.

His intercourse with the Garral family remained the same. If he spoke little
to Joam, he addressed himself more willingly to Yaquita and her daughter, and
appeared not to notice the evident coolness with which he was received. They all
agreed that when the raft arrived at Manaos, Torres should leave it, and that they
would never speak of him again. Yaquita followed the advice of Padre Passanha,
who counseled patience, but the good priest had not such an easy task in Manoel,
who was quite disposed to put on shore the intruder who had been so
unfortunately taken on to the raft.

The only thing that happened on this evening was the following:

A pirogue, going down the river, came alongside the jangada, after being
hailed by Joam Garral.

"Are you going to Manaos?" asked he of the Indian who commanded and
was steering her.

"Yes," replied he.


"When will you get there?"

"In eight days."

"Then you will arrive before we shall. Will you deliver a letter for me?"

"With pleasure."

"Take this letter, then, my friend, and deliver it at Manaos."

The Indian took the letter which Joam gave him, and a handful of reis was
the price of the commission he had undertaken.

No members of the family, then gone into the house, knew anything of this.
Torres was the only witness. He heard a few words exchanged between Joam
and the Indian, and from the cloud which passed over his face it was easy to see
that the sending of this letter considerably surprised him.


CHAPTER XVII. AN ATTACK

HOWEVER, if Manoel, to avoid giving rise to a violent scene on board, said
nothing on the subject of Torres, he resolved to have an explanation with Benito.

"Benito," he began, after taking him to the bow of the jangada, "I have
something to say to you."

Benito, generally so good-humored, stopped as he looked at Manoel, and a
cloud came over his countenance.

"I know why," he said; "it is about Torres."

"Yes, Benito."

"And I also wish to speak to you."

"You have then noticed his attention to Minha?" said Manoel, turning pale.

"Ah! It is not a feeling of jealousy, though, that exasperates you against such
aman?" said Benito quickly.

"No!" replied Manoel. "Decidedly not! Heaven forbid I should do such an
injury to the girl who is to become my wife. No, Benito! She holds the
adventurer in horror! I am not thinking anything of that sort; but it distresses me
to see this adventurer constantly obtruding himself by his presence and
conversation on your mother and sister, and seeking to introduce himself into
that intimacy with your family which is already mine."

"Manoel," gravely answered Benito, "I share your aversion for this dubious
individual, and had I consulted my feelings I would already have driven Torres
off the raft! But I dare not!"

"You dare not?" said Manoel, seizing the hand of his friend. "You dare not?"

"Listen to me, Manoel," continued Benito. "You have observed Torres well,
have you not? You have remarked his attentions to my sister! Nothing can be
truer! But while you have been noticing that, have you not seen that this


annoying man never keeps his eyes off my father, no matter if he is near to him
or far from him, and that he seems to have some spiteful secret intention in
watching him with such unaccountable persistency?"

"What are you talking about, Benito? Have you any reason to think that
Torres bears some grudge against Joam Garral?"

"No! I think nothing!" replied Benito; "it is only a presentiment! But look
well at Torres, study his face with care, and you will see what an evil grin he has
whenever my father comes into his sight."

"Well, then," exclaimed Manoel, "if it is so, Benito, the more reason for
clearing him out!"

"More reason--or less reason," replied Benito. "Manoel, I fear--what? I know
not--but to force my father to get rid of Torres would perhaps be imprudent! I
repeat it, I am afraid, though no positive fact enables me to explain my fear to
myself!"

And Benito seemed to shudder with anger as he said these words.

"Then," said Manoel, "you think we had better wait?"

"Yes; wait, before doing anything, but above all things let us be on our
guard!"

"After all," answered Manoel, "in twenty days we shall be at Manaos. There
Torres must stop. There he will leave us, and we shall be relieved of his presence
for good! Till then we must keep our eyes on him!"

"You understand me, Manoel?" asked Benito.

"I understand you, my friend, my brother!" replied Manoel, "although I do
not share, and cannot share, your fears! What connection can possibly exist
between your father and this adventurer? Evidently your father has never seen
him!"

"I do not say that my father knows Torres," said Benito; "but assuredly it
seems to me that Torres knows my father. What was the fellow doing in the
neighborhood of the fazenda when we met him in the forest of Iquitos? Why did
he then refuse the hospitality which we offered, so as to afterward manage to
force himself on us as our traveling companion? We arrive at Tabatinga, and
there he is as if he was waiting for us! The probability is that these meetings
were in pursuance of a preconceived plan. When I see the shifty, dogged look of
Torres, all this crowds on my mind. I do not know! I am losing myself in things
that defy explanation! Oh! why did I ever think of offering to take him on board
this raft?"

"Be calm, Benito, I pray you!"

"Manoel!" continued Benito, who seemed to be powerless to contain himself,
"think you that if it only concerned me--this man who inspires us all with such


aversion and disgust--I should not hesitate to throw him overboard! But when it
concerns my father, I fear lest in giving way to my impressions I may be injuring
my object! Something tells me that with this scheming fellow there may be
danger in doing anything until he has given us the right--the right and the duty--
to do it. In short, on the jangada, he is in our power, and if we both keep good
watch over my father, we can spoil his game, no matter how sure it may be, and
force him to unmask and betray himself! Then wait a little longer!"

The arrival of Torres in the bow of the raft broke off the conversation. Torres
looked slyly at the two young men, but said not a word.

Benito was not deceived when he said that the adventurer's eyes were never
off Joam Garral as long as he fancied he was unobserved.

No! he was not deceived when he said that Torres' face grew evil when he
looked at his father!

By what mysterious bond could these two men--one nobleness itself, that
was Self-evident--be connected with each other?

Such being the state of affairs it was certainly difficult for Torres, constantly
watched as he was by the two young men, by Fragoso and Lina, to make a single
movement without having instantly to repress it. Perhaps he understood the
position. If he did, he did not show it, for his manner changed not in the least.

Satisfied with their mutual explanation, Manoel and Benito promised to keep
him in sight without doing anything to awaken his suspicions.

During the following days the jangada passed on the right the mouths of the
rivers Camara, Aru, and Yuripari, whose waters instead of flowing into the
Amazon run off to the south to feed the Rio des Purus, and return by it into the
main river. At five o'clock on the evening of the 10th of August they put into the
island of Cocos.

They there passed a "seringal." This name is applied to a caoutchouc
plantation, the caoutchouc being extracted from the "seringueira" tree, whose
scientific name is siphonia elastica.

It is said that, by negligence or bad management, the number of these trees is
decreasing in the basin of the Amazon, but the forests of seringueira trees are
still very considerable on the banks of the Madeira, Purus, and other tributaries.

There were here some twenty Indians collecting and working the
caoutchouc, an operation which principally takes place during the months of
May, June, and July.

After having ascertained that the trees, well prepared by the river floods
which have bathed their stems to a height of about four feet, are in good
condition for the harvest, the Indians are set to work.

Incisions are made into the alburnum of the seringueiras; below the wound


small pots are attached, which twenty-four hours suffice to fill with a milky sap.
It can also be collected by means of a hollow bamboo, and a receptacle placed
on the ground at the foot of the tree.

The sap being obtained, the Indians, to prevent the separation of its peculiar
resins, fumigate it over a fire of the nuts of the assai palm. By spreading out the
sap on a wooden scoop, and shaking it in the smoke, its coagulation is almost
immediately obtained; it assumes a grayish-yellow tinge and solidifies. The
layers formed in succession are detached from the scoop, exposed to the sun,
hardened, and assume the brownish color with which we are familiar. The
manufacture is then complete.

Benito, finding a capital opportunity, bought from the Indians all the
caoutchouc stored in their cabins, which, by the way, are mostly built on piles.
The price he gave them was sufficiently remunerative, and they were highly
satisfied.

Four days later, on the 14th of August, the jangada passed the mouths of the
Purus.

This is another of the large affluents of the Amazon, and seems to possess a
navigable course, even for large ships, of over five hundred leagues. It rises in
the southwest, and measures nearly five thousand feet across at its junction with
the main river. After winding beneath the shade of ficuses, tahuaris, nipa palms,
and cecropias, it enters the Amazon by five mouths.

Hereabouts Araujo the pilot managed with great ease. The course of the river
was but slightly obstructed with islands, and besides, from one bank to another
its width is about two leagues.

The current, too, took along the jangada more steadily, and on the 18th of
August it stopped at the village of Pasquero to pass the night.

The sun was already low on the horizon, and with the rapidity peculiar to
these low latitudes, was about to set vertically, like an enormous meteor.

Joam Garral and his wife, Lina, and old Cybele, were in front of the house.

Torres, after having for an instant turned toward Joam as if he would speak to
him, and prevented perhaps by the arrival of Padre Passanha, who had come to
bid the family good-night, had gone back to his cabin.

The Indians and the negroes were at their quarters along the sides. Araujo,
seated at the bow, was watching the current which extended straight away in
front of him.

Manoel and Benito, with their eyes open, but chatting and smoking with
apparent indifference, walked about the central part of the craft awaiting the hour
of repose.

All at once Manoel stopped Benito with his hand and said:


"What a queer smell! Am I wrong? Do you not notice it?"

"One would say that it was the odor of burning musk!" replied Benito.
"There ought to be some alligators asleep on the neighboring beach!"

"Well, nature has done wisely in allowing them so to betray themselves."

"Yes," said Benito, "it is fortunate, for they are sufficiently formidable
creatures!"

Often at the close of the day these saurians love to stretch themselves on the
shore, and install themselves comfortably there to pass the night. Crouched at the
opening of a hole, into which they have crept back, they sleep with the mouth
open, the upper jaw perpendicularly erect, so as to lie in wait for their prey. To
these amphibians it is but sport to launch themselves in its pursuit, either by
swimming through the waters propelled by their tails or running along the bank
with a speed no man can equal.

It is on these huge beaches that the caymans are born, live, and die, not
without affording extraordinary examples of longevity. Not only can the old
ones, the centenarians, be recognized by the greenish moss which carpets their
carcass and is scattered over their protuberances, but by their natural ferocity,
which increases with age. As Benito said, they are formidable creatures, and it is
fortunate that their attacks can be guarded against.

Suddenly cries were heard in the bow.

"Caymans! caymans!"

Manoel and Benito came forward and looked.

Three large saurians, from fifteen to twenty feet long, had managed to
clamber on to the platform of the raft.

"Bring the guns! Bring the guns!" shouted Benito, making signs to the
Indians and the blacks to get behind.

"Into the house!" said Manoel; "make haste!"

And in truth, as they could not attack them at once, the best thing they could
do was to get into shelter without delay.

It was done in an instant. The Garral family took refuge in the house, where
the two young men joined them. The Indians and the negroes ran into their huts
and cabins. As they were shutting the door:

"And Minha?" said Manoel.

"She is not there!" replied Lina, who had just run to her mistress’ room.

"Good heavens! where is she?" exclaimed her mother, and they all shouted at
once:

"Himha! Minha!"

No reply.

"There she is, on the bow of the jangada!" said Benito.


"Minha!" shouted Manoel.

The two young men, and Fragoso and Joam Garral, thinking no more of
danger, rushed out of the house, guns in hand.

Scarcely were they outside when two of the alligators made a half turn and
ran toward them.

A dose of buckshot to the head, close to the eye, from Benito, stopped one of
the monsters, who, mortally wounded, writhed in frightful convulsions and fell
on his side.

But the second still lived, and came on, and there was no way of avoiding
him.

The huge alligator tore up to Joam Garral, and after knocking him over with
a sweep of his tail, ran at him with open jaws.

At this moment Torres rushed from the cabin, hatchet in hand, and struck
such a terrific blow that its edge sunk into the jaw of the cayman and left him
defenseless.

Blinded by the blood, the animal flew to the side, and, designedly or not, fell
over and was lost in the stream.

"Minha! Minha!" shouted Manoel in distraction, when he got to the bow of
the jangada.

Suddenly she came into view. She had taken refuge in the cabin of Araujo,
and the cabin had just been upset by a powerful blow from the third alligator.
Minha was flying aft, pursued by the monster, who was not six feet away from
her.

Minha fell.

A second shot from Benito failed to stop the cayman. He only struck the
animal's carapace, and the scales flew to splinters but the ball did not penetrate.

Manoel threw himself at the girl to raise her, or to snatch her from death! A
side blow from the animal's tail knocked him down too.

Minha fainted, and the mouth of the alligator opened to crush her!

And then Fragoso jumped in to the animal, and thrust in a knife to the very
bottom of his throat, at the risk of having his arm snapped off by the two jaws,
had they quickly closed.

Fragoso pulled out his arm in time, but he could not avoid the chock of the
cayman, and was hurled back into the river, whose waters reddened all around.

"Fragoso! Fragoso!" shrieked Lina, kneeling on the edge of the raft.

A second afterward Fragoso reappeared on the surface of the Amazon--safe
and sound.

But, at the peril of his life he had saved the young girl, who soon came to.
And as all hands were held out to him--Manoel's, Yaquita's, Minha's, and Lina’'s,


and he did not know what to say, he ended by squeezing the hands of the young
mulatto.

However, though Fragoso had saved Minha, it was assuredly to the
intervention of Torres that Joam Garral owed his safety.

It was not, therefore, the fazender's life that the adventurer wanted. In the
face of this fact, so much had to be admitted.

Manoel said this to Benito in an undertone.

"That is true!" replied Benito, embarrassed. "You are right, and in a sense it
is one cruel care the less! Nevertheless, Manoel, my suspicions still exist! It is
not always a man's worst enemy who wishes him dead!"

Joam Garral walked up to Torres.

"Thank you, Torres!" he said, holding out his hand. The adventurer took a
step or two backward without replying.

"Torres," continued Joam, "I am sorry that we are arriving at the end of our
voyage, and that in a few days we must part! I owe you----"

"Joam Garral!" answered Torres, "you owe me nothing! Your life is precious
to me above all things! But if you will allow me--I have been thinking--in place
of stopping at Manaos, I will go on to Belem. Will you take me there?"

Joam Garral replied by an affirmative nod.

In hearing this demand Benito in an unguarded moment was about to
intervene, but Manoel stopped him, and the young man checked himself, though
not without a violent effort.


CHAPTER XVIII. THE ARRIVAL DINNER

IN THE MORNING, after a night which was scarcely sufficient to calm so
much excitement, they unmoored from the cayman beach and departed. Before
five days, if nothing interfered with their voyage, the raft would reach the port of
Manaos.

Minha had quite recovered from her fright, and her eyes and smiles thanked
all those who had risked their lives for her.

As for Lina, it seemed as though she was more grateful to the brave Fragoso
than if it was herself that he had saved.

"T will pay you back, sooner or later, Mr. Fragoso," said she, smiling.

"And how, Miss Lina?"

"Oh! You know very well!"

"Then if I know it, let it be soon and not late!" replied the good-natured
fellow.

And from this day it began to be whispered about that the charming Lina was


engaged to Fragoso, that their marriage would take place at the same time as that
of Minha and Manoel, and that the young couple would remain at Belem with
the others.

"Capital! capital!" repeated Fragoso unceasingly; "but I never thought Para
was such a long way off!"

As for Manoel and Benito, they had had a long conversation about what had
passed. There could be no question about obtaining from Joam Garral the
dismissal of his rescuer.

"Your life is precious to me above all things!" Torres had said.

This reply, hyperbolical and enigmatical at the time, Benito had heard and
remembered.

In the meantime the young men could do nothing. More than ever they were
reduced to waiting--to waiting not for four or five days, but for seven or eight
weeks--that is to say, for whatever time it would take for the raft to get to Belem.

"There is in all this some mystery that I cannot understand," said Benito.

"Yes, but we are assured on one point," answered Manoel. "It is certain that
Torres does not want your father's life. For the rest, we must still watch!"

It seemed that from this day Torres desired to keep himself more reserved.
He did not seek to intrude on the family, and was even less assiduous toward
Minha. There seemed a relief in the situation of which all, save perhaps Joam
Garral, felt the gravity.

On the evening of the same day they left on the right the island of Baroso,
formed by a furo of that name, and Lake Manaori, which is fed by a confused
series of petty tributaries.

The night passed without incident, though Joam Garral had advised them to
watch with great care.

On the morrow, the 20th of August, the pilot, who kept near the right bank
on account of the uncertain eddies on the left, entered between the bank and the
islands.

Beyond this bank the country was dotted with large and small lakes, much as
those of Calderon, Huarandeina, and other black-watered lagoons. This water
system marks the approach of the Rio Negro, the most remarkable of all the
tributaries of the Amazon. In reality the main river still bore the name of the
Solimoens, and it is only after the junction of the Rio Negro that it takes the
name which has made it celebrated among the rivers of the globe.

During this day the raft had to be worked under curious conditions.

The arm followed by the pilot, between Calderon Island and the shore, was
very narrow, although it appeared sufficiently large. This was owing to a great
portion of the island being slightly above the mean level, but still covered by the


high flood waters. On each side were massed forests of giant trees, whose
summits towered some fifty feet above the ground, and joining one bank to the
other formed an immense cradle.

On the left nothing could be more picturesque than this flooded forest, which
seemed to have been planted in the middle of a lake. The stems of the trees arose
from the clear, still water, in which every interlacement of their boughs was
reflected with unequaled purity. They were arranged on an immense sheet of
glass, like the trees in miniature on some table epergne, and their reflection
could not be more perfect. The difference between the image and the reality
could scarcely be described. Duplicates of grandeur, terminated above and below
by a vast parasol of green, they seemed to form two hemispheres, inside which
the jangada appeared to follow one of the great circles.

It had been necessary to bring the raft under these boughs, against which
flowed the gentle current of the stream. It was impossible to go back. Hence the
task of navigating with extreme care, so as to avoid the collisions on either side.

In this all Araujo's ability was shown, and he was admirably seconded by his
crew. The trees of the forest furnished the resting-places for the long poles which
kept the jangada in its course. The least blow to the jangada would have
endangered the complete demolition of the woodwork, and caused the loss, if not
of the crew, of the greater part of the cargo.

"It is truly very beautiful," said Minha, "and it would be very pleasant for us
always to travel in this way, on this quiet water, shaded from the rays of the sun."

"At the same time pleasant and dangerous, dear Minha," said Manoel. "In a
pirogue there is doubtless nothing to fear in sailing here, but on a huge raft of
wood better have a free course and a clear stream."

"We shall be quite through the forest in a couple of hours," said the pilot.

"Look well at it, then!" said Lina. "All these beautiful things pass so quickly!
Ah! dear mistress! do you see the troops of monkeys disporting in the higher
branches, and the birds admiring themselves in the pellucid water!"

"And the flowers half-opened on the surface," replied Minha, "and which the
current dandles like the breeze!"

"And the long lianas, which so oddly stretch from one tree to another!"
added the young mulatto.

"And no Fragoso at the end of them!" said Lina's betrothed. "That was rather
a nice flower you gathered in the forest of Iquitos!"

"Just behold the flower--the only one in the world," said Lina quizzingly;
"and, mistress! just look at the splendid plants!"

And Lina pointed to the nympheas with their colossal leaves, whose flowers
bear buds as large as cocoanuts. Then, just where the banks plunged beneath the


waters, there were clumps of "mucumus," reeds with large leaves, whose elastic
stems bend to give passage to the pirogues and close again behind them. There
was there what would tempt any sportsman, for a whole world of aquatic birds
fluttered between the higher clusters, which shook with the stream.

Ibises half-lollingly posed on some old trunk, and gray herons motionless on
one leg, solemn flamingoes who from a distance looked like red umbrellas
scattered in the foliage, and phenicopters of every color, enlivened the temporary
morass.

And along the top of the water glided long and swiftly-swimming snakes,
among them the formidable gymnotus, whose electric discharges successively
repeated paralyze the most robust of men or animals, and end by dealing death.
Precautions had to be taken against the "sucurijus" serpents, which, coiled round
the trunk of some tree, unroll themselves, hang down, seize their prey, and draw
it into their rings, which are powerful enough to crush a bullock. Have there not
been met with in these Amazonian forests reptiles from thirty to thirty-five feet
long? and even, according to M. Carrey, do not some exist whose length reaches
forty-seven feet, and whose girth is that of a hogshead?

Had one of these sucurijus, indeed, got on to the raft he would have proved
as formidable as an alligator.

Very fortunately the travelers had to contend with neither gymnotus nor
sucuriju, and the passage across the submerged forest, which lasted about two
hours, was effected without accident.

Three days passed. They neared Manaos. Twenty-four hours more and the
raft would be off the mouth of the Rio Negro, before the capital of the province
of Amazones.

In fact, on the 23d of August, at five o'clock in the evening, they stopped at
the southern point of Muras Island, on the right bank of the stream. They only
had to cross obliquely for a few miles to arrive at the port, but the pilot Araujo
very properly would not risk it on that day, as night was coming on. The three
miles which remained would take three hours to travel, and to keep to the course
of the river it was necessary, above all things, to have a clear outlook.

This evening the dinner, which promised to be the last of this first part of the
voyage, was not served without a certain amount of ceremony. Half the journey
on the Amazon had been accomplished, and the task was worthy of a jovial
repast. It was fitting to drink to the health of Amazones a few glasses of that
generous liquor which comes from the coasts of Oporto and Setubal. Besides,
this was, in a way, the betrothal dinner of Fragoso and the charming Lina--that of
Manoel and Minha had taken place at the fazenda of Iquitos several weeks
before. After the young master and mistress, it was the turn of the faithful couple


who were attached to them by so many bonds of gratitude.

So Lina, who was to remain in the service of Minha, and Fragoso, who was
about to enter into that of Manoel Valdez, sat at the common table, and even had
the places of honor reserved for them.

Torres, naturally, was present at the dinner, which was worthy of the larder
and kitchen of the jangada.

The adventurer, seated opposite to Joam Garral, who was always taciturn,
listened to all that was said, but took no part in the conversation. Benito quietly
and attentively watched him. The eyes of Torres, with a peculiar expression,
constantly sought his father. One would have called them the eyes of some wild
beast trying to fascinate his prey before he sprang on it.

Manoel talked mostly with Minha. Between whiles his eyes wandered to
Torres, but he acted his part more successfully than Benito in a situation which,
if it did not finish at Manaos, would certainly end at Belem.

The dinner was jolly enough. Lina kept it going with her good humor,
Fragoso with his witty repartees.

The Padre Passanha looked gayly round on the little world he cherished, and
on the two young couples which his hands would shortly bless in the waters of
Para.

"Eat, padre," said Benito, who joined in the general conversation; "do honor
to this betrothal dinner. You will want some strength to celebrate both marriages
at once!"

"Well, my dear boy," replied Passanha, "seek out some lovely and gentle girl
who wishes you well, and you will see that I can marry you at the same time!"

"Well answered, padre!" exclaimed Manoel. "Let us drink to the coming
marriage of Benito."

"We must look out for some nice young lady at Belem," said Minha. "He
should do what everybody else does."

"To the wedding of Mr. Benito!" said Fragoso, "who ought to wish all the
world to marry him!"

"They are right, sir," said Yaquita. "I also drink to your marriage, and may
you be as happy as Minha and Manoel, and as I and your father have been!"

"As you always will be, it is to be hoped," said Torres, drinking a glass of
port without having pledged anybody. "All here have their happiness in their
own hands."

It was difficult to say, but this wish, coming from the adventurer, left an
unpleasant impression.

Manoel felt this, and wishing to destroy its effect, "Look here, padre," said
he, "while we are on this subject, are there not any more couples to betroth on


the raft?"

"I do not know," answered Padre Passanha, "unless Torres--you are not
married, I believe?"

"No; I am, and always shall be, a bachelor."

Benito and Manoel thought that while thus speaking Torres looked toward
Minha.

"And what should prevent you marrying?" replied Padre Passanha; "at Belem
you could find a wife whose age would suit yours, and it would be possible
perhaps for you to settle in that town. That would be better than this wandering
life, of which, up to the present, you have not made so very much."

"You are right, padre," answered Torres; "I do not say no. Besides the
example is contagious. Seeing all these young couples gives me rather a longing
for marriage. But I am quite a stranger in Belem, and, for certain reasons, that
would make my settlement more difficult."

"Where do you come from, then?" asked Fragoso, who always had the idea
that he had already met Torres somewhere.

"From the province of Minas Geraes."

"And you were born----"

"In the capital of the diamond district, Tijuco."

Those who had seen Joam Garral at this moment would have been surprised
at the fixity of his look which met that of Torres.


CHAPTER XIX. ANCIENT HISTORY

BUT THE CONVERSATION was continued by Fragoso, who immediately
rejoined:

"What! you come from Tijuco, from the very capital of the diamond
district?"

"Yes," said Torres. "Do you hail from that province?"

"No! I come from the Atlantic seaboard in the north of Brazil," replied
Fragoso.

"You do not know this diamond country, Mr. Manoel?" asked Torres.

A negative shake of the head from the young man was the only reply.

"And you, Mr. Benito," continued Torres, addressing the younger Garral,
whom he evidently wished to join in the conversation; "you have never had
curiosity enough to visit the diamond arraval?"

"Never," dryly replied Benito.

"Ah! I should like to see that country," said Fragoso, who unconsciously
played Torres' game. "It seems to me I should finish by picking up a diamond


worth something considerable."

"And what would you do with this diamond worth something considerable,
Fragoso?" queried Lina.

"Sell it!"

"Then you would get rich all of a sudden!"

"Very rich!"

"Well, if you had been rich three months ago you would never have had the
idea of--that liana!"

"And if I had not had that," exclaimed Fragoso, "I should not have found a
charming little wife who--well, assuredly, all is for the best!"

"You see, Fragoso," said Minha, "when you marry Lina, diamond takes the
place of diamond, and you do not lose by the change!"

"To be sure, Miss Minha," gallantly replied Fragoso; "rather I gain!"

There could be no doubt that Torres did not want the subject to drop, for he
went on with:

"It is a fact that at Tijuco sudden fortunes are realized enough to turn any
man's head! Have you heard tell of the famous diamond of Abaete, which was
valued at more than two million contos of reis? Well, this stone, which weighed
an ounce, came from the Brazilian mines! And they were three convicts--yes!
three men sentenced to transportation for life--who found it by chance in the
River Abaete, at ninety leagues from Terro de Frio."

"At a stroke their fortune was made?" asked Fragoso.

"No," replied Torres; "the diamond was handed over to the governor-general
of the mines. The value of the stone was recognized, and King John VI., of
Portugal, had it cut, and wore it on his neck on great occasions. As for the
convicts, they got their pardon, but that was all, and the cleverest could not get
much of an income out of that!"

"You, doubtless?" said Benito very dryly.

"Yes--I? Why not?" answered Torres. "Have you ever been to the diamond
district?" added he, this time addressing Joam Garral.

"Never!" said Joam, looking straight at him.

"That is a pity!" replied he. "You should go there one day. It is a very curious
place, I assure you. The diamond valley is an isolated spot in the vast empire of
Brazil, something like a park of a dozen leagues in circumference, which in the
nature of its soil, its vegetation, and its sandy rocks surrounded by a circle of
high mountains, differs considerably from the neighboring provinces. But, as I
have told you, it is one of the richest places in the world, for from 1807 to 1817
the annual return was about eighteen thousand carats. Ah! there have been some
rare finds there, not only for the climbers who seek the precious stone up to the


very tops of the mountains, but also for the smugglers who fraudulently export
it. But the work in the mines is not so pleasant, and the two thousand negroes
employed in that work by the government are obliged even to divert the
watercourses to get at the diamantiferous sand. Formerly it was easier work."

"In short," said Fragoso, "the good time has gone!"

"But what is still easy is to get the diamonds in scoundrel-fashion--that is, by
theft; and--stop! in 1826, when I was about eight years old, a terrible drama
happened at Tijuco, which showed that criminal would recoil from nothing if
they could gain a fortune by one bold stroke. But perhaps you are not
interested?"

"On the contrary, Torres; go on," replied Joam Garral, in a singularly calm
voice.

"So be it," answered Torres. "Well, the story is about stealing diamonds, and
a handful of those pretty stones is worth a million, sometimes two!"

And Torres, whose face expressed the vilest sentiments of cupidity, almost
unconsciously made a gesture of opening and shutting his hand.

"This is what happened," he continued. "At Tijuco it is customary to send off
in one delivery the diamonds collected during the year. They are divided into
two lots, according to their size, after being sorted in a dozen sieves with holes
of different dimensions. These lots are put into sacks and forwarded to Rio de
Janeiro; but as they are worth many millions you may imagine they are heavily
escorted. A workman chosen by the superintendent, four cavalrymen from the
district regiment, and ten men on foot, complete the convoy. They first make for
Villa Rica, where the commandant puts his seal on the sacks, and then the
convoy continues its journey to Rio de Janeiro. I should add that, for the sake of
precaution, the start is always kept secret. Well, in 1826, a young fellow named
Dacosta, who was about twenty-two or twenty-three years of age, and who for
some years had been employed at Tijuco in the offices of the governor-general,
devised the following scheme. He leagued himself with a band of smugglers, and
informed them of the date of the departure of the convoy. The scoundrels took
their measures accordingly. They were numerous and well armed. Close to Villa
Rica, during the night of the 22d of January, the gang suddenly attacked the
diamond escort, who defended themselves bravely, but were all massacred, with
the exception of one man, who, seriously wounded, managed to escape and bring
the news of the horrible deed. The workman was not spared any more than the
soldiers. He fell beneath he blows of the thieves, and was doubtless dragged
away and thrown over some precipice, for his body was never found."

"And this Dacosta?" asked Joam Garral.

"Well, his crime did not do him much good, for suspicion soon pointed


toward him. He was accused of having got up the affair. In vain he protested that
he was innocent. Thanks to the situation he held, he was in a position to know
the date on which the convoy's departure was to take place. He alone could have
informed the smugglers. He was charged, arrested, tried, and sentenced to death.
Such a sentence required his execution in twenty-four hours."

"Was the fellow executed?" asked Fragoso.

"No," replied Torres; "they shut him up in the prison at Villa Rica, and
during the night, a few hours only before his execution, whether alone or helped
by others, he managed to escape."

"Has this young man been heard of since?" asked Joam Garral.

"Never," replied Torres. "He probably left Brazil, and now, in some distant
land, lives a cheerful life with the proceeds of the robbery which he is sure to
have realized."

"Perhaps, on the other hand, he died miserably!" answered Joam Garral.

"And, perhaps," added Padre Passanha, "Heaven caused him to feel remorse
for his crime."

Here they all rose from the table, and, having finished their dinner, went out
to breathe the evening air. The sun was low on the horizon, but an hour had still
to elapse before nightfall.

"These stories are not very lively," said Fragoso, "and our betrothal dinner
was best at the beginning."

"But it was your fault, Fragoso," answered Lina.

"How my fault?"

"It was you who went on talking about the district and the diamonds, when
you should not have done so."

"Well, that's true," replied Fragoso; "but I had no idea we were going to wind
up in that fashion."

"You are the first to blame!"

"And the first to be punished, Miss Lina; for I did not hear you laugh all
through the dessert."

The whole family strolled toward the bow of the jangada. Manoel and Benito
walked one behind the other without speaking. Yaquita and her daughter silently
followed, and all felt an unaccountable impression of sadness, as if they had a
presentiment of some coming calamity.

Torres stepped up to Joam Garral, who, with bowed head, seemed to be lost
in thought, and putting his hand on his shoulder, said, "Joam Garral, may I have
a few minutes’ conversation with you?"

Joam looked at Torres.

"Here?" he asked.


"No; in private."

"Come, then."

They went toward the house, entered it, and the door was shut on them.

It would be difficult to depict what every one felt when Joam Garral and
Torres disappeared. What could there be in common between the adventurer and
the honest fazender of Iquitos? The menace of some frightful misfortune seemed
to hang over the whole family, and they scarcely dared speak to each other.

"Manoel!" said Benito, seizing his friend's arm, "whatever happens, this man
must leave us tomorrow at Manaos."

"Yes! it is imperative!" answered Manoel.

"And if through him some misfortune happens to my father--I shall kill him!"


CHAPTER XX. BETWEEN THE TWO MEN

FOR A MOMENT, alone in the room, where none could see or hear them,
Joam Garral and Torres looked at each other without uttering a word. Did the
adventurer hesitate to speak? Did he suspect that Joam Garral would only reply
to his demands by a scornful silence?

Yes! Probably so. So Torres did not question him. At the outset of the
conversation he took the affirmative, and assumed the part of an accuser.

"Joam," he said, "your name is not Garral. Your name is Dacosta!"

At the guilty name which Torres thus gave him, Joam Garral could not
repress a slight shudder.

"You are Joam Dacosta," continued Torres, "who, twenty-five years ago,
were a Clerk in the governor-general's office at Tijuco, and you are the man who
was sentenced to death in this affair of the robbery and murder!"

No response from Joam Garral, whose strange tranquillity surprised the
adventurer. Had he made a mistake in accusing his host? No! For Joam Garral
made no start at the terrible accusations. Doubtless he wanted to know to what
Torres was coming.

"Joam Dacosta, I repeat! It was you whom they sought for this diamond
affair, whom they convicted of crime and sentenced to death, and it was you who
escaped from the prison at Villa Rica a few hours before you should have been
executed! Do you not answer?"

Rather a long silence followed this direct question which Torres asked. Joam
Garral, still calm, took a seat. His elbow rested on a small table, and he looked
fixedly at his accuser without bending his head.

"Will you reply?" repeated Torres.

"What reply do you want from me?" said Joam quietly.


"A reply," slowly answered Torres, "that will keep me from finding out the
chief of the police at Manaos, and saying to him, 'A man is there whose identity
can easily be established, who can be recognized even after twenty-five years’
absence, and this man was the instigator of the diamond robbery at Tijuco. He
was the accomplice of the murderers of the soldiers of the escort; he is the man
who escaped from execution; he is Joam Garral, whose true name is Joam
Dacosta.""

"And so, Torres," said Joam Garral, "I shall have nothing to fear from you if
I give the answer you require?"

"Nothing, for neither you nor I will have any interest in talking about the
matter."

"Neither you nor I?" asked Joam Garral. "It is not with money, then, that
your silence is to be bought?"

"No! No matter how much you offered me!"

"What do you want, then?"

"Joam Garral," replied Torres, "here is my proposal. Do not be in a hurry to
reply by a formal refusal. Remember that you are in my power."

"What is this proposal?" asked Joam.

Torres hesitated for a moment.

The attitude of this guilty man, whose life he held in his hands, was enough
to astonish him. He had expected a stormy discussion and prayers and tears. He
had before him a man convicted of the most heinous of crimes, and the man
never flinched.

At length, crossing his arms, he said:

"You have a daughter!--I like her--and I want to marry her!"

Apparently Joam Garral expected anything from such a man, and was as
quiet as before.

"And so," he said, "the worthy Torres is anxious to enter the family of a
murderer and a thief?"

"I am the sole judge of what it suits me to do," said Torres. "I wish to be the
son-in-law of Joam Garral, and I will."

"You ignore, then, that my daughter is going to marry Manoel Valdez?"

"You will break it off with Manoel Valdez!"

"And if my daughter declines?"

"If you tell her all, I have no doubt she would consent," was the impudent
answer.

"All?"

"All, if necessary. Between her own feelings and the honor of her family and
the life of her father she would not hesitate."


"You are a consummate scoundrel, Torres," quietly said Joam, whose
coolness never forsook him.

"A scoundrel and a murderer were made to understand each other."

At these words Joam Garral rose, advanced to the adventurer, and looking
him straight in the face, "Torres," he said, "if you wish to become one of the
family of Joam Dacosta, you ought to know that Joam Dacosta was innocent of
the crime for which he was condemned."

"Really!"

"And I add," replied Joam, "that you hold the proof of his innocence, and are
keeping it back to proclaim it on the day when you marry his daughter."

"Fair play, Joam Garral," answered Torres, lowering his voice, "and when
you have heard me out, you will see if you dare refuse me your daughter!"

"IT am listening, Torres."

"Well," said the adventurer, half keeping back his words, as if he was sorry to
let them escape from his lips, "I know you are innocent! I know it, for I know the
true culprit, and I am in a position to prove your innocence."

"And the unhappy man who committed the crime?"

"Is dead."

"Dead!" exclaimed Joam Garral; and the word made him turn pale, in spite
of himself, as if it had deprived him of all power of reinstatement.

"Dead," repeated Torres; "but this man, whom I knew a long time after his
crime, and without knowing that he was a convict, had written out at length, in
his own hand, the story of this affair of the diamonds, even to the smallest
details. Feeling his end approaching, he was seized with remorse. He knew
where Joam Dacosta had taken refuge, and under what name the innocent man
had again begun a new life. He knew that he was rich, in the bosom of a happy
family, but he knew also that there was no happiness for him. And this happiness
he desired to add to the reputation to which he was entitled. But death came--he
intrusted to me, his companion, to do what he could no longer do. He gave me
the proofs of Dacosta's innocence for me to transmit them to him, and he died."

"The man's name?" exclaimed Joam Garral, in a tone he could not control.

"You will know it when I am one of your family."

"And the writing?"

Joam Garral was ready to throw himself on Torres, to search him, to snatch
from him the proofs of his innocence.

"The writing is in a safe place," replied Torres, "and you will not have it until
your daughter has become my wife. Now will you still refuse me?"

"Yes," replied Joam, "but in return for that paper the half of my fortune is
yours."


"The half of your fortune?" exclaimed Torres; "agreed, on condition that
Minha brings it to me at her marriage."

"And it is thus that you respect the wishes of a dying man, of a criminal
tortured by remorse, and who has charge you to repair as much as he could the
evil which he had done?"

"Tt is thus."

"Once more, Torres," said Joam Garral, "you are a consummate scoundrel."

"Be it so."

"And as I am not a criminal we were not made to understand one another."

"And your refuse?"

"T refuse."

"It will be your ruin, then, Joam Garral. Everything accuses you in the
proceedings that have already taken place. You are condemned to death, and you
know, in sentences for crimes of that nature, the government is forbidden the
right of commuting the penalty. Denounced, you are taken; taken, you are
executed. And I will denounce you."

Master as he was of himself, Joam could stand it no longer. He was about to
rush on Torres.

A gesture from the rascal cooled his anger.

"Take care," said Torres, "your wife knows not that she is the wife of Joam
Dacosta, your children do not know they are the children of Joam Dacosta, and
you are not going to give them the information."

Joam Garral stopped himself. He regained his usual command over himself,
and his features recovered their habitual calm.

"This discussion has lasted long enough," said he, moving toward the door,
"and I know what there is left for me to do."

"Take care, Joam Garral!" said Torres, for the last time, for he could scarcely
believe that his ignoble attempt at extortion had collapsed.

Joam Garral made him no answer. He threw back the door which opened
under the veranda, made a sign to Torres to follow him, and they advanced
toward the center of the jangada, where the family were assembled.

Benito, Manoel, and all of them, under a feeling of deep anxiety, had risen.
They could see that the bearing of Torres was still menacing, and that the fire of
anger still shone in his eyes.

In extraordinary contrast, Joam Garral was master of himself, and almost
smiling.

Both of them stopped before Yaquita and her people. Not one dared to say a
word to them.

It was Torres who, in a hollow voice, and with his customary impudence,


broke the painful silence.

"For the last time, Joam Garral," he said, "I ask you for a last reply!"

"And here is my reply."

And addressing his wife:

"Yaquita," he said, "peculiar circumstances oblige me to alter what we have
formerly decided as to the marriage of Minha and Manoel."

"At last!" exclaimed Torres.

Joam Garral, without answering him, shot at the adventurer a glance of the
deepest scorn.

But at the words Manoel had felt his heart beat as if it would break. The girl
arose, ashy pale, as if she would seek shelter by the side of her mother. Yaquita
opened her arms to protect, to defend her.

"Father," said Benito, who had placed himself between Joam Garral and
Torres, "what were you going to say?"

"I was going to say," answered Joam Garral, raising his voice, "that to wait
for our arrival in Para for the wedding of Minha and Manoel is to wait too long.
The marriage will take place here, not later than tomorrow, on the jangada, with
the aid of Padre Passanha, if, after a conversation I am about to have with
Manoel, he agrees with me to defer it no longer."

"Ah, father, father!" exclaimed the young man.

"Wait a little before you call me so, Manoel," replied Joam, in a tone of
unspeakable suffering.

Here Torres, with crossed arms, gave the whole family a look of
inconceivable insolence.

"So that is you last word?" said he, extending his hand toward Joam Garral.

"No, that is not my last word."

"What is it, then?"

"This, Torres. I am master here. You will be off, if you please, and even if
you do not please, and leave the jangada at this very instant!"

"Yes, this instant!" exclaimed Benito, "or I will throw you overboard."

Torres shrugged his shoulders.

"No threats," he said; "they are of no use. It suits me also to land, and
without delay. But you will remember me, Joam Garral. We shall not be long
before we meet.”

"If it only depends on me," answered Joam Garral, "we shall soon meet, and
rather sooner, perhaps, than you will like. Tomorrow I shall be with Judge
Ribeiro, the first magistrate of the province, whom I have advised of my arrival
at Manaos. If you dare, meet me there!"

"At Judge Ribeiro's?" said Torres, evidently disconcerted.


"At Judge Ribeiro's," answered Joam Garral.

And then, showing the pirogue to Torres, with a gesture of supreme contempt
Joam Garral ordered four of his people to land him without delay on the nearest
point of the island.

The scoundrel at last disappeared.

The family, who were still appalled, respected the silence of its chief; but
Fragoso, comprehending scarce half the gravity of the situation, and carried
away by his customary vivacity, came up to Joam Garral.

"If the wedding of Miss Minha and Mr. Manoel is to take place tomorrow on
the raft----"

"Yours shall take place at the same time," kindly answered Joam Garral.

And making a sign to Manoel, he retired to his room with him.

The interview between Joam and Manoel had lasted for half an hour, and it
seemed a century to the family, when the door of the room was reopened.

Manoel came out alone; his face glowed with generous resolution.

Going up to Yaquita, he said, "My mother!" to Minha he said, "My wife!"
and to Benito he said, "My brother!" and, turning toward Lina and Fragoso, he
said to all, "Tomorrow!"

He knew all that had passed between Joam Garral and Torres. He knew that,
counting on the protection of Judge Ribeiro, by means of a correspondence
which he had had with him for a year past without speaking of it to his people,
Joam Garral had at last succeeded in clearing himself and convincing him of his
innocence. He knew that Joam Garral had boldly undertaken the voyage with the
sole object of canceling the hateful proceedings of which he had been the victim,
so as not to leave on his daughter and son-in-law the weight of the terrible
situation which he had had to endure so long himself.

Yes, Manoel knew all this, and, further, he knew that Joam Garral--or rather
Joam Dacosta--was innocent, and his misfortunes made him even dearer and
more devoted to him. What he did not know was that the material proof of the
innocence of the fazender existed, and that this proof was in the hands of Torres.
Joam Garral wished to reserve for the judge himself the use of this proof, which,
if the adventurer had spoken truly, would demonstrate his innocence.

Manoel confined himself, then, to announcing that he was going to Padre
Passanha to ask him to get things ready for the two weddings.

Next day, the 24th of August, scarcely an hour before the ceremony was to
take place, a large pirogue came off from the left bank of the river and hailed the
jangada. A dozen paddlers had swiftly brought it from Manaos, and with a few
men it carried the chief of the police, who made himself known and came on
board.


At the moment Joam Garral and his family, attired for the ceremony, were
coming out of the house.

"Joam Garral?" asked the chief of the police.

"I am here," replied Joam.

"Joam Garral," continued the chief of the police, "you have also been Joam
Dacosta; both names have been borne by the same man--I arrest you!"

At these words Yaquita and Minha, struck with stupor, stopped without any
power to move.

"My father a murderer?" exclaimed Benito, rushing toward Joam Garral.

By a gesture his father silenced him.

"I will only ask you one question," said Joam with firm voice, addressing the
chief of police. "Has the warrant in virtue of which you arrest me been issued
against me by the justice at Manaos--by Judge Ribeiro?"

"No," answered the chief of the police, "it was given to me, with an order for
its immediate execution, by his substitute. Judge Ribeiro was struck with
apoplexy yesterday evening, and died during the night at two o'clock, without
having recovered his consciousness.”

"Dead!" exclaimed Joam Garral, crushed for a moment by the news--"dead!
dead!"

But soon raising his head, he said to his wife and children, "Judge Ribeiro
alone knew that I was innocent, my dear ones. The death of the judge may be
fatal to me, but that is no reason for me to despair."

And, turning toward Manoel, "Heaven help us!" he said to him; "we shall see
if truth will come down to the earth from Above."

The chief of the police made a sign to his men, who advanced to secure Joam
Garral.

"But speak, father!" shouted Benito, mad with despair; "say one word, and
we shall contest even by force this horrible mistake of which you are the
victim!"

"There is no mistake here, my son," replied Joam Garral; "Joam Dacosta and
Joam Garral are one. I am in truth Joam Dacosta! I am the honest man whom a
legal error unjustly doomed to death twenty-five years ago in the place of the
true culprit! That I am quite innocent I swear before Heaven, once for all, on
your heads, my children, and on the head of your mother!"

"All communication between you and yours is now forbidden," said the chief
of the police. "You are my prisoner, Joam Garral, and I will rigorously execute
my warrant."

Joam restrained by a gesture his dismayed children and servants.

"Let the justice of man be done while we wait for the justice of God!"


And with his head unbent, he stepped into the pirogue.

It seemed, indeed, as though of all present Joam Garral was the only one
whom this fearful thunderbolt, which had fallen so unexpectedly on his head,
had failed to overwhelm.


PART I. THE CRYPTOGRAM


CHAPTER I. MANAOS

THE TOWN of Manaos is in 3° 8' 4" south latitude, and 67° 27' west
longitude, reckoning from the Paris meridian. It is some four hundred and twenty
leagues from Belem, and about ten miles from the embouchure of the Rio Negro.

Manaos is not built on the Amazon. It is on the left bank of the Rio Negro,
the most important and remarkable of all the tributaries of the great artery of
Brazil, that the capital of the province, with its picturesque group of private
houses and public buildings, towers above the surrounding plain.

The Rio Negro, which was discovered by the Spaniard Favella in 1645, rises
in the very heart of the province of Popayan, on the flanks of the mountains
which separate Brazil from New Grenada, and it communicates with the Orinoco
by two of its affluents, the Pimichin and the Cassiquary.

After a noble course of some seventeen hundred miles it mingles its cloudy
waters with those of the Amazon through a mouth eleven hundred feet wide, but
such is its vigorous influx that many a mile has to be completed before those
waters lose their distinctive character. Hereabouts the ends of both its banks
trend off and form a huge bay fifteen leagues across, extending to the islands of
Anavilhanas; and in one of its indentations the port of Manaos is situated.
Vessels of all kinds are there collected in great numbers, some moored in the
stream awaiting a favorable wind, others under repair up the numerous
iguarapes, or canals, which so capriciously intersect the town, and give it its
slightly Dutch appearance.

With the introduction of steam vessels, which is now rapidly taking place,
the trade of Manaos is destined to increase enormously. Woods used in building
and furniture work, cocoa, caoutchouc, coffee, sarsaparilla, sugar-canes, indigo,
muscado nuts, salt fish, turtle butter, and other commodities, are brought here
from all parts, down the innumerable streams into the Rio Negro from the west
and north, into the Madeira from the west and south, and then into the Amazon,
and by it away eastward to the coast of the Atlantic.

Manaos was formerly called Moura, or Barra de Rio Negro. From 1757 to


1804 it was only part of the captaincy which bears the name of the great river at
whose mouth it is placed; but since 1826 it has been the capital of the large
province of Amazones, borrowing its latest name from an Indian tribe which
formerly existed in these parts of equatorial America.

Careless travelers have frequently confounded it with the famous Manoa, a
city of romance, built, it was reported, near the legendary lake of Parima--which
would seem to be merely the Upper Branco, a tributary of the Rio Negro. Here
was the Empire of El Dorado, whose monarch, if we are to believe the fables of
the district, was every morning covered with powder of gold, there being so
much of the precious metal abounding in this privileged locality that it was
swept up with the very dust of the streets. This assertion, however, when put to
the test, was disproved, and with extreme regret, for the auriferous deposits
which had deceived the greedy scrutiny of the gold-seekers turned out to be only
worthless flakes of mica!

In short, Manaos has none of the fabulous splendors of the mythical capital
of El Dorado. It is an ordinary town of about five thousand inhabitants, and of
these at least three thousand are in government employ. This fact is to be
attributed to the number of its public buildings, which consist of the legislative
chamber, the government house, the treasury, the post-office, and the custom-
house, and, in addition, a college founded in 1848, and a hospital erected in
1851. When with these is also mentioned a cemetery on the south side of a hill,
on which, in 1669, a fortress, which has since been demolished, was thrown up
against the pirates of the Amazon, some idea can be gained as to the importance
of the official establishments of the city. Of religious buildings it would be
difficult to find more than two, the small Church of the Conception and the
Chapel of Notre Dame des Remedes, built on a knoll which overlooks the town.
These are very few for a town of Spanish origin, though to them should perhaps
be added the Carmelite Convent, burned down in 1850, of which only the ruins
remain. The population of Manaos does not exceed the number above given, and
after reckoning the public officials and soldiers, is principally made of up
Portuguese and Indian merchants belonging to the different tribes of the Rio
Negro.

Three principal thoroughfares of considerable irregularity run through the
town, and they bear names highly characteristic of the tone of thought prevalent
in these parts--God-the-Father Street, God-the-Son Street, and God-the-Holy
Ghost Street!

In the west of the town is a magnificent avenue of centenarian orange trees
which were carefully respected by the architects who out of the old city made the
new. Round these principal thoroughfares is interwoven a perfect network of


unpaved alleys, intersected every now and then by four canals, which are
occasionally crossed by wooden bridges. In a few places these iguarapes flow
with their brownish waters through large vacant spaces covered with straggling
weeds and flowers of startling hues, and here and there are natural squares
shaded by magnificent trees, with an occasional white-barked sumaumeira
shooting up, and spreading out its large dome-like parasol above its gnarled
branches.

The private houses have to be sought for among some hundreds of dwellings,
of very rudimentary type, some roofed with tiles, others with interlaced branches
of the palm-tree, and with prominent miradors, and projecting shops for the most
part tenanted by Portuguese traders.

And what manner of people are they who stroll on to the fashionable
promenade from the public buildings and private residences? Men of good
appearance, with black cloth coats, chimney-pot hats, patent-leather boots,
highly-colored gloves, and diamond pins in their necktie bows; and women in
loud, imposing toilets, with flounced dressed and headgear of the latest style;
and Indians, also on the road to Europeanization in a way which bids fair to
destroy every bit of local color in this central portion of the district of the
Amazon!

Such is Manaos, which, for the benefit of the reader, it was necessary to
sketch. Here the voyage of the giant raft, so tragically interrupted, had just come
to a pause in the midst of its long journey, and here will be unfolded the further
vicissitudes of the mysterious history of the fazender of Iquitos.


CHAPTER I. THE FIRST MOMENTS

SCARCELY HAD the pirogue which bore off Joam Garral, or rather Joam
Dacosta--for it is more convenient that he should resume his real name--
disappeared, than Benito stepped up to Manoel.

"What is it you know?" he asked.

"I know that your father is innocent! Yes, innocent!" replied Manoel, "and
that he was sentenced to death twenty-three years ago for a crime which he never
committed!"

"He has told you all about it, Manoel?"

"All about it," replied the young man. "The noble fazender did not wish that
any part of his past life should be hidden from him who, when he marries his
daughter, is to be his second son."

"And the proof of his innocence my father can one day produce?"

"That proof, Benito, lies wholly in the twenty-three years of an honorable


and honored life, lies entirely in the bearing of Joam Dacosta, who comes
forward to say to justice, 'Here am I! I do not care for this false existence any
more. I do not care to hide under a name which is not my true one! You have
condemned an innocent man! Confess your errors and set matters right."

"And when my father spoke like that, you did not hesitate for a moment to
believe him?"

"Not for an instant," replied Manoel.

The hands of the two young fellows closed in a long and cordial grasp.

Then Benito went up to Padre Passanha.

"Padre," he said, "take my mother and sister away to their rooms. Do not
leave them all day. No one here doubts my father's innocence--not one, you
know that! Tomorrow my mother and I will seek out the chief of the police.
They will not refuse us permission to visit the prison. No! that would be too
cruel. We will see my father again, and decide what steps shall be taken to
procure his vindication."

Yaquita was almost helpless, but the brave woman, though nearly crushed by
this sudden blow, arose. With Yaquita Dacosta it was as with Yaquita Garral. She
had not a doubt as to the innocence of her husband. The idea even never
occurred to her that Joam Dacosta had been to blame in marrying her under a
name which was not his own. She only thought of the life of happiness she had
led with the noble man who had been injured so unjustly. Yes! On the morrow
she would go to the gate of the prison, and never leave it until it was opened!

Padre Passanha took her and her daughter, who could not restrain her tears,
and the three entered the house.

The two young fellows found themselves alone.

"And now," said Benito, "I ought to know all that my father has told you."

"T have nothing to hide from you."

"Why did Torres come on board the jangada?"

"To see to Joam Dacosta the secret of his past life."

"And so, when we first met Torres in the forest of Iquitos, his plan had
already been formed to enter into communication with my father?"

"There cannot be a doubt of it," replied Manoel. "The scoundrel was on his
way to the fazenda with the idea of consummating a vile scheme of extortion
which he had been preparing for a long time."

"And when he learned from us that my father and his whole family were
about to pass the frontier, he suddenly changed his line of conduct?"

"Yes. Because Joam Dacosta once in Brazilian territory became more at his
mercy than while within the frontiers of Peru. That is why we found Torres at
Tabatinga, where he was waiting in expectation of our arrival."


"And it was I who offered him a passage on the raft!" exclaimed Benito, with
a gesture of despair.

"Brother," said Manoel, "you need not reproach yourself. Torres would have
joined us sooner or later. He was not the man to abandon such a trail. Had we
lost him at Tabatinga, we should have found him at Manaos."

"Yes, Manoel, you are right. But we are not concerned with the past now. We
must think of the present. An end to useless recriminations! Let us see!" And
while speaking, Benito, passing his hand across his forehead, endeavored to
grasp the details of the strange affair.

"How," he asked, "did Torres ascertain that my father had been sentenced
twenty-three years back for this abominable crime at Tijuco?"

"I do not know," answered Manoel, "and everything leads me to think that
your father did not know that."

"But Torres knew that Garral was the name under which Joam Dacosta was
living?"

"Evidently."

"And he knew that it was in Peru, at Iquitos, that for so many years my father
had taken refuge?"

"He knew it," said Manoel, "but how he came to know it I do not
understand."

"One more question,” continued Benito. "What was the proposition that
Torres made to my father during the short interview which preceded his
expulsion?"

"He threatened to denounce Joam Garral as being Joam Dacosta, if he
declined to purchase his silence."

"And at what price?"

"At the price of his daughter's hand!" answered Manoel unhesitatingly, but
pale with anger.

"The scoundrel dared to do that!" exclaimed Benito.

"To this infamous request, Benito, you saw the reply that your father gave."

"Yes, Manoel, yes! The indignant reply of an honest man. He kicked Torres
off the raft. But it is not enough to have kicked him out. No! That will not do for
me. It was on Torres' information that they came here and arrested my father; is
not that so?"

"Yes, on his denunciation."

"Very well," continued Benito, shaking his fist toward the left bank of the
river, "I must find out Torres. I must know how he became master of the secret.
He must tell me if he knows the real author of this crime. He shall speak out.
And if he does not speak out, I know what I shall have to do."


"What you will have to do is for me to do as well!" added Manoel, more
coolly, but not less resolutely.

"No! Manoel, no, to me alone!"

"We are brothers, Benito," replied Manoel. "The right of demanding an
explanation belongs to us both."

Benito made no reply. Evidently on that subject his decision was irrevocable.

At this moment the pilot Araujo, who had been observing the state of the
river, came up to them.

"Have you decided," he asked, "if the raft is to remain at her moorings at the
Isle of Muras, or to go on to the port of Manaos?"

The question had to be decided before nightfall, and the sooner it was settled
the better.

In fact, the news of the arrest of Joam Dacosta ought already to have spread
through the town. That it was of a nature to excite the interest of the population
of Manaos could scarcely be doubted. But would it provoke more than curiosity
against the condemned man, who was the principal author of the crime of Tijuco,
which had formerly created such a sensation? Ought they not to fear that some
popular movement might be directed against the prisoner? In the face of this
hypothesis was it not better to leave the jangada moored near the Isle of Muras
on the right bank of the river at a few miles from Manaos?

The pros and cons of the question were well weighed.

"No!" at length exclaimed Benito; "to remain here would look as though we
were abandoning my father and doubting his innocence--as though we were
afraid to make common cause with him. We must go to Manaos, and without
delay."

"You are right,” replied Manoel. "Let us go."

Araujo, with an approving nod, began his preparations for leaving the island.
The maneuver necessitated a good deal of care. They had to work the raft
slantingly across the current of the Amazon, here doubled in force by that of the
Rio Negro, and to make for the embouchure of the tributary about a dozen miles
down on the left bank.

The ropes were cast off from the island. The jangada, again started on the
river, began to drift off diagonally. Araujo, cleverly profiting by the bendings of
the current, which were due to the projections of the banks, and assisted by the
long poles of his crew, succeeded in working the immense raft in the desired
direction.

In two hours the jangada was on the other side of the Amazon, a little above
the mouth of the Rio Negro, and fairly in the current which was to take it to the
lower bank of the vast bay which opened on the left side of the stream.


At five o'clock in the evening it was strongly moored alongside this bank, not
in the port of Manaos itself, which it could not enter without stemming a rather
powerful current, but a short mile below it.

The raft was then in the black waters of the Rio Negro, near rather a high
bluff covered with cecropias with buds of reddish-brown, and palisaded with
stiff-stalked reeds called "froxas," of which the Indians make some of their
weapons.

A few citizens were strolling about the bank. A feeling of curiosity had
doubtless attracted them to the anchorage of the raft. The news of the arrest of
Joam Dacosta had soon spread about, but the curiosity of the Manaens did not
outrun their discretion, and they were very quiet.

Benito's intention had been to land that evening, but Manoel dissuaded him.

"Wait till tomorrow," he said; "night is approaching, and there is no necessity
for us to leave the raft."

"So be it! Tomorrow!" answered Benito.

And here Yaquita, followed by her daughter and Padre Passanha, came out of
the house. Minha was still weeping, but her mother's face was tearless, and she
had that look of calm resolution which showed that the wife was now ready for
all things, either to do her duty or to insist on her rights.

Yaquita slowly advanced toward Manoel.

"Manoel," she said, "listen to what I have to say, for my conscience
commands me to speak as I am about to do."

"T am listening," replied Manoel.

Yaquita, looking him straight in the face, continued: "Yesterday, after the
interview you had with Joam Dacosta, my husband, you came to me and called
me--mother! You took Minha's hand, and called her--your wife! You then knew
everything, and the past life of Joam Dacosta had been disclosed to you."

"Yes," answered Manoel, "and heaven forbid I should have had any
hesitation in doing so!"

"Perhaps so," replied Yaquita; "but then Joam Dacosta had not been arrested.
The position is not now the same. However innocent he may be, my husband is
in the hands of justice; his past life has been publicly proclaimed. Minha is a
convict's daughter."

"Minha Dacosta or Minha Garral, what matters it to me?" exclaimed Manoel,
who could keep silent no longer.

"Manoel!" murmured Minha.

And she would certainly have fallen had not Lina's arm supported her.

"Mother, if you do not wish to kill her," said Manoel, "call me your son!"

"My son! my child!"


It was all Yaquita could say, and the tears, which she restrained with
difficulty, filled her eyes.

And then they all re-entered the house. But during the long night not an
hour's sleep fell to the lot of the unfortunate family who were being so cruelly
tried.


CHAPTER II. RETROSPECTIVE

JOAM DACOSTA had relied entirely on Judge Albeiro, and his death was
most unfortunate.

Before he was judge at Manaos, and chief magistrate in the province, Ribeiro
had known the young clerk at the time he was being prosecuted for the murder in
the diamond arrayal. He was then an advocate at Villa Rica, and he it was who
defended the prisoner at the trial. He took the cause to heart and made it his own,
and from an examination of the papers and detailed information, and not from
the simple fact of his position in the matter, he came to the conclusion that his
client was wrongfully accused, and that he had taken not the slightest part in the
murder of the escort or the theft of the diamonds--in a word, that Joam Dacosta
was innocent.

But, notwithstanding this conviction, notwithstanding his talent and zeal,
Ribeiro was unable to persuade the jury to take the same view of the matter.
How could he remove so strong a presumption? If it was not Joam Dacosta, who
had every facility for informing the scoundrels of the convoy's departure, who
was it? The official who accompanied the escort had perished with the greater
part of the soldiers, and suspicion could not point against him. Everything agreed
in distinguishing Dacosta as the true and only author of the crime.

Ribeiro defended him with great warmth and with all his powers, but he
could not succeed in saving him. The verdict of the jury was affirmative on all
the questions. Joam Dacosta, convicted of aggravated and premeditated murder,
did not even obtain the benefit of extenuating circumstances, and heard himself
condemned to death.

There was no hope left for the accused. No commutation of the sentence was
possible, for the crime was committed in the diamond arrayal. The condemned
man was lost. But during the night which preceded his execution, and when the
gallows was already erected, Joam Dacosta managed to escape from the prison
at Villa Rica. We know the rest.

Twenty years later Ribeiro the advocate became the chief justice of Manaos.
In the depths of his retreat the fazender of Iquitos heard of the change, and in it
saw a favorable opportunity for bringing forward the revision of the former


proceedings against him with some chance of success. He knew that the old
convictions of the advocate would be still unshaken in the mind of the judge. He
therefore resolved to try and rehabilitate himself. Had it not been for Ribeiro's
nomination to the chief justiceship in the province of Amazones, he might
perhaps have hesitated, for he had no new material proof of his innocence to
bring forward. Although the honest man suffered acutely, he might still have
remained hidden in exile at Iquitos, and still have asked for time to smother the
remembrances of the horrible occurrence, but something was urging him to act
in the matter without delay.

In fact, before Yaquita had spoken to him, Joam Dacosta had noticed that
Manoel was in love with his daughter.

The union of the young army doctor and his daughter was in every respect a
suitable one. It was evident to Joam that some day or other he would be asked
for her hand in marriage, and he did not wish to be obliged to refuse.

But then the thought that his daughter would have to marry under a name
which did not belong to her, that Manoel Valdez, thinking he was entering the
family of Garral, would enter that of Dacosta, the head of which was under
sentence of death, was intolerable to him. No! The wedding should not take
place unless under proper conditions! Never!

Let us recall what had happened up to this time. Four years after the young
clerk, who eventually became the partner of Magalhaés, had arrived at Iquitos,
the old Portuguese had been taken back to the farm mortally injured. A few days
only were left for him to live. He was alarmed at the thought that his daughter
would be left alone and unprotected; but knowing that Joam and Yaquita were in
love with each other, he desired their union without delay.

Joam at first refused. He offered to remain the protector or the servant of
Yaquita without becoming her husband. The wish of the dying Magalhaés was so
urgent that resistance became impossible. Yaquita put her hand into the hand of
Joam, and Joam did not withdraw it.

Yes! It was a serious matter! Joam Dacosta ought to have confessed all, or to
have fled forever from the house in which he had been so hospitably received,
from the establishment of which he had built up the prosperity! Yes! To confess
everything rather than to give to the daughter of his benefactor a name which
was not his, instead of the name of a felon condemned to death for murder,
innocent though he might be!

But the case was pressing, the old fazender was on the point of death, his
hands were stretched out toward the young people! Joam was silent, the
marriage took place, and the remainder of his life was devoted to the happiness
of the girl he had made his wife.


"The day when I confess everything," Joam repeated, "Yaquita will pardon
everything! She will not doubt me for an instant! But if I ought not to have
deceived her, I certainly will not deceive the honest fellow who wishes to enter
our family by marrying Mina! No! I would rather give myself up and have done
with this life!"

Many times had Joam thought of telling his wife about his past life. Yes! the
avowal was on his lips whenever she asked him to take her into Brazil, and with
her and her daughter descend the beautiful Amazon river. He knew sufficient of
Yaquita to be sure that her affection for him would not thereby be diminished in
the least. But courage failed him!

And this is easily intelligible in the face of the happiness of the family, which
increased on every side. This happiness was his work, and it might be destroyed
forever by his return.

Such had been his life for those long years; such had been the continuous
source of his sufferings, of which he had kept the secret so well; such had been
the existence of this man, who had no action to be ashamed of, and whom a great
injustice compelled to hide away from himself!

But at length the day arrived when there could no longer remain a doubt as to
the affection which Manoel bore to Minha, when he could see that a year would
not go by before he was asked to give his consent to her marriage, and after a
short delay he no longer hesitated to proceed in the matter.

A letter from him, addressed to Judge Ribeiro, acquainted the chief justice
with the secret of the existence of Joam Dacosta, with the name under which he
was concealed, with the place where he lived with his family, and at the same
time with his formal intention of delivering himself up to justice, and taking
steps to procure the revision of the proceedings, which would either result in his
rehabilitation or in the execution of the iniquitous judgment delivered at Villa
Rica.

What were the feelings which agitated the heart of the worthy magistrate?
We can easily divine them. It was no longer to the advocate that the accused
applied; it was to the chief justice of the province that the convict appealed.
Joam Dacosta gave himself over to him entirely, and did not even ask him to
keep the secret.

Judge Ribeiro was at first troubled about this unexpected revelation, but he
soon recovered himself, and scrupulously considered the duties which the
position imposed on him. It was his place to pursue criminals, and here was one
who delivered himself into his hands. This criminal, it was true, he had
defended; he had never doubted but that he had been unjustly condemned; his
joy had been extreme when he saw him escape by flight from the last penalty; he


had even instigated and facilitated his flight! But what the advocate had done in
the past could the magistrate do in the present?

"Well, yes!" had the judge said, "my conscience tells me not to abandon this
just man. The step he is taking is a fresh proof of his innocence, a moral proof,
even if he brings me others, which may be the most convincing of all! No! I will
not abandon him!"

From this day forward a secret correspondence took place between the
magistrate and Joam Dacosta. Ribeiro at the outset cautioned his client against
compromising himself by any imprudence. He had again to work up the matter,
again to read over the papers, again to look through the inquiries. He had to find
out if any new facts had come to light in the diamond province referring to so
serious a case. Had any of the accomplices of the crime, of the smugglers who
had attacked the convoy, been arrested since the attempt? Had any confessions or
half-confessions been brought forward? Joam Dacosta had done nothing but
protest his innocence from the very first. But that was not enough, and Judge
Ribeiro was desirous of finding in the case itself the clue to the real culprit.

Joam Dacosta had accordingly been prudent. He had promised to be so. But
in all his trials it was an immense consolation for him to find his old advocate,
though now a chief justice, so firmly convinced that he was not guilty. Yes! Joam
Dacosta, in spite of his condemnation, was a victim, a martyr, an honest man to
whom society owed a signal reparation! And when the magistrate knew the past
career of the fazender of Iquitos since his sentence, the position of his family, all
that life of devotion, of work, employed unceasingly for the happiness of those
belonging to him, he was not only more convinced but more affected, and
determined to do all that he could to procure the rehabilitation of the felon of
Tijuco.

For six months a correspondence had passed between these two men.

One day, the case being pressing, Joam Dacosta wrote to Judge Ribeiro:

"In two months I will be with you, in the power of the chief justice of the
province!"

"Come, then," replied Ribeiro.

The jangada was then ready to go down the river. Joam Dacosta embarked on
it with all his people. During the voyage, to the great astonishment of his wife
and son, he landed but rarely, as we know. More often he remained shut up on
his room, writing, working, not at his trading accounts, but, without saying
anything about it, at a kind of memoir, which he called "The History of My
Life," and which was meant to be used in the revision of the legal proceedings.

Eight days before his new arrest, made on account of information given by
Torres, which forestalled and perhaps would ruin his prospects, he intrusted to an


Indian on the Amazon a letter, in which he warned Judge Ribeiro of his
approaching arrival.

The letter was sent and delivered as addressed, and the magistrate only
waited for Joam Dacosta to commence on the serious undertaking which he
hoped to bring to a successful issue.

During the night before the arrival of the raft at Manaos Judge Ribeiro was
seized with an attack of apoplexy. But the denunciation of Torres, whose scheme
of extortion had collapsed in face of the noble anger of his victim, had produced
its effect. Joam Dacosta was arrested in the bosom of his family, and his old
advocate was no longer in this world to defend him!

Yes, the blow was terrible indeed. His lot was cast, whatever his fate might
be; there was no going back for him! And Joam Dacosta rose from beneath the
blow which had so unexpectedly struck him. It was not only his own honor
which was in question, but the honor of all who belonged to him.


CHAPTER IV. MORAL PROOFS

THE WARRANT against Joam Dacosta, alias Joam Garral, had been issued
by the assistant of Judge Ribeiro, who filled the position of the magistrate in the
province of Amazones, until the nomination of the successor of the late justice.

This assistant bore the name of Vicente Jarriquez. He was a surly little
fellow, whom forty years’ practice in criminal procedure had not rendered
particularly friendly toward those who came before him. He had had so many
cases of this sort, and tried and sentenced so many rascals, that a prisoner's
innocence seemed to him a priori inadmissable. To be sure, he did not come to a
decision unconscientiously; but his conscience was strongly fortified and was
not easily affected by the circumstances of the examination or the arguments for
the defense. Like a good many judges, he thought but little of the indulgence of
the jury, and when a prisoner was brought before him, after having passed
through the sieve of inquest, inquiry, and examination, there was every
presumption in his eyes that the man was quite ten times guilty.

Jarriquez, however, was not a bad man. Nervous, fidgety, talkative, keen,
crafty, he had a curious look about him, with his big head on his little body; his
ruffled hair, which would not have disgraced the judge's wig of the past; his
piercing gimlet-like eyes, with their expression of surprising acuteness; his
prominent nose, with which he would assuredly have gesticulated had it been
movable; his ears wide open, so as to better catch all that was said, even when it
was out of range of ordinary auditory apparatus; his fingers unceasingly tapping
the table in front of him, like those of a pianist practicing on the mute; and his


body so long and his legs so short, and his feet perpetually crossing and
recrossing, as he sat in state in his magistrate's chair.

In private life, Jarriquez, who was a confirmed old bachelor, never left his
law-books but for the table which he did not despise; for chess, of which he was
a past master; and above all things for Chinese puzzles, enigmas, charades,
rebuses, anagrams, riddles, and such things, with which, like more than one
European justice--thorough sphinxes by taste as well as by profession--he
principally passed his leisure.

It will be seen that he was an original, and it will be seen also how much
Joam Dacosta had lost by the death of Judge Ribeiro, inasmuch as his case
would come before this not very agreeable judge.

Moreover, the task of Jarriquez was in a way very simple. He had either to
inquire nor to rule; he had not even to regulate a discussion nor to obtain a
verdict, neither to apply the articles of the penal code nor to pronounce a
sentence. Unfortunately for the fazender, such formalities were no longer
necessary; Joam Dacosta had been arrested, convicted, and sentenced twenty-
three years ago for the crime at Tijuco; no limitation had yet affected his
sentence. No demand in commutation of the penalty could be introduced, and no
appeal for mercy could be received. It was only necessary then to establish his
identity, and as soon as the order arrived from Rio Janeiro justice would have to
take its course.

But in the nature of things Joam Dacosta would protest his innocence; he
would say he had been unjustly condemned. The magistrate's duty,
notwithstanding the opinions he held, would be to listen to him. The question
would be, what proofs could the convict offer to make good his assertions? And
if he was not able to produce them when he appeared before his first judges, was
he able to do so now?

Herein consisted all the interest of the examination. There would have to be
admitted the fact of a defaulter, prosperous and safe in a foreign country, leaving
his refuge of his own free will to face the justice which his past life should have
taught him to dread, and herein would be one of those rare and curious cases
which ought to interest even a magistrate hardened with all the surroundings of
forensic strife. Was it impudent folly on the part of the doomed man of Tijuco,
who was tired of his life, or was it the impulse of a conscience which would at
all risks have wrong set right? The problem was a strange one, it must be
acknowledged.

On the morrow of Joam Dacosta's arrest, Judge Jarriquez made his way to
the prison in God-the-Son Street, where the convict had been placed. The prison
was an old missionary convent, situated on the bank of one of the principal


iguarapes of the town. To the voluntary prisoners of former times there had
succeeded in this building, which was but little adapted for the purpose, the
compulsory prisoners of to-day. The room occupied by Joam Dacosta was
nothing like one of those sad little cells which form part of our modern
penitentiary system: but an old monk's room, with a barred window without
shutters, opening on to an uncultivated space, a bench in one corner, and a kind
of pallet in the other. It was from this apartment that Joam Dacosta, on this 25th
of August, about eleven o'clock in the morning, was taken and brought into the
judge's room, which was the old common hall of the convent.

Judge Jarriquez was there in front of his desk, perched on his high chair, his
back turned toward the window, so that his face was in shadow while that of the
accused remained in full daylight. His clerk, with the indifference which
characterizes these legal folks, had taken his seat at the end of the table, his pen
behind his ear, ready to record the questions and answers.

Joam Dacosta was introduced into the room, and at a sign from the judge the
guards who had brought him withdrew.

Judge Jarriquez looked at the accused for some time. The latter, leaning
slightly forward and maintaining a becoming attitude, neither careless nor
humble, waited with dignity for the questions to which he was expected to reply.

"Your name?" said Judge Jarriquez.

"Joam Dacosta."

"Your age?"

"Fifty-two."

"Where do you live?"

"In Peru, at the village of Iquitos."

"Under what name?"

"Under that of Garral, which is that of my mother."

"And why do you bear that name?"

"Because for twenty-three years I wished to hide myself from the pursuit of
Brazilian justice."

The answers were so exact, and seemed to show that Joam Dacosta had made
up his mind to confess everything concerning his past and present life, that Judge
Jarriquez, little accustomed to such a course, cocked up his nose more than was
usual to him.

"And why," he continued, "should Brazilian justice pursue you?"

"Because I was sentenced to death in 1826 in the diamond affair at Tijuco."

"You confess then that you are Joam Dacosta?"

"T am Joam Dacosta."

All this was said with great calmness, and as simply as possible. The little


eyes of Judge Jarriquez, hidden by their lids, seemed to say:

"Never came across anything like this before."

He had put the invariable question which had hitherto brought the invariable
reply from culprits of every category protesting their innocence. The fingers of
the judge began to beat a gentle tattoo on the table.

"Joam Dacosta," he asked, "what were you doing at Iquitos?"

"I was a fazender, and engaged in managing a farming establishment of
considerable size."

"It was prospering?"

"Greatly prospering.”

"How long ago did you leave your fazenda?"

"About nine weeks."

"Why?"

"As to that, sir," answered Dacosta, "I invented a pretext, but in reality I had
a motive."

"What was the pretext?"

"The responsibility of taking into Para a large raft, and a cargo of different
products of the Amazon."

"Ah! and what was the real motive of your departure?"

And in asking this question Jarriquez said to himself:

"Now we shall get into denials and falsehoods."

"The real motive," replied Joam Dacosta, in a firm voice, "was the resolution
I had taken to give myself up to the justice of my country."

"You give yourself up!" exclaimed the judge, rising from his stool. "You give
yourself up of your own free will?"

"Of my own free will.”

"And why?"

"Because I had had enough of this lying life, this obligation to live under a
false name, of this impossibility to be able to restore to my wife and children that
which belongs to them; in short, sir, because----"

"Because?"

"I was innocent!"

"That is what I was waiting for," said Judge Jarriquez.

And while his fingers tattooed a slightly more audible march, he made a sign
with his head to Dacosta, which signified as clearly as possible, "Go on! Tell me
your history. I know it, but I do not wish to interrupt you in telling it in your own
way."

Joam Dacosta, who did not disregard the magistrate's far from encouraging
attitude, could not but see this, and he told the history of his whole life. He spoke


quietly without departing from the calm he had imposed upon himself, without
omitting any circumstances which had preceded or succeeded his condemnation.
In the same tone he insisted on the honored and honorable life he had led since
his escape, on his duties as head of his family, as husband and father, which he
had so worthily fulfilled. He laid stress only on one circumstance--that which
had brought him to Manaos to urge on the revision of the proceedings against
him, to procure his rehabilitation--and that he was compelled to do.

Judge Jarriquez, who was naturally prepossessed against all criminals, did
not interrupt him. He contented himself with opening and shutting his eyes like a
man who heard the story told for the hundredth time; and when Joam Dacosta
laid on the table the memoir which he had drawn up, he made no movement to
take it.

"You have finished?" he said.

"Yes, sir."

"And you persist in asserting that you only left Iquitos to procure the revision
of the judgment against you."

"T had no other intention."

"What is there to prove that? Who can prove that, without the denunciation
which had brought about your arrest, you would have given yourself up?"

"This memoir, in the first place."

"That memoir was in your possession, and there is nothing to show that had
you not been arrested, you would have put it to the use you say you intended."

"At the least, sir, there was one thing that was not in my possession, and of
the authenticity of which there can be no doubt."

"What?"

"The letter I wrote to your predecessor, Judge Ribeiro, the letter which gave
him notice of my early arrival."

"Ah! you wrote?"

"Yes. And the letter which ought to have arrived at its destination should
have been handed over to you."

"Really!" answered Judge Jarriquez, in a slightly incredulous tone. "You
wrote to Judge Ribeiro."

"Before he was a judge in this province," answered Joam Dacosta, "he was
an advocate at Villa Rica. He it was who defended me in the trial at Tijuco. He
never doubted of the justice of my cause. He did all he could to save me. Twenty
years later, when he had become chief justice at Manaos, I let him know who I
was, where I was, and what I wished to attempt. His opinion about me had not
changed, and it was at his advice I left the fazenda, and came in person to
proceed with my rehabilitation. But death had unfortunately struck him, and


maybe I shall be lost, sir, if in Judge Jarriquez I do not find another Judge
Ribeiro."

The magistrate, appealed to so directly, was about to start up in defiance of
all the traditions of the judicial bench, but he managed to restrain himself, and
was contented with muttering:

"Very strong, indeed; very strong!"

Judge Jarriquez was evidently hard of heart, and proof against all surprise.

At this moment a guard entered the room, and handed a sealed packet to the
magistrate.

He broke the seal and drew a letter from the envelope. He opened it and read
it, not without a certain contraction of his eyebrows, and then said:

"I have no reason for hiding from you, Joam Dacosta, that this is the letter
you have been speaking about, addressed by you to Judge Ribeiro and sent on to
me. I have, therefore, no reason to doubt what you have said on the subject."

"Not only on that subject," answered Dacosta, "but on the subject of all the
circumstances of my life which I have brought to your knowledge, and which are
none of them open to question."

"Eh! Joam Dacosta," quickly replied Judge Jarriquez. "You protest your
innocence; but all prisoners do as much! After all, you only offer moral
presumptions. Have you any material proof?"

"Perhaps I have," answered Joam Dacosta.

At these words, Judge Jarriquez left his chair. This was too much for him,
and he had to take two or three circuits of the room to recover himself.


CHAPTER V. MATERIAL PROOFS

WHEN THE MAGISTRATE had again taken his place, like a man who
considered he was perfectly master of himself, he leaned back in his chair, and
with his head raised and his eyes looking straight in front, as though not even
noticing the accused, remarked, in a tone of the most perfect indifference:


"Go on."

Joam Dacosta reflected for a minute as if hesitating to resume the order of
his thoughts, and then answered as follows:

"Up to the present, sir, I have only given you moral presumptions of my
innocence grounded on the dignity, propriety, and honesty of the whole of my
life. I should have thought that such proofs were those most worthy of being
brought forward in matters of justice."

Judge Jarriquez could not restrain a movement of his shoulders, showing that
such was not his opinion.

"Since they are not enough, I proceed with the material proofs which I shall
perhaps be able to produce," continued Dacosta; "I say perhaps, for I do not yet
know what credit to attach to them. And, sir, I have never spoken of these things
to my wife or children, not wishing to raise a hope which might be destroyed."

"To the point," answered Jarriquez.

"T have every reason to believe, sir, that my arrest on the eve of the arrival of
the raft at Manaos is due to information given to the chief of the police!"

"You are not mistaken, Joam Dacosta, but I ought to tell you that the
information is anonymous."

"It matters little, for I know that it could only come from a scoundrel called
Torres."

"And what right have you to speak in such a way of this--informer?"

"A scoundrel! Yes, sir!" replied Joam quickly. "This man, whom I received
with hospitality, only came to me to propose that I should purchase his silence to
offer me an odious bargain that I shall never regret having refused, whatever
may be the consequences of his denunciation!"

"Always this method!" thought Judge Jarriquez; "accusing others to clear
himself."

But he none the less listened with extreme attention to Joam's recital of his
relations with the adventurer up to the moment when Torres let him know that he
knew and could reveal the name of the true author of the crime of Tijuco.

"And what is the name of the guilty man?" asked Jarriquez, shaken in his
indifference.

"I do not know," answered Joam Dacosta. "Torres was too cautious to let it
out."

"And the culprit is living?"

"He is dead."

The fingers of Judge Jarriquez tattooed more quickly, and he could not avoid
exclaiming, "The man who can furnish the proof of a prisoner's innocence is
always dead."


"If the real culprit is dead, sir," replied Dacosta, "Torres at least is living, and
the proof, written throughout in the handwriting of the author of the crime, he
has assured me is in his hands! He offered to sell it to me!"

"Eh! Joam Dacosta!" answered Judge Jarriquez, "that would not have been
dear at the cost of the whole of your fortune!"

"If Torres had only asked my fortune, I would have given it to him and not
one of my people would have demurred! Yes, you are right, sir; a man cannot
pay too dearly for the redemption of his honor! But this scoundrel, knowing that
I was at his mercy, required more than my fortune!"

"How so?"

"My daughter's hand was to be the cost of the bargain! I refused; he
denounced me, and that is why I am now before you!"

"And if Torres had not informed against you," asked Judge Jarriquez--"if
Torres had not met with you on your voyage, what would you have done on
learning on your arrival of the death of Judge Ribeiro? Would you then have
delivered yourself into the hands of justice?"

"Without the slightest hesitation," replied Joam, in a firm voice; "for, I repeat
it, I had no other object in leaving Iquitos to come to Manaos."

This was said in such a tone of truthfulness that Judge Jarriquez experienced
a kind of feeling making its way to that corner of the heart where convictions are
formed, but he did not yet give in.

He could hardly help being astonished. A judge engaged merely in this
examination, he knew nothing of what is known by those who have followed this
history, and who cannot doubt but that Torres held in his hands the material
proof of Joam Dacosta's innocence. They know that the document existed; that it
contained this evidence; and perhaps they may be led to think that Judge
Jarriquez was pitilessly incredulous. But they should remember that Judge
Jarriquez was not in their position; that he was accustomed to the invariable
protestations of the culprits who came before him. The document which Joam
Dacosta appealed to was not produced; he did not really know if it actually
existed; and to conclude, he had before him a man whose guilt had for him the
certainty of a settled thing.

However, he wished, perhaps through curiosity, to drive Joam Dacosta
behind his last entrenchments.

"And so," he said, "all your hope now rests on the declaration which has
been made to you by Torres."

"Yes, sir, if my whole life does not plead for me."

"Where do you think Torres really is?"

"T think in Manaos."


"And you hope that he will speak--that he will consent to good-naturedly
hand over to you the document for which you have declined to pay the price he
asked?"

"I hope so, sir," replied Joam Dacosta; "the situation now is not the same for
Torres; he has denounced me, and consequently he cannot retain any hope of
resuming his bargaining under the previous conditions. But this document might
still be worth a fortune if, supposing I am acquitted or executed, it should ever
escape him. Hence his interest is to sell me the document, which can thus not
injure him in any way, and I think he will act according to his interest."

The reasoning of Joam Dacosta was unanswerable, and Judge Jarriquez felt it
to be so. He made the only possible objection.

"The interest of Torres is doubtless to sell you the document--if the document
exists."

"If it does not exist," answered Joam Dacosta, in a penetrating voice, "in
trusting to the justice of men, I must put my trust only in God!"

At these words Judge Jarriquez rose, and, in not quite such an indifferent
tone, said, "Joam Dacosta, in examining you here, in allowing you to relate the
particulars of your past life and to protest your innocence, I have gone further
than my instructions allow me. An information has already been laid in this
affair, and you have appeared before the jury at Villa Rica, whose verdict was
given unanimously, and without even the addition of extenuating circumstances.
You have been found guilty of the instigation of, and complicity in, the murder
of the soldiers and the robbery of the diamonds at Tijuco, the capital sentence
was pronounced on you, and it was only by flight that you escaped execution.
But that you came here to deliver yourself over, or not, to the hands of justice
twenty-three years afterward, you would never have been retaken. For the last
time, you admit that you are Joam Dacosta, the condemned man of the diamond
arrayal?"

"Tam Joam Dacosta."

"You are ready to sign this declaration?"

"T am ready."

And with a hand without a tremble Joam Dacosta put his name to the foot of
the declaration and the report which Judge Jarriquez had made his clerk draw up.

"The report, addressed to the minister of justice, is to be sent off to Rio
Janeiro," said the magistrate. "Many days will elapse before we receive orders to
carry out your sentence. If then, as you say, Torres possesses the proof of your
innocence, do all you can yourself--do all you can through your friends--do
everything, so that that proof can be produced in time. Once the order arrives no
delay will be possible, and justice must take its course."


Joam Dacosta bowed slightly.

"Shall I be allowed in the meantime to see my wife and children?" he asked.

"After to-day, if you wish," answered Judge Jarriquez; "you are no longer in
close confinement, and they can be brought to you as soon as they apply."

The magistrate then rang the bell. The guards entered the room, and took
away Joam Dacosta.

Judge Jarriquez watched him as he went out, and shook his head and
muttered:

"Well, well! This is a much stranger affair than I ever thought it would be!"


CHAPTER VI. THE LAST BLOW

WHILE JOAM DACOSTA was undergoing this examination, Yaquita, from
an inquiry made by Manoel, ascertained that she and her children would be
permitted to see the prisoner that very day about four o'clock in the afternoon.

Yaquita had not left her room since the evening before. Minha and Lina kept
near her, waiting for the time when she would be admitted to see her husband.

Yaquita Garral or Yaquita Dacosta, he would still find her the devoted wife
and brave companion he had ever known her to be.

About eleven o'clock in the morning Benito joined Manoel and Fragoso, who
were talking in the bow of the jangada.

"Manoel," said he, "I have a favor to ask you."

"What is it?"

"And you too, Fragoso."

"I am at your service, Mr. Benito," answered the barber.

"What is the matter?" asked Manoel, looking at his friend, whose expression
was that of aman who had come to some unalterable resolution.

"You never doubt my father's innocence? Is that so?" said Benito.

"Ah!" exclaimed Fragoso. "Rather I think it was I who committed the crime."

"Well, we must now commence on the project I thought of yesterday."

"To find out Torres?" asked Manoel.

"Yes, and know from him how he found out my father's retreat. There is
something inexplicable about it. Did he know it before? I cannot understand it,
for my father never left Iquitos for more than twenty years, and this scoundrel is
hardly thirty! But the day will not close before I know it; or, woe to Torres!"

Benito's resolution admitted of no discussion; and besides, neither Manoel
nor Fragoso had the slightest thought of dissuading him.

"IT will ask, then," continued Benito, "for both of you to accompany me. We
shall start in a minute or two. It will not do to wait till Torres has left Manaos.


He has no longer got his silence to sell, and the idea might occur to him. Let us
be off!"

And so all three of them landed on the bank of the Rio Negro and started for
the town.

Manaos was not so considerable that it could not be searched in a few hours.
They had made up their minds to go from house to house, if necessary, to look
for Torres, but their better plan seemed to be to apply in the first instance to the
keepers of the taverns and lojas where the adventurer was most likely to put up.
There could hardly be a doubt that the ex-captain of the woods would not have
given his name; he might have personal reasons for avoiding all communication
with the police. Nevertheless, unless he had left Manaos, it was almost
impossible for him to escape the young fellows' search. In any case, there would
be no use in applying to the police, for it was very probable--in fact, we know
that it actually was so--that the information given to them had been anonymous.

For an hour Benito, Manoel, and Fragoso walked along the principal streets
of the town, inquiring of the tradesmen in their shops, the tavern-keepers in their
cabarets, and even the bystanders, without any one being able to recognize the
individual whose description they so accurately gave.

Had Torres left Manaos? Would they have to give up all hope of coming
across him?

In vain Manoel tried to calm Benito, whose head seemed on fire. Cost what it
might, he must get at Torres!

Chance at last favored them, and it was Fragoso who put them on the right
track.

In a tavern in Holy Ghost Street, from the description which the people
received of the adventurer, they replied that the individual in question had put up
at the loja the evening before.

"Did he sleep here?" asked Fragoso.

"Yes," answered the tavern-keeper.

"Is he here now?"

"No. He has gone out."

"But has he settled his bill, as aman would who has gone for good?"

"By no means; he left his room about an hour ago, and he will doubtless
come back to supper."

"Do you know what road he took when he went out?"

"We saw him turning toward the Amazon, going through the lower town, and
you will probably meet him on that side."

Fragoso did not want any more. A few seconds afterward he rejoined the
young fellows, and said:


"T am on the track."

"He is there!" exclaimed Benito.

"No; he has just gone out, and they have seen him walking across to the bank
of the Amazon."

"Come on!" replied Benito.

They had to go back toward the river, and the shortest way was for them to
take the left bank of the Rio Negro, down to its mouth.

Benito and his companions soon left the last houses of the town behind, and
followed the bank, making a slight detour so as not to be observed from the
jangada.

The plain was at this time deserted. Far away the view extended across the
flat, where cultivated fields had replaced the former forests.

Benito did not speak; he could not utter a word. Manoel and Fragoso
respected his silence. And so the three of them went along and looked about on
all sides as they traversed the space between the bank of the Rio Negro and that
of the Amazon. Three-quarters of an hour after leaving Manaos, and still they
had seen nothing!

Once or twice Indians working in the fields were met with. Manoel
questioned them, and one of them at length told him that a man, such as he
described, had just passed in the direction of the angle formed by the two rivers
at their confluence.

Without waiting for more, Benito, by an irresistible movement, strode to the
front, and his two companions had to hurry on to avoid being left behind.

The left bank of the Amazon was then about a quarter of a mile off. A sort of
cliff appeared ahead, hiding a part of the horizon, and bounding the view a few
hundred paces in advance.

Benito, hurrying on, soon disappeared behind one of the sandy knolls.

"Quicker! quicker!" said Manoel to Fragoso. "We must not leave him alone
for an instant."

And they were dashing along when a shout struck on their ears.

Had Benito caught sight of Torres? What had he seen? Had Benito and
Torres already met?

Manoel and Fragoso, fifty paces further on, after swiftly running round one
of the spurs of the bank, saw two men standing face to face to each other.

They were Torres and Benito.

In an instant Manoel and Fragoso had hurried up to them. It might have been
supposed that in Benito's state of excitement he would be unable to restrain
himself when he found himself once again in the presence of the adventurer. It
was not So.


As soon as the young man saw himself face to face with Torres, and was
certain that he could not escape, a complete change took place in his manner, his
coolness returned, and he became once more master of himself.

The two men looked at one another for a few moments without a word.

Torres first broke silence, and, in the impudent tone habitual to him,
remarked:

"Ah! How goes it, Mr. Benito Garral?"

"No, Benito Dacosta!" answered the young man.

"Quite so," continued Torres. "Mr. Benito Dacosta, accompanied by Mr.
Manoel Valdez and my friend Fragoso!"

At the irritating qualification thus accorded him by the adventurer, Fragoso,
who was by no means loath to do him some damage, was about to rush to the
attack, when Benito, quite unmoved, held him back.

"What is the matter with you, my lad?" exclaimed Torres, retreating for a few
steps. "I think I had better put myself on guard."

And as he spoke he drew from beneath his poncho his manchetta, the
weapon, adapted at will for offense or defense, which a Brazilian is never
without. And then, slightly stooping, and planted firmly on his feet, he waited
for what was to follow.

"I have come to look for you, Torres," said Benito, who had not stirred in the
least at this threatening attitude.

"To look for me?" answered the adventurer. "It is not very difficult to find
me. And why have you come to look for me?"

"To know from your own lips what you appear to know of the past life of my
father."

"Really?"

"Yes. I want to know how you recognized him, why you were prowling
about our fazenda in the forest of Iquitos, and why you were waiting for us at
Tabatinga."

"Well! it seems to me nothing could be clearer!" answered Torres, with a
grin. "I was waiting to get a passage on the jangada, and I went on board with
the intention of making him a very simple proposition--which possibly he was
wrong in rejecting."

At these words Manoel could stand it no longer. With pale face and eye of
fire he strode up to Torres.

Benito, wishing to exhaust every means of conciliation, thrust himself
between them.

"Calm yourself, Manoel!" he said. "I am calm--even I."

And then continuing:


"Quite so, Torres; I know the reason of your coming on board the raft.
Possessed of a secret which was doubtless given to you, you wanted to make it a
means of extortion. But that is not what I want to know at present."

"What is it, then?"

"I want to know how you recognized Joam Dacosta in the fazenda of
Iquitos?"

"How I recognized him?" replied Torres. "That is my business, and I see no
reason why I should tell you. The important fact is, that I was not mistaken when
I denounced in him the real author of the crime of Tijuco!"

"You say that to me?" exclaimed Benito, who began to lose his self-
possession.

"I will tell you nothing,” returned Torres; "Joam Dacosta declined my
propositions! He refused to admit me into his family! Well! now that his secret is
known, now that he is a prisoner, it is I who refuse to enter his family, the family
of a thief, of a murderer, of a condemned felon, for whom the gallows now
waits!"

"Scoundrel!" exclaimed Benito, who drew his manchetta from his belt and
put himself in position.

Manoel and Fragoso, by a similar movement, quickly drew their weapons.

"Three against one!" said Torres.

"No! one against one!" answered Benito.

"Really! I should have thought an assassination would have better suited an
assassin's son!"

"Torres!" exclaimed Benito, "defend yourself, or I will kill you like a mad
dog!"

"Mad! so be it!" answered Torres. "But I bite, Benito Dacosta, and beware of
the wounds!"

And then again grasping his manchetta, he put himself on guard and ready to
attack his enemy.

Benito had stepped back a few paces.

"Torres," he said, regaining all his coolness, which for a moment he had lost;
"you were the guest of my father, you threatened him, you betrayed him, you
denounced him, you accused an innocent man, and with God's help I am going to
kill you!"

Torres replied with the most insolent smile imaginable. Perhaps at the
moment the scoundrel had an idea of stopping any struggle between Benito and
him, and he could have done so. In fact he had seen that Joam Dacosta had said
nothing about the document which formed the material proof of his innocence.

Had he revealed to Benito that he, Torres, possessed this proof, Benito would


have been that instant disarmed. But his desire to wait till the very last moment,
so as to get the very best price for the document he possessed, the recollection of
the young man's insulting words, and the hate which he bore to all that belonged
to him, made him forget his own interest.

In addition to being thoroughly accustomed to the manchetta, which he often
had had occasion to use, the adventurer was strong, active, and artful, so that
against an adversary who was scarcely twenty, who could have neither his
strength nor his dexterity, the chances were greatly in his favor.

Manoel by a last effort wished to insist on fighting him instead of Benito.

"No, Manoel," was the cool reply, "it is for me alone to avenge my father,
and as everything here ought to be in order, you shall be my second."

"Benito!"

"As for you, Fragoso, you will not refuse if I ask you to act as second for that
man?"

"So be it," answered Fragoso, "though it is not an office of honor. Without
the least ceremony," he added, "I would have killed him like a wild beast."

The place where the duel was about to take place was a level bank about fifty
paces long, on the top of a cliff rising perpendicularly some fifty feet above the
Amazon. The river slowly flowed at the foot, and bathed the clumps of reeds
which bristled round its base.

There was, therefore, none too much room, and the combatant who was the
first to give way would quickly be driven over into the abyss.

The signal was given by Manoel, and Torres and Benito stepped forward.

Benito had complete command over himself. The defender of a sacred cause,
his coolness was unruffled, much more so than that of Torres, whose conscience
insensible and hardened as it was, was bound at the moment to trouble him.

The two met, and the first blow came from Benito. Torres parried it. They
then jumped back, but almost at the same instant they rushed together, and with
their left hands seized each other by the shoulder--never to leave go again.

Torres, who was the strongest, struck a side blow with his manchetta which
Benito could not quite parry. His left side was touched, and his poncho was
reddened with his blood. But he quickly replied, and slightly wounded Torres in
the hand.

Several blows were then interchanged, but nothing decisive was done. The
ever silent gaze of Benito pierced the eyes of Torres like a sword blade thrust to
his very heart. Visibly the scoundrel began to quail. He recoiled little by little,
pressed back by his implacable foe, who was more determined on taking the life
of his father's denouncer than in defending his own. To strike was all that Benito
longed for; to parry was all that the other now attempted to do.


Soon Torres saw himself thrust to the very edge of the bank, at a spot where,
slightly scooped away, it overhung the river. He perceived the danger; he tried to
retake the offensive and regain the lost ground. His agitation increased, his looks
grew livid. At length he was obliged to stoop beneath the arm which threatened
him.

"Die, then!" exclaimed Benito.

The blow was struck full on its chest, but the point of the manchetta was
stopped by a hard substance hidden beneath the poncho of the adventurer.

Benito renewed his attack, and Torres, whose return thrust did not touch his
adversary, felt himself lost. He was again obliged to retreat. Then he would have
shouted--shouted that the life of Joam Dacosta depended on his own! He had not
time!

A second thrust of the manchetta pierced his heart. He fell backward, and the
ground suddenly failing him, he was precipitated down the cliff. As a last effort
his hands convulsively clutched at a clump of reeds, but they could not stop him,
and he disappeared beneath the waters of the river.

Benito was supported on Manoel's shoulder; Fragoso grasped his hands. He
would not even give his companions time to dress his wound, which was very
slight.

"To the jangada!" he said, "to the jangada!"

Manoel and Fragoso with deep emotion followed him without speaking a
word.

A quarter of an hour afterward the three reached the bank to which the raft
was moored. Benito and Manoel rushed into the room where were Yaquita and
Minha, and told them all that had passed.

"My son!" "My brother!"

The words were uttered at the same moment.

"To the prison!" said Benito.

"Yes! Come! come!" replied Yaquita.

Benito, followed by Manoel, hurried along his mother, and half an hour later
they arrived before the prison.

Owing to the order previously given by Judge Jarriquez they were
immediately admitted, and conducted to the chamber occupied by the prisoner.

The door opened. Joam Dacosta saw his wife, his son, and Manoel enter the
room.

"Ah! Joam, my Joam!" exclaimed Yaquita.

"Yaquita! my wife! my children!" replied the prisoner, who opened his arms
and pressed them to his heart.

"My Joam, innocent!"


"Innocent and avenged!" said Benito.

"Avenged? What do you mean?"

"Torres is dead, father; killed by my hand!"

"Dead!--Torres!--Dead!" gasped Joam Dacosta. "My son! You have ruined
me!"


CHAPTER VII. RESOLUTIONS

A FEW HOURS later the whole family had returned to the raft, and were
assembled in the large room. All were there, except the prisoner, on whom the
last blow had just fallen. Benito was quite overwhelmed, and accused himself of
having destroyed his father, and had it not been for the entreaties of Yaquita, of
his sister, of Padre Passanha, and of Manoel, the distracted youth would in the
first moments of despair have probably made away with himself. But he was
never allowed to get out of sight; he was never left alone. And besides, how
could he have acted otherwise? Ah! why had not Joam Dacosta told him all
before he left the jangada? Why had he refrained from speaking, except before a
judge, of this material proof of his innocence? Why, in his interview with
Manoel after the expulsion of Torres, had he been silent about the document
which the adventurer pretended to hold in his hands? But, after all, what faith
ought he to place in what Torres had said? Could he be certain that such a
document was in the rascal's possession?

Whatever might be the reason, the family now knew everything, and that
from the lips of Joam Dacosta himself. They knew that Torres had declared that
the proof of the innocence of the convict of Tijuco actually existed; that the
document had been written by the very hand of the author of the attack; that the
criminal, seized by remorse at the moment of his death, had intrusted it to his
companion, Torres; and that he, instead of fulfilling the wishes of the dying man,
had made the handing over of the document an excuse for extortion. But they
knew also that Torres had just been killed, and that his body was engulfed in the
waters of the Amazon, and that he died without even mentioning the name of the
guilty man.

Unless he was saved by a miracle, Joam Dacosta might now be considered as
irrevocably lost. The death of Judge Ribeiro on the one hand, the death of Torres
on the other, were blows from which he could not recover! It should here be said
that public opinion at Manaos, unreasoning as it always is, was all against he
prisoner. The unexpected arrest of Joam Dacosta had revived the memory of the
terrible crime of Tijuco, which had lain forgotten for twenty-three years. The
trial of the young clerk at the mines of the diamond arrayal, his capital sentence,


his escape a few hours before his intended execution--all were remembered,
analyzed, and commented on. An article which had just appeared in the O Diario
d'o Grand Para, the most widely circulated journal in these parts, after giving a
history of the circumstances of the crime, showed itself decidedly hostile to the
prisoner. Why should these people believe in Joam Dacosta's innocence, when
they were ignorant of all that his friends knew--of what they alone knew?

And so the people of Manaos became excited. A mob of Indians and negroes
hurried, in their blind folly, to surround the prison and roar forth tumultuous
shouts of death. In this part of the two Americas, where executions under Lynch
law are of frequent occurrence, the mob soon surrenders itself to its cruel
instincts, and it was feared that on this occasion it would do justice with its own
hands.

What a night it was for the passengers from the fazenda! Masters and
servants had been affected by the blow! Were not the servants of the fazenda
members of one family? Every one of them would watch over the safety of
Yaquita and her people! On the bank of the Rio Negro there was a constant
coming and going of the natives, evidently excited by the arrest of Joam
Dacosta, and who could say to what excesses these half-barbarous men might be
led?

The time, however, passed without any demonstration against the jangada.

On the morrow, the 26th of August, as soon as the sun rose, Manoel and
Fragoso, who had never left Benito for an instant during this terrible night,
attempted to distract his attention from his despair. After taking him aside they
made him understand that there was no time to be lost--that they must make up
their minds to act.

"Benito," said Manoel, "pull yourself together! Be a man again! Be a son
again!"

"My father!" exclaimed Benito. "I have killed him!"

"No!" replied Manoel. "With heaven's help it is possible that all may not be
lost!"

"Listen to us, Mr. Benito," said Fragoso.

The young man, passing his hand over his eyes, made a violent effort to
collect himself.

"Benito," continued Manoel, "Torres never gave a hint to put us on the track
of his past life. We therefore cannot tell who was the author of the crime of
Tijuco, or under what conditions it was committed. To try in that direction is to
lose our time."

"And time presses!" added Fragoso.

"Besides," said Manoel, "suppose we do find out who this companion of


Torres was, he is dead, and he could not testify in any way to the innocence of
Joam Dacosta. But it is none the less certain that the proof of this innocence
exists, and there is not room to doubt the existence of a document which Torres
was anxious to make the subject of a bargain. He told us so himself. The
document is a complete avowal written in the handwriting of the culprit, which
relates the attack in its smallest details, and which clears our father! Yes! a
hundred times, yes! The document exists!"

"But Torres does not exist!" groaned Benito, "and the document has perished
with him!"

"Wait, and don't despair yet!" answered Manoel. "You remember under what
circumstances we made the acquaintance of Torres? It was in the depths of the
forest of Iquitos. He was in pursuit of a monkey which had stolen a metal case,
which it so strangely kept, and the chase had lasted a couple of hours when the
monkey fell to our guns. Now, do you think that it was for the few pieces of gold
contained in the case that Torres was in such a fury to recover it? and do you not
remember the extraordinary satisfaction which he displayed when we gave him
back the case which we had taken out of the monkey's paw?"

"Yes! yes!" answered Benito. "This case which I held--which I gave back to
him! Perhaps it contained----"

"It is more than probable! It is certain!" replied Manoel.

"And I beg to add," said Fragoso, "for now the fact recurs to my memory,
that during the time you were at Ega I remained on board, at Lina's advice, to
keep an eye on Torres, and I saw him--yes, I saw him--reading, and again
reading, an old faded paper, and muttering words which I could not understand."

"That was the document!" exclaimed Benito, who snatched at the hope--the
only one that was left. "But this document; had he not put it in some place of
security?"

"No," answered Manoel--"no; it was too precious for Torres to dream of
parting with it. He was bound to carry it always about with him, and doubtless in
that very case."

"Wait! wait, Manoel!" exclaimed Benito; "I remember--yes, I remember.
During the struggle, at the first blow I struck Torres in his chest, my manchetta
was stopped by some hard substance under his poncho, like a plate of metal----"

"That was the case!" said Fragoso.

"Yes," replied Manoel; "doubt is impossible! That was the case; it was in his
breast-pocket."

"But the corpse of Torres?"

"We will recover it!"

"But the paper! The water will have stained it, perhaps destroyed it, or


rendered it undecipherable!"

"Why," answered Manoel, "if the metal case which held it was water-tight?"

"Manoel," replied Benito, who seized on the last hope, "you are right! The
corpse of Torres must be recovered! We will ransack the whole of this part of the
river, if necessary, but we will recover it!"

The pilot Araujo was then summoned and informed of what they were going
to do.

"Good!" replied he; "I know all the eddies and currents where the Rio Negro
and the Amazon join, and we shall succeed in recovering the body. Let us take
two pirogues, two ubas, a dozen of our Indians, and make a start."

Padre Passanha was then coming out of Yaquita's room.

Benito went to him, and in a few words told him what they were going to do
to get possession of the document. "Say nothing to my mother or my sister," he
added; "if this last hope fails it will kill them!"

"Go, my lad, go," replied Passanha, "and may God help you in your search."

Five minutes afterward the four boats started from the raft. After descending
the Rio Negro they arrived near the bank of the Amazon, at the very place where
Torres, mortally wounded, had disappeared beneath the waters of the stream.


CHAPTER VIII. THE FIRST SEARCH

THE SEARCH had to commence at once, and that for two weighty reasons.

The first of these was--and this was a question of life or death--that this proof
of Joam Dacosta's innocence must be produced before the arrival of the order
from Rio Janeiro. Once the identity of the prisoner was established, it was
impossible that such an order could be other than the order for his execution.

The second was that the body of Torres should be got out of the water as
quickly as possible so as to regain undamaged the metal case and the paper it
ought to contain.

At this juncture Araujo displayed not only zeal and intelligence, but also a
perfect knowledge of the state of the river at its confluence with the Rio Negro.

"If Torres," he said to the young men, "had been from the first carried away
by the current, we should have to drag the river throughout a large area, for we
shall have a good many days to wait for his body to reappear on the surface
through the effects of decomposition."

"We cannot do that," replied Manoel. "This very day we ought to succeed."

"If, on the contrary," continued the pilot, "the corpse has got stuck among the
reeds and vegetation at the foot of the bank, we shall not be an hour before we
find it."


"To work, then!" answered Benito.

There was but one way of working. The boats approached the bank, and the
Indians, furnished with long poles, began to sound every part of the river at the
base of the bluff which had served for the scene of combat.

The place had been easily recognized. A track of blood stained the declivity
in its chalky part, and ran perpendicularly down it into the water; and there many
a clot scattered on the reeds indicated the very spot where the corpse had
disappeared.

About fifty feet down stream a point jutted out from the riverside and kept
back the waters in a kind of eddy, as in a large basin. There was no current
whatever near the shore, and the reeds shot up out of the river unbent. Every
hope then existed that Torres' body had not been carried away by the main
stream. Where the bed of the river showed sufficient slope, it was perhaps
possible for the corpse to have rolled several feet along the ridge, and even there
no effect of the current could be traced.

The ubas and the pirogues, dividing the work among them, limited the field
of their researches to the extreme edge of the eddy, and from the circumference
to the center the crews' long poles left not a single point unexplored. But no
amount of sounding discovered the body of the adventurer, neither among the
clumps of reeds nor on the bottom of the river, whose slope was then carefully
examined.

Two hours after the work had begun they had been led to think that the body,
having probably struck against the declivity, had fallen off obliquely and rolled
beyond the limits of this eddy, where the action of the current commenced to be
felt.

"But that is no reason why we should despair," said Manoel, "still less why
we should give up our search."

"Will it be necessary," exclaimed Benito, "to search the river throughout its
breadth and its length?"

"Throughout its breadth, perhaps," answered Araujo, "throughout its length,
no--fortunately."

"And why?" asked Manoel.

"Because the Amazon, about a mile away from its junction with the Rio
Negro, makes a sudden bend, and at the same time its bed rises, so that there is a
kind of natural barrier, well known to sailors as the Bar of Frias, which things
floating near the surface are alone able to clear. In short, the currents are ponded
back, and they cannot possibly have any effect over this depression."

This was fortunate, it must be admitted. But was Araujo mistaken? The old
pilot of the Amazon could be relied on. For the thirty years that he had followed


his profession the crossing of the Bar of Frias, where the current was increased
in force by its decrease in depth, had often given him trouble. The narrowness of
the channel and the elevation of the bed made the passage exceedingly difficult,
and many a raft had there come to grief.

And so Araujo was right in declaring that if the corpse of Torres was still
retained by its weight on the sandy bed of the river, it could not have been
dragged over the bar. It is true that later on, when, on account of the expansion
of the gases, it would again rise to the surface, the current would bear it away,
and it would then be irrevocably lost down the stream, a long way beyond the
obstruction. But this purely physical effect would not take place for several days.

They could not have applied to a man who was more skillful or more
conversant with the locality than Araujo, and when he affirmed that the body
could not have been borne out of the narrow channel for more than a mile or so,
they were sure to recover it if they thoroughly sounded that portion of the river.

Not an island, not an islet, checked the course of the Amazon in these parts.
Hence, when the foot of the two banks had been visited up to the bar, it was in
the bed itself, about five hundred feet in width, that more careful investigations
had to be commenced.

The way the work was conducted was this. The boats taking the right and left
of the Amazon lay alongside the banks. The reeds and vegetation were tried with
the poles. Of the smallest ledges in the banks in which a body could rest, not one
escaped the scrutiny of Araujo and his Indians.

But all this labor produced no result, and half the day had elapsed without
the body being brought to the surface of the stream.

An hour's rest was given to the Indians. During this time they partook of
some refreshment, and then they returned to their task.

Four of the boats, in charge of the pilot, Benito, Fragoso, and Manoel,
divided the river between the Rio Negro and the Bar of Frias into four portions.
They set to work to explore its very bed. In certain places the poles proved
insufficient to thoroughly search among the deeps, and hence a few dredges--or
rather harrows, made of stones and old iron, bound round with a solid bar--were
taken on board, and when the boats had pushed off these rakes were thrown in
and the river bottom stirred up in every direction.

It was in this difficult task that Benito and his companions were employed
till the evening. The ubas and pirogues, worked by the oars, traversed the whole
surface of the river up to the bar of Frias.

There had been moments of excitement during this spell of work, when the
harrows, catching in something at the bottom, offered some slight resistance.
They were then hauled up, but in place of the body so eagerly searched for, there


would appear only heavy stones or tufts of herbage which they had dragged from
their sandy bed. No one, however, had an idea of giving up the enterprise. They
none of them thought of themselves in this work of salvation. Benito, Manoel,
Araujo had not even to stir up the Indians or to encourage them. The gallant
fellows knew that they were working for the fazender of Iquitos--for the man
whom they loved, for the chief of the excellent family who treated their servants
so well.

Yes; and so they would have passed the night in dragging the river. Of every
minute lost all knew the value.

A little before the sun disappeared, Araujo, finding it useless to continue his
operations in the gloom, gave the signal for the boats to join company and return
together to the confluence of the Rio Negro and regain the jangada.

The work so carefully and intelligently conducted was not, however, at an
end.

Manoel and Fragoso, as they came back, dared not mention their ill success
before Benito. They feared that the disappointment would only force him to
some act of despair.

But neither courage nor coolness deserted the young fellow; he was
determined to follow to the end this supreme effort to save the honor and the life
of his father, and he it was who addressed his companions, and said: "To-morrow
we will try again, and under better conditions if possible."

"Yes," answered Manoel; "you are right, Benito. We can do better. We cannot
pretend to have entirely explored the river along the whole of the banks and over
the whole of its bed."

"No; we cannot have done that," replied Araujo; "and I maintain what I said-
-that the body of Torres is there, and that it is there because it has not been
carried away, because it could not be drawn over the Bar of Frias, and because it
will take many days before it rises to the surface and floats down the stream.
Yes, it is there, and not a demijohn of tafia will pass my lips until I find it!"

This affirmation from the pilot was worth a good deal, and was of a hope-
inspiring nature.

However, Benito, who did not care so much for words as he did for things,
thought proper to reply, "Yes, Araujo; the body of Torres is in the river, and we
shall find it if----"

"If?" said the pilot.

"If it has not become the prey of the alligators!"

Manoel and Fragoso waited anxiously for Araujo's reply.

The pilot was silent for a few moments; they felt that he was reflecting
before he spoke. "Mr. Benito," he said at length, "I am not in the habit of


speaking lightly. I had the same idea as you; but listen. During the ten hours we
have been at work have you seen a single cayman in the river?"

"Not one," said Fragoso.

"If you have not seen one," continued the pilot, "it was because there were
none to see, for these animals have nothing to keep them in the white waters
when, a quarter of a mile off, there are large stretches of the black waters, which
they so greatly prefer. When the raft was attacked by some of these creatures it
was in a part where there was no place for them to flee to. Here it is quite
different. Go to the Rio Negro, and there you will see caymans by the score. Had
Torres’ body fallen into that tributary there might be no chance of recovering it.
But it was in the Amazon that it was lost, and in the Amazon it will be found."

Benito, relieved from his fears, took the pilot's hand and shook it, and
contented himself with the reply, "To-morrow, my friends!"

Ten minutes later they were all on board the jangada. During the day Yaquit
had passed some hours with her husband. But before she started, and when she
saw neither the pilot, nor Manoel, nor Benito, nor the boats, she had guessed the
search on which they had gone, but she said nothing to Joam Dacosta, as she
hoped that in the morning she would be able to inform him of their success.

But when Benito set foot on the raft she perceived that their search had been
fruitless. However, she advanced toward him. "Nothing?" she asked.

"Nothing," replied Benito. "But the morrow is left to us."

The members of the family retired to their rooms, and nothing more was said
as to what had passed.

Manoel tried to make Benito lie down, so as to take a few hours' rest.

"What is the good of that?" asked Benito. "Do you think I could sleep?"


CHAPTER IX. THE SECOND ATTEMPT

ON THE MORROW, the 27th of August, Benito took Manoel apart, before
the sun had risen, and said to him: "Our yesterday's search was vain. If we begin
again under the same conditions we may be just as unlucky."

"We must do so, however," replied Manoel.

"Yes," continued Benito; "but suppose we do not find the body, can you tell
me how long it will be before it rises to the surface?"

"If Torres," answered Manoel, "had fallen into the water living, and not
mortally wounded, it would take five or six days; but as he only disappeared
after being so wounded, perhaps two or three days would be enough to bring him
up again."

This answer of Manoel, which was quite correct, requires some explanation.


Every human body which falls into the water will float if equilibrium is
established between its density and that of its liquid bed. This is well known to
be the fact, even when a person does not know how to swim. Under such
circumstances, if you are entirely submerged, and only keep your mouth and
nose away from the water, you are sure to float. But this is not generally done.
The first movement of a drowning man is to try and hold as much as he can of
himself above the water; he holds up his head and lifts up his arms, and these
parts of his body, being no longer supported by the liquid, do not lose that
amount of weight which they would do if completely immersed. Hence an
excess of weight, and eventually entire submersion, for the water makes its way
to the lungs through the mouth, takes the place of the air which fills them, and
the body sinks to the bottom.

On the other hand, when the man who falls into the water is already dead the
conditions are different, and more favorable for his floating, for then the
movements of which we have spoken are checked, and the liquid does not make
its way to the lungs so copiously, as there is no attempt to respire, and he is
consequently more likely to promptly reappear. Manoel then was right in
drawing the distinction between the man who falls into the water living and the
man who falls into it dead. In the one case the return to the surface takes much
longer than in the other.

The reappearance of the body after an immersion more or less prolonged is
always determined by the decomposition, which causes the gases to form. These
bring about the expansion of the cellular tissues, the volume augments and the
weight decreases, and then, weighing less than the water it displaces, the body
attains the proper conditions for floating.

"And thus," continued Manoel, "supposing the conditions continue
favorable, and Torres did not live after he fell into the water, if the
decomposition is not modified by circumstances which we cannot foresee, he
will not reappear before three days."

"We have not got three days," answered Benito. "We cannot wait, you know;
we must try again, and in some new way."

"What can you do?" answered Manoel.

"Plunge down myself beneath the waters," replied Benito, "and search with
my eyes--with my hands."

"Plunge in a hundred times--a thousand times!" exclaimed Manoel. "So be it.
I think, like you, that we ought to go straight at what we want, and not struggle
on with poles and drags like a blind man who only works by touch. I also think
that we cannot wait three days. But to jump in, come up again, and go down
again will give only a short period for the exploration. No; it will never do, and


we Shall only risk a second failure."

"Have you no other plan to propose, Manoel?" asked Benito, looking
eamestly at his friend.

"Well, listen. There is what would seem to be a Providential circumstance
that may be of use to us."

"What is that?"

"Yesterday, as we hurried through Manaos, I noticed that they were repairing
one of the quays on the bank of the Rio Negro. The submarine works were being
carried on with the aid of a diving-dress. Let us borrow, or hire, or buy, at any
price, this apparatus, and then we may resume our researches under more
favorable conditions."

"Tell Araujo, Fragoso, and our men, and let us be off," was the instant reply
of Benito.

The pilot and the barber were informed of the decision with regard to
Manoel's project. Both were ordered to go with the four boats and the Indians to
the basin of Frias, and there to wait for the two young men.

Manoel and Benito started off without losing a moment, and reached the
quay at Manaos. There they offered the contractor such a price that he put the
apparatus at their service for the whole day.

"Will you not have one of my men," he asked, "to help you?"

"Give us your foreman and one of his mates to work the air-pump," replied
Manoel.

"But who is going to wear the diving-dress?"

"IT am," answered Benito.

"You!" exclaimed Manoel.

"T intend to do so."

It was useless to resist.

An hour afterward the raft and all the instruments necessary for the
enterprise had drifted down to the bank where the boats were waiting.

The diving-dress is well known. By its means men can descend beneath the
waters and remain there a certain time without the action of the lungs being in
any way injured. The diver is clothed in a waterproof suit of India rubber, and
his feet are attached to leaden shoes, which allow him to retain his upright
position beneath the surface. At the collar of the dress, and about the height of
the neck, there is fitted a collar of copper, on which is screwed a metal globe
with a glass front. In this globe the diver places his head, which he can move
about at his ease. To the globe are attached two pipes; one used for carrying off
the air ejected from the lungs, and which is unfit for respiration, and the other in
communication with a pump worked on the raft, and bringing in the fresh air.


When the diver is at work the raft remains immovable above him; when the
diver moves about on the bottom of the river the raft follows his movements, or
he follows those of the raft, according to his convenience.

These diving-dresses are now much improved, and are less dangerous than
formerly. The man beneath the liquid mass can easily bear the additional
pressure, and if anything was to be feared below the waters it was rather some
cayman who might there be met with. But, as had been observed by Araujo, not
one of these amphibians had been seen, and they are well known to prefer the
black waters of the tributaries of the Amazon. Besides, in case of danger, the
diver has always his check-string fastened to the raft, and at the least warning
can be quickly hauled to the surface.

Benito, invariably very cool once his resolution was taken, commenced to
put his idea into execution, and got into the diving dress. His head disappeared in
the metal globe, his hand grasped a sort of iron spear with which to stir up the
vegetation and detritus accumulated in the river bed, and on his giving the signal
he was lowered into the stream.

The men on the raft immediately commenced to work the air-pump, while
four Indians from the jangada, under the orders of Araujo, gently propelled it
with their long poles in the desired direction.

The two pirogues, commanded one by Fragoso, the other by Manoel,
escorted the raft, and held themselves ready to start in any direction, should
Benito find the corpse of Torres and again bring it to the surface of the Amazon.


CHAPTER X. ACANNON SHOT

BENITO THEN HAD disappeared beneath the vast sheet which still covered
the corpse of the adventurer. Ah! If he had had the power to divert the waters of
the river, to turn them into vapor, or to drain them off--if he could have made the
Frias basin dry down stream, from the bar up to the influx of the Rio Negro, the
case hidden in Torres' clothes would already have been in his hand! His father's
innocence would have been recognized! Joam Dacosta, restored to liberty, would
have again started on the descent of the river, and what terrible trials would have
been avoided!

Benito had reached the bottom. His heavy shoes made the gravel on the bed
crunch beneath him. He was in some ten or fifteen feet of water, at the base of
the cliff, which was here very steep, and at the very spot where Torres had
disappeared.

Near him was a tangled mass of reeds and twigs and aquatic plants, all laced
together, which assuredly during the researches of the previous day no pole


could have penetrated. It was consequently possible that the body was entangled
among the submarine shrubs, and still in the place where it had originally fallen.

Hereabouts, thanks to the eddy produced by the prolongation of one of the
spurs running out into the stream, the current was absolutely nil. Benito guided
his movements by those of the raft, which the long poles of the Indians kept just
over his head.

The light penetrated deep through the clear waters, and the magnificent sun,
shining in a cloudless sky, shot its rays down into them unchecked. Under
ordinary conditions, at a depth of some twenty feet in water, the view becomes
exceedingly blurred, but here the waters seemed to be impregnated with a
luminous fluid, and Benito was able to descend still lower without the darkness
concealing the river bed.

The young man slowly made his way along the bank. With his iron-shod
spear he probed the plants and rubbish accumulated along its foot. Flocks of fish,
if we can use such an expression, escaped on all sides from the dense thickets
like flocks of birds. It seemed as though the thousand pieces of a broken mirror
glimmered through the waters. At the same time scores of crustaceans
scampered over the sand, like huge ants hurrying from their hills.

Notwithstanding that Benito did not leave a single point of the river
unexplored, he never caught sight of the object of his search. He noticed,
however, that the slope of the river bed was very abrupt, and he concluded that
Torres had rolled beyond the eddy toward the center of the stream. If so, he
would probably still recover the body, for the current could hardly touch it at the
depth, which was already great, and seemed sensibly to increase. Benito then
resolved to pursue his investigations on the side where he had begun to probe the
vegetation. This was why he continued to advance in that direction, and the raft
had to follow him during a quarter of an hour, as had been previously arranged.

The quarter of an hour had elapsed, and Benito had found nothing. He felt
the need of ascending to the surface, so as to once more experience those
physiological conditions in which he could recoup his strength. In certain spots,
where the depth of the river necessitated it, he had had to descend about thirty
feet. He had thus to support a pressure almost equal to an atmosphere, with the
result of the physical fatigue and mental agitation which attack those who are not
used to this kind of work. Benito then pulled the communication cord, and the
men on the raft commenced to haul him in, but they worked slowly, taking a
minute to draw him up two or three feet so as not to produce in his internal
organs the dreadful effects of decompression.

As soon as the young man had set foot on the raft the metallic sphere of the
diving-dress was raised, and he took a long breath and sat down to rest.


The pirogues immediately rowed alongside. Manoel, Fragoso, and Araujo
came close to him, waiting for him to speak.

"Well?" asked Manoel.

"Still nothing! Nothing!"

"Have you not seen a trace?"

"Not one!"

"Shall I go down now?"

"No, Manoel," answered Benito; "I have begun; I know where to go. Let me
do it!"

Benito then explained to the pilot that his intention was to visit the lower part
of the bank up to the Bar of Frias, for there the slope had perhaps stopped the
corpse, if, floating between the two streams, it had in the least degree been
affected by the current. But first he wanted to skirt the bank and carefully
explore a sort of hole formed in the slope of the bed, to the bottom of which the
poles had evidently not been able to penetrate. Araujo approved of this plan, and
made the necessary preparations.

Manoel gave Benito a little advice. "As you want to pursue your search on
that side," he said, "the raft will have to go over there obliquely; but mind what
you are doing, Benito. That is much deeper than where you have been yet; it
may be fifty or sixty feet, and you will have to support a pressure of quite two
atmospheres. Only venture with extreme caution, or you may lose your presence
of mind, or no longer know where you are or what to do. If your head feels as if
in a vice, and your ears tingle, do not hesitate to give us the signal, and we will
at once haul you up. You can then begin again if you like, as you will have got
accustomed to move about in the deeper parts of the river."

Benito promised to attend to these hints, of which he recognized the
importance. He was particularly struck with the fact that his presence of mind
might abandon him at the very moment he wanted it most.

Benito shook hands with Manoel; the sphere of the diving-dress was again
screwed to his neck, the pump began to work, and the diver once more
disappeared beneath the stream.

The raft was then taken about forty feet along the left bank, but as it moved
toward the center of the river the current increased in strength, the ubas were
moored, and the rowers kept it from drifting, so as only to allow it to advance
with extreme slowness.

Benito descended very gently, and again found himself on the firm sand.
When his heels touched the ground it could be seen, by the length of the haulage
cord, that he was at a depth of some sixty-five or seventy feet. He was therefore
in a considerable hole, excavated far below the ordinary level.


The liquid medium was more obscure, but the limpidity of these transparent
waters still allowed the light to penetrate sufficiently for Benito to distinguish
the objects scattered on the bed of the river, and to approach them with some
safety. Besides, the sand, sprinkled with mica flakes, seemed to form a sort of
reflector, and the very grains could be counted glittering like luminous dust.

Benito moved on, examining and sounding the smallest cavities with his
spear. He continued to advance very slowly; the communication cord was paid
out, and as the pipes which served for the inlet and outlet of the air were never
tightened, the pump was worked under the proper conditions.

Benito turned off so as to reach the middle of the bed of the Amazon, where
there was the greatest depression. Sometimes profound obscurity thickened
around him, and then he could see nothing, so feeble was the light; but this was a
purely passing phenomenon, and due to the raft, which, floating above his head,
intercepted the solar rays and made the night replace the day. An instant
afterward the huge shadow would be dissipated, and the reflection of the sands
appear again in full force.

All the time Benito was going deeper. He felt the increase of the pressure
with which his body was wrapped by the liquid mass. His respiration became
less easy; the retractibility of his organs no longer worked with as much ease as
in the midst of an atmosphere more conveniently adapted for them. And so he
found himself under the action of physiological effects to which he was
unaccustomed. The rumbling grew louder in his ears, but as his thought was
always lucid, as he felt that the action of his brain was quite clear--even a little
more so than usual--he delayed giving the signal for return, and continued to go
down deeper still.

Suddenly, in the subdued light which surrounded him, his attention was
attracted by a confused mass. It seemed to take the form of a corpse, entangled
beneath a clump of aquatic plants. Intense excitement seized him. He stepped
toward the mass; with his spear he felt it. It was the carcass of a huge cayman,
already reduced to a skeleton, and which the current of the Rio Negro had swept
into the bed of the Amazon. Benito recoiled, and, in spite of the assertions of the
pilot, the thought recurred to him that some living cayman might even then be
met with in the deeps near the Bar of Frias!

But he repelled the idea, and continued his progress, so as to reach the
bottom of the depression.

And now he had arrived at a depth of from eighty to a hundred feet, and
consequently was experiencing a pressure of three atmospheres. If, then, this
cavity was also drawn blank, he would have to suspend his researches.

Experience has shown that the extreme limit for such submarine explorations


lies between a hundred and twenty and a hundred and thirty feet, and that below
this there is great danger, the human organism not only being hindered from
performing his functions under such a pressure, but the apparatus failing to keep
up a sufficient supply of air with the desirable regularity.

But Benito was resolved to go as far as his mental powers and physical
energies would let him. By some strange presentiment he was drawn toward this
abyss; it seemed to him as though the corpse was very likely to have rolled to the
bottom of the hole, and that Torres, if he had any heavy things about him, such
as a belt containing either money or arms, would have sunk to the very lowest
point. Of a sudden, in a deep hollow, he saw a body through the gloom! Yes! A
corpse, still clothed, stretched out like a man asleep, with his arms folded under
his head!

Was that Torres? In the obscurity, then very dense, he found it difficult to
see; but it was a human body that lay there, less than ten paces off, and perfectly
motionless!

A sharp pang shot through Benito. His heart, for an instant, ceased to beat.
He thought he was going to lose consciousness. By a supreme effort he
recovered himself. He stepped toward the corpse.

Suddenly a shock as violent as unexpected made his whole frame vibrate! A
long whip seemed to twine round his body, and in spite of the thick diving-dress
he felt himself lashed again and again.

"A gymnotus!" he said.

It was the only word that passed his lips.

In fact, it was a "puraque," the name given by the Brazilians to the
gymnotus, or electric snake, which had just attacked him.

It is well known that the gymnotus is a kind of eel, with a blackish, slimy
skin, furnished along the back and tail with an apparatus composed of plates
joined by vertical lamelle, and acted on by nerves of considerable power. This
apparatus is endowed with singular electrical properties, and is apt to produce
very formidable results. Some of these gymnotuses are about the length of a
common snake, others are about ten feet long, while others, which, however, are
rare, even reach fifteen or twenty feet, and are from eight to ten inches in
diameter.

Gymnotuses are plentiful enough both in the Amazon and its tributaries; and
it was one of these living coils, about ten feet long, which, after uncurving itself
like a bow, again attacked the diver.

Benito knew what he had to fear from this formidable animal. His clothes
were powerless to protect him. The discharges of the gymnotus, at first
somewhat weak, become more and more violent, and there would come a time


when, exhausted by the shocks, he would be rendered powerless.

Benito, unable to resist the blows, half-dropped upon the sand. His limbs
were becoming paralyzed little by little under the electric influences of the
gymnotus, which lightly touched his body as it wrapped him in its folds. His
arms even he could not lift, and soon his spear escaped him, and his hand had
not strength enough left to pull the cord and give the signal.

Benito felt that he was lost. Neither Manoel nor his companions could
suspect the horrible combat which was going on beneath them between the
formidable puraque and the unhappy diver, who only fought to suffer, without
any power of defending himself.

And that at the moment when a body--the body of Torres without a doubt!--
had just met his view.

By a supreme instinct of self-preservation Benito uttered a cry. His voice was
lost in the metallic sphere from which not a sound could escape!

And now the puraque redoubled its attacks; it gave forth shock after shock,
which made Benito writhe on the sand like the sections of a divided worm, and
his muscles were wrenched again and again beneath the living lash.

Benito thought that all was over; his eyes grew dim, his limbs began to
stiffen.

But before he quite lost his power of sight and reason he became the witness
of a phenomenon, unexpected, inexplicable, and marvelous in the extreme.

A deadened roar resounded through the liquid depths. It was like a thunder-
clap, the reverberations of which rolled along the river bed, then violently
agitated by the electrical discharges of the gymnotus. Benito felt himself bathed
as it were in the dreadful booming which found an echo in the very deepest of
the river depths.

And then a last cry escaped him, for fearful was the vision which appeared
before his eyes!

The corpse of the drowned man which had been stretched on the sand arose!
The undulations of the water lifted up the arms, and they swayed about as if with
some peculiar animation. Convulsive throbs made the movement of the corpse
still more alarming.

It was indeed the body of Torres. One of the suns rays shot down to it
through the liquid mass, and Benito recognized the bloated, ashy features of the
scoundrel who fell by his own hand, and whose last breath had left him beneath
the waters.

And while Benito could not make a single movement with his paralyzed
limbs, while his heavy shoes kept him down as if he had been nailed to the sand,
the corpse straightened itself up, the head swayed to and fro, and disentangling


itself from the hole in which it had been kept by a mass of aquatic weeds, it
slowly ascended to the surface of the Amazon.


CHAPTER XI. THE CONTENTS OF THE CASE

WHAT WAS it that had happened? A purely physical phenomenon, of which
the following is the explanation.

The gunboat Santa Ana, bound for Manaos, had come up the river and
passed the bar at Frias. Just before she reached the embouchure of the Rio Negro
she hoisted her colors and saluted the Brazilian flag. At the report vibrations
were produced along the surface of the stream, and these vibrations making their
way down to the bottom of the river, had been sufficient to raise the corpse of
Torres, already lightened by the commencement of its decomposition and the
distension of its cellular system. The body of the drowned man had in the
ordinary course risen to the surface of the water.

This well-known phenomenon explains the reappearance of the corpse, but it
must be admitted that the arrival of the Santa Ana was a fortunate coincidence.

By a shout from Manoel, repeated by all his companions, one of the pirogues
was immediately steered for the body, while the diver was at the same time
hauled up to the raft.

Great was Manoel's emotion when Benito, drawn on to the platform, was laid
there in a state of complete inertia, not a single exterior movement betraying that
he still lived.

Was not this a second corpse which the waters of the Amazon had given up?

As quickly as possible the diving-dress was taken off him.

Benito had entirely lost consciousness beneath the violent shocks of the
gymnotus.

Manoel, distracted, called to him, breathed into him, and endeavored to
recover the heart's pulsation.

"It beats! It beats!" he exclaimed.

Yes! Benito's heart did still beat, and in a few minutes Manoel's efforts
restored him to life.

"The body! the Body!"

Such were the first words, the only ones which escaped from Benito's lips.

"There it is!" answered Fragoso, pointing to a pirogue then coming up to the
raft with the corpse.

"But what has been the matter, Benito?" asked Manoel. "Has it been the want
of air?"

"No!" said Benito; "a puraque attacked me! But the noise? the detonation?"


"A cannon shot!" replied Manoel. "It was the cannon shot which brought the
corpse to the surface."

At this moment the pirogue came up to the raft with the body of Torres,
which had been taken on board by the Indians. His sojourn in the water had not
disfigured him very much. He was easily recognizable, and there was no doubt
as to his identity.

Fragoso, kneeling down in the pirogue, had already begun to undo the
clothes of the drowned man, which came away in fragments.

At the moment Torres’ right arm, which was now left bare, attracted his
attention. On it there appeared the distinct scar of an old wound produced by a
blow from a knife.

"That scar!" exclaimed Fragoso. "But--that is good! I remember now----"

"What?" demanded Manoel.

"A quarrel! Yes! a quarrel I witnessed in the province of Madeira three years
ago. How could I have forgotten it! This Torres was then a captain of the woods.
Ah! I know now where I had seen him, the scoundrel!"

"That does not matter to us now!" cried Benito. "The case! the case! Has he
still got that?" and Benito was about to tear away the last coverings of the corpse
to get at it.

Manoel stopped him.

"One moment, Benito," he said; and then, turning to the men on the raft who
did not belong to the jangada, and whose evidence could not be suspected at any
future time:

"Just take note, my friends," he said, "of what we are doing here, so that you
can relate before the magistrate what has passed."

The men came up to the pirogue.

Fragoso undid the belt which encircled the body of Torres underneath the
torn poncho, and feeling his breast-pocket, exclaimed:

"The case!"

A cry of joy escaped from Benito. He stretched forward to seize the case, to
make sure than it contained----

"No!" again interrupted Manoel, whose coolness did not forsake him. "It is
necessary that not the slightest possible doubt should exist in the mind of the
magistrate! It is better that disinterested witnesses should affirm that this case
was really found on the corpse of Torres!"

"You are right," replied Benito.

"My friend," said Manoel to the foreman of the raft, "just feel in the pocket
of the waistcoat."

The foreman obeyed. He drew forth a metal case, with the cover screwed on,


and which seemed to have suffered in no way from its sojourn in the water.

"The paper! Is the paper still inside?" exclaimed Benito, who could not
contain himself.

"It is for the magistrate to open this case!" answered Manoel. "To him alone
belongs the duty of verifying that the document was found within it."

"Yes, yes. Again you are right, Manoel," said Benito. "To Manaos, my
friends--to Manaos!"

Benito, Manoel, Fragoso, and the foreman who held the case, immediately
jumped into one of the pirogues, and were starting off, when Fragoso said:

"And the corpse?"

The pirogue stopped.

In fact, the Indians had already thrown back the body into the water, and it
was drifting away down the river.

"Torres was only a scoundrel," said Benito. "If I had to fight him, it was God
that struck him, and his body ought not to go unburied!"

And so orders were given to the second pirogue to recover the corpse, and
take it to the bank to await its burial.

But at the same moment a flock of birds of prey, which skimmed along the
surface of the stream, pounced on the floating body. They were urubus, a kind of
small vulture, with naked necks and long claws, and black as crows. In South
America they are known as gallinazos, and their voracity is unparalleled. The
body, torn open by their beaks, gave forth the gases which inflated it, its density
increased, it sank down little by little, and for the last time what remained of
Torres disappeared beneath the waters of the Amazon.

Ten minutes afterward the pirogue arrived at Manaos. Benito and his
companions jumped ashore, and hurried through the streets of the town. In a few
minutes they had reached the dwelling of Judge Jarriuez, and informed him,
through one of his servants, that they wished to see him immediately.

The judge ordered them to be shown into his study.

There Manoel recounted all that had passed, from the moment when Torres
had been killed until the moment when the case had been found on his corpse,
and taken from his breast-pocket by the foreman.

Although this recital was of a nature to corroborate all that Joam Dacosta had
said on the subject of Torres, and of the bargain which he had endeavored to
make, Judge Jarriquez could not restrain a smile of incredulity.

"There is the case, sir," said Manoel. "For not a single instant has it been in
our hands, and the man who gives it to you is he who took it from the body of
Torres."

The magistrate took the case and examined it with care, turning it over and


over as though it were made of some precious material. Then he shook it, and a
few coins inside sounded with a metallic ring. Did not, then, the case contain the
document which had been so much sought after--the document written in the
very hand of the true author of the crime of Tijuco, and which Torres had wished
to sell at such an ignoble price to Joam Dacosta? Was this material proof of the
convict's innocence irrevocably lost?

We can easily imagine the violent agitation which had seized upon the
spectators of this scene. Benito could scarcely utter a word, he felt his heart
ready to burst. "Open it, sir! open the case!" he at last exclaimed, in a broken
voice.

Judge Jarriquez began to unscrew the lid; then, when the cover was removed,
he turned up the case, and from it a few pieces of gold dropped out and rolled on
the table.

"But the paper! the paper!" again gasped Benito, who clutched hold of the
table to save himself from falling.

The magistrate put his fingers into the case and drew out, not without
difficulty, a faded paper, folded with care, and which the water did not seem to
have even touched.

"The document! that is the document!" shouted Fragoso; "that is the very
paper I saw in the hands of Torres!"

Judge Jarriquez unfolded the paper and cast his eyes over it, and then he
turned it over so as to examine it on the back and the front, which were both
covered with writing. "A document it really is!" said he; "there is no doubt of
that. It is indeed a document!"

"Yes," replied Benito; "and that is the document which proves my father's
innocence!"

"I do not know that," replied Judge Jarriquez; "and I am much afraid it will
be very difficult to know it."

"Why?" exclaimed Benito, who became pale as death.

"Because this document is a cryptogram, and----"

"Well?"

"We have not got the key!"


CHAPTER XII. THE DOCUMENT

THIS WAS a contingency which neither Joam Dacosta nor his people could
have anticipated. In fact, as those who have not forgotten the first scene in this
story are aware, the document was written in a disguised form in one of the
numerous systems used in cryptography.


But in which of them?

To discover this would require all the ingenuity of which the human brain
was Capable.

Before dismissing Benito and his companions, Judge Jarriquez had an exact
copy made of the document, and, keeping the original, handed it over to them
after due comparison, so that they could communicate with the prisoner.

Then, making an appointment for the morrow, they retired, and not wishing
to lose an instant in seeing Joam Dacosta, they hastened on to the prison, and
there, in a short interview, informed him of all that had passed.

Joam Dacosta took the document and carefully examined it. Shaking his
head, he handed it back to his son. "Perhaps," he said, "there is therein written
the proof I shall never be able to produce. But if that proof escapes me, if the
whole tenor of my life does not plead for me, I have nothing more to expect
from the justice of men, and my fate is in the hands of God!"

And all felt it to be so. If the document remained indecipherable, the position
of the convict was a desperate one.

"We shall find it, father!" exclaimed Benito. "There never was a document of
this sort yet which could stand examination. Have confidence--yes, confidence!
Heaven has, so to speak, miraculously given us the paper which vindicates you,
and, after guiding our hands to recover it, it will not refuse to direct our brains to
unravel it."

Joam Dacosta shook hands with Benito and Manoel, and then the three
young men, much agitated, retired to the jangada, where Yaquita was awaiting
them.

Yaquita was soon informed of what had happened since the evening--the
reappearance of the body of Torres, the discovery of the document, and the
strange form under which the real culprit, the companion of the adventurer, had
thought proper to write his confession--doubtless, so that it should not
compromise him if it fell into strange hands.

Naturally, Lina was informed of this unexpected complication, and of the
discovery made by Fragoso that Torres was an old captain of the woods
belonging to the gang who were employed about the mouths of the Madeira.

"But under what circumstances did you meet him?" asked the young mulatto.

"It was during one of my runs across the province of Amazones," replied
Fragoso, "when I was going from village to village, working at my trade."

"And the scar?"

"What happened was this: One day I arrived at the mission of Aranas at the
moment that Torres, whom I had never before seen, had picked a quarrel with
one of his comrades--and a bad lot they are!--and this quarrel ended with a stab


from a knife, which entered the arm of the captain of the woods. There was no
doctor there, and so I took charge of the wound, and that is how I made his
acquaintance."

"What does it matter after all," replied the young girl, "that we know what
Torres had been? He was not the author of the crime, and it does not help us in
the least."

"No, it does not," answered Fragoso; "for we shall end by reading the
document, and then the innocence of Joam Dacosta will be palpable to the eyes
of all."

This was likewise the hope of Yaquita, of Benito, of Manoel, and of Minha,
and, shut up in the house, they passed long hours in endeavoring to decipher the
writing.

But if it was their hope--and there is no need to insist on that point--it was
none the less that of Judge Jarriquez.

After having drawn up his report at the end of his examination establishing
the identity of Joam Dacosta, the magistrate had sent it off to headquarters, and
therewith he thought he had finished with the affair so far as he was concerned.
It could not well be otherwise.

On the discovery of the document, Jarriquez suddenly found himself face to
face with the study of which he was a master. He, the seeker after numerical
combinations, the solver of amusing problems, the answerer of charades,
rebuses, logogryphs, and such things, was at last in his true element.

At the thought that the document might perhaps contain the justification of
Joam Dacosta, he felt all the instinct of the analyst aroused. Here, before his very
eyes, was a cryptogram! And so from that moment he thought of nothing but
how to discover its meaning, and it is scarcely necessary to say that he made up
his mind to work at it continuously, even if he forgot to eat or to drink.

After the departure of the young people, Judge Jarriquez installed himself in
his study. His door, barred against every one, assured him of several hours of
perfect solitude. His spectacles were on his nose, his snuff-box on the table. He
took a good pinch so as to develop the finesse and sagacity of his mind. He
picked up the document and became absorbed in meditation, which soon became
materialized in the shape of a monologue. The worthy justice was one of those
unreserved men who think more easily aloud than to himself. "Let us proceed
with method," he said. "No method, no logic; no logic, no success."

Then, taking the document, he ran through it from beginning to end, without
understanding it in the least.

The document contained a hundred lines, which were divided into half a
dozen paragraphs.


"Hum!" said the judge, after a little reflection; "to try every paragraph, one
after the other, would be to lose precious time, and be of no use. I had better
select one of these paragraphs, and take the one which is likely to prove the most
interesting. Which of them would do this better than the last, where the recital of
the whole affair is probably summed up? Proper names might put me on the
track, among others that of Joam Dacosta; and if he had anything to do with this
document, his name will evidently not be absent from its concluding paragraph."

The magistrate’s reasoning was logical, and he was decidedly right in
bringing all his resources to bear in the first place on the gist of the cryptogram
as contained in its last paragraph.

Here is the paragraph, for it is necessary to again bring it before the eyes of
the reader so as to show how an analyst set to work to discover its meaning.

"Phyjslyddqfdzxgasgzzqqehxgkfndrxujuglocytdxv
ksbxhhuypohdvyrymhuhpuydkjoxphetozlsletnpmvffo
vpdpajxhyynojyggaymeqynfuqlnmvlyfgsuzmqIztlbqq
yugsqeubvnrcredgruzblrmxyuhqhpzdrrgcrohepqxufl
vvrplphonthvddgqfhqsntzhhhnfepmqkyuuexktogzgkyu
umfvIjdqdpzjqsykrplxhxqrymvklohhhotozvdksppsuvj
hd."

At the outset, Judge Jarrizuez noticed that the lines of the document were not
divided either into words or phrases, and that there was a complete absence of
punctuation. This fact could but render the reading of the document more
difficult.

"Let us see, however," he said, "if there is not some assemblage of letters
which appears to form a word--I mean a pronounceable word, whose number of
consonants is in proportion to its vowels. And at the beginning I see the word
phy; further on the word gas. Halloo! ujugi. Does that mean the African town on
the banks of Tanganyika? What has that got to do with all this? Further on here
is the word ypo. Is it Greek, then? Close by here is rym and puy, and jox, and
phetoz, and jyggay, and mv, and qruz. And before that we have got red and let.
That is good! those are two English words. Then ohe--syk; then rym once more,
and then the word oto.”

Judge Jarriquez let the paper drop, and thought for a few minutes.

"All the words I see in this thing seem queer!" he said. "In fact, there is
nothing to give a clue to their origin. Some look like Greek, some like Dutch;
some have an English twist, and some look like nothing at all! To say nothing of
these series of consonants which are not wanted in any human pronunciation.
Most assuredly it will not be very easy to find the key to this cryptogram."

The magistrate's fingers commenced to beat a tattoo on his desk--a kind of


reveille to arouse his dormant faculties.

"Let us see," he said, "how many letters there are in the paragraph."

He counted them, pen in hand.

"Two hundred and seventy-six!" he said. "Well, now let us try what
proportion these different letters bear to each other."

This occupied him for some time. The judge took up the document, and, with
his pen in his hand, he noted each letter in alphabetical order.

In a quarter of an hour he had obtained the following table:

a= 3 times b=4--c=3--d=16--e=9--f=10--g=13--h=23--i=4
--j=8--k=9--1=9--m=9--n=9--0=12--p=16--q=16--r=12--s
=10--t=8--u=17--v=13--x=12 --y=19 --Z = 12 -- ----------------
Total... 276 times.

"Ah, ah!" he exclaimed. "One thing strikes me at once, and that is that in this
paragraph all the letters of the alphabet are not used. That is very strange. If we
take up a book and open it by chance it will be very seldom that we shall hit
upon two hundred and seventy-six letters without all the signs of the alphabet
figuring among them. After all, it may be chance," and then he passed to a
different train of thought. "One important point is to see if the vowels and
consonants are in their normal proportion."

And so he seized his pen, counted up the vowels, and obtained the following
result:

a= 3timese =9--i=4--o0= 12 --u=17 -- y= 19 -- ---------------- Total...
276 times.

"And thus there are in this paragraph, after we have done our subtraction,
sixty-four vowels and two hundred and twelve consonants. Good! that is the
normal proportion. That is about a fifth, as in the alphabet, where there are six
vowels among twenty-six letters. It is possible, therefore, that the document is
written in the language of our country, and that only the signification of each
letter is changed. If it has been modified in regular order, and a b is always
represented by an /, and o by av,ag byak, anu by anys, etc., I will give up my
judgeship if I do not read it. What can I do better than follow the method of that
great analytical genius, Edgar Allan Poe?"

Judge Jarriquez herein alluded to a story by the great American romancer,
which is a masterpiece. Who has not read the "Gold Bug?" In this novel a
cryptogram, composed of ciphers, letters, algebraic signs, asterisks, full-stops,
and commas, is submitted to a truly mathematical analysis, and is deciphered
under extraordinary conditions, which the admirers of that strange genius can
never forget. On the reading of the American document depended only a
treasure, while on that of this one depended a man's life. Its solution was


consequently all the more interesting.

The magistrate, who had often read and re-read his "Gold Bug," was
perfectly acquainted with the steps in the analysis so minutely described by
Edgar Poe, and he resolved to proceed in the same way on this occasion. In
doing so he was certain, as he had said, that if the value or signification of each
letter remained constant, he would, sooner or later, arrive at the solution of the
document.

"What did Edgar Poe do?" he repeated. "First of all he began by finding out
the sign--here there are only letters, let us say the letter--which was reproduced
the oftenest. I see that that is h, for it is met with twenty-three times. This
enormous proportion shows, to begin with, that h does not stand for h, but, on
the contrary, that it represents the letter which recurs most frequently in our
language, for I suppose the document is written in Portuguese. In English or
French it would certainly be e, in Italian it would be i or a, in Portuguese it will
be a or o. Now let us say that it signifies a or 0."

After this was done, the judge found out the letter which recurred most
frequently after h, and so on, and he formed the following table:

h = 23 times y = 19 --u=17 --dpq=16--gv=13--orxz=12--fs=10
--eklmn=9--jt=8--bi=8--ac=8--

"Now the letter a only occurs thrice!" exclaimed the judge, "and it ought to
occur the oftenest. Ah! that clearly proves that the meaning had been changed.
And now, after a or 0, what are the letters which figure oftenest in our language?
Let us see," and Judge Jarriquez, with truly remarkable sagacity, which denoted
a very observant mind, started on this new quest. In this he was only imitating
the American romancer, who, great analyst as he was, had, by simple induction,
been able to construct an alphabet corresponding to the signs of the cryptogram
and by means of it to eventually read the pirate's parchment note with ease.

The magistrate set to work in the same way, and we may affirm that he was
no whit inferior to his illustrious master. Thanks to his previous work at
logogryphs and squares, rectangular arrangements and other enigmas, which
depend only on an arbitrary disposition of the letters, he was already pretty
strong in such mental pastimes. On this occasion he sought to establish the order
in which the letters were reproduced--vowels first, consonants afterward.

Three hours had elapsed since he began. He had before his eyes an alphabet
which, if his procedure were right, would give him the right meaning of the
letters in the document. He had only to successively apply the letters of his
alphabet to those of his paragraph. But before making this application some
slight emotion seized upon the judge. He fully experienced the intellectual
gratification--much greater than, perhaps, would be thought--of the man who,


after hours of obstinate endeavor, saw the impatiently sought-for sense of the
logogryph coming into view.

"Now let us try," he said; "and I shall be very much surprised if I have not
got the solution of the enigma!"

Judge Jarriquez took off his spectacles and wiped the glasses; then he put
them back again and bent over the table. His special alphabet was in one hand,
the cryptogram in the other. He commenced to write under the first line of the
paragraph the true letters, which, according to him, ought to correspond exactly
with each of the cryptographic letters. As with the first line so did he with the
second, and the third, and the fourth, until he reached the end of the paragraph.

Oddity as he was, he did not stop to see as he wrote if the assemblage of
letters made intelligible words. No; during the first stage his mind refused all
verification of that sort. What he desired was to give himself the ecstasy of
reading it all straight off at once.

And now he had done.

"Let us read!" he exclaimed.

And he read. Good heavens! what cacophony! The lines he had formed with
the letters of his alphabet had no more sense in them that those of the document!
It was another series of letters, and that was all. They formed no word; they had
no value. In short, they were just as hieroglyphic.

"Confound the thing!" exclaimed Judge Jarriquez.


CHAPTER XIII. IS IT AMATTER OF FIGURES?

IT WAS SEVEN o'clock in the evening. Judge Jarriquez had all the time
been absorbed in working at the puzzle--and was no further advanced--and had
forgotten the time of repast and the time of repose, when there came a knock at
his study door.

It was time. An hour later, and all the cerebral substance of the vexed
magistrate would certainly have evaporated under the intense heat into which he
had worked his head.

At the order to enter--which was given in an impatient tone--the door opened
and Manoel presented himself.

The young doctor had left his friends on board the jangada at work on the
indecipherable document, and had come to see Judge Jarriquez. He was anxious
to know if he had been fortunate in his researches. He had come to ask if he had
at length discovered the system on which the cryptogram had been written.

The magistrate was not sorry to see Manoel come in. He was in that state of
excitement that solitude was exasperating to him. He wanted some one to speak


to, some one as anxious to penetrate the mystery as he was. Manoel was just the
man.

"Sir," said Manoel as he entered, "one question! Have you succeeded better
than we have?"

"Sit down first," exclaimed Judge Jarriquez, who got up and began to pace
the room. "Sit down. If we are both of us standing, you will walk one way and I
shall walk the other, and the room will be too narrow to hold us."

Manoel sat down and repeated his question.

"No! I have not had any success!" replied the magistrate; "I do not think I am
any better off. I have got nothing to tell you; but I have found out a certainty."

"What is that, sir?"

"That the document is not based on conventional signs, but on what is known
in cryptology as a cipher, that is to say, on a number."

"Well, sir," answered Manoel, "cannot a document of that kind always be
read?"

"Yes," said Jarriquez, "if a letter is invariably represented by the same letter;
if an a, for example, is always a p, and a p is always an x; if not, it cannot."

"And in this document?"

"In this document the value of the letter changes with the arbitrarily selected
cipher which necessitates it. So a b will in one place be represented by a k will
later on become a z, later on an u or ann or an f, or any other letter."

"And then?"

"And then, I am sorry to say, the cryptogram is indecipherable."

"Indecipherable!" exclaimed Manoel. "No, sir; we shall end by finding the
key of the document on which the man's life depends."

Manoel had risen, a prey to the excitement he could not control; the reply he
had received was too hopeless, and he refused to accept it for good.

At a gesture from the judge, however, he sat down again, and in a calmer
voice asked:

"And in the first place, sir, what makes you think that the basis of this
document is a number, or, as you call it, a cipher?"

"Listen to me, young man," replied the judge, "and you will be forced to give
in to the evidence."

The magistrate took the document and put it before the eyes of Manoel and
showed him what he had done.

"I began," he said, "by treating this document in the proper way, that is to
say, logically, leaving nothing to chance. I applied to it an alphabet based on the
proportion the letters bear to one another which is usual in our language, and I
sought to obtain the meaning by following the precepts of our immortal analyst,


Edgar Poe. Well, what succeeded with him collapsed with me."

"Collapsed!" exclaimed Manoel.

"Yes, my dear young man, and I at once saw that success sought in that
fashion was impossible. In truth, a stronger man than I might have been
deceived."

"But I should like to understand," said Manoel, "and I do not----"

"Take the document," continued Judge Jarriquez; "first look at the disposition
of the letters, and read it through."

Manoel obeyed.

"Do you not see that the combination of several of the letters is very
strange?" asked the magistrate.

"I do not see anything," said Manoel, after having for perhaps the hundredth
time read through the document.

"Well! study the last paragraph! There you understand the sense of the whole
is bound to be summed up. Do you see anything abnormal?"

"Nothing."

"There is, however, one thing which absolutely proves that the language is
subject to the laws of number."

"And that is?"

"That is that you see three h's coming together in two different places."

What Jarriquez said was correct, and it was of a nature to attract attention.
The two hundred and fourth, two hundred and fifth, and two hundred and sixth
letters of the paragraph, and the two hundred and fifty-eight, two hundred and
fifty-ninth, and two hundred and sixtieth letters of the paragraph were
consecutive h's. At first this peculiarity had not struck the magistrate.

"And that proves?" asked Manoel, without divining the deduction that could
be drawn from the combination.

"That simply proves that the basis of the document is a number. It shows a
priori that each letter is modified in virtue of the ciphers of the number and
according to the place which it occupies."

"And why?"

"Because in no language will you find words with three consecutive
repetitions of the letter h.”

Manoel was struck with the argument; he thought about it, and, in short, had
no reply to make.

"And had I made the observation sooner," continued the magistrate, "I might
have spared myself a good deal of trouble and a headache which extends from
my occiput to my sinciput."

"But, sir," asked Manoel, who felt the little hope vanishing on which he had


hitherto rested, "what do you mean by a cipher?"

"Tell me a number."

"Any number you like."

"Give me an example and you will understand the explanation better."

Judge Jarriquez sat down at the table, took up a sheet of paper and a pencil,
and said:

"Now, Mr. Manoel, let us choose a sentence by chance, the first that comes;
for instance:

Judge Jarriquez has an ingenious mind.

I write this phrase so as to space the letters different and I get:

Judgejarriquezhasaningeniousmind.

"That done," said the magistrate, to whom the phrase seemed to contain a
proposition beyond dispute, looking Manoel straight in the face, "suppose I take
a number by chance, so as to give a cryptographic form to this natural succession
of words; suppose now this word is composed of three ciphers, and let these
ciphers be 2, 3, and 4. Now on the line below I put the number 234, and repeat it
as Many times as are necessary to get to the end of the phrase, and so that every
cipher comes underneath a letter. This is what we get:

JudgejarrIquezhasanIngenlousm!Ind23423423423
4234234234234234234234 And now, Mr. Manoel, replacing each
letter by the letter in advance of it in alphabetical order according to the value of
the cipher, we get:

jt+2=lut+3=xd+4=hg+2=ie+3=hj+4=na+2=cr+3=ur
+4=vit2=kq+3=tut+t4=yet2=gat+3=ch+4=tat2=cs+3=
vat4=ent+2=pit+3=In+4=rg+2=iet+3=hn+4=rit+2=kor+3
=ru+4=ys+2=uandso on.

"If, on account of the value of the ciphers which compose the number I come
to the end of the alphabet without having enough complementary letters to
deduct, I begin again at the beginning. That is what happens at the end of my
name when the z is replaced by the 3. As after z the alphabet has no more letters,
I commence to count from a, and so get the c. That done, when I get to the end
of this cryptographic system, made up of the 234--which was arbitrarily selected,
do not forget!--the phrase which you recognize above is replaced by

Ixhihncuvktygclveplrihrkryupmpg.

"And now, young man, just look at it, and do you not think it is very much
like what is in the document? Well, what is the consequence? Why, that the
signification of the letters depends on a cipher which chance puts beneath them,
and the cryptographic letter which answers to a true one is not always the same.
So in this phrase the first j is represented by an I, the second by an n; the first e


by an h, the second b a g, the third by an h; the first d is represented by an h, the
last by a g; the first u by an x, the last by a y; the first and second a's by ac, the
last by an e; and in my own name one r is represented by a u, the other by a v.
and so on. Now do you see that if you do not know the cipher 234 you will never
be able to read the lines, and consequently if we do not know the number of the
document it remains undecipherable."

On hearing the magistrate reason with such careful logic, Manoel was at first
overwhelmed, but, raising his head, he exclaimed:

"No, sir, I will not renounce the hope of finding the number!"

"We might have done so," answered Judge Jarriquez, "if the lines of the
document had been divided into words."

"And why?"

"For this reason, young man. I think we can assume that in the last paragraph
all that is written in these earlier paragraphs is summed up. Now I am convinced
that in it will be found the name of Joam Dacosta. Well, if the lines had been
divided into words, in trying the words one after the other--I mean the words
composed of seven letters, as the name of Dacosta is--it would not have been
impossible to evolve the number which is the key of the document."

"Will you explain to me how you ought to proceed to do that, sir?" asked
Manoel, who probably caught a glimpse of one more hope.

"Nothing can be more simple," answered the judge. "Let us take, for
example, one of the words in the sentence we have just written--my name, if you
like. It is represented in the cryptogram by this queer succession of letters,
ncuvktygc. Well, arranging these letters in a column, one under the other, and
then placing against them the letters of my name and deducting one from the
other the numbers of their places in alphabetical order, I see the following result:

Between n and j we have 4 letters -- c -- a -- 2 -- -- u-- r-- 3 -- -- v--r-- 4 --
--k--j--2----t--q--3----y--u--4----g--e--2----c--z--3--

"Now what is the column of ciphers made up of that we have got by this
simple operation? Look here! 423 423 423, that is to say, of repetitions of the
numbers 423, or 234, or 342."

"Yes, that is it!" answered Manoel.

"You understand, then, by this means, that in calculating the true letter from
the false, instead of the false from the true, I have been able to discover the
number with ease; and the number I was in search of is really the 234 which I
took as the key of my cryptogram."”

"Well, sir!" exclaimed Manoel, "if that is so, the name of Dacosta is in the
last paragraph; and taking successively each letter of those lines for the first of
the seven letters which compose his name, we ought to get----"


"That would be impossible," interrupted the judge, "except on one
condition."

"What is that?"

"That the first cipher of the number should happen to be the first letter of the
word Dacosta, and I think you will agree with me that that is not probable."

"Quite so!" sighed Manoel, who, with this improbability, saw the last chance
vanish.

"And so we must trust to chance alone," continued Jarriquez, who shook his
head, "and chance does not often do much in things of this sort."

"But still," said Manoel, "chance might give us this number."

"This number," exclaimed the magistrate--"this number? But how many
ciphers is it composed of? Of two, or three, or four, or nine, or ten? Is it made of
different ciphers only or of ciphers in different order many times repeated? Do
you not know, young man, that with the ordinary ten ciphers, using all at a time,
but without any repetition, you can make three million two hundred and sixty-
eight thousand and eight hundred different numbers, and that if you use the same
cipher more than once in the number, these millions of combinations will be
enormously increased! And do you not know that if we employ every one of the
five hundred and twenty-five thousand and six hundred minutes of which the
year is composed to try at each of these numbers, it would take you six years,
and that you would want three centuries if each operation took you an hour? No!
You ask the impossible!"

"Impossible, sir?" answered Manoel. "An innocent man has been branded as
guilty, and Joam Dacosta is to lose his life and his honor while you hold in your
hands the material proof of his innocence! That is what is impossible!"

"Ah! young man!" exclaimed Jarriquez, "who told you, after all, that Torres
did not tell a lie? Who told you that he really did have in his hands a document
written by the author of the crime? that this paper was the document, and that
this document refers to Joam Dacosta?"

"Who told me so?" repeated Manoel, and his face was hidden in his hands.

In fact, nothing could prove for certain that the document had anything to do
with the affair in the diamond province. There was, in fact, nothing to show that
it was not utterly devoid of meaning, and that it had been imagined by Torres
himself, who was as capable of selling a false thing as a true one!

"Tt does not matter, Manoel," continued the judge, rising; "it does not matter!
Whatever it may be to which the document refers, I have not yet given up
discovering the cipher. After all, it is worth more than a logogryph or a rebus!"

At these words Manoel rose, shook hands with the magistrate, and returned
to the jangada, feeling more hopeless when he went back than when he set out.


CHAPTER XIV. CHANCE!

A COMPLETE change took place in public opinion on the subject of Joam
Dacosta. To anger succeeded pity. The population no longer thronged to the
prison of Manaos to roar out cries of death to the prisoner. On the contrary, the
most forward of them in accusing him of being the principal author of the crime
of Tijuco now averred that he was not guilty, and demanded his immediate
restoration to liberty. Thus it always is with the mob--from one extreme they run
to the other. But the change was intelligible.

The events which had happened during the last few days--the struggle
between Benito and Torres; the search for the corpse, which had reappeared
under such extraordinary circumstances; the finding of the "indecipherable"
document, if we can so call it; the information it concealed, the assurance that it
contained, or rather the wish that it contained, the material proof of the
guiltlessness of Joam Dacosta; and the hope that it was written by the real
culprit--all these things had contributed to work the change in public opinion.
What the people had desired and impatiently demanded forty-eight hours before,
they now feared, and that was the arrival of the instructions due from Rio de
Janeiro.

These, however, were not likely to be delayed.

Joam Dacosta had been arrested on the 24th of August, and examined next
day. The judge's report was sent off on the 26th. It was now the 28th. In three or
four days more the minister would have come to a decision regarding the
convict, and it was only too certain that justice would take its course.

There was no doubt that such would be the case. On the other hand, that the
assurance of Dacosta's innocence would appear from the document, was not
doubted by anybody, neither by his family nor by the fickle population of
Manaos, who excitedly followed the phases of this dramatic affair.

But, on the other hand, in the eyes of disinterested or indifferent persons who
were not affected by the event, what value could be assigned to this document?
and how could they even declare that it referred to the crime in the diamond
arrayal? It existed, that was undeniable; it had been found on the corpse of
Torres, nothing could be more certain. It could even be seen, by comparing it
with the letter in which Torres gave the information about Joam Dacosta, that the
document was not in the handwriting of the adventurer. But, as had been
suggested by Judge Jarriquez, why should not the scoundrel have invented it for
the sake of his bargain? And this was less unlikely to be the case, considering
that Torres had declined to part with it until after his marriage with Dacosta's


daughter--that is to say, when it would have been impossible to undo an
accomplished fact.

All these views were held by some people in some form, and we can quite
understand what interest the affair created. In any case, the situation of Joam
Dacosta was most hazardous. If the document were not deciphered, it would be
just the same as if it did not exist; and if the secret of the cryptogram were not
miraculously divined or revealed before the end of the three days, the supreme
sentence would inevitably be suffered by the doomed man of Tijuco. And this
miracle a man attempted to perform! The man was Jarriquez, and he now really
set to work more in the interest of Joam Dacosta than for the satisfaction of his
analytical faculties. A complete change had also taken place in his opinion. Was
not this man, who had voluntarily abandoned his retreat at Iquitos, who had
come at the risk of his life to demand his rehabilitation at the hands of Brazilian
justice, a moral enigma worth all the others put together? And so the judge had
resolved never to leave the document until he had discovered the cipher. He set
to work at it in a fury. He ate no more; he slept no more! All his time was passed
in inventing combinations of numbers, in forging a key to force this lock!

This idea had taken possession of Judge Jarriquez's brain at the end of the
first day. Suppressed frenzy consumed him, and kept him in a perpetual heat. His
whole house trembled; his servants, black or white, dared not come near him.
Fortunately he was a bachelor; had there been a Madame Jarriquez she would
have had a very uncomfortable time of it. Never had a problem so taken
possession of this oddity, and he had thoroughly made up his mind to get at the
solution, even if his head exploded like an overheated boiler under the tension of
its vapor.

It was perfectly clear to the mind of the worthy magistrate that the key to the
document was a number, composed of two or more ciphers, but what this
number was all investigation seemed powerless to discover.

This was the enterprise on which Jarriquez, in quite a fury, was engaged, and
during this 28th of August he brought all his faculties to bear on it, and worked
away almost superhumanly.

To arrive at the number by chance, he said, was to lose himself in millions of
combinations, which would absorb the life of a first-rate calculator. But if he
could in no respect reckon on chance, was it impossible to proceed by
reasoning? Decidedly not! And so it was "to reason till he became unreasoning"
that Judge Jarriquez gave himself up after vainly seeking repose in a few hours
of sleep. He who ventured in upon him at this moment, after braving the formal
defenses which protected his solitude, would have found him, as on the day
before, in his study, before his desk, with the document under his eyes, the


thousands of letters of which seemed all jumbled together and flying about his
head.

"Ah!" he exclaimed, "why did not the scoundrel who wrote this separate the
words in this paragraph? We might--we will try--but no! However, if there is
anything here about the murder and the robbery, two or three words there must
be in it--'arrayal,’ 'diamond,' 'Tijuco,' 'Dacosta,' and others; and in putting down
their cryptological equivalents the number could be arrived at. But there is
nothing--not a single break!--not one word by itself! One word of two hundred
and seventy-six letters! I hope the wretch may be blessed two hundred and
seventy-six times for complicating his system in this way! He ought to be
hanged two hundred and seventy-six times!"

And a violent thump with his fist on the document emphasized this charitable
wish.

"But," continued the magistrate, "if I cannot find one of the words in the
body of the document, I might at least try my hand at the beginning and end of
each paragraph. There may be a chance there that I ought not to miss."

And impressed with this idea Judge Jarriquez successively tried if the letters
which commenced or finished the different paragraphs could be made to
correspond with those which formed the most important word, which was sure to
be found somewhre, that of Dacosta.

He could do nothing of the kind.

In fact, to take only the last paragraph with which he began, the formula was:

P=Dh=ay=cf=os=sl=ty=a

Now, at the very first letter Jarriquez was stopped in his calculations, for the
difference in alphabetical position between the d and the p gave him not one
cipher, but two, namely, 12, and in this kind of cryptograph only one letter can
take the place of another.

It was the same for the seven last letters of the paragraph, p s u vj hd, of
which the series also commences with a p, and which in no case could stand for
the d in Dacosta, because these letters were in like manner twelve spaces apart.

So it was not his name that figured here.

The same observation applies to the words arrayal and Tijuco, which were
successively tried, but whose construction did not correspond with the
cryptographic series.

After he had got so far, Judge Jarriquez, with his head nearly splitting, arose
and paced his office, went for fresh air to the window, and gave utterance to a
growl, at the noise of which a flock of hummingbirds, murmuring among the
foliage of a mimosa tree, betook themselves to flight. Then he returned to the
document.


He picked it up and turned it over and over.

"The humbug! the rascal!" he hissed; "it will end by driving me mad! But
steady! Be calm! Don't let our spirits go down! This is not the time!"

And then, having refreshed himself by giving his head a thorough sluicing
with cold water:

"Let us try another way," he said, "and as I cannot hit upon the number from
the arrangement of the letters, let us see what number the author of the document
would have chosen in confessing that he was the author of the crime at Tijuco."

This was another method for the magistrate to enter upon, and maybe he was
right, for there was a certain amount of logic about it.

"And first let us try a date! Why should not the culprit have taken the date of
the year in which Dacosta, the innocent man he allowed to be sentenced in his
own place, was born? Was he likely to forget a number which was so important
to him? Then Joam Dacosta was born in 1804. Let us see what 1804 will give us
as a cryptographical number."

And Judge Jarriquez wrote the first letters of the paragraph, and putting over
them the number 1804 repeated thrice, he obtained

1804 1804 1804 phyj slyd dqfd

Then in counting up the spaces in alphabetical order, he obtained

s.yf rdy. cif.

And this was meaningless! And he wanted three letters which he had to
replace by points, because the ciphers, 8, 4, and 4, which command the three
letters, h, d, and d, do not give corresponding letters in ascending the series.

"That is not it again!" exclaimed Jarriquez. "Let us try another number."

And he asked himself, if instead of this first date the author of the document
had not rather selected the date of the year in which the crime was committed.

This was in 1826.

And so proceeding as above, he obtained.

1826 1826 1826 phyj slyd dqfd


and that gave

o.vd rdv. cid.

the same meaningless series, the same absence of sense, as many letters
wanting as in the former instance, and for the same reason.

"Bother the number!" exclaimed the magistrate. "We must give it up again.
Let us have another one! Perhaps the rascal chose the number of contos
representing the amount of the booty!"

Now the value of the stolen diamonds was estimated at eight hundred and
thirty-four contos, or about 2,500,000 francs, and so the formula became

834 834 834 834 phy jsl ydd qfd

and this gave a result as little gratifying as the others----

het bph pa. ic.

"Confound the document and him who imagined it!" shouted Jarriquez,
throwing down the paper, which was wafted to the other side of the room. "It
would try the patience of a saint!"

But the short burst of anger passed away, and the magistrate, who had no
idea of being beaten, picked up the paper. What he had done with the first letters
of the different paragraphs he did with the last--and to no purpose. Then he tried
everything his excited imagination could suggest.

He tried in succession the numbers which represented Dacosta's age, which
would have been known to the author of the crime, the date of his arrest, the date
of the sentence at the Villa Rica assizes, the date fixed for the execution, etc.,
etc., even the number of victims at the affray at Tijuco!

Nothing! All the time nothing!

Judge Jarriquez had worked himself into such a state of exasperation that
there really was some fear that his mental faculties would lose their balance. He
jumped about, and twisted about, and wrestled about as if he really had got hold
of his enemy's body. Then suddenly he cried, "Now for chance! Heaven help me
now, logic is powerless!"

His hand seized a bell-pull hanging near his table. The bell rang furiously,
and the magistrate strode up to the door, which he opened. "Bobo!" he shouted.

A moment or two elapsed.

Bobo was a freed negro, who was the privileged servant of Jarriquez. He did
not appear; it was evident that Bobo was afraid to come into his master's room.

Another ring at the bell; another call to Bobo, who, for his own safety,
pretended to be deaf on this occasion. And now a third ring at the bell, which
unhitched the crank and broke the cord.

This time Bobo came up. "What is it, sir?" asked Bobo, prudently waiting on
the threshold.


"Advance, without uttering a single word!" replied the judge, whose flaming
eyes made the negro quake again.

Bobo advanced.

"Bobo," said Jarriquez, "attend to what I say, and answer immediately; do
not even take time to think, or I----"

Bobo, with fixed eyes and open mouth, brought his feet together like a
soldier and stood at attention.

"Are you ready?" asked his master.

"Tam."

"Now, then, tell me, without a moment's thought--you understand--the first
number than comes into your head."

"76223," answered Bobo, all in a breath. Bobo thought he would please his
master by giving him a pretty large one!

Judge Jarriquez had run to the table, and, pencil in hand, had made out a
formula with the number given by Bobo, and which Bobo had in this way only
given him at a venture.

It is obvious that it was most unlikely that a number such as 76223 was the
key of the document, and it produced no other result than to bring to the lips of
Jarriquez such a vigorous ejaculation that Bobo disappeared like a shot!


CHAPTER XV. THE LAST EFFORTS

THE MAGISTRATE, however, was not the only one who passed his time
unprofitably. Benito, Manoel, and Minha tried all they could together to extract
the secret from the document on which depended their father's life and honor. On
his part, Fragoso, aided by Lina, could not remain quiet, but all their ingenuity
had failed, and the number still escaped them.

"Why don't you find it, Fragoso?" asked the young mulatto.

"T will find it," answered Fragoso.

And he did not find it!

Here we should say that Fragoso had an idea of a project of which he had not
even spoken to Lina, but which had taken full possession of his mind. This was
to go in search of the gang to which the ex-captain of the woods had belonged,
and to find out who was the probable author of this cipher document, which was
supposed to be the confession of the culprit of Tijuco. The part of the Amazon
where these people were employed, the very place where Fragoso had met
Torres a few years before, was not very far from Manaos. He would only have to
descend the river for about fifty miles, to the mouth of the Madeira, a tributary
coming in on the right, and there he was almost sure to meet the head of these


"capitaes do mato," to which Torres belonged. In two days, or three days at the
outside, Fragoso could get into communication with the old comrades of the
adventurer.

"Yes! I could do that," he repeated to himself; "but what would be the good
of it, supposing I succeeded? If we are sure that one of Torres' companions has
recently died, would that prove him to be the author of this crime? Would that
show that he gave Torres a document in which he announced himself the author
of this crime, and exonerated Joam Dacosta? Would that give us the key of the
document? No! Two men only knew the cipher--the culprit and Torres! And
these two men are no more!"

So reasoned Fragoso. It was evident that his enterprise would do no good.
But the thought of it was too much for him. An irresistible influence impelled
him to set out, although he was not even sure of finding the band on the Madeira.
In fact, it might be engaged in some other part of the province, and to come up
with it might require more time than Fragoso had at his disposal! And what
would be the result?

It is none the less true, however, that on the 29th of August, before sunrise,
Fragoso, without saying anything to anybody, secretly left the jangada, arrived at
Manaos, and embarked in one of the egariteas which daily descend the Amazon.

And great was the astonishment when he was not seen on board, and did not
appear during the day. No one, not even Lina, could explain the absence of so
devoted a servant at such a crisis.

Some of them even asked, and not without reason, if the poor fellow,
rendered desperate at having, when he met him on the frontier, personally
contributed to bringing Torres on board the raft, had not made away with
himself.

But if Fragoso could so reproach himself, how about Benito? In the first
place at Iquitos he had invited Torres to visit the fazenda; in the second place he
had brought him on board the jangada, to become a passenger on it; and in the
third place, in killing him, he had annihilated the only witness whose evidence
could save the condemned man.

And so Benito considered himself responsible for everything--the arrest of
his father, and the terrible events of which it had been the consequence.

In fact, had Torres been alive, Benito could not tell but that, in some way or
another, from pity or for reward, he would have finished by handing over the
document. Would not Torres, whom nothing could compromise, have been
persuaded to speak, had money been brought to bear upon him? Would not the
long-sought-for proof have been furnished to the judge? Yes, undoubtedly! And
the only man who could have furnished this evidence had been killed through


Benito!

Such was what the wretched man continually repeated to his mother, to
Manoel, and to himself. Such were the cruel responsibilities which his
conscience laid to his charge.

Between her husband, with whom she passed all the time that was allowed
her, and her son, a prey to despair which made her tremble for his reason, the
brave Yaquita lost none of her moral energy. In her they found the valiant
daughter of Magalhaés, the worthy wife of the fazender of Iquitos.

The attitude of Joam Dacosta was well adapted to sustain her in this ordeal.
That gallant man, that rigid Puritan, that austere worker, whose whole life had
been a battle, had not yet shown a moment of weakness.

The most terrible blow which had struck him without prostrating him had
been the death of Judge Ribeiro, in whose mind his innocence did not admit of a
doubt. Was it not with the help of his old defender that he had hoped to strive for
his rehabilitation? The intervention of Torres he had regarded throughout as
being quite secondary for him. And of this document he had no knowledge when
he left Iquitos to hand himself over to the justice of his country. He only took
with him moral proofs. When a material proof was unexpectedly produced in the
course of the affair, before or after his arrest, he was certainly not the man to
despise it. But if, on account of regrettable circumstances, the proof disappeared,
he would find himself once more in the same position as when he passed the
Brazilian frontier--the position of a man who came to say, "Here is my past life;
here is my present; here is an entirely honest existence of work and devotion
which I bring you. You passed on me at first an erroneous judgment. After
twenty-three years of exile I have come to give myself up! Here I am; judge me
again!"

The death of Torres, the impossibility of reading the document found on him,
had thus not produced on Joam Dacosta the impression which it had on his
children, his friends, his household, and all who were interested in him.

"I have faith in my innocence," he repeated to Yaquita, "as I have faith in
God. If my life is still useful to my people, and a miracle is necessary to save
me, that miracle will be performed; if not, I shall die! God alone is my judge!"

The excitement increased in Manaos as the time ran on; the affair was
discussed with unexampled acerbity. In the midst of this enthralment of public
opinion, which evoked so much of the mysterious, the document was the
principal object of conversation.

At the end of this fourth day not a single person doubted but that it contained
the vindication of the doomed man. Every one had been given an opportunity of
deciphering its incomprehensible contents, for the "Diario d'o Grand Para" had


reproduced it in facsimile. Autograph copies were spread about in great numbers
at the suggestion of Manoel, who neglect nothing that might lead to the
penetration of the mystery--not even chance, that "nickname of Providence," as
some one has called it.

In addition, a reward of one hundred contos (or three hundred thousand
francs) was promised to any one who could discover the cipher so fruitlessly
sought after--and read the document. This was quite a fortune, and so people of
all classes forgot to eat, drink, or sleep to attack this unintelligible cryptogram.

Up to the present, however, all had been useless, and probably the most
ingenious analysts in the world would have spent their time in vain. It had been
advertised that any solution should be sent, without delay, to Judge Jarriquez, to
his house in God-the-Son Street; but the evening of the 29th of August came and
none had arrived, nor was any likely to arrive.

Of all those who took up the study of the puzzle, Judge Jarriquez was one of
the most to be pitied. By a natural association of ideas, he also joined in the
general opinion that the document referred to the affair at Tijuco, and that it had
been written by the hand of the guilty man, and exonerated Joam Dacosta. And
so he put even more ardor into his search for the key. It was not only the art for
art's sake which guided him, it was a sentiment of justice, of pity toward a man
suffering under an unjust condemnation. If it is the fact that a certain quantity of
phosphorus is expended in the work of the brain, it would be difficult to say how
many milligrammes the judge had parted with to excite the network of his
"sensorium," and after all, to find out nothing, absolutely nothing.

But Jarriquez had no idea of abandoning the inquiry. If he could only now
trust to chance, he would work on for that chance. He tried to evoke it by all
means possible and impossible. He had given himself over to fury and anger,
and, what was worse, to impotent anger!

During the latter part of this day he had been trying different numbers--
numbers selected arbitrarily--and how many of them can scarcely be imagined.
Had he had the time, he would not have shrunk from plunging into the millions
of combinations of which the ten symbols of numeration are capable. He would
have given his whole life to it at the risk of going mad before the year was out.
Mad! was he not that already? He had had the idea that the document might be
read through the paper, and so he turned it round and exposed it to the light, and
tried it in that way.

Nothing! The numbers already thought of, and which he tried in this new
way, gave no result. Perhaps the document read backward, and the last letter was
really the first, for the author would have done this had he wished to make the
reading more difficult.


Nothing! The new combination only furnished a series of letters just as
enigmatic.

At eight o'clock in the evening Jarriquez, with his face in his hands, knocked
up, worn out mentally and physically, had neither strength to move, to speak, to
think, or to associate one idea with another.

Suddenly a noise was heard outside. Almost immediately, notwithstanding
his formal orders, the door of his study was thrown open. Benito and Manoel
were before him, Benito looking dreadfully pale, and Manoel supporting him,
for the unfortunate young man had hardly strength to support himself.

The magistrate quickly arose.

"What is it, gentlemen? What do you want?" he asked.

"The cipher! the cipher!" exclaimed Benito, mad with grief--"the cipher of
the document."

"Do you know it, then?" shouted the judge.

"No, sir," said Manoel. "But you?"

"Nothing! nothing!"

"Nothing?" gasped Benito, and in a paroxysm of despair he took a knife from
his belt and would have plunged it into his breast had not the judge and Manoel
jumped forward and managed to disarm him.

"Benito," said Jarriquez, in a voice which he tried to keep calm, "if you
father cannot escape the expiation of a crime which is not his, you could do
something better than kill yourself."

"What?" said Benito.

"Try and save his life!"

"How?"

"That is for you to discover," answered the magistrate, "and not for me to


W


Say.


CHAPTER XVI. PREPARATIONS

ON THE FOLLOWING day, the 30th of August, Benito and Manoel talked
matters over together. They had understood the thought to which the judge had
not dared to give utterance in their presence, and were engaged in devising some
means by which the condemned man could escape the penalty of the law.

Nothing else was left for them to do. It was only too certain that for the
authorities at Rio Janeiro the undeciphered document would have no value
whatever, that it would be a dead letter, that the first verdict which declared
Joam Dacosta the perpetrator of the crime at Tijuco would not be set aside, and
that, as in such cases no commutation of the sentence was possible, the order for


his execution would inevitably be received.

Once more, then, Joam Dacosta would have to escape by flight from an
unjust imprisonment.

It was at the outset agreed between the two young men that the secret should
be carefully kept, and that neither Yaquita nor Minha should be informed of
preparations, which would probably only give rise to hopes destined never to be
realized. Who could tell if, owing to some unforeseen circumstance, the attempt
at escape would not prove a miserable failure?

The presence of Fragoso on such an occasion would have been most
valuable. Discreet and devoted, his services would have been most welcome to
the two young fellows; but Fragoso had not reappeared. Lina, when asked, could
only say that she knew not what had become of him, nor why he had left the raft
without telling her anything about it.

And assuredly, had Fragoso foreseen that things would have turned out as
they were doing, he would never have left the Dacosta family on an expedition
which appeared to promise no serious result. Far better for him to have assisted
in the escape of the doomed man than to have hurried off in search of the former
comrades of Torres!

But Fragoso was away, and his assistance had to be dispensed with.

At daybreak Benito and Manoel left the raft and proceeded to Manaos. They
soon reached the town, and passed through its narrow streets, which at that early
hour were quite deserted. In a few minutes they arrived in front of the prison.
The waste ground, amid which the old convent which served for a house of
detention was built, was traversed by them in all directions, for they had come to
study it with the utmost care.

Fifty-five feet from the ground, in an angle of the building, they recognized
the window of the cell in which Joam Dacosta was confined. The window was
secured with iron bars in a miserable state of repair, which it would be easy to
tear down or cut through if they could only get near enough. The badly jointed
stones in the wall, which were crumbled away every here and there, offered
many a ledge for the feet to rest on, if only a rope could be fixed to climb up by.
One of the bars had slipped out of its socket, and formed a hook over which it
might be possible to throw a rope. That done, one or two of the bars could be
removed, so as to permit a man to get through. Benito and Manoel would then
have to make their way into the prisoner's room, and without much difficulty the
escape could be managed by means of the rope fastened to the projecting iron.
During the night, if the sky were very cloudy, none of these operations would be
noticed before the day dawned. Joam Dacosta could get safely away.

Manoel and Benito spent an hour about the spot, taking care not to attract


attention, but examining the locality with great exactness, particularly as
regarded the position of the window, the arrangement of the iron bars, and the
place from which it would be best to throw the line.

"That is agreed," said Manoel at length. "And now, ought Joam Dacosta to be
told about this?"

"No, Manoel. Neither to him, any more than to my mother, ought we to
impart the secret of an attempt in which there is such a risk of failure."

"We shall succeed, Benito!" continued Manoel. "However, we must prepare
for everything; and in case the chief of the prison should discover us at the
moment of escape----"

"We shall have money enough to purchase his silence," answered Benito.

"Good!" replied Manoel. "But once your father is out of prison he cannot
remain hidden in the town or on the jangada. Where is he to find refuge?"

This was the second question to solve: and a very difficult one it was.

A hundred paces away from the prison, however, the waste land was crossed
by one of those canals which flow through the town into the Rio Negro. This
canal afforded an easy way of gaining the river if a pirogue were in waiting for
the fugitive. From the foot of the wall to the canal side was hardly a hundred
yards.

Benito and Manoel decided that about eight o'clock in the evening one of the
pirogues, with two strong rowers, under the command of the pilot Araujo, should
start from the jangada. They could ascend the Rio Negro, enter the canal, and,
crossing the waste land, remain concealed throughout the night under the tall
vegetation on the banks.

But once on board, where was Joam Dacosta to seek refuge? To return to
Iquitos was to follow a road full of difficulties and peril, and a long one in any
case, should the fugitive either travel across the country or by the river. Neither
by horse not pirogue could he be got out of danger quickly enough, and the
fazenda was no longer a safe retreat. He would not return to it as the fazender,
Joam Garral, but as the convict, Joam Dacosta, continually in fear of his
extradition. He could never dream of resuming his former life.

To get away by the Rio Negro into the north of the province, or even beyond
the Brazilian territory, would require more time than he could spare, and his first
care must be to escape from immediate pursuit.

To start again down the Amazon? But stations, village, and towns abounded
on both sides of the river. The description of the fugitive would be sent to all the
police, and he would run the risk of being arrested long before he reached the
Atlantic. And supposing he reached the coast, where and how was he to hide and
wait for a passage to put the sea between himself and his pursuers?


On consideration of these various plans, Benito and Manoel agreed that
neither of them was practicable. One, however, did offer some chance of safety,
and that was to embark in the pirogue, follow the canal into the Rio Negro,
descend this tributary under the guidance of the pilot, reach the confluence of the
rivers, and run down the Amazon along its right bank for some sixty miles
during the nights, resting during the daylight, and so gaining the embouchure of
the Madeira.

This tributary, which, fed by a hundred affluents, descends from the
watershed of the Cordilleras, is a regular waterway opening into the very heart of
Bolivia. A pirogue could pass up it and leave no trace of its passage, and a refuge
could be found in some town or village beyond the Brazilian frontier. There
Joam Dacosta would be comparatively safe, and there for several months he
could wait for an opportunity of reaching the Pacific coast and taking passage in
some vessel leaving one of its ports; and if the ship were bound for one of the
States of North America he would be free. Once there, he could sell the fazenda,
leave his country forever, and seek beyond the sea, in the Old World, a final
retreat in which to end an existence so cruelly and unjustly disturbed. Anywhere
he might go, his family--not excepting Manoel, who was bound to him by so
many ties--would assuredly follow without the slightest hesitation.

"Let us go," said Benito; "we must have all ready before night, and we have
no time to lose."

The young men returned on board by way of the canal bank, which led along
the Rio Negro. They satisfied themselves that the passage of the pirogue would
be quite possible, and that no obstacles such as locks or boats under repair were
there to stop it. They then descended the left bank of the tributary, avoiding the
slowly-filling streets of the town, and reached the jangada.

Benito's first care was to see his mother. He felt sufficiently master of
himself to dissemble the anxiety which consumed him. He wished to assure her
that all hope was not lost, that the mystery of the document would be cleared up,
that in any case public opinion was in favor of Joam, and that, in face of the
agitation which was being made in his favor, justice would grant all the
necessary time for the production of the material proof his innocence. "Yes,
mother," he added, "before to-morrow we shall be free from anxiety."

"May heaven grant it so!" replied Yaquita, and she looked at him so keenly
that Benito could hardly meet her glance.

On his part, and as if by pre-arrangement, Manoel had tried to reassure
Minha by telling her that Judge Jarriquez was convinced of the innocence of
Joam, and would try to save him by every means in his power.

"IT only wish he would, Manoel," answered she, endeavoring in vain to


restrain her tears.

And Manoel left her, for the tears were also welling up in his eyes and
witnessing against the words of hope to which he had just given utterance.

And now the time had arrived for them to make their daily visit to the
prisoner, and Yaquita and her daughter set off to Manaos.

For an hour the young men were in consultation with Araujo. They
acquainted him with their plan in all its details, and they discussed not only the
projected escape, but the measures which were necessary for the safety of the
fugitive.

Araujo approved of everything; he undertook during the approaching night to
take the pirogue up the canal without attracting any notice, and he knew its
course thoroughly as far as the spot where he was to await the arrival of Joam
Dacosta. To get back to the mouth of the Rio Negro was easy enough, and the
pirogue would be able to pass unnoticed among the numerous craft continually
descending the river.

Araujo had no objection to offer to the idea of following the Amazon down
to its confluence with the Madeira. The course of the Madeira was familiar to
him for quite two hundred miles up, and in the midst of these thinly-peopled
provinces, even if pursuit took place in their direction, all attempts at capture
could be easily frustrated; they could reach the interior of Bolivia, and if Joam
decided to leave his country he could procure a passage with less danger on the
coast of the Pacific than on that of the Atlantic.

Araujo's approval was most welcome to the young fellows; they had great
faith in the practical good sense of the pilot, and not without reason. His zeal
was undoubted, and he would assuredly have risked both life and liberty to save
the fazender of Iquitos.

With the utmost secrecy Araujo at once set about his preparations. A
considerable sum in gold was handed over to him by Benito to meet all
eventualities during the voyage on the Madeira. In getting the pirogue ready, he
announced his intention of going in search of Fragoso, whose fate excited a good
deal of anxiety among his companions. He stowed away in the boat provisions
for many days, and did not forget the ropes and tools which would be required
by the young men when they reached the canal at the appointed time and place.

These preparations evoked no curiosity on the part of the crew of the
jangada, and even the two stalwart negroes were not let into the secret. They,
however, could be absolutely depended on. Whenever they learned what the
work of safety was in which they were engaged--when Joam Dacosta, once more
free, was confided to their charge--Araujo knew well that they would dare
anything, even to the risk of their own lives, to save the life of their master.


By the afternoon all was ready, and they had only the night to wait for. But
before making a start Manoel wished to call on Judge Jarriquez for the last time.
The magistrate might perhaps have found out something new about the
document. Benito preferred to remain on the raft and wait for the return of his
mother and sister.

Manoel then presented himself at the abode of Judge Jarriquez, and was
immediately admitted.

The magistrate, in the study which he never quitted, was still the victim of
the same excitement. The document crumpled by his impatient fingers, was still
there before his eyes on the table.

"Sir," said Manoel, whose voice trembled as he asked the question, "have
you received anything from Rio de Janeiro."

"No," answered the judge; "the order has not yet come to hand, but it may at
any moment."

"And the document?"

"Nothing yet!" exclaimed he. "Everything my imagination can suggest I have
tried, and no result."

"None?"

"Nevertheless, I distinctly see one word in the document--only one!"

"What is that--what is the word?"

Fly!"

Manoel said nothing, but he pressed the hand which Jarriquez held out to
him, and returned to the jangada to wait for the moment of action.


CHAPTER XVII. THE LAST NIGHT

THE VISIT of Yaquita and her daughter had been like all such visits during
the few hours which each day the husband and wife spent together. In the
presence of the two beings whom Joam so dearly loved his heart nearly failed
him. But the husband--the father--retained his self-command. It was he who
comforted the two poor women and inspired them with a little of the hope of
which so little now remained to him. They had come with the intention of
cheering the prisoner. Alas! far more than he they themselves were in want of
cheering! But when they found him still bearing himself unflinchingly in the
midst of his terrible trial, they recovered a little of their hope.

Once more had Joam spoken encouraging words to them. His indomitable
energy was due not only to the feeling of his innocence, but to his faith in that
God, a portion of whose justice yet dwells in the hearts of men. No! Joam
Dacosta would never lose his life for the crime of Tijuco!


Hardly ever did he mention the document. Whether it were apocryphal or no,
whether it were in the handwriting of Torres or in that of the real perpetrator of
the crime, whether it contained or did not contain the longed-for vindication, it
was on no such doubtful hypothesis that Joam Dacosta presumed to trust. No; he
reckoned on a better argument in his favor, and it was to his long life of toil and
honor that he relegated the task of pleading for him.

This evening, then, his wife and daughter, strengthened by the manly words,
which thrilled them to the core of their hearts, had left him more confident than
they had ever been since his arrest. For the last time the prisoner had embraced
them, and with redoubled tenderness. It seemed as though the dénouement was
nigh.

Joam Dacosta, after they had left, remained for some time perfectly
motionless. His arms rested on a small table and supported his head. Of what
was he thinking? Had he at last been convinced that human justice, after failing
the first time, would at length pronounce his acquittal?

Yes, he still hoped. With the report of Judge Jarriquez establishing his
identity, he knew that his memoir, which he had penned with so much sincerity,
would have been sent to Rio de Janeiro, and was now in the hands of the chief
justice. This memoir, as we know, was the history of his life from his entry into
the offices of the diamond arrayal until the very moment when the jangada
stopped before Manaos. Joam Dacosta was pondering over his whole career. He
again lived his past life from the moment when, as an orphan, he had set foot in
Tijuco. There his zeal had raised him high in the offices of the governor-general,
into which he had been admitted when still very young. The future smiled on
him; he would have filled some important position. Then this sudden
catastrophe; the robbery of the diamond convoy, the massacre of the escort, the
suspicion directed against him as the only official who could have divulged the
secret of the expedition, his arrest, his appearance before the jury, his conviction
in spite of all the efforts of his advocate, the last hours spent in the condemned
cell at Villa Rica, his escape under conditions which betokened almost
superhuman courage, his flight through the northern provinces, his arrival on the
Peruvian frontier, and the reception which the starving fugitive had met with
from the hospitable fazender Magalhaés.

The prisoner once more passed in review these events, which had so cruelly
marred his life. And then, lost in his thoughts and recollections, he sat,
regardless of a peculiar noise on the outer wall of the convent, of the jerkings of
a rope hitched on to a bar of his window, and of grating steel as it cut through
iron, which ought at once to have attracted the attention of a less absorbed man.

Joam Dacosta continued to live the years of his youth after his arrival in


Peru. He again saw the fazender, the clerk, the partner of the old Portuguese,
toiling hard for the prosperity of the establishment at Iquitos. Ah! why at the
outset had he not told all to his benefactor? He would never have doubted him. It
was the only error with which he could reproach himself. Why had he not
confessed to him whence he had come, and who he was--above all, at the
moment when Magalhaés had place in his hand the hand of the daughter who
would never have believed that he was the author of so frightful a crime.

And now the noise outside became loud enough to attract the prisoner's
attention. For an instant Joam raised his head; his eyes sought the window, but
with a vacant look, as though he were unconscious, and the next instant his head
again sank into his hands. Again he was in thought back at Iquitos.

There the old fazender was dying; before his end he longed for the future of
his daughter to be assured, for his partner to be the sole master of the settlement
which had grown so prosperous under his management. Should Dacosta have
spoken then? Perhaps; but he dared not do it. He again lived the happy days he
had spent with Yaquita, and again thought of the birth of his children, again felt
the happiness which had its only trouble in the remembrances of Tijuco and the
remorse that he had not confessed his terrible secret.

The chain of events was reproduced in Joam's mind with a clearness and
completeness quite remarkable.

And now he was thinking of the day when his daughter's marriage with
Manoel had been decided. Could he allow that union to take place under a false
name without acquainting the lad with the mystery of his life? No! And so at the
advice of Judge Ribeiro he resolved to come and claim the revision of his
sentence, to demand the rehabilitation which was his due! He was starting with
his people, and then came the intervention of Torres, the detestable bargain
proposed by the scoundrel, the indignant refusal of the father to hand over his
daughter to save his honor and his life, and then the denunciation and the arrest!

Suddenly the window flew open with a violent push from without.

Joam started up; the souvenire of the past vanished like a shadow.

Benito leaped into the room; he was in the presence of his father, and the
next moment Manoel, tearing down the remaining bars, appeared before him.

Joam Dacosta would have uttered a cry of surprise. Benito left him no time
to do so.

"Father," he said, "the window grating is down. A rope leads to the ground. A
pirogue is waiting for you on the canal not a hundred yards off. Araujo is there
ready to take you far away from Manaos, on the other bank of the Amazon
where your track will never be discovered. Father, you must escape this very
moment! It was the judge's own suggestion!"


"Tt must be done!" added Manoel.

"Fly! I!--Fly a second time! Escape again?"

And with crossed arms, and head erect, Joam Dacosta stepped forward.

"Never!" he said, in a voice so firm that Benito and Manoel stood
bewildered.

The young men had never thought of a difficulty like this. They had never
reckoned on the hindrances to escape coming from the prisoner himself.

Benito advanced to his father, and looking him straight in the face, and
taking both his hands in his, not to force him, but to try and convince him, said:

"Never, did you say, father?"

"Never!"

"Father," said Manoel--"for I also have the right to call you father--listen to
us! If we tell you that you ought to fly without losing an instant, it is because if
you remain you will be guilty toward others, toward yourself!"

"To remain," continued Benito, "is to remain to die! The order for execution
may come at any moment! If you imagine that the justice of men will nullify a
wrong decision, if you think it will rehabilitate you whom it condemned twenty
years since, you are mistaken! There is hope no longer! You must escape!
Come!"

By an irresistible impulse Benito seized his father and drew him toward the
window.

Joam Dacosta struggled from his son's grasp and recoiled a second time.

"To fly," he answered, in the tone of a man whose resolution was unalterable,
"is to dishonor myself, and you with me! It would be a confession of my guilt!
Of my own free will I surrendered myself to my country's judges, and I will
await their decision, whatever that decision may be!"

"But the presumptions on which you trusted are insufficient," replied
Manoel, "and the material proof of your innocence is still wanting! If we tell you
that you ought to fly, it is because Judge Jarriquez himself told us so. You have
now only this one chance left to escape from death!"

"IT will die, then," said Joam, in a calm voice. "I will die protesting against
the decision which condemned me! The first time, a few hours before the
execution--I fled! Yes! I was then young. I had all my life before me in which to
struggle against man's injustice! But to save myself now, to begin again the
miserable existence of a felon hiding under a false name, whose every effort is
required to avoid the pursuit of the police, again to live the life of anxiety which
I have led for twenty-three years, and oblige you to share it with me; to wait
each day for a denunciation which sooner or later must come, to wait for the
claim for extradition which would follow me to a foreign country! Am I to live


for that? No! Never!"

"Father," interrupted Benito, whose mind threatened to give way before such
obstinacy, "you shall fly! I will have it so!" And he caught hold of Joam Dacosta,
and tried by force to drag him toward the window.

"No! no!"

"You wish to drive me mad?"

"My son," exclaimed Joam Dacosta, "listen to me! Once already I escaped
from the prison at Villa Rica, and people believed I fled from well-merited
punishment. Yes, they had reason to think so. Well, for the honor of the name
which you bear I shall not do so again."

Benito had fallen on his knees before his father. He held up his hands to him;
he begged him:

"But this order, father," he repeated, "this order which is due to-day--even
now--it will contain your sentence of death."

"The order may come, but my determination will not change. No, my son!
Joam Dacosta, guilty, might fly! Joam Dacosta, innocent, will not fly!"

The scene which followed these words was heart-rending. Benito struggled
with his father. Manoel, distracted, kept near the window ready to carry off the
prisoner--when the door of the room opened.

On the threshold appeared the chief of the police, accompanied by the head
warder of the prison and a few soldiers. The chief of the police understood at a
glance that an attempt at escape was being made; but he also understood from
the prisoner's attitude that he it was who had no wish to go! He said nothing. The
sincerest pity was depicted on his face. Doubtless he also, like Judge Jarriquez,
would have liked Dacosta to have escaped.

It was too late!

The chief of the police, who held a paper in his hand, advanced toward the
prisoner.

"Before all of you," said Joam Dacosta, "let me tell you, sir, that it only
rested with me to get away, and that I would not do so."

The chief of the police bowed his head, and then, in a voice which he vainly
tried to control:

"Joam Dacosta," he said, "the order has this moment arrived from the chief
justice at Rio Janeiro."

"Father!" exclaimed Manoel and Benito.

"This order," asked Joam Dacosta, who had crossed his arms, "this order
requires the execution of my sentence?"

"Yes!"

"And that will take place?"


"To-morrow."

Benito threw himself on his father. Again would he have dragged him from
his cell, but the soldiers came and drew away the prisoner from his grasp.

At a sign from the chief of the police Benito and Manoel were taken away.
An end had to be put to this painful scene, which had already lasted too long.

"Sir," said the doomed man, "before to-morrow, before the hour of my
execution, may I pass a few moments with Padre Passanha, whom I ask you to
tell?"

"Tt will be forbidden."

"May I see my family, and embrace for a last time my wife and children?"

"You shall see them."

"Thank you, sir," answered Joam; "and now keep guard over that window; it
will not do for them to take me out of here against my will."

And then the chief of the police, after a respectful bow, retired with the
warder and the soldiers.

The doomed man, who had now but a few hours to live, was left alone.


CHAPTER XVIII. FRAGOSO

AND SO the order had come, and, as Judge Jarriquez had foreseen, it was an
order requiring the immediate execution of the sentence pronounced on Joam
Dacosta. No proof had been produced; justice must take its course.

It was the very day--the 31st of August, at nine o'clock in the morning of
which the condemned man was to perish on the gallows.

The death penalty in Brazil is generally commuted except in the case of
negroes, but this time it was to be suffered by a white man.

Such are the penal arrangements relative to crimes in the diamond arrayal,
for which, in the public interest, the law allows no appear to mercy.

Nothing could now save Joam Dacosta. It was not only life, but honor that he
was about to lose.

But on the 31st of August a man was approaching Manaos with all the speed
his horse was capable of, and such had been the pace at which he had come that
half a mile from the town the gallant creature fell, incapable of carrying him any
further.

The rider did not even stop to raise his steed. Evidently he had asked and
obtained from it all that was possible, and, despite the state of exhaustion in
which he found himself, he rushed off in the direction of the city.

The man came from the eastern provinces, and had followed the left bank of
the river. All his means had gone in the purchase of this horse, which, swifter far


than any pirogue on the Amazon, had brought him to Manaos.

It was Fragoso!

Had, then, the brave fellow succeeded in the enterprise of which he had
spoken to nobody? Had he found the party to which Torres belonged? Had he
discovered some secret which would yet save Joam Dacosta?

He hardly knew. But in any case he was in great haste to acquaint Judge
Jarriquez with what he had ascertained during his short excursion.

And this is what had happened.

Fragoso had made no mistake when he recognized Torres as one of the
captains of the party which was employed in the river provinces of the Madeira.

He set out, and on reaching the mouth of that tributary he learned that the
chief of these capitaes da mato was then in the neighborhood.

Without losing a minute, Fragoso started on the search, and, not without
difficulty, succeeded in meeting him.

To Fragoso's questions the chief of the party had no hesitation in replying; he
had no interest in keeping silence with regard to the few simple matters on which
he was interrogated. In fact, three questions only of importance were asked him
by Fragoso, and these were:

"Did not a captain of the woods named Torres belong to your party a few
months ago?"

"Yes."

"At that time had he not one intimate friend among his companions who has
recently died?"

"Just so!"

"And the name of that friend was?"

"Ortega."

This was all that Fragoso had learned. Was this information of a kind to
modify Dacosta's position? It was hardly likely.

Fragoso saw this, and pressed the chief of the band to tell him what he knew
of this Ortega, of the place where he came from, and of his antecedents
generally. Such information would have been of great importance if Ortega, as
Torres had declared, was the true author of the crime of Tijuco. But
unfortunately the chief could give him no information whatever in the matter.

What was certain was that Ortega had been a member of the band for many
years, that an intimate friendship existed between him and Torres, that they were
always seen together, and that Torres had watched at his bedside when he died.

This was all the chief of the band knew, and he could tell no more. Fragoso,
then, had to be contented with these insignificant details, and departed
immediately.


But if the devoted fellow had not brought back the proof that Ortega was the
author of the crime of Tijuco, he had gained one thing, and that was the
knowledge that Torres had told the truth when he affirmed that one of his
comrades in the band had died, and that he had been present during his last
moments.

The hypothesis that Ortega had given him the document in question had now
become admissible. Nothing was more probable than that this document had
reference to the crime of which Ortega was really the author, and that it
contained the confession of the culprit, accompanied by circumstances which
permitted of no doubt as to its truth.

And so, if the document could be read, if the key had been found, if the
cipher on which the system hung were known, no doubt of its truth could be
entertained.

But this cipher Fragoso did not know. A few more presumptions, a half-
certainty that the adventurer had invented nothing, certain circumstances tending
to prove that the secret of the matter was contained in the document--and that
was all that the gallant fellow brought back from his visit to the chief of the gang
of which Torres had been a member.

Nevertheless, little as it was, he was in all haste to relate it to Judge
Jarriquez. He knew that he had not an hour to lose, and that was why on this
very morning, at about eight o'clock, he arrived, exhausted with fatigue, within
half a mile of Manaos. The distance between there and the town he traversed in a
few minutes. A kind of irresistible presentiment urged him on, and he had almost
come to believe that Joam Dacosta's safety rested in his hands.

Suddenly Fragoso stopped as if his feet had become rooted in the ground. He
had reached the entrance to a small square, on which opened one of the town
gates.

There, in the midst of a dense crowd, arose the gallows, towering up some
twenty feet, and from it there hung the rope!

Fragoso felt his consciousness abandon him. He fell; his eyes involuntarily
closed. He did not wish to look, and these words escaped his lips: "Too late! too
late!" But by a superhuman effort he raised himself up. No; it was not too late,
the corpse of Joam Dacosta was not hanging at the end of the rope!

"Judge Jarriquez! Judge Jarriquez!" shouted Fragoso, and panting and
bewildered he rushed toward the city gate, dashed up the principal street of
Manaos, and fell half-dead on the threshold of the judge's house. The door was
shut. Fragoso had still strength enough left to knock at it.

One of the magistrate's servants came to open it; his master would see no
one.


In spite of this denial, Fragoso pushed back the man who guarded the
entrance, and with a bound threw himself into the judge's study.

"I come from the province where Torres pursued his calling as captain of the
woods!" he gasped. "Mr. Judge, Torres told the truth. Stop--stop the execution?"

"You found the gang?"

"Yes."

"And you have brought me the cipher of the document?"

Fragoso did not reply.

"Come, leave me alone! leave me alone!" shouted Jarriquez, and, a prey to
an outburst of rage, he grasped the document to tear it to atoms.

Fragoso seized his hands and stopped him. "The truth is there!" he said.

"I know," answered Jarriquez; "but it is a truth which will never see the
light!"

"Tt will appear--it must! it must!"

"Once more, have you the cipher?"

"No," replied Fragoso; "but, I repeat, Torres has not lied. One of his
companions, with whom he was very intimate, died a few months ago, and there
can be no doubt but that this man gave him the document he came to sell to
Joam Dacosta."

"No," answered Jarriquez--"no, there is no doubt about it--as far as we are
concerned; but that is not enough for those who dispose of the doomed man's
life. Leave me!"

Fragoso, repulsed, would not quit the spot. Again he threw himself at the
judge's feet. "Joam Dacosta is innocent!" he cried; "you will not leave him to
die? It was not he who committed the crime of Tijuco; it was the comrade of
Torres, the author of that document! It was Ortega!"

As he uttered the name the judge bounded backward. A kind of calm swiftly
succeeded to the tempest which raged within him. He dropped the document
from his clenched hand, smoothed it out on the table, sat down, and, passing his
hand over his eyes--"That name?" he said--"Ortega? Let us see," and then he
proceeded with the new name brought back by Fragoso as he had done with the
other names so vainly tried by himself.

After placing it above the first six letters of the paragraph he obtained the
following formula:

OrtegaPhyjsl

"Nothing!" he said. "That give us--nothing!"

And in fact the h placed under the r could not be expressed by a cipher, for,
in alphabetical order, this letter occupies an earlier position to that of the r.

The p, the y, the j, arranged beneath the letters o, t, e, disclosed the cipher 1,


4, 5, but as for the s and the / at the end of the word, the interval which separated
them from the g and the a was a dozen letters, and hence impossible to express
by a single cipher, so that they corresponded to neither g nor a.

And here appalling shouts arose in the streets; they were the cries of despair.

Fragoso jumped to one of the windows, and opened it before the judge could
hinder him.

The people filled the road. The hour had come at which the doomed man was
to start from the prison, and the crowd was flowing back to the spot where the
gallows had been erected.

Judge Jarriquez, quite frightful to look upon, devoured the lines of the
document with a fixed stare.

"The last letters!" he muttered. "Let us try once more the last letters!"

It was the last hope.

And then, with a hand whose agitation nearly prevented him from writing at
all, he placed the name of Ortega over the six last letters of the paragraph, as he
had done over the first.

An exclamation immediately escaped him. He saw, at first glance, that the
six last letters were inferior in alphabetical order to those which composed
Ortega's name, and that consequently they might yield the number.

And when he reduced the formula, reckoning each later letter from the
earlier letter of the word, he obtained.

Ortega432513Suvjhd

The number thus disclosed was 432513.

But was this number that which had been used in the document? Was it not
as erroneous as those he had previously tried?

At this moment the shouts below redoubled--shouts of pity which betrayed
the sympathy of the excited crowd. A few minutes more were all that the
doomed man had to live!

Fragoso, maddened with grief, darted from the room! He wished to see, for
the last time, his benefactor who was on the road to death! He longed to throw
himself before the mournful procession and stop it, shouting, "Do not kill this
just man! do not kill him!"

But already Judge Jarriquez had placed the given number above the first
letters of the paragraph, repeating them as often as was necessary, as follows:

432513432513432513432513Phyjslyddqfdzxgasgz
zqqeh

And then, reckoning the true letters according to their alphabetical order, he
read:

"Le véritable auteur du vol de----"


A yell of delight escaped him! This number, 432513, was the number sought
for so long! The name of Ortega had enabled him to discover it! At length he
held the key of the document, which would incontestably prove the innocence of
Joam Dacosta, and without reading any more he flew from his study into the
street, shouting:

"Halt! Halt!"

To cleave the crowd, which opened as he ran, to dash to the prison, whence
the convict was coming at the last moment, with his wife and children clinging
to him with the violence of despair, was but the work of a minute for Judge
Jarriquez.

Stopping before Joam Dacosta, he could not speak for a second, and then
these words escaped his lips:

"Innocent! Innocent!"


CHAPTER XIX. THE CRIME OF TIJUCO

ON THE ARRIVAL of the judge the mournful procession halted. A roaring
echo had repeated after him and again repeated the cry which escaped from
every mouth:

"Innocent! Innocent!"

Then complete silence fell on all. The people did not want to lose one
syllable of what was about to be proclaimed.

Judge Jarriquez sat down on a stone seat, and then, while Minha, Benito,
Manoel, and Fragoso stood round him, while Joam Dacosta clasped Yaquita to
his heart, he first unraveled the last paragraph of the document by means of the
number, and as the words appeared by the institution of the true letters for the
cryptological ones, he divided and punctuated them, and then read it out in a
loud voice. And this is what he read in the midst of profound silence:

Le véritable auteur du vol des diamants et de 43 251343251 343251 34 325
134 32513432 51 34 Ph yjslyddf dzxgas gz zqq ehx gkfndrxu ju gi l'assassinat
des soldats qui escortaient le convoi, 32513432513 432 5134325 134
32513432513 43 251343 _ocytdxvksbx bhu ypohdvy rym huhpuydkjox ph
etozsl

commis dans la nuit du vingt-deux janvier mil_ 251343 2513 43 2513 43
251343251 3432513 432 _etnpmv ffov pd pajx hy ynojyggay meqynfu qin

huit-cent vingt-six, n'est donc pas Joam Dacosta,_ 5134 3251 3425 134 3251
3432 513 4325 1343251 _mvly fgsu zmgqiz tlb qgyu gsqe uvb nrcc edgruzb

injustement condamné a mort, c'est moi, les misérable_ 34325134325
13432513 4 3251 3432 513 43 251343251 _l4msyuhgqpz drrgcroh e pqxu fivv rpl


ph onthvddaf

employé de_ l'administration du_ district diamantin,. 3432513 43
251343251343251 34 32513432 513432513 _hqsntzh hh nfepmqkyuuexkto gz
gkyuumfv ijdqdpzjq

out, moi seul, qui signe de mon vrai nom, Ortega._ 432 513 4325 134 32513
43 251 3432 513 432513 syk rp! xhxq rym vkloh hh oto zvdk spp suvjhd.

"The real author of the robbery of the diamonds and of the murder of the
soldiers who escorted the convoy, committed during the night of the twenty-
second of January, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-six, was thus not
Joam Dacosta, unjustly condemned to death; it was I, the wretched servant of the
Administration of the diamond district; yes, I alone, who sign this with my true
hame, Ortega."

The reading of this had hardly finished when the air was rent with prolonged
hurrahs.

What could be more conclusive than this last paragraph, which summarized
the whole of the document, and proclaimed so absolutely the innocence of the
fazender of Iquitos, and which snatched from the gallows this victim of a
frightful judicial mistake!

Joam Dacosta, surrounded by his wife, his children, and his friends, was
unable to shake the hands which were held out to him. Such was the strength of
his character that a reaction occurred, tears of joy escaped from his eyes, and at
the same instant his heart was lifted up to that Providence which had come to
save him so miraculously at the moment he was about to offer the last expiation
to that God who would not permit the accomplishment of that greatest of crimes,
the death of an innocent man!

Yes! There could be no doubt as to the vindication of Joam Dacosta. The true
author of the crime of Tijuco confessed of his own free will, and described the
circumstances under which it had been perpetrated!

By means of the number Judge Jarriquez interpreted the whole of the
cryptogram.

And this was what Ortega confessed.

He had been the colleague of Joam Dacosta, employed, like him, at Tijuco,
in the offices of the governor of the diamond arrayal. He had been the official
appointed to accompany the convoy to Rio de Janeiro, and, far from recoiling at
the horrible idea of enriching himself by means of murder and robbery, he had
informed the smugglers of the very day the convoy was to leave Tijuco.

During the attack of the scoundrels, who awaited the convoy just beyond
Villa Rica, he pretended to defend himself with the soldiers of the escort, and
then, falling among the dead, he was carried away by his accomplices. Hence it


was that the solitary soldier who survived the massacre had reported that Ortega
had perished in the struggle.

But the robbery did not profit the guilty man in the long run, for, a little time
afterward, he was robbed by those whom he had helped to commit the crime.

Penniless, and unable to enter Tijuco again, Ortega fled away to the
provinces in the north of Brazil, to those districts of the Upper Amazon where
the capitaes da mato are to be found. He had to live somehow, and so he joined
this not very honorable company; they neither asked him who he was nor
whence he came, and so Ortega became a captain of the woods, and for many
years he followed the trade of a chaser of men.

During this time Torres, the adventurer, himself in absolute want, became his
companion. Ortega and he became most intimate. But, as he had told Torres,
remorse began gradually to trouble the scoundrel's life. The remembrance of his
crime became horrible to him. He knew that another had been condemned in his
place! He knew subsequently that the innocent man had escaped from the last
penalty, but that he would never be free from the shadow of the capital sentence!
And then, during an expedition of his party for several months beyond the
Peruvian frontier, chance caused Ortega to visit the neighborhood of Iquitos, and
there in Joam Garral, who did not recognize him, he recognized Joam Dacosta.

Henceforth he resolved to make all the reparation he could for the injustice
of which his old comrade had been the victim. He committed to the document all
the facts relative to the crime of Tijuco, writing it first in French, which had been
his mother's native tongue, and then putting it into the mysterious form we know,
his intention being to transmit it to the fazender of Iquitos, with the cipher by
which it could be read.

Death prevented his completing his work of reparation. Mortally wounded in
a scuffle with some negroes on the Madeira, Ortega felt he was doomed. His
comrade Torres was then with him. He thought he could intrust to his friend the
secret which had so grievously darkened his life. He gave him the document, and
made him swear to convey it to Joam Dacosta, whose name and address he gave
him, and with his last breath he whispered the number 432513, without which
the document would remain undecipherable.

Ortega dead, we know how the unworthy Torres acquitted himself of his
mission, how he resolved to turn to his own profit the secret of which he was the
possessor, and how he tried to make it the subject of an odious bargain.

Torres died without accomplishing his work, and carried his secret with him.
But the name of Ortega, brought back by Fragoso, and which was the signature
of the document, had afforded the means of unraveling the cryptogram, thanks to
the sagacity of Judge Jarriquez. Yes, the material proof sought after for so long


was the incontestable witness of the innocence of Joam Dacosta, returned to life,
restored to honor.

The cheers redoubled when the worthy magistrate, in a loud voice, and for
the edification of all, read from the document this terrible history.

And from that moment Judge Jarriquez, who possessed this indubitable
proof, arranged with the chief of the police, and declined to allow Joam Dacosta,
while waiting new instructions from Rio Janeiro, to stay in any prison but his
own house.

There could be no difficulty about this, and in the center of the crowd of the
entire population of Manaos, Joam Dacosta, accompanied by all his family,
beheld himself conducted like a conquerer to the magistrate's residence.

And in that minute the honest fazender of Iquitos was well repaid for all that
he had suffered during the long years of exile, and if he was happy for his
family's sake more than for his own, he was none the less proud for his country's
sake that this supreme injustice had not been consummated!

And in all this what had become of Fragoso?

Well, the good-hearted fellow was covered with caresses! Benito, Manoel,
and Minha had overwhelmed him, and Lina had by no means spared him. He did
not know what to do, he defended himself as best he could. He did not deserve
anything like it. Chance alone had done it. Were any thanks due to him for
having recognized Torres as a captain of the woods? No, certainly not. As to his
idea of hurrying off in search of the band to which Torres had belonged, he did
not think it had been worth much, and as to the name of Ortega, he did not even
know its value.

Gallant Fragoso! Whether he wished it or no, he had none the less saved
Joam Dacosta!

And herein what a strange succession of different events all tending to the
same end. The deliverance of Fragoso at the time when he was dying of
exhaustion in the forest of Iquitos; the hospitable reception he had met with at
the fazenda, the meeting with Torres on the Brazilian frontier, his embarkation
on the jangada; and lastly, the fact that Fragoso had seen him somewhere before.

"Well, yes!" Fragoso ended by exclaiming; "but it is not to me that all this
happiness is due, it is due to Lina!"

"To me?" replied the young mulatto.

"No doubt of it. Without the liana, without the idea of the liana, could I ever
have been the cause of so much happiness?"

So that Fragoso and Lina were praised and petted by all the family, and by all
the new friends whom so many trials had procured them at Manaos, need hardly
be insisted on.


But had not Judge Jarriquez also had his share in this rehabilitation of an
innocent man? If, in spite of all the shrewdness of his analytical talents, he had
not been able to read the document, which was absolutely undecipherable to any
one who had not got the key, had he not at any rate discovered the system on
which the cryptogram was composed? Without him what could have been done
with only the name of Ortega to reconstitute the number which the author of the
crime and Torres, both of whom were dead, alone knew?

And so he also received abundant thanks.

Needless to say that the same day there was sent to Rio de Janeiro a detailed
report of the whole affair, and with it the original document and the cipher to
enable it to be read. New instructions from the minister of justice had to be
waited for, though there could be no doubt that they would order the immediate
discharge of the prisoner. A few days would thus have to be passed at Manaos,
and then Joam Dacosta and his people, free from all constraint, and released
from all apprehension, would take leave of their host to go on board once more
and continue their descent of the Amazon to Para, where the voyage was
intended to terminate with the double marriage of Minha and Manoel and Lina
and Fragoso.

Four days afterward, on the fourth of September, the order of discharge
arrived. The document had been recognized as authentic. The handwriting was
really that of Ortega, who had been formerly employed in the diamond district,
and there could be no doubt that the confession of his crime, with the minutest
details that were given, had been entirely written with his own hand.

The innocence of the convict of Villa Rica was at length admitted. The
rehabilitation of Joam Dacosta was at last officially proclaimed.

That very day Judge Jarriquez dined with the family on board the giant raft,
and when evening came he shook hands with them all. Touching were the
adieus, but an engagement was made for them to see him again on their return at
Manaos, and later on the fazenda of Iquitos.

On the morning of the morrow, the fifth of September, the signal for
departure was given. Joam Dacosta and Yaquita, with their daughter and sons,
were on the deck of the enormous raft. The jangada had its moorings slackened
off and began to move with the current, and when it disappeared round the bend
of the Rio Negro, the hurrahs of the whole population of Manaos, who were
assembled on the bank, again and again re-echoed across the stream.


CHAPTER XX. THE LOWER AMAZON
LITTLE REMAINS to tell of the second part of the voyage down the mighty


river. It was but a series of days of joy. Joam Dacosta returned to a new life,
which shed its happiness on all who belonged to him.

The giant raft glided along with greater rapidity on the waters now swollen
by the floods. On the left they passed the small village of Don Jose de Maturi,
and on the right the mouth of that Madeira which owes its name to the floating
masses of vegetable remains and trunks denuded of their foliage which it bears
from the depths of Bolivia. They passed the archipelago of Caniny, whose islets
are veritable boxes of palms, and before the village of Serpa, which,
successively transported from one back to the other, has definitely settled on the
left of the river, with its little houses, whose thresholds stand on the yellow
carpet of the beach.

The village of Silves, built on the left of the Amazon, and the town of Villa
Bella, which is the principal guarana market in the whole province, were soon
left behind by the giant raft. And so was the village of Faro and its celebrated
river of the Nhamundas, on which, in 1539, Orellana asserted he was attacked by
female warriors, who have never been seen again since, and thus gave us the
legend which justifies the immortal name of the river of the Amazons.

Here it is that the province of Rio Negro terminates. The jurisdiction of Para
then commences; and on the 22d of September the family, marveling much at a
valley which has no equal in the world, entered that portion of the Brazilian
empire which has no boundary to the east except the Atlantic.

"How magnificent!" remarked Minha, over and over again.

"How long!" murmured Manoel.

"How beautiful!" repeated Lina.

"When shall we get there?" murmured Fragoso.

And this was what might have been expected of these folks from the
different points of view, though time passed pleasantly enough with them all the
same. Benito, who was neither patient nor impatient, had recovered all his
former good humor.

Soon the jangada glided between interminable plantations of cocoa-trees
with their somber green flanked by the yellow thatch or ruddy tiles of the roofs
of the huts of the settlers on both banks from Obidos up to the town of Monto
Alegre.

Then there opened out the mouth of the Rio Trombetas, bathing with its
black waters the houses of Obidos, situated at about one hundred and eighty
miles from Belem, quite a small town, and even a "citade" with large streets
bordered with handsome habitations, and a great center for cocoa produce. Then
they saw another tributary, the Tapajos, with its greenish-gray waters descending
from the south-west; and then Santarem, a wealthy town of not less than five


thousand inhabitants, Indians for the most part, whose nearest houses were built
on the vast beach of white sand.

After its departure from Manaos the jangada did not stop anywhere as it
passed down the much less encumbered course of the Amazon. Day and night it
moved along under the vigilant care of its trusty pilot; no more stoppages either
for the gratification of the passengers or for business purposes. Unceasingly it
progressed, and the end rapidly grew nearer.

On leaving Alemquer, situated on the left bank, a new horizon appeared in
view. In place of the curtain of forests which had shut them in up to then, our
friends beheld a foreground of hills, whose undulations could be easily descried,
and beyond them the faint summits of veritable mountains vandyked across the
distant depth of sky. Neither Yaquita, nor her daughter, nor Lina, nor old Cybele,
had ever seen anything like this.

But in this jurisdiction of Para, Manoel was at home, and he could tell them
the names of the double chain which gradually narrowed the valley of the huge
river.

"To the right," said he, "that is the Sierra de Paracuarta, which curves in a
half-circle to the south! To the left, that is the Sierra de Curuva, of which we
have already passed the first outposts."

"Then they close in?" asked Fragoso.

"They close in!" replied Manoel.

And the two young men seemed to understand each other, for the same slight
but significant nodding of the head accompanied the question and reply.

At last, notwithstanding the tide, which since leaving Obidos had begun to be
felt, and which somewhat checked the progress of the raft, the town of Monto
Alegre was passed, then that of Pravnha de Onteiro, then the mouth of the
Xingu, frequented by Yurumas Indians, whose principal industry consists in
preparing their enemies' heads for natural history cabinets.

To what a superb size the Amazon had now developed as already this
monarch of rivers gave signs of opening out like a sea! Plants from eight to ten
feet high clustered along the beach, and bordered it with a forest of reeds. Porto
de Mos, Boa Vista, and Gurupa, whose prosperity is on the decline, were soon
among the places left in the rear.

Then the river divided into two important branches, which flowed off toward
the Atlantic, one going away northeastward, the other eastward, and between
them appeared the beginning of the large island of Marajo. This island is quite a
province in itself. It measures no less than a hundred and eighty leagues in
circumference. Cut up by marshes and rivers, all savannah to the east, all forest
to the west, it offers most excellent advantages for the raising of cattle, which


can here be seen in their thousands. This immense barricade of Marajo is the
natural obstacle which has compelled the Amazon to divide before precipitating
its torrents of water into the sea. Following the upper branch, the jangada, after
passing the islands of Caviana and Mexiana, would have found an embouchure
of some fifty leagues across, but it would also have met with the bar of the
prororoca, that terrible eddy which, for the three days preceding the new or full
moon, takes but two minutes instead of six hours to raise the river from twelve to
fifteen feet above ordinary high-water mark.

This is by far the most formidable of tide-races. Most fortunately the lower
branch, known as the Canal of Breves, which is the natural area of the Para, is
not subject to the visitations of this terrible phenomenon, and its tides are of a
more regular description. Araujo, the pilot, was quite aware of this. He steered,
therefore, into the midst of magnificent forests, here and there gliding past island
covered with muritis palms; and the weather was so favorable that they did not
experience any of the storms which so frequently rage along this Breves Canal.

A few days afterward the jangada passed the village of the same name,
which, although built on the ground flooded for many months in the year, has
become, since 1845, an important town of a hundred houses. Throughout these
districts, which are frequented by Tapuyas, the Indians of the Lower Amazon
become more and more commingled with the white population, and promise to
be completely absorbed by them.

And still the jangada continued its journey down the river. Here, at the risk of
entanglement, it grazed the branches of the mangliers, whose roots stretched
down into the waters like the claws of gigantic crustaceans; then the smooth
trunks of the paletuviers, with their pale-green foliage, served as the resting-
places for the long poles of the crew as they kept the raft in the strength of the
current.

Then came the Tocantins, whose waters, due to the different rivers of the
province of Goyaz, mingle with those of the Amazon by an embouchure of great
size, then the Moju, then the town of Santa Ana.

Majestically the panorama of both banks moved along without a pause, as
though some ingenious mechanism necessitated its unrolling in the opposite
direction to that of the stream.

Already numerous vessels descending the river, ubas, egariteas, vigilandas,
pirogues of all builds, and small coasters from the lower districts of the Amazon
and the Atlantic seaboard, formed a procession with the giant raft, and seemed
like sloops beside some might man-of-war.

At length there appeared on the left Santa Maria de Belem do Para--the
"town" as they call it in that country--with its picturesque lines of white houses


at many different levels, its convents nestled among the palm-trees, the steeples
of its cathedral and of Nostra Senora de Merced, and the flotilla of its
brigantines, brigs, and barks, which form its commercial communications with
the old world.

The hearts of the passengers of the giant raft beat high. At length they were
coming to the end of the voyage which they had thought they would never reach.
While the arrest of Joam detained them at Manaos, halfway on their journey,
could they ever have hoped to see the capital of the province of Para?

It was in the course of this day, the 15th of October--four months and a half
after leaving the fazenda of Iquitos--that, as they rounded a sharp bend in the
river, Belem came into sight.

The arrival of the jangada had been signaled for some days. The whole town
knew the story of Joam Dacosta. They came forth to welcome him, and to him
and his people accorded a most sympathetic reception.

Hundreds of craft of all sorts conveyed them to the fazender, and soon the
jangada was invaded by all those who wished to welcome the return of their
compatriot after his long exile. Thousands of sight-seers--or more correctly
speaking, thousands of friends crowded on to the floating village as soon as it
came to its moorings, and it was vast and solid enough to support the entire
population. Among those who hurried on board one of the first pirogues had
brought Madame Valdez. Manoel's mother was at last able to clasp to her arms
the daughter whom her son had chosen. If the good lady had not been able to
come to Iquitos, was it not as though a portion of the fazenda, with her new
family, had come down the Amazon to her?

Before evening the pilot Araujo had securely moored the raft at the entrance
of a creek behind the arsenal. That was to be its last resting-place, its last halt,
after its voyage of eight hundred leagues on the great Brazilian artery. There the
huts of the Indians, the cottage of the negroes, the store-rooms which held the
valuable cargo, would be gradually demolished; there the principal dwelling,
nestled beneath its verdant tapestry of flowers and foliage, and the little chapel
whose humble bell was then replying to the sounding clangor from the steeples
of Belem, would each in its turn disappear.

But, ere this was done, a ceremony had to take place on the jangada--the
marriage of Manoel and Minha, the marriage of Lina and Fragoso. To Father
Passanha fell the duty of celebrating the double union which promised so
happily. In that little chapel the two couples were to receive the nuptial
benediction from his hands.

If it happened to be so small as to be only capable of holding the members of
Dacosta's family, was not the giant raft large enough to receive all those who


wished to assist at the ceremony? and if not, and the crowd became so great, did
not the ledges of the river banks afford sufficient room for as many others of the
sympathizing crowd as were desirous of welcoming him whom so signal a
reparation had made the hero of the day?

It was on the morrow, the 16th of October, that with great pomp the
marriages were celebrated.

It was a magnificent day, and from about ten o'clock in the morning the raft
began to receive its crowd of guests. On the bank could be seen almost the entire
population of Belem in holiday costume. On the river, vessels of all sorts
crammed with visitors gathered round the enormous mass of timber, and the
waters of the Amazon literally disappeared even up to the left bank beneath the
vast flotilla.

When the chapel bell rang out its opening note it seemed like a signal of joy
to ear and eye. In an instant the churches of Belem replied to the bell of the
jangada. The vessels in the port decked themselves with flags up to their
mastheads, and the Brazilian colors were saluted by the many other national
flags. Discharges of musketry reverberated on all sides, and it was only with
difficulty that their joyous detonations could cope with the loud hurrahs from the
assembled thousands.


The Dacosta family came forth from their house and moved through the
crowd toward the little chapel. Joam was received with absolutely frantic
applause. He gave his arm to Madame Valdez; Yaquita was escorted by the
governor of Belem, who, accompanied by the friends of the young army
surgeon, had expressed a wish to honor the ceremony with his presence. Manoel
walked by the side of Minha, who looked most fascinating in her bride's
costume, and then came Fragoso, holding the hand of Lina, who seemed quite
radiant with joy. Then followed Benito, then old Cybele and the servants of the
worthy family between the double ranks of the crew of the jangada.

Padre Passanha awaited the two couples at the entrance of the chapel. The
ceremony was very simple, and the same bands which had formerly blessed
Joam and Yaquita were again stretched forth to give the nuptial benediction to
their child.

So much happiness was not likely to be interrupted by the sorrow of long
separation. In fact, Manoel Valdez almost immediately sent in his resignation, so
as to join the family at Iquitos, where he is still following the profession of a
country doctor.

Naturally the Fragosos did not hesitate to go back with those who were to
them friends rather than masters.

Madame Valdez had no desire to separate so happy a group, but she insisted
on one thing, and that was that they should often come and see her at Belem.
Nothing could be easier. Was not the mighty river a bond of communication
between Belem and Iquitos? In a few days the first mail steamer was to begin a
regular and rapid service, and it would then only take a week to ascend the
Amazon, on which it had taken the giant raft so many months to drift. The
important commercial negotiations, ably managed by Benito, were carried
through under the best of conditions, and soon of what had formed this jangada--
that is to say, the huge raft of timber constructed from an entire forest at Iquitos--
there remained not a trace.

A month afterward the fazender, his wife, his son, Manoel and Minha Valdez,
Lina and Fragoso, departed by one of the Amazon steamers for the immense
establishment at Iquitos of which Benito was to take the management.

Joam Dacosta re-entered his home with his head erect, and it was indeed a
family of happy hearts which he brought back with him from beyond the
Brazilian frontier. As for Fragoso, twenty times a day was he heard to repeat,
"What! without the liana?" and he wound up by bestowing the name on the
young mulatto who, by her affection for the gallant fellow, fully justified its
appropriateness. "If it were not for the one letter," he said, "would not Lina and
Liana be the same?"


FACING THE FLAG


BY JULES VERNE


CHAPTER I.

HEALTHFUL HOUSE.

The carte de visite received that day, June 15, 189-, by the director of the
establishment of Healthful House was a very neat one, and simply bore, without
escutcheon or coronet, the name:

COUNT D'ARTIGAS.

Below this name, in a corner of the card, the following address was written
in lead pencil:

"On board the schooner Ebba, anchored off New-Berne, Pamlico Sound."

The capital of North Carolina--one of the forty-four states of the Union at
this epoch--is the rather important town of Raleigh, which is about one hundred
and fifty miles in the interior of the province. It is owing to its central position
that this city has become the seat of the State legislature, for there are others that
equal and even surpass it in industrial and commercial importance, such as
Wilmington, Charlotte, Fayetteville, Edenton, Washington, Salisbury,
Tarborough, Halifax, and New-Berne. The latter town is situated on estuary of
the Neuse River, which empties itself into Pamlico Sound, a sort of vast
maritime lake protected by a natural dyke formed by the isles and islets of the
Carolina coast.

The director of Healthful House could never have imagined why the card
should have been sent to him, had it not been accompanied by a note from the
Count d'Artigas soliciting permission to visit the establishment. The personage
in question hoped that the director would grant his request, and announced that
he would present himself in the afternoon, accompanied by Captain Spade,
commander of the schooner Ebba.

This desire to penetrate to the interior of the celebrated sanitarium, then in
great request by the wealthy invalids of the United States, was natural enough on
the part of a foreigner. Others who did not bear such a high-sounding name as
the Count d'Artigas had visited it, and had been unstinting in their compliments
to the director. The latter therefore hastened to accord the authorization
demanded, and added that he would be honored to open the doors of the
establishment to the Count d'Artigas.

Healthful House, which contained a select personnel, and was assured of the
co-operation of the most celebrated doctors in the country, was a private
enterprise. Independent of hospitals and almshouses, but subjected to the
surveillance of the State, it comprised all the conditions of comfort and salubrity


essential to establishments of this description designed to receive an opulent
clientele.

It would have been difficult to find a more agreeable situation than that of
Healthful House. On the landward slope of a hill extended a park of two hundred
acres planted with the magnificent vegetation that grows so luxuriantly in that
part of North America, which is equal in latitude to the Canary and Madeira
Islands. At the furthermost limit of the park lay the wide estuary of the Neuse,
swept by the cool breezes of Pamlico Sound and by the winds that blew from the
ocean beyond the narrow lido of the coast.

Healthful House, where rich invalids were cared for under such excellent
hygienic conditions, was more generally reserved for the treatment of chronic
complaints; but the management did not decline to admit patients affected by
mental troubles, when the latter were not of an incurable nature.

It thus happened--a circumstance that was bound to attract a good deal of
attention to Healthful House, and which perhaps was the motive for the visit of
the Count d'Artigas--that a person of world-wide notoriety had for eighteen
months been under special observation there.

This person was a Frenchman named Thomas Roch, forty-five years of age.
He was, beyond question, suffering from some mental malady, but expert
alienists admitted that he had not entirely lost the use of his reasoning faculties.
It was only too evident that he had lost all notion of things as far as the ordinary
acts of life were concerned; but in regard to subjects demanding the exercise of
his genius, his sanity was unimpaired and unassailable--a fact which
demonstrates how true is the dictum that genius and madness are often closely
allied! Otherwise his condition manifested itself by complete loss of memory;--
the impossibility of concentrating his attention upon anything, lack of judgment,
delirium and incoherence. He no longer even possessed the natural animal
instinct of self-preservation, and had to be watched like an infant whom one
never permits out of one's sight. Therefore a warder was detailed to keep close
watch over him by day and by night in Pavilion No. 17, at the end of Healthful
House Park, which had been specially set apart for him.

Ordinary insanity, when it is not incurable, can only be cured by moral
means. Medicine and therapeutics are powerless, and their inefficacy has long
been recognized by specialists. Were these moral means applicable to the case of
Thomas Roch? One may be permitted to doubt it, even amid the tranquil and
salubrious surroundings of Healthful House. As a matter of fact the very
symptoms of uneasiness, changes of temper, irritability, queer traits of character,
melancholy, apathy, and a repugnance for serious occupations were distinctly
apparent; no treatment seemed capable of curing or even alleviating these


symptoms. This was patent to all his medical attendants.

It has been justly remarked that madness is an excess of subjectivity; that is
to say, a state in which the mind accords too much to mental labor and not
enough to outward impressions. In the case of Thomas Roch this indifference
was practically absolute. He lived but within himself, so to speak, a prey to a
fixed idea which had brought him to the condition in which we find him. Could
any circumstance occur to counteract it--to "exteriorize" him, as it were? The
thing was improbable, but it was not impossible.

It is now necessary to explain how this Frenchman came to quit France, what
motive attracted him to the United States, why the Federal government had
judged it prudent and necessary to intern him in this sanitarium, where every
utterance that unconsciously escaped him during his crises were noted and
recorded with the minutest care.

Eighteen months previously the Secretary of the Navy at Washington, had
received a demand for an audience in regard to a communication that Thomas
Roch desired to make to him.

As soon as he glanced at the name, the secretary perfectly understood the
nature of the communication and the terms which would accompany it, and an
immediate audience was unhesitatingly accorded.

Thomas Roch's notoriety was indeed such that, out of solicitude for the
interests confided to his keeping, and which he was bound to safeguard, he could
not hesitate to receive the petitioner and listen to the proposals which the latter
desired personally to submit to him.

Thomas Roch was an inventor--an inventor of genius. Several important
discoveries had brought him prominently to the notice of the world. Thanks to
him, problems that had previously remained purely theoretical had received
practical application. He occupied a conspicuous place in the front rank of the
army of science. It will be seen how worry, deceptions, mortification, and the
outrages with which he was overwhelmed by the cynical wits of the press
combined to drive him to that degree of madness which necessitated his
internment in Healthful House.

His latest invention in war-engines bore the name of Roch's Fulgurator. This
apparatus possessed, if he was to be believed, such superiority over all others,
that the State which acquired it would become absolute master of earth and
ocean.

The deplorable difficulties inventors encounter in connection with their
inventions are only too well known, especially when they endeavor to get them
adopted by governmental commissions. Several of the most celebrated examples
are still fresh in everybody's memory. It is useless to insist upon this point,


because there are sometimes circumstances underlying affairs of this kind upon
which it is difficult to obtain any light. In regard to Thomas Roch, however, it is
only fair to say that, as in the case of the majority of his predecessors, his
pretensions were excessive. He placed such an exorbitant price upon his new
engine that it was practicably impossible to treat with him.

This was due to the fact--and it should not be lost sight of--that in respect of
previous inventions which had been most fruitful in result, he had been imposed
upon with the greatest audacity. Being unable to obtain therefrom the profits
which he had a right to expect, his temper had become soured. He became
suspicious, would give up nothing without knowing just what he was doing,
impose conditions that were perhaps unacceptable, wanted his mere assertions
accepted as sufficient guarantee, and in any case asked for such a large sum of
money on account before condescending to furnish the test of practical
experiment that his overtures could not be entertained.

In the first place he had offered the fulgurator to France, and made known
the nature of it to the commission appointed to pass upon his proposition. The
fulgurator was a sort of autopropulsive engine, of peculiar construction, charged
with an explosive composed of new substances and which only produced its
effect under the action of a deflagrator that was also new.

When this engine, no matter in what way it was launched, exploded, not on
striking the object aimed at, but several hundred yards from it, its action upon
the atmospheric strata was so terrific that any construction, warship or floating
battery, within a zone of twelve thousand square yards, would be blown to
atoms. This was the principle of the shell launched by the Zalinski pneumatic
gun with which experiments had already been made at that epoch, but its results
were multiplied at least a hundred-fold.

If, therefore, Thomas Roch's invention possessed this power, it assured the
offensive and defensive superiority of his native country. But might not the
inventor be exaggerating, notwithstanding that the tests of other engines he had
conceived had proved incontestably that they were all he had claimed them to
be? This, experiment could alone show, and it was precisely here where the rub
came in. Roch would not agree to experiment until the millions at which he
valued his fulgurator had first been paid to him.

It is certain that a sort of disequilibrium had then occurred in his mental
faculties. It was felt that he was developing a condition of mind that would
gradually lead to definite madness. No government could possibly condescend to
treat with him under the conditions he imposed.

The French commission was compelled to break off all negotiations with
him, and the newspapers, even those of the Radical Opposition, had to admit that


it was difficult to follow up the affair.

In view of the excess of subjectivity which was unceasingly augmenting in
the profoundly disturbed mind of Thomas Roch, no one will be surprised at the
fact that the cord of patriotism gradually relaxed until it ceased to vibrate. For
the honor of human nature be it said that Thomas Roch was by this time
irresponsible for his actions. He preserved his whole consciousness only in so far
as subjects bearing directly upon his invention were concerned. In this particular
he had lost nothing of his mental power. But in all that related to the most
ordinary details of existence his moral decrepitude increased daily and deprived
him of complete responsibility for his acts.

Thomas Roch's invention having been refused by the commission, steps
ought to have been taken to prevent him from offering it elsewhere. Nothing of
the kind was done, and there a great mistake was made.

The inevitable was bound to happen, and it did. Under a growing irritability
the sentiment of patriotism, which is the very essence of the citizen--who before
belonging to himself belongs to his country-- became extinct in the soul of the
disappointed inventor. His thoughts turned towards other nations. He crossed the
frontier, and forgetting the ineffaceable past, offered the fulgurator to Germany.

There, as soon as his exorbitant demands were made known, the government
refused to receive his communication. Besides, it so happened that the military
authorities were just then absorbed by the construction of a new ballistic engine,
and imagined they could afford to ignore that of the French inventor.

As the result of this second rebuff Roch's anger became coupled with hatred-
-an instinctive hatred of humanity--especially after his pourparlers with the
British Admiralty came to naught. The English being practical people, did not at
first repulse Thomas Roch. They sounded him and tried to get round him; but
Roch would listen to nothing. His secret was worth millions, and these millions
he would have, or they would not have his secret. The Admiralty at last declined
to have anything more to do with him.

It was in these conditions, when his intellectual trouble was growing daily
worse, that he made a last effort by approaching the American Government. That
was about eighteen months before this story opens.

The Americans, being even more practical than the English, did not attempt
to bargain for Roch's fulgurator, to which, in view of the French chemist's
reputation, they attached exceptional importance. They rightly esteemed him a
man of genius, and took the measures justified by his condition, prepared to
indemnify him equitably later.

As Thomas Roch gave only too visible proofs of mental alienation, the
Administration, in the very interest of his invention, judged it prudent to


sequestrate him.

As is already known, he was not confined in a lunatic asylum, but was
conveyed to Healthful House, which offered every guarantee for the proper
treatment of his malady. Yet, though the most careful attention had been devoted
to him, no improvement had manifested itself.

Thomas Roch, let it be again remarked--this point cannot be too often
insisted upon--incapable though he was of comprehending and performing the
ordinary acts and duties of life, recovered all his powers when the field of his
discoveries was touched upon. He became animated, and spoke with the
assurance of a man who knows whereof he is descanting, and an authority that
carried conviction with it. In the heat of his eloquence he would describe the
marvellous qualities of his fulgurator and the truly extraordinary effects it
caused. As to the nature of the explosive and of the deflagrator, the elements of
which the latter was composed, their manufacture, and the way in which they
were employed, he preserved complete silence, and all attempts to worm the
secret out of him remained ineffectual. Once or twice, during the height of the
paroxysms to which he was occasionally subject, there had been reason to
believe that his secret would escape him, and every precaution had been taken to
note his slightest utterance. But Thomas Roch had each time disappointed his
watchers. If he no longer preserved the sentiment of self-preservation, he at least
knew how to preserve the secret of his discovery.

Pavilion No. 17 was situated in the middle of a garden that was surrounded
by hedges, and here Roch was accustomed to take exercise under the
surveillance of his guardian. This guardian lived in the same pavilion, slept in
the same room with him, and kept constant watch upon him, never leaving him
for an hour. He hung upon the lightest words uttered by the patient in the course
of his hallucinations, which generally occurred in the intermediary state between
sleeping and waking--watched and listened while he dreamed.

This guardian was known as Gaydon. Shortly after the sequestration of
Thomas Roch, having learned that an attendant speaking French fluently was
wanted, he had applied at Healthful House for the place, and had been engaged
to look after the new inmate.

In reality the alleged Gaydon was a French engineer named Simon Hart, who
for several years past had been connected with a manufactory of chemical
products in New Jersey. Simon Hart was forty years of age. His high forehead
was furrowed with the wrinkle that denoted the thinker, and his resolute bearing
denoted energy combined with tenacity. Extremely well versed in the various
questions relating to the perfecting of modern armaments, Hart knew everything
that had been invented in the shape of explosives, of which there were over


eleven hundred at that time, and was fully able to appreciate such a man as
Thomas Roch. He firmly believed in the power of the latter's fulgurator, and had
no doubt whatever that the inventor had conceived an engine that was capable of
revolutionizing the condition of both offensive and defensive warfare on land
and sea. He was aware that the demon of insanity had respected the man of
science, and that in Roch's partially diseased brain the flame of genius still
bummed brightly. Then it occurred to him that if, during Roch's crises, his secret
was revealed, this invention of a Frenchman would be seized upon by some
other country to the detriment of France. Impelled by a spirit of patriotism, he
made up his mind to offer himself as Thomas Roch's guardian, by passing
himself off as an American thoroughly conversant with the French language, in
order that if the inventor did at any time disclose his secret, France alone should
benefit thereby. On pretext of returning to Europe, he resigned his position at the
New Jersey manufactory, and changed his name so that none should know what
had become of him.

Thus it came to pass that Simon Hart, alias Gaydon, had been an attendant at
Healthful House for fifteen months. It required no little courage on the part of a
man of his position and education to perform the menial and exacting duties of
an insane man's attendant; but, as has been before remarked, he was actuated by
a spirit of the purest and noblest patriotism. The idea of depriving Roch of the
legitimate benefits due to the inventor, if he succeeded in learning his secret,
never for an instant entered his mind.

He had kept the patient under the closest possible observation for fifteen
months yet had not been able to learn anything from him, or worm out of him a
single reply to his questions that was of the slightest value. But he had become
more convinced than ever of the importance of Thomas Roch's discovery, and
was extremely apprehensive lest the partial madness of the inventor should
become general, or lest he should die during one of his paroxysms and carry his
secret with him to the grave.

This was Simon Hart's position, and this the mission to which he had wholly
devoted himself in the interest of his native country.

However, notwithstanding his deceptions and troubles, Thomas Roch's
physical health, thanks to his vigorous constitution, was not particularly affected.
A man of medium height, with a large head, high, wide forehead, strongly-cut
features, iron-gray hair and moustache, eyes generally haggard, but which
became piercing and imperious when illuminated by his dominant idea, thin lips
closely compressed, as though to prevent the escape of a word that could betray
his secret--such was the inventor confined in one of the pavilions of Healthful
House, probably unconscious of his sequestration, and confided to the


surveillance of Simon Hart the engineer, become Gaydon the warder.


CHAPTER II.

COUNT D'ARTIGAS.

Just who was this Count d'Artigas? A Spaniard? So his name would appear
to indicate. Yet on the stern of his schooner, in letters of gold, was the name
Ebba, which is of pure Norwegian origin. And had you asked him the name of
the captain of the Ebba, he would have replied, Spade, and would doubtless have
added that that of the boatswain was Effrondat, and that of the ship's cook,
Helim--all singularly dissimilar and indicating very different nationalities.

Could any plausible hypothesis be deducted from the type presented by
Count d'Artigas? Not easily. If the color of his skin, his black hair, and the easy
grace of his attitude denoted a Spanish origin, the ensemble of his person
showed none of the racial characteristics peculiar to the natives of the Iberian
peninsula.

He was a man of about forty-five years of age, about the average height, and
robustly constituted. With his calm and haughty demeanor he resembled an
Hindoo lord in whose blood might mingle that of some superb type of Malay. If
he was not naturally of a cold temperament, he at least, with his imperious
gestures and brevity of speech, endeavored to make it appear that he was. As to
the language usually spoken by him and his crew, it was one of those idioms
current in the islands of the Indian Ocean and the adjacent seas. Yet when his
maritime excursions brought him to the coasts of the old or new world he spoke
English with remarkable facility, and with so slight an accent as to scarcely
betray his foreign origin.

None could have told anything about his past, nor even about his present life,
nor from what source he derived his fortune,--obviously a large one, inasmuch as
he was able to gratify his every whim and lived in the greatest luxury whenever
he visited America,--nor where he resided when at home, nor where was the port
from which his schooner hailed, and none would have ventured to question him
upon any of these points so little disposed was he to be communicative. He was
not the kind of man to give anything away or compromise himself in the
slightest degree, even when interviewed by American reporters.

All that was known about him was what was published in the papers when
the arrival of the Ebba was reported in some port, and particularly in the ports of
the east coast of the United States, where the schooner was accustomed to put in
at regular periods to lay in provisions and stores for a lengthy voyage. She would
take on board not only flour, biscuits, preserves, fresh and dried meat, live stock,


wines, beers, and spirits, but also clothing, household utensils, and objects of
luxury--all of the finest quality and highest price, and which were paid for either
in dollars, guineas, or other coins of various countries and denominations.

Consequently, if no one knew anything about the private life of Count
d'Artigas, he was nevertheless very well known in the various ports of the United
States from the Florida peninsula to New England.

It is therefore in no way surprising that the director of Healthful House
should have felt greatly flattered by the Count's visit, and have received him with
every mark of honor and respect.

It was the first time that the schooner Ebba had dropped anchor in the port of
New-Berne, and no doubt a mere whim of her owner had brought him to the
mouth of the Neuse. Otherwise why should he have come to such a place?
Certainly not to lay in stores, for Pamlico Sound offered neither the resources
nor facilities to be found in such ports as Boston, New York, Dover, Savannah,
Wilmington in North Carolina, and Charleston in South Carolina. What could he
have procured with his piastres and banknotes in the small markets of New-
Berne? This chief town of Craven County contained barely six thousand
inhabitants. Its commerce consisted principally in the exportation of grain, pigs,
furniture, and naval munitions. Besides, a few weeks previously, the schooner
had loaded up for some destination which, as usual, was unknown.

Had this enigmatical personage then come solely for the purpose of visiting
Healthful House? Very likely. There would have been nothing surprising in the
fact, seeing that the establishment enjoyed a high and well-merited reputation.

Or perhaps the Count had been inspired by curiosity to meet Thomas Roch?
This curiosity would have been legitimate and natural enough in view of the
universal renown of the French inventor. Fancy--a mad genius who claimed that
his discoveries were destined to revolutionize the methods of modern military
art!

As he had notified the director he would do, the Count d'Artigas presented
himself in the afternoon at the door of Healthful House, accompanied by Captain
Spade, the commander of the Ebba.

In conformity with orders given, both were admitted and conducted to the
office of the director. The latter received his distinguished visitor with
empressement, placed himself at his disposal, and intimated his intention of
personally conducting him over the establishment, not being willing to concede
to anybody else the honor of being his cicerone. The Count on his part was
profuse in the expression of his thanks for the considerations extended to him.

They went over the common rooms and private habitations of the
establishment, the director prattling unceasingly about the care with which the


patients were tended--much better care, if he was to be believed, than they could
possibly have had in the bosoms of their families--and priding himself upon the
results achieved, and which had earned for the place its well-merited success.

The Count d'Artigas listened to his ceaseless chatter with apparent interest,
probably in order the better to dissemble the real motive of his visit. However,
after going the rounds for an hour he ventured to remark:

"Have you not among your patients, sir, one anent whom there was a great
deal of talk some time ago, and whose presence here contributed in no small
measure to attract public attention to Healthful House?"

"You refer to Thomas Roch, I presume, Count?" queried the director.

"Precisely--that Frenchman--that inventor--whose mental condition is said to
be very precarious."

"Very precarious, Count, and happily so, perhaps! In my opinion humanity
has nothing to gain by his discoveries, the application of which would increase
the already too numerous means of destruction."

"You speak wisely, sir, and I entirely agree with you. Real progress does not
lie in that direction, and I regard as inimical to society all those who seek to
follow it. But has this inventor entirely lost the use of his intellectual faculties?"

"Entirely, no; save as regards the ordinary things of life. In this respect he no
longer possesses either comprehension or responsibility. His genius as an
inventor, however, remains intact; it has survived his moral degeneracy, and, had
his insensate demands been complied with, I have no doubt he would have
produced a new war engine--which the world can get along very well without."

"Very well without, as you say, sir," re-echoed the Count d'Artigas, and
Captain Spade nodded approval.

"But you will be able to judge for yourself, Count, for here is the pavilion
occupied by Thomas Roch. If his confinement is well justified from the point of
view of public security he is none the less treated with all the consideration due
to him and the attention which his condition necessitates. Besides, Healthful
House is beyond the reach of indiscreet persons who might...."

The director completed the phrase with a significant motion of his head--
which brought an imperceptible smile to the lips of the stranger.

"But," asked the Count, "is Thomas Roch never left alone?"

"Never, Count, never. He has a permanent attendant in whom we have
implicit confidence, who speaks his language and keeps the closest possible
watch upon him. If in some way or other some indication relative to his
discovery were to escape him, it would be immediately noted down and its value
would be passed upon by those competent to judge."

Here the Count d'Artigas stole a rapid and meaning glance at Captain Spade,


who responded with a gesture which said plainly enough: "I understand." And
had any one observed the captain during the visit, they could not have failed to
remark that he examined with the greatest minuteness that portion of the park
surrounding Pavilion No. 17, and the different paths leading to the latter--
probably in view of some prearranged scheme.

The garden of the pavilion was near the high wall surrounding the property,
from the foot of which on the other side the hill sloped gently to the right bank
of the Neuse.

The pavilion itself was a one-story building surmounted by a terrace in the
Italian style. It contained two rooms and an ante-room with strongly-barred
windows. On each side and in rear of the habitation were clusters of fine trees,
which were then in full leaf. In front was a cool, green velvety lawn, ornamented
with shrubs and brilliantly tinted flowers. The whole garden extended over about
half an acre, and was reserved exclusively for the use of Thomas Roch, who was
free to wander about it at pleasure under the surveillance of his guardian.

When the Count d'Artigas, Captain Spade, and the director entered the
garden, the first person they saw was the warder Gaydon, standing at the door of
the pavilion. Unnoticed by the director the Count d'Artigas eyed the attendant
with singular persistence.

It was not the first time that strangers had come to see the occupant of
Pavilion No. 17, for the French inventor was justly regarded as the most
interesting inmate of Healthful House. Nevertheless, Gaydon's attention was
attracted by the originality of the type presented by the two visitors, of whose
nationality he was ignorant. If the name of the Count d'Artigas was not
unfamiliar to him, he had never had occasion to meet that wealthy gentleman
during the latter's sojourn in the eastern ports. He therefore had no idea as to who
the Count was. Neither was he aware that the schooner Ebba was then anchored
at the entrance to the Neuse, at the foot of the hill upon which Healthful House
was situated.

"Gaydon," demanded the director, "where is Thomas Roch?"

"Yonder," replied the warder, pointing to a man who was walking
meditatively under the trees in rear of the pavilion.

"The Count d'Artigas has been authorized to visit Healthful House," the
director explained; "and does not wish to go away without having seen Thomas
Roch, who was lately the subject of a good deal too much discussion."

"And who would be talked about a great deal more," added the Count, "had
the Federal Government not taken the precaution to confine him in this
establishment."

"A necessary precaution, Count."


"Necessary, as you observe, Mr. Director. It is better for the peace of the
world that his secret should die with him."

After having glanced at the Count d'Artigas, Gaydon had not uttered a word;
but preceding the two strangers he walked towards the clump of trees where the
inventor was pacing back and forth.

Thomas Roch paid no attention to them. He appeared to be oblivious of their
presence.

Meanwhile, Captain Spade, while being careful not to excite suspicion, had
been minutely examining the immediate surroundings of the pavilion and the
end of the park in which it was situated. From the top of the sloping alleys he
could easily distinguish the peak of a mast which showed above the wall of the
park. He recognized the peak at a glance as being that of the Ella, and knew
therefore that the wall at this part skirted the right bank of the Neuse.

The Count d'Artigas' whole attention was concentrated upon the French
inventor. The latter's health appeared to have suffered in no way from his
eighteen months' confinement; but his queer attitude, his incoherent gestures, his
haggard eye, and his indifference to what was passing around him testified only
too plainly to the degeneration of his mental faculties.

At length Thomas Roch dropped into a seat and with the end of a switch
traced in the sand of the alley the outline of a fortification. Then kneeling down
he made a number of little mounds that were evidently intended to represent
bastions. He next plucked some leaves from a neighboring tree and stuck them in
the mounds like so many tiny flags. All this was done with the utmost
seriousness and without any attention whatever being paid to the onlookers.

It was the amusement of a child, but a child would have lacked this
characteristic gravity.

"Is he then absolutely mad?" demanded the Count d'Artigas, who in spite of
his habitual impassibility appeared to be somewhat disappointed.

"I warned you, Count, that nothing could be obtained from him."

"Couldn't he at least pay some attention to us?"

"It would perhaps be difficult to induce him to do so."

Then turning to the attendant:

"Speak to him, Gaydon. Perhaps he will answer you."

"Oh! he'll answer me right enough, sir, never fear," replied Gaydon.

He went up to the inventor and touching him on the shoulder, said gently:
"Thomas Roch!"

The latter raised his head, and of the persons present he doubtless saw but his
keeper, though Captain Spade had come up and all formed a circle about him.

"Thomas Roch," continued Gaydon, speaking in English, "here are some


visitors to see you. They are interested in your health--in your work."

The last word alone seemed to rouse him from his indifference.

"My work?" he replied, also in English, which he spoke like a native.

Then taking a pebble between his index finger and bent thumb, as a boy
plays at marbles, he projected it against one of the little sand-heaps. It scattered,
and he jumped for joy.

"Blown to pieces! The bastion is blown to pieces! My explosive has
destroyed everything at one blow!" he shouted, the light of triumph flashing in
his eyes.

"You see," said the director, addressing the Count d'Artigas. "The idea of his
invention never leaves him."

"And it will die with him," affirmed the attendant.

"Couldn't you, Gaydon, get him to talk about his fulgurator?" asked his chief.

"I will try, if you order me to do so, sir."

"Well, I do order you, for I think it might interest the Count d'Artigas."

"Certainly," assented the Count, whose physiognomy betrayed no sign of the
sentiments which were agitating him.

"T ought to warn you that I risk bringing on another fit," observed Gaydon.

"You can drop the conversation when you consider it prudent. Tell Thomas
Roch that a foreigner wishes to negotiate with him for the purchase of his
fulgurator."

"But are you not afraid he may give his secret away?" questioned the Count.

He spoke with such vivacity that Gaydon could not restrain a glance of
distrust, which, however, did not appear to disturb the equanimity of that
impenetrable nobleman.

"No fear of that," said the warder. "No promise would induce him to divulge
his secret. Until the millions he demands are counted into his hand he will
remain as mute as a stone."

"I don't happen to be carrying those millions about me," remarked the Count
quietly.

Gaydon again touched Roch on the shoulder and repeated:

"Thomas Roch, here are some foreigners who are anxious to acquire your
invention."

The madman started.

"My invention?" he cried. "My deflagrator?"

And his growing animation plainly indicated the imminence of the fit that
Gaydon had been apprehensive about, and which questions of this character
invariably brought on.

"How much will you give me for it--how much?" continued Roch. "How


much--how much?"

"Ten million dollars," replied Gaydon.

"Ten millions! Ten millions! A fulgurator ten million times more powerful
than anything hitherto invented! Ten millions for an autopropulsive projectile
which, when it explodes, destroys everything in sight within a radius of over
twelve thousand square yards! Ten millions for the only deflagrator that can
provoke its explosion! Why, all the wealth of the world wouldn't suffice to
purchase the secret of my engine, and rather than sell it at such a price I would
cut my tongue in half with my teeth. Ten millions, when it is worth a billion--a
billion--a billion!"

It was clear that Roch had lost all notion of things, and had Gaydon offered
him ten billions the madman would have replied in exactly the same manner.

The Count d'Artigas and Captain Spade had not taken their eyes off him. The
Count was impassible as usual, though his brow had darkened, but the captain
shook his head in a manner that implied plainly: "Decidedly there is nothing to
hope from this poor devil!"

After his outburst Roch fled across the garden crying hoarsely:

"Billions! Billions!"

Gaydon turned to the director and remarked:

"I told you how it would be."

Then he rushed after his patient, caught him by the arm, and led him, without
any attempt at resistance, into the pavilion and closed the door.

The Count d'Artigas remained alone with the director, Captain Spade having
strolled off again in the direction of the wall at the bottom of the park.

"You see I was not guilty of exaggeration, Count," said the director. "It is
obvious to every one that Thomas Roch is becoming daily worse. In my opinion
his case is a hopeless one. If all the money he asks for were offered to him,
nothing could be got from him."

"Very likely," replied the Count, "still, if his pecuniary demands are
supremely absurd, he has none the less invented an engine the power of which is
infinite, one might say."

"That is the opinion expressed by competent persons, Count. But what he has
discovered will ere long be lost with himself in one of these fits which are
becoming more frequent and intense. Very soon even the motive of interest, the
only sentiment that appears to have survived in his mind, will become extinct."

"Mayhap the sentiment of hatred will remain, though," muttered the Count,
as Spade joined them at the garden gate.


CHAPTER III.

KIDNAPPED.

Half an hour later the Count d'Artigas and Captain Spade were following the
beech-lined road that separated the Healthful House estate from the right bank of
the Neuse. Both had taken leave of the director, the latter declaring himself
greatly honored by their visit, and the former thanking him warmly for his
courteous reception. A hundred-dollar bill left as a tip for the staff of the
establishment had certainly not belied the Count's reputation for generosity. He
was--there could be no doubt about it--a foreigner of the highest distinction, if
distinction be measured by generosity.

Issuing by the gate at the main entrance to Healthful House, they had skirted
the wall that surrounded the property, and which was high enough to preclude
the possibility of climbing it. Not a word passed between them for some time;
the Count was deep in thought and Captain Spade was not in the habit of
addressing him without being first spoken to.

At last when they stood beneath the rear wall behind which, though it was
not visible, the Count knew Pavilion No. 17 was situated, he said:

"You managed, I presume, to thoroughly explore the place, and are
acquainted with every detail of it?"

"Certainly, Count" replied Captain Spade, emphasizing the title.

"You are perfectly sure about it?"

"Perfectly. I could go through the park with my eyes shut. If you still persist
in carrying out your scheme the pavilion can be easily reached."

"I do persist, Spade."

"Notwithstanding Thomas Roch's mental condition?"

"Notwithstanding his condition; and if we succeed in carrying him off----"

"That is my affair. When night comes on I undertake to enter the park of
Healthful House, and then the pavilion garden without being seen by anybody."

"By the entrance gate?"

"No, on this side."

"Yes, but on this side there is the wall, and if you succeed in climbing it, how
are you going to get over it again with Thomas Roch? What if the madman cries
out--what if he should resist--what if his keeper gives the alarm?"

"Don't worry yourself in the least about that. We have only got to go in and
come out by this door."

Captain Spade pointed to a narrow door let into the wall a few paces distant,
and which was doubtless used by the staff of the establishment when they had
occasion to go out by the river.

"That is the way I propose to go in. It's much easier than scaling the wall


with a ladder."

"But the door is closed."

"Tt will open."

"Has it no bolts?"

"Yes, but I shot them back while we were strolling about, and the director
didn't notice what I had done."

"How are you going to open it?" queried the Count, going to the door.

"Here is the key," replied Spade, producing it.

He had withdrawn it from the lock, where it happened to be, when he had
unbolted the door.

"Capital!" exclaimed the Count. "It couldn't be better. The business will be
easier than I expected. Let us get back to the schooner. At eight o'clock one of
the boats will put you ashore with five men."

"Yes, five men will do," said Captain Spade. "There will be enough of them
to effect our object even if the keeper is aroused and it becomes necessary to put
him out of the way."

"Put him out of the way--well, if it becomes absolutely necessary of course
you must, but it would be better to seize him too and bring him aboard the Ebba
Who knows but what he has already learned a part of Roch's secret?"

True."

"Besides, Thomas Roch is used to him, and I don't propose to make him
change his habitudes in any way."

This observation was accompanied by such a significant smile that Captain
Spade could entertain no doubt as to the rdle reserved for the warder of Healthful
House.

The plan to kidnap them both was thus settled, and appeared to have every
chance of being successful; unless during the couple of hours of daylight that yet
remained it was noticed that the key of the door had been stolen and the bolts
drawn back, Captain Spade and his men could at least count upon being able to
enter the park, and the rest, the captain affirmed, would be easy enough.

Thomas Roch was the only patient in the establishment isolated and kept
under special surveillance. All the other invalids lived in the main building, or
occupied pavilions in the front of the park. The plan was to try and seize Roch
and Gaydon separately and bind and gag them before they could cry out.

The Count d'Artigas and his companion wended their way to a creek where
one of the Ebba's boats awaited them. The schooner was anchored two cable
lengths from the shore, her sails neatly rolled upon her yards, which were
squared as neatly as those of a pleasure yacht or of a man-of-war. At the peak of
the mainmast a narrow red pennant was gently swayed by the wind, which came


in fitful puffs from the east.

The Count and the captain jumped into the boat and a few strokes of the four
oars brought them alongside of the schooner. They climbed on deck and going
forward to the jib-boom, leaned over the starboard bulwark and gazed at an
object that floated on the water a few strokes ahead of the vessel. It was a small
buoy that was rocked by the ripple of the ebbing tide.

Twilight gradually set in, and the outline of New-Berne on the left bank of
the sinuous Neuse became more and more indistinct until it disappeared in the
deepening shades of night. A mist set in from the sea, but though it obscured the
moon it brought no sign of rain. The lights gleamed out one by one in the houses
of the town. The fishing smacks came slowly up the river to their anchorage,
impelled by the oars of their crews which struck the water with sharp, rhythmical
strokes, and with their sails distended on the chance of catching an occasional
puff of the dropping wind to help them along. A couple of steamers passed,
sending up volumes of black smoke and myriads of sparks from their double
stacks, and lashing the water into foam with their powerful paddles.

At eight o'clock the Count d'Artigas appeared on the schooner's deck
accompanied by a man about fifty years of age, to whom he remarked:

"Tt is time to go, Serko."

"Very well, I will tell Spade," replied Serko.

At that moment the captain joined them.

"You had better get ready to go," said the Count.

"All is ready."

"Be careful to prevent any alarm being given, and arrange matters so that no
one will for a minute suspect that Thomas Roch and his keeper have been
brought on board the Ebba."

"They wouldn't find them if they came to look for them," observed Serko,
shrugging his shoulders and laughing heartily as though he had perpetrated a
huge joke.

"Nevertheless, it is better not to arouse their suspicion," said d'Artigas.

The boat was lowered, and Captain Spade and five sailors took their places
in it. Four of the latter got out the oars. The boatswain, Effrondat, who was to
remain in charge of the boat, went to the stern beside Captain Spade and took the
tiller.

"Good luck, Spade," said Serko with a smile, "and don't make more noise
about it than if you were a gallant carrying off his lady-love."

"I won't--unless that Gaydon chap--"

"We must have both Roch and Gaydon," insisted the Count d'Artigas.

"That is understood," replied Spade.


The boat pushed off, and the sailors on the deck of the schooner watched it
till it was lost to sight in the darkness.

Pending its return, no preparations for the Ebba's departure were made.
Perhaps there was no intention of quitting the port after the men had been
kidnapped. Besides, how could the vessel have reached the open sea? Not a
breath of air was now stirring, and in half an hour the tide would be setting in
again, and rising strongly and rapidly for several miles above New-Berne.

Anchored, as has already been said, a couple of cable-lengths from the shore,
the Ebba might have been brought much nearer to it, for the water was deep
enough, and this would have facilitated the task of the kidnappers when they
returned from their expedition. If, however, the Count d'Artigas preferred to let
the vessel stay where she was, he probably had his reasons.

Not a soul was in sight on the bank, and the road, with its borders of beech
trees that skirted the wall of Healthful House estate, was equally deserted. The
boat was made fast to the shore. Then Captain Spade and his four sailors landed,
leaving the boatswain in charge, and disappeared amid the trees.

When they reached the wall Captain Spade stopped and the sailors drew up
on each side of the doorway. The captain had only to turn the key in the lock and
push the door, unless one of the servants, noticing that the door was not secured
as usual, had bolted it. In this event their task would be an extremely difficult
one, even if they succeeded in scaling the high wall.

The captain put his ear to the key-hole and listened.

Not a sound was to be heard in the park. Not even a leaf was rustling in the
branches of the beeches under which they were standing. The surrounding
country was wrapt in the profoundest silence.

Captain Spade drew the key from his pocket, inserted it in the lock and
turned it noiselessly. Then he cautiously pushed the door, which opened inward.

Things were, then, just as he had left them, and no one had noticed the theft
of the key.

After assuring himself that nobody happened to be in the neighborhood of
the pavilion the captain entered, followed by his men. The door was left wide
open, so that they could beat a hurried and uninterrupted retreat in case of
necessity. The trees and bushes in this shady part of the park were very thick,
and it was so dark that it would not have been easy to distinguish the pavilion
had not a light shone brightly in one of the windows.

No doubt this was the window of the room occupied by Roch and his
guardian, Gaydon, seeing that the latter never left the patient placed in his charge
either by night or day. Captain Spade had expected to find him there.

The party approached cautiously, taking the utmost precaution to avoid


kicking a pebble or stepping on a twig, the noise of which might have revealed
their presence. In this way they reached the door of the pavilion near which was
the curtained window of the room in which the light was burning.

But if the door was locked, how were they going to get in? Captain Spade
must have asked himself. He had no key, and to attempt to effect an entrance
through the window would be hazardous, for, unless Gaydon could be prevented
from giving the alarm, he would rouse the whole establishment.

There was no help for it, however. The essential was to get possession of
Roch. If they could kidnap Gaydon, too, in conformity with the intentions of the
Count d'Artigas, so much the better. If not--

Captain Spade crept stealthily to the window, and standing on tiptoe, looked
in. Through an aperture in the curtain he could see all over the room.

Gaydon was standing beside Thomas Roch, who had not yet recovered from
the fit with which he had been attacked during the Count d'Artigas' visit. His
condition necessitated special attention, and the warder was ministering to the
patient under the direction of a third person.

The latter was one of the doctors attached to Healthful House, and had been
at once sent to the pavilion by the director when Roch's paroxysm came on. His
presence of course rendered the situation more complicated and the work of the
kidnappers more difficult.

Roch, fully dressed, was extended upon a sofa. He was now fairly calm. The
paroxysm, which was abating, would be followed by several hours of torpor and
exhaustion.

Just as Captain Spade peeped through the window the doctor was making
preparations to leave. The Captain heard him say to Gaydon that his (the
doctor's) presence was not likely to be required any more that night, and that
there was nothing to be done beyond following the instructions he had given.

The doctor then walked towards the door, which, it will be remembered, was
close to the window in front of which Spade and his men were standing. If they
remained where they were they could not fail to be seen, not only by the doctor,
but by the warder, who was accompanying him to the door.

Before they made their appearance, however, the sailors, at a sign from their
chief, had dispersed and hidden themselves behind the bushes, while Spade
himself crouched in the shadow beneath the window. Luckily Gaydon had not
brought the lamp with him, so that the captain was in no danger of being seen.

As he was about to take leave of Gaydon, the doctor stopped on the step and
remarked:

"This is one of the worst attacks our patient has had. One or two more like
that and he will lose the little reason he still possesses."


"Just so," said Gaydon. "I wonder that the director doesn't prohibit all visitors
from entering the pavilion. Roch owes his present attack to a Count d'Artigas,
for whose amusement harmful questions were put to him."

"T will call the director's attention to the matter," responded the doctor.

He then descended the steps and Gaydon, leaving the door of the pavilion
ajar, accompanied him to the end of the path.

When they had gone Captain Spade stood up, and his men rejoined him.

Had they not better profit by the chance thus unexpectedly afforded them to
enter the room and secure Roch, who was in a semi-comatose condition, and
then await Gaydon's return, and seize the warder as he entered?

This would have involved considerable risk. Gaydon, at a glance, would
perceive that his patient was missing and raise an alarm; the doctor would come
running back; the whole staff of Healthful House would turn out, and Spade
would not have time to escape with his precious prisoner and lock the door in the
wall after him.

He did not have much chance to deliberate about it, for the warder was heard
returning along the gravel path. Spade decided that the best thing to be done was
to spring upon him as he passed and stifle his cries and overpower him before he
could attempt to offer any resistance. The carrying off of the mad inventor would
be easy enough, inasmuch as he was unconscious, and could not raise a finger to
help himself.

Gaydon came round a clump of bushes and approached the entrance to the
pavilion. As he raised his foot to mount the steps the four sailors sprang upon
him, bore him backwards to the ground, and had gagged him, securely bound
him hand and foot, and bandaged his eyes before he began to realize what had
happened.

Two of the men then kept guard over him, while Captain Spade and the
others entered the house.

As the captain had surmised, Thomas Roch had sunk into such a torpor that
he could have heard nothing of what had been going on outside. Reclining at full
length, with his eyes closed, he might have been taken for a dead man but for his
heavy breathing. There was no need either to bind or gag him. One man took
him by the head and another by the feet and started off with him to the schooner.

Captain Spade was the last to quit the house after extinguishing the lamp and
closing the door behind him. In this way there was no reason to suppose that the
inmates would be missed before morning.

Gaydon was carried off in the same way as Thomas Roch had been. The two
remaining sailors lifted him and bore him quietly but rapidly down the path to
the door in the wall. The park was pitch dark. Not even a glimmer of the lights in


the windows of Healthful House could be seen through the thick foliage.

Arrived at the wall, Spade, who had led the way, stepped aside to allow the
sailors with their burdens to pass through, then followed and closed and locked
the door. He put the key in his pocket, intending to throw it into the Neuse as
soon as they were safely on board the schooner.

There was no one on the road, nor on the bank of the river.

The party made for the boat, and found that Effrondat, the boatswain, had
made all ready to receive them.

Thomas Roch and Gaydon were laid in the bottom of the boat, and the
sailors again took their places at the oars.

"Hurry up, Effrondat, and cast off the painter," ordered the captain.

The boatswain obeyed, and pushed the boat off with his foot as he scrambled
in.

The men bent to their oars and rowed rapidly to the schooner, which was
easily distinguishable, having hung out a light at her mizzenmast head.

In two minutes they were alongside.

The Count d'Artigas was leaning on the bulwarks by the gangway.

"All right, Spade?" he questioned.

"Yes, sir, all right!"

"Both of them?"

"Both the madman and his keeper."

"Doesn't anybody know about it up at Healthful House?

"Not a soul.”

It was not likely that Gaydon, whose eyes and ears were bandaged, but who
preserved all his sang-froid, could have recognized the voices of the Count
d'Artigas and Captain Spade. Nor did he have the chance to. No attempt was
immediately made to hoist him on board. He had been lying in the bottom of the
boat alongside the schooner for fully half an hour, he calculated, before he felt
himself lifted, and then lowered, doubtless to the bottom of the hold.

The kidnapping having been accomplished it would seem that it only
remained for the Ebba to weigh anchor, descend the estuary and make her way
out to sea through Pamlico Sound. Yet no preparations for departure were made.

Was it not dangerous to stay where they were after their daring raid? Had the
Count d'Artigas hidden his prisoners so securely as to preclude the possibility of
their being discovered if the Ebba, whose presence in proximity to Healthful
House could not fail to excite suspicion, received a visit from the New-Berne
police?

However this might have been, an hour after the return of the expedition,
every soul on board save the watch--the Count d'Artigas, Serko, and Captain


Spade in their respective cabins, and the crew in the forecastle, were sound
asleep.


CHAPTER IV.

THE SCHOONER EBBA.

It was not till the next morning, and then very leisurely, that the Ebba began
to make preparations for her departure. From the extremity of New-Berne quay
the crew might have been seen holystoning the deck, after which they loosened
the reef lines, under the direction of Effrondat, the boatswain, hoisted in the
boats and cleared the halyards.

At eight o'clock the Count d'Artigas had not yet appeared on deck. His
companion, Serko the engineer, as he was called on board, had not quitted his
cabin. Captain Spade was strolling quietly about giving orders.

The Ebba would have made a splendid racing yacht, though she had never
participated in any of the yacht races either on the North American or British
coasts. The height of her masts, the extent of the canvas she carried, her shapely,
raking hull, denoted her to be a craft of great speed, and her general lines
showed that she was also built to weather the roughest gales at sea. In a
favorable wind she would probably make twelve knots an hour.

Notwithstanding these advantages, however, she must in a dead calm
necessarily suffer from the same disadvantages as other sailing vessels, and it
might have been supposed that the Count d'Artigas would have preferred a
steam-yacht with which he could have gone anywhere, at any time, in any
weather. But apparently he was satisfied to stick to the old method, even when
he made his long trips across the Atlantic.

On this particular morning the wind was blowing gently from the west,
which was very favorable to the Ebba, and would enable her to stand straight out
of the Neuse, across Pamlico Sound, and through one of the inlets that led to the
open sea.

At ten o'clock the Ebba was still rocking lazily at anchor, her stem up stream
and her cable tautened by the rapidly ebbing tide. The small buoy that on the
previous evening had been moored near the schooner was no longer to be seen,
and had doubtless been hoisted in.

Suddenly a gun boomed out and a slight wreath of white smoke arose from
the battery. It was answered by other reports from the guns on the chain of
islands along the coast.

At this moment the Count d'Artigas and Engineer Serko appeared on deck.
Captain Spade went to meet them.


"Guns barking," he said laconically.

"We expected it,” replied Serko, shrugging his shoulders. "They are signals
to close the passes."

"What has that to do with us?" asked the Count d'Artigas quietly.

"Nothing at all," said the engineer.

They all, of course, knew that the alarm-guns indicated that the
disappearance of Thomas Roch and the warder Gaydon from Healthful House
had been discovered.

At daybreak the doctor had gone to Pavilion No. 17 to see how his patient
had passed the night, and had found no one there. He immediately notified the
director, who had the grounds thoroughly searched. It was then discovered that
the door in rear of the park was unbolted, and that, though locked, the key had
been taken away. It was evident that Roch and his attendant had been carried out
that way. But who were the kidnappers? No one could possibly imagine. All that
could be ascertained was that at half-past seven on the previous night one of the
doctors had attended Thomas Roch, who was suffering from one of his fits, and
that when the medical man had left him the invalid was in an unconscious
condition. What had happened after the doctor took leave of Gaydon at the end
of the garden-path could not even be conjectured.

The news of the disappearance was telegraphed to New Berne, and thence to
Raleigh. On receipt of it the Governor had instantly wired orders that no vessel
was to be allowed to quit Pamlico Sound without having been first subjected to a
most rigorous search. Another dispatch ordered the cruiser Falcon, which was
stationed in the port, to carry out the Governor's instructions in this respect. At
the same time measures were taken to keep a strict lookout in every town and
village in the State.

The Count d'Artigas could see the Falcon, which was a couple of miles away
to the east in the estuary, getting steam up and making hurried preparations to
carry out her mission. It would take at least an hour before the warship could be
got ready to steam out, and the schooner might by that time have gained a good
Start.

"Shall I weigh anchor?" demanded Captain Spade.

"Yes, as we have a fair wind; but you can take your time about it," replied the
Count d'Artigas.

"The passes of Pamlico Sound will be under observation," observed Engineer
Serko, "and no vessel will be able to get out without receiving a visit from
gentlemen as inquisitive as they will be indiscreet."

"Never mind, get under way all the same," ordered the Count. "When the
officers of the cruiser or the Custom-House officers have been over the Ebba the


embargo will be raised. I shall be indeed surprised if we are not allowed to go
about our business."

"With a thousand pardons for the liberty taken, and best wishes for a good
voyage and speedy return,” chuckled Engineer Serko, following the phrase with
a loud and prolonged laugh.

When the news was received at New-Berne, the authorities at first were
puzzled to know whether the missing inventor and his keeper had fled or been
carried off. As, however, Roch's flight could not have taken place without the
connivance of Gaydon, this supposition was speedily abandoned. In the opinion
of the director and management of Healthful House the warder was absolutely
above suspicion. They must both, then, have been kidnapped.

It can easily be imagined what a sensation the news caused in the town.
What! the French inventor who had been so closely guarded had disappeared,
and with him the secret of the wonderful fulgurator that nobody had been able to
worm out of him? Might not the most serious consequences follow? Might not
the discovery of the new engine be lost to America forever? If the daring act had
been perpetrated on behalf of another nation, might not that nation, having
Thomas Roch in its power, be eventually able to extract from him what the
Federal Government had vainly endeavored to obtain? And was it reasonable,
was it permissible, to suppose for an instant that he had been carried off for the
benefit of a private individual?

Certainly not, was the emphatic reply to the latter question, which was too
ridiculous to be entertained. Therefore the whole power of the State was
employed in an effort to recover the inventor. In every county of North Carolina
a special surveillance was organized on every road and at every railroad station,
and every house in town and country was searched. Every port from Wilmington
to Norfolk was closed, and no craft of any description could leave without being
thoroughly overhauled. Not only the cruiser Falcon, but every available cutter
and launch was sent out with orders to patrol Pamlico Sound and board yachts,
merchant vessels and fishing smacks indiscriminately whether anchored or not
and search them down to the keelson.

Still the crew of the Ebba prepared calmly to weigh anchor, and the Count
d'Artigas did not appear to be in the least concerned at the orders of the
authorities and at the consequences that would ensue, if Thomas Roch and his
keeper, Gaydon, were found on board.

At last all was ready, the crew manned the capstan bars, the sails were
hoisted, and the schooner glided gracefully through the water towards the Sound.

Twenty miles from New-Berne the estuary curves abruptly and shoots off
towards the northwest for about the same distance, gradually widening until it


empties itself into Pamlico Sound.

The latter is a vast expanse about seventy miles across from Sivan Island to
Roanoke. On the seaward side stretches a chain of long and narrow islands,
forming a natural breakwater north and south from Cape Lookout to Cape
Hatteras and from the latter to Cape Henry, near Norfolk City, in Virginia.

Numerous beacons on the islands and islets form an easy guide for vessels at
night seeking refuge from the Atlantic gales, and once inside the chain they are
certain of finding plenty of good anchoring grounds.

Several passes afford an outlet from the Sound to the sea. Beyond Sivan
Island lighthouse is Ocracoke inlet, and next is the inlet of Hatteras. There are
also three others known as Logger Head inlet, New inlet, and Oregon inlet. The
Ocracoke was the one nearest the Ebba, and she could make it without tacking,
but the Falcon was searching all vessels that passed through. This did not,
however, make any particular difference, for by this time all the passes, upon
which the guns of the forts had been trained, were guarded by government
vessels.

The Ebba, therefore, kept on her way, neither trying to avoid nor offering to
approach the searchers. She seemed to be merely a pleasure-yacht out for a
morning sail.

No attempt had up to that time been made to accost her. Was she, then,
specially privileged, and to be spared the bother of being searched? Was the
Count d'Artigas considered too high and mighty a personage to be thus molested,
and delayed even for an hour? It was unlikely, for though he was regarded as a
distinguished foreigner who lived the life of luxury enjoyed by the favored of
fortune, no one, as a matter of fact, knew who he was, nor whence he came, nor
whither he was going.

The schooner sped gracefully over the calm waters of the sound, her flag--a
gold crescent in the angle of a red field--streaming proudly in the breeze. Count
d'Artigas was cosily ensconced in a basket-work chair on the after-deck,
conversing with Engineer Serko and Captain Spade.

"They don't seem in a hurry to board us," remarked Serko.

"They can come whenever they think proper," said the Count in a tone of
supreme indifference.

"No doubt they are waiting for us at the entrance to the inlet," suggested
Captain Spade.

"Let them wait," grunted the wealthy nobleman.

Then he relapsed into his customary unconcerned impassibility.

Captain Spade's hypothesis was doubtless correct. The Falcon had as yet
made no move towards the schooner, but would almost certainly do so as soon as


the latter reached the inlet, and the Count would have to submit to a search of his
vessel if he wished to reach the open sea.

How was it then that he manifested such extraordinary unconcern? Were
Thomas Roch and Gaydon so safely hidden that their hiding-place could not
possibly be discovered?

The thing was possible, but perhaps the Count d'Artigas would not have been
quite so confident had he been aware that the Ebba had been specially signalled
to the warship and revenue cutters as a suspect.

The Count's visit to Healthful House on the previous day had now attracted
particular attention to him and his schooner. Evidently, at the time, the director
could have had no reason to suspect the motive of his visit. But a few hours later,
Thomas Roch and his keeper had been carried off. No one else from outside had
been near the pavilion that day. It was admitted that it would have been an easy
matter for the Count's companion, while the former distracted the director's
attention, to push back the bolts of the door in the wall and steal the key. Then
the fact that the Ebba was anchored in rear of, and only a few hundred yards
from, the estate, was in itself suspicious. Nothing would have been easier for the
desperadoes than to enter by the door, surprise their victims, and carry them off
to the schooner.

These suspicions, neither the director nor the personnel of the establishment
had at first liked to give expression to, but when the Ebba was seen to weigh
anchor and head for the open sea, they appeared to be confirmed.

They were communicated to the authorities of New-Berne, who immediately
ordered the commander of the Falcon to intercept the schooner, to search her
minutely high and low, and from stem to stern, and on no account to let her
proceed, unless he was absolutely certain that Roch and Gaydon were not on
board.

Assuredly the Count d'Artigas could have had no idea that his vessel was the
object of such stringent orders; but even if he had, it is questionable whether this
superbly haughty and disdainful nobleman would hove manifested any particular
anxiety.

Towards three o'clock, the warship which was cruising before the inlet, after
having sent search parties aboard a few fishing-smacks, suddenly manoeuvred to
the entrance of the pass, and awaited the approaching schooner. The latter surely
did not imagine that she could force a passage in spite of the cruiser, or escape
from a vessel propelled by steam. Besides, had she attempted such a foolhardy
trick, a couple of shots from the Falcon's guns would speedily have constrained
her to lay to.

Presently a boat, manned by two officers and ten sailors, put off from the


cruiser and rowed towards the Ebba. When they were only about half a cable's
length off, one of the men rose and waved a flag.

"That's a signal to stop,” said Engineer Serko.

"Precisely," remarked the Count d'Artigas.

"We shall have to lay to."

"Then lay to."

Captain Spade went forward and gave the necessary orders, and in a few
minutes the vessel slackened speed, and was soon merely drifting with the tide.

The Falcon's boat pulled alongside, and a man in the bows held on to her
with a boat-hook. The gangway was lowered by a couple of hands on the
schooner, and the two officers, followed by eight of their men, climbed on deck.

They found the crew of the Ebba drawn up in line on the forecastle.

The officer in command of the boarding-party--a first lieutenant--advanced
towards the owner of the schooner, and the following questions and answers
were exchanged:

"This schooner belongs to the Count d'Artigas, to whom, I presume, I have
the honor of speaking?"

"Yes, sir."

"What is her name?"

"The Ebba."

"She is commanded by?--"

"Captain Spade."

"What is his nationality?"

"Hindo-Malay."

The officer scrutinized the schooner's flag, while the Count d'Artigas added:

"Will you be good enough to tell me, sir, to what circumstance I owe the
pleasure of your visit on board my vessel?"

"Orders have been received," replied the officer, "to search every vessel now
anchored in Pamlico Sound, or which attempts to leave it."

He did not deem it necessary to insist upon this point since the Ebba, above
every other, was to be subjected to the bother of a rigorous examination.

"You, of course, sir, have no intention of refusing me permission to go over
your schooner?"

"Assuredly not, sir. My vessel is at your disposal from peaks to bilges. Only I
should like to know why all the vessels which happen to be in Pamlico Sound to-
day are being subjected to this formality."

"IT see no reason why you should not be informed, Monsieur the Count,"
replied the officer. "The governor of North Carolina has been apprised that
Healthful House has been broken into and two persons kidnapped, and the


authorities merely wish to satisfy themselves that the persons carried off have
not been embarked during the night."

"Is it possible?" exclaimed the Count, feigning surprise. "And who are the
persons who have thus disappeared from Healthful House?"

"An inventor--a madman--and his keeper."

"A madman, sir? Do you, may I ask, refer to the Frenchman, Thomas Roch?"

"The same."

"The Thomas Roch whom I saw yesterday during my visit to the
establishment--whom I questioned in presence of the director--who was seized
with a violent paroxysm just as Captain Spade and I were leaving?"

The officer observed the stranger with the keenest attention, in an effort to
surprise anything suspicious in his attitude or remarks.

"It is incredible!" added the Count, as though he had just heard about the
outrage for the first time.

"I can easily understand, sir, how uneasy the authorities must be," he went
on, "in view of Thomas Roch's personality, and I cannot but approve of the
measures taken. I need hardly say that neither the French inventor nor his keeper
is on board the Ebba. However, you can assure yourself of the fact by examining
the schooner as minutely as you desire. Captain Spade, show these gentlemen
over the vessel."

Then saluting the lieutenant of the Falcon coldly, the Count d'Artigas sank
into his deck-chair again and replaced his cigar between his lips, while the two
officers and eight sailors, conducted by Captain Spade, began their search.

In the first place they descended the main hatchway to the after saloon--a
luxuriously-appointed place, filled with art objects of great value, hung with rich
tapestries and hangings, and wainscotted with costly woods.

It goes without saying that this and the adjoining cabins were searched with a
care that could not have been surpassed by the most experienced detectives.
Moreover, Captain Spade assisted them by every means in his power, obviously
anxious that they should not preserve the slightest suspicion of the Ebba's owner.

After the grand saloon and cabins, the elegant dining-saloon was visited.
Then the cook's galley, Captain Spade's cabin, and the quarters of the crew in the
forecastle were overhauled, but no sign of Thomas Roch or Gaydon was to be
seen.

Next, every inch of the hold, etc., was examined, with the aid of a couple of
lanterns. Water-kegs, wine, brandy, whisky and beer barrels, biscuit-boxes, in
fact, all the provision boxes and everything the hold contained, including the
stock of coal, was moved and probed, and even the bilges were scrutinized, but
all in vain.


Evidently the suspicion that the Count d'Artigas had carried off the missing
men was unfounded and unjust. Even a rat could not have escaped the notice of
the vigilant searchers, leave alone two men.

When they returned on deck, however, the officers, as a matter of precaution
looked into the boats hanging on the davits, and punched the lowered sails, with
the same result.

It only remained for them, therefore, to take leave of the Count d'Artigas.

"You must pardon us for having disturbed you, Monsieur the Count," said the
lieutenant.

"You were compelled to obey your orders, gentlemen."

"It was merely a formality, of course," ventured the officer.

By a slight inclination of the head the Count signified that he was quite
willing to accept this euphemism.

"I assure you, gentlemen, that I have had no hand in this kidnapping."

"We can no longer believe so, Monsieur the Count, and will withdraw."

"As you please. Is the Ebba now free to proceed?"

"Certainly."

"Then au revoir, gentlemen, au revoir, for I am an habitué of this coast and
shall soon be back again. I hope that ere my return you will have discovered the
author of the outrage, and have Thomas Roch safely back in Healthful House. It
is a consummation devoutly to be wished in the interest of the United States--I
might even say of the whole world."

The two officers courteously saluted the Count, who responded with a nod.
Captain Spade accompanied them to the gangway, and they were soon making
for the cruiser, which had steamed near to pick them up.

Meanwhile the breeze had freshened considerably, and when, at a sign from
d'Artigas, Captain Spade set sail again, the Ebba skimmed swiftly through the
inlet, and half an hour after was standing out to sea.

For an hour she continued steering east-northeast, and then, the wind, being
merely a land breeze, dropped, and the schooner lay becalmed, her sails limp,
and her flag drooping like a wet rag. It seemed that it would be impossible for
the vessel to continue her voyage that night unless a breeze sprang up, and of
this there was no sign.

Since the schooner had cleared the inlet Captain Spade had stood in the bows
gazing into the water, now to port, now to starboard, as if on the lookout for
something. Presently he shouted in a stentorian voice:

"Furl sail!"

The sailors rushed to their posts, and in an instant the sails came rattling
down and were furled.


Was it Count d'Artigas' intention to wait there till daybreak brought a breeze
with it? Presumably, or the sails would have remained hoisted to catch the
faintest puff.

A boat was lowered and Captain Spade jumped into it, accompanied by a
sailor, who paddled it towards an object that was floating on the water a few
yards away.

This object was a small buoy, similar to that which had floated on the bosom
of the Neuse when the Ebba lay off Healthful House.

The buoy, with a towline affixed to it, was lifted into the boat that was then
paddled to the bow of the Ella, from the deck of which another hawser was cast
to the captain, who made it fast to the towline of the buoy. Having dropped the
latter overboard again, the captain and the sailor returned to the ship and the boat
was hoisted in.

Almost immediately the hawser tautened, and the Elba, though not a stitch of
canvas had been set, sped off in an easterly direction at a speed that could not
have been less than ten knots an hour.

Night was falling fast, and soon the rapidly receding lights along the
American coast were lost in the mist on the horizon.


CHAPTER V.

WHERE AM I?

(Notes by Simon Hart, the Engineer.)

Where am I? What has happened since the sudden aggression of which I was
the victim near the pavilion.

I had just quitted the doctor, and was about to mount the steps, close the door
and resume my post beside Thomas Roch when several men sprang upon me and
knocked me down. Who are they? My eyes having been bandaged I was unable
to recognize them. I could not cry for help, having been gagged. I could make no
resistance, for they had bound me hand and foot. Thus powerless, I felt myself
lifted and carried about one hundred paces, then hoisted, then lowered, then laid
down.

Where? Where?

And Thomas Roch, what has become of him? It must have been he rather
than I they were after. I was but Gaydon, the warder. None suspected that I was
Simon Hart, the engineer, nor could they have suspected my nationality. Why,
therefore, should they have desired to kidnap a mere hospital attendant?

There can consequently be no doubt that the French inventor has been
carried off; and if he was snatched from Healthful House it must have been in


the hope of forcing his secret from him.

But I am reasoning on the supposition that Thomas Roch was carried off
with me. Is it so? Yes--it must be--it is. I can entertain no doubt whatever about
it. I have not fallen into the hands of malefactors whose only intention is
robbery. They would not have acted in this way. After rendering it impossible for
me to cry out, after having thrown me into a clump of bushes in the corner of the
garden, after having kidnapped Thomas Roch they would not have shut me up--
where I now am.

Where? This is the question which I have been asking myself for hours
without being able to answer it.

However, one thing is certain, and that is that I have embarked upon an
extraordinary adventure, that will end?--In what manner I know not--I dare not
even imagine what the upshot of it will be. Anyhow, it is my intention to commit
to memory, minute by minute, the least circumstance, and then, if it be possible,
to jot down my daily impressions. Who knows what the future has in store for
me? And who knows but what, in my new position, I may finally discover the
secret of Roth's fulgurator? If I am to be delivered one day, this secret must be
made known, as well as who is the author, or who are the authors, of this
criminal outrage, which may be attended with such serious consequences.

I continually revert to this question, hoping that some incident will occur to
enlighten me:

Where am I?

Let me begin from the beginning.

After having been carried by the head and feet from Healthful House, I felt
that I was laid, without any brutality, I must admit, upon the stretchers of a row-
boat of small dimensions.

The rocking caused by the weight of my body was succeeded shortly
afterwards by a further rocking--which I attribute to the embarking of a second
person. Can there be room for doubt that it was Thomas Roch? As far as he was
concerned they would not have had to take the precaution of gagging him, or of
bandaging his eyes, or of binding him. He must still have been in a state of
prostration which precluded the possibility of his making any resistance, or even
of being conscious of what was being done. The proof that I am not deceiving
myself is that I could smell the unmistakable odor of ether. Now, yesterday,
before taking leave of us, the doctor administered a few drops of ether to the
invalid and--I remember distinctly--a little of this extremely volatile substance
fell upon his clothing while he was struggling in his fit. There is therefore
nothing astonishing in the fact that this odor should have clung to him, nor that I
should have distinguished it, even beneath the bandages that covered my face.


Yes, Thomas Roch was extended near me in the boat. And to think that had I
not returned to the pavilion when I did, had I delayed a few minutes longer, I
should have found him gone!

Let me think. What could have inspired that Count d'Artigas with the
unfortunate curiosity to visit Healthful House? If he had not been allowed to see
my patient nothing of the kind would have happened. Talking to Thomas Roch
about his inventions brought on a fit of exceptional violence. The director is
primarily to blame for not heeding my warning. Had he listened to me the doctor
would not have been called upon to attend him, the door of the pavilion would
have been locked, and the attempt of the band would have been frustrated.

As to the interest there could have been in carrying off Thomas Roch, either
on behalf of a private person or of one of the states of the Old World, it is so
evident that there is no need to dwell upon it. However, I can be perfectly easy
about the result. No one can possibly succeed in learning what for fifteen months
I have been unable to ascertain. In the condition of intellectual collapse into
which my fellow-countryman has fallen, all attempts to force his secret from him
will be futile. Moreover, he is bound to go from bad to worse until he is
hopelessly insane, even as regards those points upon which he has hitherto
preserved his reason intact.

After all, however, it is less about Thomas Roch than myself that I must
think just now, and this is what I have experienced, to resume the thread of my
adventure where I dropped it:

After more rocking caused by our captors jumping into it, the boat is rowed
off. The distance must be very short, for a minute after we bumped against
something. I surmise that this something must be the hull of a ship, and that we
have run alongside. There is some scurrying and excitement. Indistinctly through
my bandages I can hear orders being given and a confused murmur of voices that
lasts for about five minutes, but I cannot distinguish a word that is said.

The only thought that occurs to me now is that they will hoist me on board
and lower me to the bottom of the hold and keep me there till the vessel is far out
at sea. Obviously they will not allow either Thomas Roch or his keeper to appear
on deck as long as she remains in Pamlico Sound.

My conjecture is correct. Still gagged and bound I am at last lifted by the
legs and shoulders. My impression, however, is that I am not being raised over a
ship's bulwark, but on the contrary am being lowered. Are they going to drop me
overboard to drown like a rat, so as to get rid of a dangerous witness? This
thought flashes into my brain, and a quiver of anguish passes through my body
from head to foot. Instinctively I draw a long breath, and my lungs are filled
with the precious air they will speedily lack.


No, there is no immediate cause for alarm. I am laid with comparative
gentleness upon a hard floor, which gives me the sensation of metallic coldness.
I am lying at full length. To my extreme surprise, I find that the ropes with which
I was bound have been untied and loosened. The tramping about around me has
ceased. The next instant I hear a door closed with a bang.

Where am I? And, in the first place, am I alone? I tear the gag from my
mouth, and the bandages from my head.

It is dark--pitch dark. Not a ray of light, not even the vague perception of
light that the eyes preserve when the lids are tightly closed.

I shout--I shout repeatedly. No response. My voice is smothered. The air I
breathe is hot, heavy, thick, and the working of my lungs will become difficult,
impossible, unless the store of air is renewed.

I extend my arms and feel about me, and this is what I conclude:

I am in a compartment with sheet-iron walls, which cannot measure more
than four cubic yards. I can feel that the walls are of bolted plates, like the sides
of a ship's water-tight compartment.

I can feel that the entrance to it is by a door on one side, for the hinges
protrude somewhat. This door must open inwards, and it is through here, no
doubt, that I was carried in.

I place my ear to the door, but not a sound can be heard. The silence is as
profound as the obscurity--a strange silence that is only broken by the
sonorousness of the metallic floor when I move about. None of the dull noises
usually to be heard on board a ship is perceptible, not even the rippling of the
water along the hull. Nor is there the slightest movement to be felt; yet, in the
estuary of the Neuse, the current is always strong enough, to cause a marked
oscillation to any vessel.

But does the compartment in which I am confined, really belong to a ship?
How do I know that I am afloat on the Neuse, though I was conveyed a short
distance in a boat? Might not the latter, instead of heading for a ship in waiting
for it, opposite Healthful House, have been rowed to a point further down the
river? In this case is it not possible that I was carried into the collar of a house?
This would explain the complete immobility of the compartment. It is true that
the walls are of bolted plates, and that there is a vague smell of salt water, that
odor sui generis which generally pervades the interior of a ship, and which there
is no mistaking.

An interval, which I estimate at about four hours, must have passed since my
incarceration. It must therefore be near midnight. Shall I be left here in this way
till morning? Luckily, I dined at six o'clock, which is the regular dinner-hour at
Healthful House. I am not suffering from hunger. In fact I feel more inclined to


sleep than to eat. Still, I hope I shall have energy enough to resist the inclination.
I will not give way to it. I must try and find out what is going on outside. But
neither sound nor light can penetrate this iron box. Wait a minute, though;
perhaps by listening intently I may hear some sound, however feeble. Therefore
I concentrate all my vital power in my sense of hearing. Moreover, I try--in case
I should really not be on terra firma--to distinguish some movement, some
oscillation of my prison. Admitting that the ship is still at anchor, it cannot be
long before it will start--otherwise I shall have to give up imagining why
Thomas Roch and I have been carried off.

At last--it is no illusion--a slight rolling proves to me, beyond a doubt, that I
am not on land. We are evidently moving, but the motion is scarcely perceptible.
It is not a jerky, but rather a gliding movement, as though we were skimming
through the water without effort, on an even keel.

Let me consider the matter calmly. I am on board a vessel that was anchored
in the Neuse, waiting under sail or steam, for the result of the expedition. A boat
brought me aboard, but, I repeat, I did not feel that I was lifted over her
bulwarks. Was I passed through a porthole? But after all, what does it matter?
Whether I was lowered into the hold or not, I am certainly upon something that
is floating and moving.

No doubt I shall soon be let out, together with Thomas Roch, supposing
them to have locked him up as carefully as they have me. By being let out, I
mean being accorded permission to go on deck. It will not be for some hours to
come, however, that is certain, for they won't want us to be seen, so that there is
no chance of getting a whiff of fresh air till we are well out at sea. If it is a
sailing vessel, she must have waited for a breeze--for the breeze that freshens off
shore at daybreak, and is favorable to ships navigating Pamlico Sound.

It certainly cannot be a steamer. I could not have failed to smell the oil and
other odors of the engine-room. And then I should feel the trembling of the
machinery, the jerks of the pistons, and the movements of the screws or paddles.

The best thing to do is to wait patiently. I shan't be taken out of this hole until
to-morrow, anyway. Moreover, if I am not released, somebody will surely bring
me something to eat. There is no reason to suppose that they intend to starve me
to death. They wouldn't have taken the trouble to bring me aboard, but would
have dropped me to the bottom of the river had they been desirous of getting rid
of me. Once we are out at sea, what will they have to fear from me? No one
could hear my shouts. As to demanding an explanation and making a fuss, it
would be useless. Besides, what am I to the men who have carried us off? A
mere hospital attendant--one Gaydon, who is of no consequence. It is Thomas
Roch they were after. I was taken along too because I happened to return to the


pavilion at the critical moment.

At any rate, no matter what happens, no matter who our kidnappers may be,
no matter where we are taken, I shall stick to this resolution: I will continue to
play my role of warder. No one, no! none, can suspect that Gaydon is Simon
Hart, the engineer. There are two advantages in this: in the first place, they will
take no notice of a poor devil of a warder, and in the second, I may be able to
solve the mystery surrounding this plot and tum my knowledge to profit, if I
succeed in making my escape.

But whither are my thoughts wandering? I must perforce wait till we arrive
at our destination before thinking of escaping. It will be time enough to bother
about that when the occasion presents itself. Until then the essential is that they
remain ignorant as to my identity, and they cannot, and shall not, know who I
am.

I am now certain that we are going through the water. But there is one thing
that puzzles me. It is hot a sailing vessel, neither can it be a steamer. Yet it is
incontestably propelled by some powerful machine. There are none of the
noises, nor is there the trembling that accompanies the working of steam
engines. The movement of the vessel is more continuous and regular, it is a sort
of direct rotation that is communicated by the motor, whatever the latter may be.
No mistake is possible: the ship is propelled by some special mechanism. But
what is it?

Is it one of those turbines that have been spoken of lately, which, fitted into a
submerged tube, are destined to replace the ordinary screw, it being claimed that
they utilize the resistance of the water better than the latter and give increased
speed to a ship?

In a few hours' time I shall doubtless know all about this means of
locomotion.

Meanwhile there is another thing that equally puzzles me. There is not the
slightest rolling or pitching. How is it that Pamlico Sound is so extraordinarily
calm? The varying currents continuously ruffle the surface of the Sound, even if
nothing else does.

It is true the tide may be out, and I remember that last night the wind had
fallen altogether. Still, no matter, the thing is inexplicable, for a ship propelled
by machinery, no matter at what speed she may be going, always oscillates more
or less, and I cannot perceive the slightest rocking.

Such are the thoughts with which my mind is persistently filled. Despite an
almost overpowering desire to sleep, despite the torpor that is coming upon me
in this suffocating atmosphere, I am resolved not to close my eyes. I will keep
awake till daylight, and there will be no daylight for me till it is let into my


prison from the outside. Perhaps even if the door were open it would not
penetrate to this black hole, and I shall probably not see it again until I am taken
on deck.

I am squatting in a corner of my prison, for I have no stool or anything to sit
upon, but as my eyelids are heavy and I feel somnolent in spite of myself, I get
up and walk about. Then I wax wrathful, anger fills my soul, I beat upon the iron
walls with my fists, and shout for help. In vain! I hurt my hands against the bolts
of the plates, and no one answers my cries.

Such conduct is unworthy of me. I flattered myself that I would remain calm
under all circumstances and here I am acting like a child.

The absence of any rolling or lurching movement at least proves that we are
not yet at sea. Instead of crossing Pamlico Sound, may we not be going in the
opposite direction, up the River Neuse? No! What would they go further inland
for? If Thomas Roch has been carried off from Healthful House, his captors
obviously mean to take him out of the United States--probably to a distant island
in the Atlantic, or to some point on the European continent. It is, therefore, not
up the Neuse that our maritime machine, whatever it may be, is going, but across
Pamlico Sound, which must be as calm as a mirror.

Very well, then, when we get to sea I shall soon, know, for the vessel will
rock right enough in the swell off shore, even though there be no wind,--unless I
am aboard a battleship, or big cruiser, and this I fancy can hardly be!

But hark! If I mistake not--no, it was not imagination--I hear footsteps. Some
one is approaching the side of the compartment where the door is. One of the
crew no doubt. Are they going to let me out at last? I can now hear voices. A
conversation is going on outside the door, but it is carried on in a language that I
do not understand. I shout to them--I shout again, but no answer is vouchsafed.

There is nothing to do, then, but wait, wait, wait! I keep repeating the word
and it rings in my ears like a bell.

Let me try to calculate how long I have been here. The ship must have been
under way for at least four or five hours. I reckon it must be past midnight, but I
cannot tell, for unfortunately my watch is of no use to me in this Cimmerian
darkness.

Now, if we have been going for five hours, we must have cleared Pamlico
Sound, whether we issued by Ocracoke or Hatteras inlet, and must be off the
coast a good mile, at least. Yet I haven't felt any motion from the swell of the
sea.

It is inexplicable, incredible! Come now, have I made a mistake? Am I the
dupe of an illusion? Am I not imprisoned in the hold of a ship under way?

Another hour has passed and the movement of the ship suddenly ceases; I


realize perfectly that she is stationary. Has she reached her destination? In this
event we can only be in one of the coast ports to the north or south of Pamlico
Sound. But why should Thomas Roch be landed again? The abduction must
soon have been discovered, and our kidnappers would run the greatest risk of
falling into the hands of the authorities if they attempted to disembark.

However this may be, if the vessel is coming to anchor I shall hear the noise
of the chain as it is paid out, and feel the jerk as the ship is brought up. I know
that sound and that jerk well from experience, and I am bound to hear and feel
them in a minute or two.

I wait--I listen.

A dead and disquieting silence reigns on board. I begin to wonder whether I
am not the only living being in the ship.

Now I feel an irresistible torpor coming over me. The air is vitiated. I cannot
breathe. My chest is bursting. I try to resist, but it is impossible to do so. The
temperature rises to such a degree that I am compelled to divest myself of part of
my clothing. Then I lie me down in a corner. My heavy eyelids close, and I sink
into a prostration that eventually forces me into heavy slumber.

How long have I been asleep? I cannot say. Is it night? Is it day? I know not.
I remark, however, that I breathe more easily, and that the air is no longer
poisoned carbonic acid.

Was the air renewed while I slept? Has the door been opened? Has anybody
been in here?

Yes, here is the proof of it!

In feeling about, my hand has come in contact with a mug filled with a liquid
that exhales an inviting odor. I raise it to my lips, which, are burning, for I am
suffering such an agony of thirst that I would even drink brackish water.

It is ale--an ale of excellent quality--which refreshes and comforts me, and I
drain the pint to the last drop.

But if they have not condemned me to die of thirst, neither have they
condemned me to die of hunger, I suppose?

No, for in one of the comers I find a basket, and this basket contains some
bread and cold meat.

I fall to, eating greedily, and my strength little by little returns.

Decidedly, I am not so abandoned as I thought I was. Some one entered this
obscure hole, and the open door admitted a little of the oxygen from the outside,
without which I should have been suffocated. Then the wherewithal to quench
my thirst and appease the pangs of hunger was placed within my reach.

How much longer will this incarceration last? Days? Months? I cannot
estimate the hours that have elapsed since I fell asleep, nor have I any idea as to


what time of the day or night it may be. I was careful to wind up my watch,
though, and perhaps by feeling the hands--Yes, I think the little hand marks eight
o'clock--in the morning, no doubt. What I do know, however, is that the ship is
not in motion. There is not the slightest quiver.

Hours and hours, weary, interminable hours go by, and I wonder whether
they are again waiting till night comes on to renew my stock of air and
provisions. Yes, they are waiting to take advantage of my slumbers. But this time
I am resolved to resist. I will feign to be asleep--and I shall know how to force
an answer from whoever enters!


CHAPTER VI.

ON DECK.

Here I am in the open air, breathing freely once more. I have at last been
hauled out of that stifling box and taken on deck. I gaze around me in every
direction and see no sign of land. On every hand is that circular line which
defines earth and sky. No, there is not even a speck of land to be seen to the
west, where the coast of North America extends for thousands of miles.

The setting sun now throws but slanting rays upon the bosom of the ocean. It
must be about six o'clock in the evening. I take out my watch and it marks
thirteen minutes past six.

As I have already mentioned, I waited for the door of my prison to open,
thoroughly resolved not to fall asleep again, but to spring upon the first person
who entered and force him to answer my questions. I was not aware then that it
was day, but it was, and hour after hour passed and no one came. I began to
suffer again from hunger and thirst, for I had not preserved either bite or sup.

As soon as I awoke I felt that the ship was in motion again, after having, I
calculated, remained stationary since the previous day--no doubt in some lonely
creek, since I had not heard or felt her come to anchor.

A few minutes ago--it must therefore have been six o'clock--I again heard
footsteps on the other side of the iron wall of my compartment. Was anybody
coming to my cell? Yes, for I heard the creaking of the bolts as they were drawn
back, and then the door opened, and the darkness in which I had been plunged
since the first hour of my captivity was illumined by the light of a lantern.

Two men, whom I had no time to look at, entered and seized me by the arms.
A thick cloth was thrown over my head, which was enveloped in such a manner
that I could see absolutely nothing.

What did it all mean? What were they going to do with me? I struggled, but
they held me in an iron grasp. I questioned them, but they made no reply. The


men spoke to each other in a language that I could not understand, and had never
heard before.

They stood upon no ceremony with me. It is true I was only a madhouse
warder, and they probably did not consider it necessary to do so; but I question
very much whether Simon Hart, the engineer, would have received any more
courtesy at their hands.

This time, however, no attempt was made to gag me nor to bind either my
arms or legs. I was simply restrained by main force from breaking away from
them.

In a moment I was dragged out of the compartment and pushed along a
narrow passage. Next, the steps of a metallic stairway resounded under our feet.
Then the fresh air blew in my face and I inhaled it with avidity.

Finally they took their hands from off me, and I found myself free. I
immediately tore the cloth off my head and gazed about me.

I am on board a schooner which is ripping through the water at a great rate
and leaving a long white trail behind her.

I had to clutch at one of the stays for support, dazzled as I was by the light
after my forty-eight hours' imprisonment in complete obscurity.

On the deck a dozen men with rough, weatherbeaten faces come and go--
very dissimilar types of men, to whom it would be impossible to attribute any
particular nationality. They scarcely take any notice of me.

As to the schooner, I estimate that she registers from two hundred and fifty to
three hundred tons. She has a fairly wide beam, her masts are strong and lofty,
and her large spread of canvas must carry her along at a spanking rate in a good
breeze.

Aft, a grizzly-faced man is at the wheel, and he is keeping her head to the sea
that is running pretty high.

I try to find out the name of the vessel, but it is not to be seen anywhere,
even on the life-buoys.

I walk up to one of the sailors and inquire:

"What is the name of this ship?"

No answer, and I fancy the man does not understand me.

"Where is the captain?" I continue.

But the sailor pays no more heed to this than he did to the previous question.

I turn on my heel and go forward.

Above the forward hatchway a bell is suspended. Maybe the name of the
schooner is engraved upon it. I examine it, but can find no name upon it.

I then return to the stern and address the man at the wheel. He gazes at me
sourly, shrugs his shoulders, and bending, grasps the spokes of the wheel solidly,


and brings the schooner, which had been headed off by a large wave from port,
stem on to sea again.

Seeing that nothing is to be got from that quarter, I turn away and look about
to see if I can find Thomas Roch, but I do not perceive him anywhere. Is he not
on board? He must be. They could have had no reason for carrying me off alone.
No one could have had any idea that I was Simon Hart, the engineer, and even
had they known it what interest could they have had in me, and what could they
expect of me?

Therefore, as Roch is not on deck, I conclude that he is locked in one of the
cabins, and trust he has met with better treatment than his ex-guardian.

But what is this--and how on earth could I have failed to notice it before?
How is this schooner moving? Her sails are furled--there is not an inch of canvas
set--the wind has fallen, and the few puffs that occasionally come from the east
are unfavorable, in view of the fact that we are going in that very direction. And
yet the schooner speeds through the sea, her bows down, throwing off clouds of
foam, and leaving a long, milky, undulating trail in her wake.

Is she a steam-yacht? No--there is not a smokestack about her. Is she
propelled by electricity--by a battery of accumulators, or by piles of great power
that work her screw and send her along at this rate?

I can come to no other conclusion. In any case she must be fitted with a
screw, and by leaning over the stern I shall be able to see it, and can find out
what sets it working afterwards.

The man at the wheel watches me ironically as I approach, but makes no
effort to prevent me from looking over.

I gaze long and earnestly, but there is no foaming and seething of the water
such as is invariably caused by the revolutions of the screw--naught but the long
white furrow that a sailing vessel leaves behind is discernible in the schooner's
wake.

Then, what kind of a machine is it that imparts such a marvellous speed to
the vessel? As I have already said, the wind is against her, and there is a heavy
swell on.

I must--I will know. No one pays the slightest attention, and I again go
forward.

As I approach the forecastle I find myself face to face with a man who is
leaning nonchalantly on the raised hatchway and who is watching me. He seems
to be waiting for me to speak to him.

I recognize him instantly. He is the person who accompanied the Count
d'Artigas during the latter's visit to Healthful House. There can be no mistake--it
is he right enough.


It was, then, that rich foreigner who abducted Thomas Roch, and I am on
board the Ebba his schooner-yacht which is so well known on the American
coast!

The man before me will enlighten me about what I want to know. I
remember that he and the Count spoke English together.

I take him to be the captain of the schooner.

"Captain," I say, "you are the person I saw at Healthful House. You
remember me, of course?"

He looks me up and down but does not condescend to reply.

"IT am Warder Gaydon, the attendant of Thomas Roch," I continue, "and I
want to know why you have carried me off and placed me on board this
schooner?"

The captain interrupts me with a sign. It is not made to me, however, but to
some sailors standing near.

They catch me by the arms, and taking no notice of the angry movement that
I cannot restrain, bundle me down the hatchway. The hatchway stair in reality, I
remark, is a perpendicular iron ladder, at the bottom of which, to right and left,
are some cabins, and forward, the men's quarters.

Are they going to put me back in my dark prison at the bottom of the hold?

No. They turn to the left and push me into a cabin. It is lighted by a porthole,
which is open, and through which the fresh air comes in gusts from the briny.
The furniture consists of a bunk, a chair, a chest of drawers, a wash-hand-stand
and a table.

The latter is spread for dinner, and I sit down. Then the cook's mate comes in
with two or three dishes. He is a colored lad, and as he is about to withdraw, I try
to question him, but he, too, vouchsafes no reply. Perhaps he doesn't understand
me.

The door is closed, and I fall to and eat with an excellent appetite, with the
intention of putting off all further questioning till some future occasion when I
shall stand a chance of getting answered.

It is true I am a prisoner, but this time I am comfortable enough, and I hope I
shall be permitted to occupy this cabin for the remainder of the voyage, and not
be lowered into that black hole again.

I now give myself up to my thoughts, the first of which is that it was the
Count d'Artigas who planned the abduction; that it was he who is responsible for
the kidnapping of Thomas Roch, and that consequently the French inventor must
be just as comfortably installed somewhere on board the schooner.

But who is this Count d'Artigas? Where does he hail from? If he has seized
Thomas Roch, is it not because he is determined to secure the secret of the


fulgurator at no matter what cost? Very likely, and I must therefore be careful not
to betray my identity, for if they knew the truth, I should never be afforded a
chance to get away.

But what a lot of mysteries to clear up, how many inexplicable things to
explain--the origin of this d'Artigas, his intentions as to the future, whither we
are bound, the port to which the schooner belongs, and this mysterious progress
through the water without sails and without screws, at a speed of at least ten
knots an hour!

The air becoming keener as night deepens, I close and secure the porthole,
and as my cabin is bolted on the outside, the best thing I can do is to get into my
bunk and let myself be gently rocked to sleep by the broad Atlantic in this
mysterious cradle, the Ebba.

The next morning I rise at daybreak, and having performed my ablutions,
dress myself and wait.

Presently the idea of trying the door occurs to me. I find that it has been
unbolted, and pushing it open, climb the iron ladder and emerge on deck.

The crew are washing down the deck, and standing aft and conversing are
two men, one of whom is the captain. The latter manifests no surprise at seeing
me, and indicates my presence to his companion by a nod.

This other man, whom I have never before seen, is an individual of about
fifty years of age, whose dark hair is streaked with gray. His features are
delicately chiselled, his eyes are bright, and his expression is intelligent and not
at all displeasing. He is somewhat of the Grecian type, and T have no doubt that
he is of Hellenic origin when I hear him called Serko--Engineer Serko--by the
Captain of the Ebba.

As to the latter, he is called Spade--Captain Spade--and this name has an
Italian twang about it. Thus there is a Greek, an Italian, and a crew recruited
from every corner of the earth to man a schooner with a Norwegian name! This
mixture strikes me as being suspicious.

And that Count d'Artigas, with his Spanish name and Asiatic type, where
does he come from?

Captain Spade and Engineer Serko continue to converse in a low tone of
voice. The former is keeping a sharp eye on the man at the wheel, who does not
appear to pay any particular attention to the compass in front of him. He seems
to pay more heed to the gestures of one of the sailors stationed forward, and who
signals to him to put the helm to port or to starboard.

Thomas Roch is near them, gazing vacantly out upon the vast expanse which
is not limited on the horizon by a single speck of land. Two sailors watch his
every movement. It is evidently feared that the madman may possibly attempt to


jump overboard.

I wonder whether I shall be permitted to communicate with my ward.

I walk towards him, and Captain Spade and Engineer Serko watch me.

Thomas Roch doesn't see me coming, and I stand beside him. Still he takes
no notice of me, and makes no movement. His eyes, which sparkle brightly,
wander over the ocean, and he draws in deep breaths of the salt, vivifying
atmosphere. Added to the air surcharged with oxygen is a magnificent sunset in
a cloudless sky. Does he perceive the change in his situation? Has he already
forgotten about Healthful House, the pavilion in which he was a prisoner, and
Gaydon, his keeper? It is highly probable. The past has presumably been effaced
from his memory and he lives solely in the present.

In my opinion, even on the deck of the Ebba, in the middle of the sea,
Thomas Roch is still the helpless, irresponsible man whom I tended for fifteen
months. His intellectual condition has undergone no change, and his reason will
return only when he is spoken to about his inventions. The Count d'Artigas is
perfectly aware of this mental disposition, having had a proof of it during his
visit, and he evidently relies thereon to surprise sooner or later the inventor's
secret. But with what object?

"Thomas Roch!" I exclaim.

My voice seems to strike him, and after gazing at me fixedly for an instant he
averts his eyes quickly.

I take his hand and press it. He withdraws it brusquely and walks away,
without having recognized me, in the direction of Captain Spade and Engineer
Serko.

Does he think of speaking to one or other of these men, and if they speak to
him will he be more reasonable than he was with me, and reply to them?

At this moment his physiognomy lights up with a gleam of intelligence. His
attention, obviously, has been attracted by the queer progress of the schooner. He
gazes at the masts and the furled sails. Then he turns back and stops at the place
where, if the Ebba were a steamer, the funnel ought to be, and which in this case
ought to be belching forth a cloud of black smoke.

What appeared so strange to me evidently strikes Thomas Roch as being
strange, too. He cannot explain what I found inexplicable, and, as I did, he walks
aft to see if there is a screw.

On the flanks of the Ebba a shoal of porpoises are sporting. Swift as is the
schooner's course they easily pass her, leaping and gambolling in their native
element with surprising grace and agility.

Thomas Roch pays no attention to them, but leans over the stern.

Engineer Serko and Captain Spade, fearful lest he should fall overboard,


hurry to him and drag him gently, but firmly, away.

I observe from long experience that Roch is a prey to violent excitement. He
turns about and gesticulates, uttering incoherent phrases the while.

It is plain to me that another fit is coming on, similar to the one he had in the
pavilion of Healthful House on the night we were abducted. He will have to be
seized and carried down to his cabin, and I shall perhaps be summoned to attend
to him.

Meanwhile Engineer Serko and Captain Spade do not lose sight of him for a
moment. They are evidently curious to see what he will do.

After walking towards the mainmast and assuring himself that the sails are
not set, he goes up to it and flinging his arms around it, tries with all his might to
shake it, as though seeking to pull it down.

Finding his efforts futile, he quits it and goes to the foremast, where the same
performance is gone through. He waxes more and more excited. His vague
utterances are followed by inarticulate cries.

Suddenly he rushes to the port stays and clings to them, and I begin to fear
that he will leap into the rigging and climb to the cross-tree, where he might be
precipitated into the sea by a lurch of the ship.

On a sign from Captain Spade, some sailors run up and try to make him
relinquish his grasp of the stays, but are unable to do so. I know that during his
fits he is endowed with the strength of ten men, and many a time I have been
compelled to summon assistance in order to overpower him.

Other members of the crew, however, come up, and the unhappy madman is
borne to the deck, where two big sailors hold him down, despite his
extraordinary strength.

The only thing to do is to convey him to his cabin, and let him lie there till he
gets over his fit. This is what will be done in conformity with orders given by a
newcomer whose voice seems familiar to me.

I turn and recognize him.

He is the Count d'Artigas, with a frown on his face and an imperious manner,
just as I had seen him at Healthful House.

I at once advance toward him. I want an explanation and mean to have it.

"By what right, sir?"--I begin.

"By the right of might," replies the Count.

Then he turns on his heel, and Thomas Roch is carried below.


CHAPTER VII.
TWO DAYS AT SEA.


Perhaps--should circumstances render it necessary--I may be induced to tell
the Count d'Artigas that I am Simon Hart, the engineer. Who knows but what I
may receive more consideration than if I remain Warder Gaydon? This measure,
however, demands reflection. I have always been dominated by the thought that
if the owner of the Ebba kidnapped the French inventor, it was in the hope of
getting possession of Roch's fulgurator, for which, neither the old nor new
continent would pay the impossible price demanded. In that case the best thing I
can do is to remain Warder Gaydon, on the chance that I may be allowed to
continue in attendance upon him. In this way, if Thomas Roch should ever
divulge his secret, I may learn what it was impossible to do at Healthful House,
and can act accordingly.

Meanwhile, where is the Ebba bound?--first question.

Who and what is the Count d'Artigas?--second question.

The first will be answered in a few days' time, no doubt, in view of the
rapidity with which we are ripping through the water, under the action of a
means of propulsion that I shall end by finding out all about. As regards the
second, I am by no means so sure that my curiosity will ever be gratified.

In my opinion this enigmatical personage has an all important reason for
hiding his origin, and I am afraid there is no indication by which I can gauge his
nationality. If the Count d'Artigas speaks English fluently--and I was able to
assure myself of that fact during his visit to Pavilion No. 17,--he pronounces it
with a harsh, vibrating accent, which is not to be found among the peoples of
northern latitudes. I do not remember ever to have heard anything like it in the
course of my travels either in the Old or New World--unless it be the harshness
characteristic of the idioms in use among the Malays. And, in truth, with his
olive, verging on copper-tinted skin, his jet-black, crinkly hair, his piercing,
deep-set, restless eyes, his square shoulders and marked muscular development,
it is by no means unlikely that he belongs to one of the extreme Eastern races.

I believe this name of d'Artigas is an assumed one, and his title of Count
likewise. If his schooner bears a Norwegian name, he at any rate is not of
Scandinavian origin. He has nothing of the races of Northern Europe about him.

But whoever and whatever he may be, this man abducted Thomas Roch--and
me with him--with no good intention, I'll be bound.

But what I should like to know is, has he acted as the agent of a foreign
power, or on his own account? Does he wish to profit alone by Thomas Roch's
invention, and is he in the position to dispose of it profitably? That is another
question that I cannot yet answer. Maybe I shall be able to find out from what I
hear and see ere I make my escape, if escape be possible.

The Ebba continues on her way in the same mysterious manner. I am free to


walk about the deck, without, however, being able to go beyond the fore
hatchway. Once I attempted to go as far as the bows where I could, by leaning
over, perceive the schooner's stem as it cut through the water, but acting, it was
plain, on orders received, the watch on deck turned me back, and one of them,
addressing me brusquely in harsh, grating English, said:

"Go back! Go back! You are interfering with the working of the ship!"

With the working of the ship! There was no working.

Did they realize that I was trying to discover by what means the schooner
was propelled? Very likely, and Captain Spade, who had looked on, must have
known it, too. Even a hospital attendant could not fail to be astonished at the fact
that a vessel without either screw or sails was going along at such a speed.
However this may be, for some reason or other, the bows of the Ebba are barred
to me.

Toward ten o'clock a breeze springs up--a northwest wind and very
favorable--and Captain Spade gives an order to the boatswain. The latter
immediately pipes all hands on deck, and the mainsail, the foresail, staysail and
jibs are hoisted. The work could not have been executed with greater regularity
and discipline on board a man-of-war.

The Ebba now has a slight list to port, and her speed is notably increased.
But the motor continues to push her along, as is evident from the fact that the
sails are not always as full as they ought to be if the schooner were bowling
along solely under their action. However, they continue to render yeoman's
service, for the breeze has set in steadily.

The sky is clear, for the clouds in the west disappear as soon as they attain
the horizon, and the sunlight dances on the water.

My preoccupation now is to find out as near as possible where we are bound
for. Iam a good-enough sailor to be able to estimate the approximate speed of a
ship. In my opinion the Ebba has been travelling at the rate of from ten to eleven
knots an hour. As to the direction we have been going in, it is always the same,
and I have been able to verify this by casual glances at the binnacle. If the fore
part of the vessel is barred to Warder Gaydon he has been allowed a free run of
the remainder of it. Time and again I have glanced at the compass, and noticed
that the needle invariably pointed to the east, or to be exact, east-southeast.

These are the conditions in which we are navigating this part of the Atlantic
Ocean, which is bounded on the west by the coast of the United States of
America.

I appeal to my memory. What are the islands or groups of islands to be found
in the direction we are going, ere the continent of the Old World is reached?

North Carolina, which the schooner quitted forty-eight hours ago, is


traversed by the thirty-fifth parallel of latitude, and this parallel, extending
eastward, must, if I mistake not, cut the African coast at Morocco. But along the
line, about three thousand miles from America, are the Azores. Is it presumable
that the Ebba is heading for this archipelago, that the port to which she belongs
is somewhere in these islands which constitute one of Portugal's insular
domains? I cannot admit such an hypothesis.

Besides, before the Azores, on the line of the thirty-fifth parallel, is the
Bermuda group, which belongs to England. It seems to me to be a good deal less
hypothetical that, if the Count d'Artigas was entrusted with the abduction of
Thomas Roch by a European Power at all, it was by the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland. The possibility, however, remains that he may be
acting solely in his own interest.

Three or four times during the day Count d'Artigas has come aft and
remained for some time scanning the surrounding horizon attentively. When a
sail or the smoke from a steamer heaves in sight he examines the passing vessel
for a considerable time with a powerful telescope. I may add that he has not once
condescended to notice my presence on deck.

Now and then Captain Spade joins him and both exchange a few words in a
language that I can neither understand nor recognize.

It is with Engineer Serko, however, that the owner of the Ebba converses
more readily than with anybody else, and the latter appears to be very intimate
with him. The engineer is a good deal more free, more loquacious and less surly
than his companions, and I wonder what position he occupies on the schooner. Is
he a personal friend of the Count d'Artigas? Does he scour the seas with him,
sharing the enviable life enjoyed by the rich yachtsman? He is the only man of
the lot who seems to manifest, if not sympathy with, at least some interest in me.

I have not seen Thomas Roch all day. He must be shut in his cabin, still
under the influence of the fit that came upon him last night.

I feel certain that this is so, when about three o'clock in the afternoon, just as
he is about to go below, the Count beckons me to approach.

I do not know what he wishes to say to me, this Count d'Artigas, but I do
know what I will say to him.

"Do these fits to which Thomas Roch is subject last long?" he asks me in
English.

"Sometimes forty-eight hours," I reply.

"What is to be done?"

"Nothing at all. Let him alone until he falls asleep. After a night's sleep the
fit will be over and Thomas Roch will be his own helpless self again."

"Very well, Warder Gaydon, you will continue to attend him as you did at


Healthful House, if it be necessary."

"To attend to him!"

"Yes--on board the schooner--pending our arrival."

"Where?"

"Where we shall be to-morrow afternoon," replies the Count.

To-morrow, I say to myself. Then we are not bound for the coast of Africa,
nor even the Azores. There only remains the hypothesis that we are making for
the Bermudas.

Count d'Artigas is about to go down the hatchway when I interrogate him in


my turn:
"Sir," I exclaim, "I desire to know, I have the right to know, where I am
going, and----"


"Here, Warder Gaydon," he interrupted, "you have no rights. All you have to
do is to answer when you are spoken to." "I protest!"

"Protest, then," replies this haughty and imperious personage, glancing at me
menacingly.

Then he disappears down the hatchway, leaving me face to face with
Engineer Serko.

"If I were you, Warder Gaydon, I would resign myself to the inevitable,"
remarks the latter with a smile. "When one is caught in a trap----"

"One can cry out, I suppose?"

"What is the use when no one is near to hear you?"

"T shall be heard some day, sir."

"Some day--that's a long way off. However, shout as much as you please."

And with this ironical advice, Engineer Serko leaves me to my own
reflections.

Towards four o'clock a big ship is reported about six miles off to the east,
coming in our direction. She is moving rapidly and grows perceptibly larger.
Black clouds of smoke pour out of her two funnels. She is a warship, for a
narrow pennant floats from her mainmast, and though she is not flying any flag I
take her to be an American cruiser.

I wonder whether the Ebba will render her the customary salute as she
passes.

No; for the schooner suddenly changes her course with the evident intention
of avoiding her.

This proceeding on the part of such a suspicious yacht does not astonish me
greatly. But what does cause me extreme surprise is Captain Spade's way of
manoeuvring.

He runs forward to a signalling apparatus in the bows, similar to that by


which orders are transmitted to the engine room of a steamer. As soon as he
presses one of the buttons of this apparatus the Ebba veers off a point to the
south-west.

Evidently an order of "some kind" has been transmitted to the driver of the
machine of "some kind" which causes this inexplicable movement of the
schooner by the action of a motor of "some kind" the principle of which I cannot
guess at.

The result of this manoeuvre is that the Ebba slants away from the cruiser,
whose course does not vary. Why should this warship cause a pleasure-yacht to
turn out of its way? I have no idea.

But the Ebba behaves in a very different manner when about six o'clock in
the evening a second ship comes in sight on the port bow. This time, instead of
seeking to avoid her, Captain Spade signals an order by means of the apparatus
above referred to, and resumes his course to the east--which will bring him close
to the said ship.

An hour later, the two vessels are only about four miles from each other.

The wind has dropped completely. The strange ship, which is a three-masted
merchantman, is taking in her top-gallant sails. It is useless to expect the wind to
spring up again during the night, and she will lay becalmed till morning. The
Ebba, however, propelled by her mysterious motor, continues to approach her.

It goes without saying, that Captain Spade has also begun to take in sail, and
the work, under the direction of the boatswain Effrondat, is executed with the
same precision and promptness that struck me before.

When the twilight deepens into darkness, only a mile and a half separates the
vessels.

Captain Spade then comes up to me--I am standing on the starboard side--
and unceremoniously orders me to go below.

I can but obey. I remark, however, ere I go, that the boatswain has not lighted
the head-lamps, whereas the lamps of the three-master shine brightly--green to
starboard, and red to port.

I entertain no doubt that the schooner intends to pass her without being seen;
for though she has slackened speed somewhat, her direction has not been in any
way modified.

I enter my cabin under the impression of a vague foreboding. My supper is
on the table, but uneasy, I know not why, I hardly touch it, and lie down to wait
for sleep that does not come.

I remain in this condition for two hours. The silence is unbroken save by the
water that ripples along the vessel's sides.

My mind is full of the events of the past two days, and other thoughts crowd


thickly upon me. To-morrow afternoon we shall reach our destination. To-
morrow, I shall resume, on land, my attendance upon Thomas Roch, "if it be
necessary," said the Count d'Artigas.

If, when I was thrown into that black hole at the bottom of the hold, I was
able to perceive when the schooner started off across Pamlico Sound, I now feel
that she has come to a stop. It must be about ten o'clock.

Why has she stopped? When Captain Spade ordered me below, there was no
land in sight. In this direction, there is no island until the Bermuda group is
reached--at least there is none on the map--and we shall have to go another fifty
or sixty miles before the Bermudas can be sighted by the lookout men. Not only
has the Ebba stopped, but her immobility is almost complete. There is not a
breath of wind, and scarcely any swell, and her slight, regular rocking is hardly
perceptible.

Then my thoughts turn to the merchantman, which was only a mile and a
half off, on our bow, when I came below. If the schooner continued her course
towards her, she must be almost alongside now. We certainly cannot be lying
more than one or two cables' length from her. The three-master, which was
becalmed at sundown, could not have gone west. She must be close by, and if the
night is clear, I shall be able to see her through the porthole.

It occurs to me, that perhaps a chance of escape presents itself. Why should I
not attempt it, since no hope of being restored to liberty is held out to me? It is
true I cannot swim, but if I seize a life buoy and jump overboard, I may be able
to reach the ship, if I am not observed by the watch on deck.

I must quit my cabin and go up by the forward hatchway. I listen. I hear no
noise, either in the men's quarters, or on deck. The sailors must all be asleep at
this hour. Here goes.

I try to open the door, and find it is bolted on the outside, as I might have
expected.

I must give up the attempt, which, after all, had small chance of success.

The best thing I can do, is to go to sleep, for I am weary of mind, if not of
body. I am restless and racked by conflicting thoughts, and apprehensions of I
know not what. Oh! if I could but sink into the blessed oblivion of slumber!

I must have managed to fall asleep, for I have just been awakened by a noise-
-an unusual noise, such as I have not hitherto heard on board the schooner.

Day begins to peer through the glass of my porthole, which is turned towards
the east. I look at my watch. It is half-past four.

The first thing I wonder is, whether the Ebba has resumed her voyage.

No, I am certain she has not, either by sail, or by her motor. The sea is as
calm at sunrise as it was at sunset. If the Ebba has been going ahead while I


slept, she is at any rate, stationary now.

The noise to which I referred, is caused by men hurrying to and fro on deck--
by men heavily laden. I fancy I can also hear a similar noise in the hold beneath
my cabin floor, the entrance to which is situated abaft the foremast. I also feel
that something is scraping against the schooner's hull. Have boats come
alongside? Are the crew engaged in loading or unloading merchandise?

And yet we cannot possibly have reached our journey's end. The Count
d'Artigas said that we should not reach our destination till this afternoon. Now, I
repeat, she was, last night, fully fifty or sixty miles from the nearest land, the
group of the Bermudas. That she could have returned westward, and can be in
proximity to the American coast, is inadmissible, in view of the distance.
Moreover, I have reason to believe that the Ebba has remained stationary all
night. Before I fell asleep, I know she had stopped, and I now know that she is
not moving.

However, I shall see when I am allowed to go on deck. My cabin door is still
bolted, I find on trying it; but I do not think they are likely to keep me here when
broad daylight is on.

An hour goes by, and it gradually gets lighter. I look out of my porthole. The
ocean is covered by a mist, which the first rays of the sun will speedily disperse.

I can, however, see for a half a mile, and if the three-masted merchantman is
not visible, it is probably because she is lying off the other, or port, side of the
Ebba.

Presently I hear a key turned in my door, and the bolts drawn. I push the door
open and clamber up the iron ladder to the deck, just as the men are battening
down the cover of the hold.

I look for the Count d'Artigas, but do not see him. He has not yet left his
cabin.

Aft, Captain Spade and Engineer Serko are superintending the stowing of
some bales, which have doubtless been hoisted from the hold. This explains the
noisy operations that were going on when I was awakened. Obviously, if the
crew are getting out the cargo, we are approaching the end of our voyage. We are
not far from port, and perhaps in a few hours, the schooner will drop anchor.

But what about the sailing ship that was to port of us? She ought to be in the
same place, seeing that there has been and is no wind.

I look for her, but she is nowhere to be seen. There is not a sail, not a speck
on the horizon either east, west, north or south.

After cogitating upon the circumstance I can only arrive at the following
conclusion, which, however, can only be accepted under reserve: Although I did
not notice it, the Ebba resumed her voyage while I slept, leaving the three-master


becalmed behind her, and this is why the merchantman is no longer visible.

I am careful not to question Captain Spade about it, nor even Engineer
Serko, as I should certainly receive no answer.

Besides, at this moment Captain Spade goes to the signalling apparatus and
presses one of the buttons on the upper disk. Almost immediately the Ebba gives
a jerk, then with her sails still furled, she starts off eastward again.

Two hours later the Count d'Artigas comes up through the main hatchway
and takes his customary place aft. Serko and Captain Spade at once approach
and engage in conversation with him.

All three raise their telescopes and sweep the horizon from southeast to
northeast.

No one will be surprised to learn that I gaze intently in the same direction;
but having no telescope I cannot distinguish anything.

The midday meal over we all return on deck--all with the exception of
Thomas Roch, who has not quitted his cabin.

Towards one o'clock land is sighted by the lookout man on the foretop cross-
tree. Inasmuch as the Elba is bowling along at great speed I shall soon be able to
make out the coast line.

In effect, two hours later a vague semicircular line that curves outward is
discernible about eight miles off. As the schooner approaches it becomes more
distinct. It is a mountain, or at all events very high ground, and from its summit a
cloud of smoke ascends.

What! A volcano in these parts? It must then be----


CHAPTER VIII.

BACK CUP.

In my opinion the Ebba could have struck no other group of islands but the
Bermudas in this part of the Atlantic. This is clear from the distance covered
from the American coast and the direction sailed in since we issued from
Pamlico Sound. This direction has constantly been south-southeast, and the
distance, judging from the Ebba's rate of speed, which has scarcely varied, is
approximately seven hundred and fifty miles.

Still, the schooner does not slacken speed. The Count d'Artigas and Engineer
Serko remain aft, by the man at the wheel. Captain Spade has gone forward.

Are we not going to leave this island, which appears to be isolated, to the
west?

It does not seem likely, since it is still broad daylight, and the hour at which
the Ebba was timed to arrive.


All the sailors are drawn up on deck, awaiting orders, and Boatswain
Effrondat is making preparations to anchor.

Ere a couple of hours have passed I shall know all about it. It will be the first
answer to one of the many questions that have perplexed me since the schooner
put to sea.

And yet it is most unlikely that the port to which the Ebba belongs is situated
on one of the Bermuda islands, in the middle of an English archipelago--unless
the Count d'Artigas has kidnapped Thomas Roch for the British government,
which I cannot believe.

I become aware that this extraordinary man is gazing at me with singular
persistence. Although he can have no suspicion that I am Simon Hart, the
engineer, he must be asking himself what I think of this adventure. If Warder
Gaydon is but a poor devil, this poor devil will manifest as much unconcern as to
what is in store for him as any gentleman could--even though he were the
proprietor of this queer pleasure yacht. Still I am a little uneasy under his gaze.

I dare say that if the Count d'Artigas could guess how certain things have
suddenly become clear to me, he would not hesitate to have me thrown
overboard.

Prudence therefore commands me to be more circumspect than ever.

Without giving rise to any suspicion--even in the mind of Engineer Serko--I
have succeeded in raising a corner of the mysterious veil, and I begin to see
ahead a bit.

As the Ebba draws nearer, the island, or rather islet, towards which she is
speeding shows more sharply against the blue background of the sky. The sun
which has passed the zenith, shines full upon the western side. The islet is
isolated, or at any rate I cannot see any others of the group to which it belongs,
either to north or south.

This islet, of curious contexture, resembles as near as possible a cup turned
upside down, from which a fuliginous vapor arises. Its summit--the bottom of
the cup, if you like--is about three hundred feet above the level of the sea, and its
flanks, which are steep and regular, are as bare as the sea-washed rocks at its
base.

There is another peculiarity about it which must render the islet easily
recognizable by mariners approaching it from the west, and this is a rock which
forms a natural arch at the base of the mountain--the handle of the cup, so to
speak--and through which the waves wash as freely as the sunshine passes. Seen
this way the islet fully justifies the name of Back Cup given to it.

Well, I know and recognize this islet! It is situated at the extremity of the
archipelago of the Bermudas. It is the "reversed cup" that I had occasion to visit


a few years ago--No, I am not mistaken. I then climbed over the calcareous and
crooked rocks at its base on the east side. Yes, it is Back Cup, sure enough!

Had I been less self-possessed I might have uttered an exclamation of
surprise--and satisfaction--which, with good reason, would have excited the
attention and suspicion of the Count d'Artigas.

These are the circumstances under which I came to explore Back Cup while
on a visit to Bermuda.

This archipelago, which is situated about seven hundred and fifty miles from
North Carolina is composed of several hundred islands or islets. Its centre is
crossed by the sixty-fourth meridian and the thirty-second parallel. Since the
Englishman Lomer was shipwrecked and cast up there in 1609, the Bermudas
have belonged to the United Kingdom, and in consequence the colonial
population has increased to ten thousand inhabitants. It was not for its
productions of cotton, coffee, indigo, and arrowroot that England annexed the
group--seized it, one might say; but because it formed a splendid maritime
station in that part of the Ocean, and in proximity to the United States of
America. Possession was taken of it without any protest on the part of other
powers, and Bermuda is now administered by a British governor with the
addition of a council and a General Assembly.

The principal islands of the archipelago are called St. David, Somerset,
Hamilton, and St. George. The latter has a free port, and the town of the same
name is also the capital of the group.

The largest of these isles is not more than seventeen miles long and five
wide. Leaving out the medium-sized ones, there remains but an agglomeration of
islets and reefs scattered over an area of twelve square leagues.

Although the climate of Bermuda is very healthy, very salubrious, the isles
are nevertheless frightfully beaten by the heavy winter tempests of the Atlantic,
and their approach by navigators presents certain difficulties.

What the archipelago especially lacks are rivers and rios. However, as
abundant rains fall frequently, this drawback is got over by the inhabitants, who
treasure up the heaven-sent water for household and agricultural purposes. This
has necessitated the construction of vast cisterns which the downfalls keep filled.
These works of engineering skill justly merit the admiration they receive and do
honor to the genius of man.

It was in connection with the setting up of these cisterns that I made the trip,
as well as out of curiosity to inspect the fine works.

I obtained from the company of which I was the engineer in New Jersey a
vacation of several weeks, and embarked at New York for the Bermudas.

While I was staying on Hamilton Island, in the vast port of Southampton, an


event occurred of great interest to geologists.

One day a whole flotilla of fishers, men, women and children, entered
Southampton Harbor. For fifty years these families had lived on the east coast of
Back Cup, where they had erected log-cabins and houses of stone. Their position
for carrying on their industry was an exceptionally favorable one, for the waters
teem with fish all the year round, and in March and April whales abound.

Nothing had hitherto occurred to disturb their tranquil existence. They were
quite contented with their rough lot, which was rendered less onerous by the
facility of communication with Hamilton and St. George. Their solid barks took
cargoes of fish there, which they exchanged for the necessities of life.

Why had they thus abandoned the islet with the intention, as it pretty soon
appeared, of never returning to it? The reason turned out to be that they no
longer considered themselves in safety there.

A couple of months previously they had been at first surprised, then alarmed,
by several distinct detonations that appeared to have taken place in the interior of
the mountain. At the same time smoke and flames issued from the summit--or
the bottom of the reversed cup, if you like. Now no one had ever suspected that
the islet was of volcanic origin, or that there was a crater at the top, no one
having been able to climb its sides. Now, however, there could be no possible
doubt that the mountain was an ancient volcano that had suddenly become active
again and threatened the village with destruction.

During the ensuing two months internal rumblings and explosions continued
to be heard, which were accompanied by bursts of flame from the top--especially
at night. The island was shaken by the explosions--the shocks could be distinctly
felt. All these phenomena were indicative of an imminent eruption, and there
was no spot at the base of the mountain that could afford any protection from the
rivers of lava that would inevitably pour down its smooth, steep slopes and
overwhelm the village in their boiling flood. Besides, the very mountain might
be destroyed in the eruption.

There was nothing for the population exposed to such a dire catastrophe to
do but leave. This they did. Their humble Lares and Penates, in fact all their
belongings, were loaded into the fishing-smacks, and the entire colony sought
refuge in Southhampton Harbor.

The news that a volcano, that had presumably been smouldering for centuries
at the western extremity of the group, showed signs of breaking out again,
caused a sensation throughout the Bermudas. But while some were terrified, the
curiosity of others was aroused, mine included. The phenomenon was worth
investigation, even if the simple fisher-folk had exaggerated.

Back Cup, which, as already stated, lies at the western extremity of the


archipelago, is connected therewith by a chain of small islets and reefs, which
cannot be approached from the east. Being only three hundred feet in altitude, it
cannot be seen either from St. George or Hamilton. I joined a party of explorers
and we embarked in a cutter that landed us on the island, and made our way to
the abandoned village of the Bermudan fishers.

The internal crackings and detonations could be plainly heard, and a sheaf of
smoke was swayed by the wind at the summit.

Beyond a peradventure the ancient volcano had been started again by the
subterranean fire, and an eruption at any moment was to be apprehended.

In vain we attempted to climb to the mouth of the crater. The mountain
sheered down at an angle of from seventy-five to eighty degrees, and its smooth,
slippery sides afforded absolutely no foothold. Anything more barren than this
rocky freak of nature it would be difficult to conceive. Only a few tufts of wild
herbs were to be seen upon the whole island, and these seemed to have no raison
d'étre.

Our explorations were therefore necessarily limited, and in view of the active
symptoms of danger that manifested themselves, we could but approve the
action of the villagers in abandoning the place; for we entertained no doubt that
its destruction was imminent.

These were the circumstances in which I was led to visit Back Cup, and no
one will consequently be surprised at the fact that I recognized it immediately
we hove in sight of the queer structure.

No, I repeat, the Count d'Artigas would probably not be overpleased if he
were aware that Warder Gaydon is perfectly acquainted with this islet, even if
the Ebba was to anchor there--which, as there is no port, is, to say the least,
extremely improbable.

As we draw nearer, I attentively examine Back Cup. Not one of its former
inhabitants has been induced to return, and, as it is absolutely deserted, I cannot
imagine why the schooner should visit the place.

Perhaps, however, the Count d'Artigas and his companions have no intention
of landing there. Even though the Ebba should find temporary shelter between
the rocky sides of a narrow creek there is nothing to give ground to the
supposition that a wealthy yachtsman would have the remotest idea of fixing
upon as his residence an arid cone exposed to all the terrible tempests of the
Western Atlantic. To live hero is all very well for rustic fishermen, but not for
the Count d'Artigas, Engineer Serko, Captain Spade and his crew.

Back Cup is now only half a mile off, and the seaweed thrown up on its
rocky base is plainly discernible. The only living things upon it are the sea-gulls
and other birds that circle in clouds around the smoking crater.


When she is only two cable's lengths off, the schooner slackens speed, and
then stops at the entrance of a sort of natural canal formed by a couple of reefs
that barely rise above the water.

I wonder whether the Ebba will venture to try the dangerous feat of passing
through it. I do not think so. She will probably lay where she is--though why she
should do so I do not know--for a few hours, and then continue her voyage
towards the east.

However this may be I see no preparations in progress for dropping anchor.
The anchors are suspended in their usual places, the cables have not been
cleared, and no motion has been made to lower a single boat.

At this moment Count d'Artigas, Engineer Serko and Captain Spade go
forward and perform some manoeuvre that is inexplicable to me.

I walk along the port side of the deck until I am near the foremast, and then I
can see a small buoy that the sailors are hoisting in. Almost immediately the
water, at the same spot becomes dark and I observe a black mass rising to the
surface. Is it a big whale rising for air, and is the Ebba in danger of being
shattered by a blow from the monster's tail?

Now I understand! At last the mystery is solved. I know what was the motor
that caused the schooner to go at such an extraordinary speed without sails and
without a screw. Her indefatigable motor is emerging from the sea, after having
towed her from the coast of America to the archipelago of the Bermudas. There
it is, floating alongside--a submersible boat, a submarine tug, worked by a screw
set in motion by the current from a battery of accumulators or powerful electric
piles.

On the upper part of the long cigar-shaped iron tug is a platform in the
middle of which is the "lid" by which an entrance is effected. In the fore part of
the platform projects a periscope, or lookout, formed by portholes or lenses
through which an electric searchlight can throw its gleam for some distance
under water in front of and on each side of the tug. Now relieved of its ballast of
water the boat has risen to the surface. Its lid will open and fresh air will
penetrate it to every part. In all probability, if it remained submerged during the
day it rose at night and towed the Ebba on the surface.

But if the mechanical power of the tug is produced by electricity the latter
must be furnished by some manufactory where it is stored, and the means of
procuring the batteries is not to be found on Back Cup, I suppose.

And then, why does the Ebba have recourse to this submarine towing
system? Why is she not provided with her own means of propulsion, like other
pleasure-boats?

These are things, however, upon which I have at present no leisure to


ruminate.

The lid of the tug opens and several men issue on to the platform. They are
the crew of this submarine boat, and Captain Spade has been able to
communicate with them and transmit his orders as to the direction to be taken by
means of electric signals connected with the tug by a wire that passes along the
stem of the schooner.

Engineer Serko approaches me and says, pointing to the boat:

"Get in.”

"Get in!" I exclaim.

"Yes, in the tug, and look sharp about it."

As usual there is nothing for it but to obey. I hasten to comply with the order
and clamber over the side.

At the same time Thomas Roch appears on deck accompanied by one of the
crew. He appears to be very calm, and very indifferent too, and makes no
resistance when he is lifted over and lowered into the tug. When he has been
taken in, Count d'Artigas and Engineer Serko follow.

Captain Spade and the crew of the Ebba remain behind, with the exception of
four men who man the dinghy, which has been lowered. They have hold of a
long hawser, with which the schooner is probably to be towed through the reef.
Is there then a creek in the middle of the rocks where the vessel is secure from
the breakers? Is this the port to which she belongs?

They row off with the hawser and make the end fast to a ring in the reef.
Then the crew on board haul on it and in five minutes the schooner is so
completely lost to sight among the rocks that even the tip of her mast could not
be seen from the sea.

Who in Bermuda imagines that a vessel is accustomed to lay up in this secret
creek? Who in America would have any idea that the rich yachtsman so well
known in all the eastern ports abides in the solitude of Back Cup mountain?

Twenty minutes later the dinghy returns with the four men towards the tug
which was evidently waiting for them before proceeding--where?

They climb on board, the little boat is made fast astern, a movement is felt,
the screw revolves rapidly and the tug skims along the surface to Back Cup,
skirting the reefs to the south.

Three cable's lengths further on, another tortuous canal is seen that leads to
the island. Into this the tug enters. When it gets close inshore, an order is given
to two men who jump out and haul the dinghy up on a narrow sandy beach out
of the reach of wave or weed, and where it will be easily get-at-able when
wanted.

This done the sailors return to the tug and Engineer Serko signs to me to go


below.

A short iron ladder leads into a central cabin where various bales and
packages are stored, and for which no doubt there was not room in the hold of
the schooner. I am pushed into a side cabin, the door is shut upon me, and here I
am once more a prisoner in profound darkness.

I recognize the cabin the moment I enter it. It is the place in which I spent so
many long hours after our abduction from Healthful House, and in which I was
confined until well out at sea off Pamlico Sound.

It is evident that Thomas Roch has been placed in a similar compartment.

A loud noise is heard, the banging of the lid as it closes, and the tug begins to
sink as the water is admitted to the tanks.

This movement is succeeded by another--a movement that impels the boat
through the water.

Three minutes later it stops, and I feel that we are rising to the surface again.

Another noise made by the lid being raised.

The door of my cabin opens, and I rush out and clamber on to the platform.

I look around and find that the tug has penetrated to the interior of Back Cup
mountain.

This is the mysterious retreat where Count d'Artigas lives with his
companions--out of the world, so to speak.


CHAPTER IX.

INSIDE BACK CUP.

The next morning I am able to make a first inspection of the vast cavern of
Back Cup. No one seeks to prevent me.

What a night I have passed! What strange visions I have seen! With what
impatience I waited for morming!

I was conducted to a grotto about a hundred paces from the edge of the lake
where the tug stopped. The grotto, twelve feet by ten, was lighted by an
incandescent lamp, and fitted with an entrance door that was closed upon me.

I am not surprised that electricity is employed in lighting the interior of the
cavern, as it is also used in the submarine boat. But where is it generated? Where
does it come from? Is there a manufactory installed somewhere or other in this
vast crypt, with machinery, dynamos and accumulators?

My cell is neatly furnished with a table on which provisions are spread, a
bunk with bedding, a basket chair, a wash-hand-stand with toilet set, and a closet
containing linen and various suits of clothes. In a drawer of the table I find
paper, ink and pens.


My dinner consists of fresh fish, preserved meat, bread of excellent quality,
ale and whisky; but I am so excited that I scarcely touch it. Yet I feel that I ought
to fortify myself and recover my calmness of mind. I must and will solve the
mystery surrounding the handful of men who burrow in the bowels of this island.

So it is under the carapace of Back Cup that Count d'Artigas has established
himself! This cavity, the existence of which is not even suspected, is his home
when he is not sailing in the Ebba along the coasts of the new world or the old.
This is the unknown retreat he has discovered, to which access is obtained by a
submarine passage twelve or fifteen feet below the surface of the ocean.

Why has he severed himself from the world? What has been his past? If, as I
suspect, this name of d'Artigas and this title of Count are assumed, what motive
has he for hiding his identity? Has he been banished, is he an outcast of society
that he should have selected this place above all others? Am I not in the power of
an evildoer anxious to ensure impunity for his crimes and to defy the law by
seeking refuge in this undiscoverable burrow? I have the right of supposing
anything in the case of this suspicious foreigner, and I exercise it.

Then the question to which I have never been able to suggest a satisfactory
answer once more surges into my mind. Why was Thomas Roch abducted from
Healthful House in the manner already fully described? Does the Count
d'Artigas hope to force from him the secret of his fulgurator with a view to
utilizing it for the defence of Back Cup in case his retreat should by chance be
discovered? Hardly. It would be easy enough to starve the gang out of Back Cup,
by preventing the tug from supplying them with provisions. On the other hand,
the schooner could never break through the investing lines, and if she did her
description would be known in every port. In this event, of what possible use
would Thomas Roch's invention be to the Count d'Artigas Decidedly, I cannot
understand it!

About seven o'clock in the morning I jump out of bed. If I am a prisoner in
the cavern I am at least not imprisoned in my grotto cell. The door yields when I
turn the handle and push against it, and I walk out.

Thirty yards in front of me is a rocky plane, forming a sort of quay that
extends to right and left. Several sailors of the Ebba are engaged in landing bales
and stores from the interior of the tug, which lays alongside a little stone jetty.

A dim light to which my eyes soon grow accustomed envelops the cavern
and comes from a hole in the centre of the roof, through which the blue sky can
be seen.

"It is from that hole that the smoke which can be seen for such a distance
issues," I say to myself, and this discovery suggests a whole series of reflections.

Back Cup, then, is not a volcano, as was supposed--as I supposed myself.


The flames that were seen a few years ago, and the columns of smoke that still
rise were and are produced artificially. The detonations and rumblings that so
alarmed the Bermudan fishers were not caused by the internal workings of
nature. These various phenomena were fictitious. They manifested themselves at
the mere will of the owner of the island, who wanted to scare away the
inhabitants who resided on the coast. He succeeded, this Count d'Artigas, and
remains the sole and undisputed monarch of the mountain. By exploding
gunpowder, and burning seaweed swept up in inexhaustible quantities by the
ocean, he has been able to simulate a volcano upon the point of eruption and
effectually scare would-be settlers away!

The light becomes stronger as the sun rises higher, the daylight streams
through the fictitious crater, and I shall soon be able to estimate the cavern's
dimensions. This is how I calculate:

Exteriorly the island of Back Cup, which is as nearly as possible circular,
measures two hundred and fifty yards in circumference, and presents an interior
superficies of about six acres. The sides of the mountain at its base vary in
thickness from thirty to a hundred yards.

It therefore follows that this excavation practically occupies the whole of that
part of Back Cup island which appears above water. As to the length of the
submarine tunnel by which communication is obtained with the outside, and
through which the tug passed, I estimate that it is fifty yards in length.

The size of the cavern can be judged from these approximate figures. But
vast as it is, I remember that there are caverns of larger dimensions both in the
old and new worlds. For instance in Carniole, Northumberland, Derbyshire,
Piedmont, the Balearics, Hungary and California are larger grottoes than Back
Cup, and those at Han-sur-Lesse in Belgium, and the Mammoth Caves in
Kentucky, are also more extensive. The latter contain no fewer than two hundred
and twenty-six domes, seven rivers, eight cataracts, thirty two wells of unknown
depth, and an immense lake which extends over six or seven leagues, the limit of
which has never been reached by explorers.

I know these Kentucky grottoes, having visited them, as many thousands of
tourists have done. The principal one will serve as a comparison to Back Cup.
The roof of the former, like that of the latter, is supported by pillars of various
lengths, which give it the appearance of a Gothic cathedral, with naves and
aisles, though it lacks the architectural regularity of a religious edifice. The only
difference is that whereas the roof of the Kentucky grotto is over four hundred
feet high, that of Back Cup is not above two hundred and twenty at that part of it
where the round hole through which issue the smoke and flames is situated.

Another peculiarity, and a very important one, that requires to be pointed out,


is that whereas the majority of the grottoes referred to are easily accessible, and
were therefore bound to be discovered some time or other, the same remark does
not apply to Back Cup. Although it is marked on the map as an island forming
part of the Bermuda group, how could any one imagine that it is hollow, that its
rocky sides are only the walls of an enormous cavern? In order to make such a
discovery it would be necessary to get inside, and to get inside a submarine
apparatus similar to that of the Count d'Artigas would be necessary.

In my opinion this strange yachtsman's discovery of the tunnel by which he
has been able to found this disquieting colony of Back Cup must have been due
to pure chance.

Now I turn my attention to the lake and observe that it is a very small one,
measuring not more than four hundred yards in circumference. It is, properly
speaking, a lagoon, the rocky sides of which are perpendicular. It is large enough
for the tug to work about in it, and holds enough water too, for it must be one
hundred and twenty-five feet deep.

It goes without saying that this crypt, given its position and structure,
belongs to the category of those which are due to the encroachments of the sea.
It is at once of Neptunian and Plutonian origin, like the grottoes of Crozon and
Morgate in the bay of Douarnenez in France, of Bonifacio on the Corsican coast,
Thorgatten in Norway, the height of which is estimated at over three hundred
feet, the catavaults of Greece, the grottoes of Gibraltar in Spain, and Tourana in
Cochin China, whose carapace indicates that they are all the product of this dual
geological labor.

The islet of Back Cup is in great part formed of calcareous rocks, which
slope upwards gently from the lagoon towards the sides and are separated from
each other by narrow beaches of fine sand. Thick layers of seaweed that have
been swept through the tunnel by the tide and thrown up around the lake have
been piled into heaps, some of which are dry and some still wet, but all of which
exhale the strong odor of the briny ocean. This, however, is not the only
combustible employed by the inhabitants of Back Cup, for I see an enormous
store of coal that must have been brought by the schooner and the tug. But it is
the incineration of masses of dried seaweed that causes the smoke vomited forth
by the crater of the mountain.

Continuing my walk I perceive on the northern side of the lagoon the
habitations of this colony of troglodytes--do they not merit the appellation? This
part of the cavern, which is known as the Beehive, fully justifies its name, for it
is honeycombed by cells excavated in the limestone rock and in which these
human bees--or perhaps they should rather be called wasps--reside.

The lay of the cavern to the east is very different. Here hundreds of pillars of


all shapes rise to the dome, and form a veritable forest of stone trees through the
sinuous avenues of which one can thread one's way to the extreme limit of the
place.

By counting the cells of the Beehive I calculate that Count d'Artigas'
companions number from eighty to one hundred.

As my eye wanders over the place I notice that the Count is standing in front
of one of the cells, which is isolated from the others, and talking to Engineer
Serko and Captain Spade. After a while they stroll down to the jetty alongside
which the tug is lying.

A dozen men have been emptying the merchandise out of the tug and
transporting the goods in boats to the other side, where great cellars have been
excavated in the rocks and form the storehouses of the band.

The orifice of the tunnel is not visible in the waters of the lagoon, and I
remember that when I was brought here I felt the tug sink several feet before it
entered. In this respect therefore Back Cup does not resemble either the grottoes
of Staffa or Morgate, entrance to which is always open, even at high tide. There
may be another passage communicating with the coast, either natural or
artificial, and this I shall have to make my business to find out.

The island well merits its name of Back Cup. It is indeed a gigantic cup
turned upside down, not only to outward appearance, but inwardly, too, though
people are ignorant of the fact.

I have already remarked that the Beehive is situated to the north of the
lagoon, that is to say to the left on entering by the tunnel. On the opposite side
are the storerooms filled with provisions of all kinds, bales of merchandise,
barrels of wine, beer, and spirits and various packets bearing different marks and
labels that show that they came from all parts of the world. One would think that
the cargoes of a score of ships had been landed here.

A little farther on is a large wooden shed the nature of which is easily
distinguishable. From a pole above it a network of thick copper wires extends
which conducts the current to the powerful electric lights suspended from the
roof or dome, and to the incandescent lamps in each of the cells of the hive. A
large number of lamps are also installed among the stone pillars and light up the
avenues to their extremities.

"Shall I be permitted to roam about wherever I please?" I ask myself. I hope
so. I cannot for the life of me see why the Count d'Artigas should prohibit me
from doing so, for I cannot get farther than the surrounding walls of his
mysterious domain. I question whether there is any other issue than the tunnel,
and how on earth could I get through that?

Besides, admitting that I am able to get through it, I cannot get off the island.


My disappearance would be soon noticed, and the tug would take out a dozen
men who would explore every nook and cranny. I should inevitably be
recaptured, brought back to the Beehive, and deprived of my liberty for good.

I must therefore give up all idea of making my escape, unless I can see that it
has some chance of being successful, and if ever an opportunity does present
itself I shall not be slow to take advantage of it.

On strolling round by the rows of cells I am able to observe a few of these
companions of the Count d'Artigas who are content to pass their monotonous
existence in the depths of Back Cup. As I said before, calculating from the
number of cells in the Beehive, there must be between eighty and a hundred of
them.

They pay no attention whatever to me as I pass, and on examining them
closely it seems to me that they must have been recruited from every country. I
do not distinguish any community of origin among them, not even a similarity
by which they might be classed as North Americans, Europeans or Asiatics. The
color of their skin shades from white to yellow and black--the black peculiar to
Australia rather than to Africa. To sum up, they appear for the most part to
pertain to the Malay races. I may add that the Count d'Artigas certainly belongs
to that particular race which peoples the Dutch isles in the West Pacific, while
Engineer Serko must be Levantine and Captain Spade of Italian origin.

But if the inhabitants of Back Cup are not bound to each other by ties of
race, they certainly are by instinct and inclination. What forbidding, savage-
looking faces they have, to be sure! They are men of violent character who have
probably never placed any restraint upon their passions, nor hesitated at
anything, and it occurs to me that in all likelihood they have sought refuge in this
cavern, where they fancy they can continue to defy the law with impunity, after a
long series of crimes--robbery, murder, arson, and excesses of all descriptions
committed together. In this case Back Cup is nothing but a lair of pirates, the
Count d'Artigas is the leader of the band and Serko and Spade are his
lieutenants.

I cannot get this idea out of my head, and the more I consider the more
convinced I am that I am right, especially as everything I see during my stroll
about the cavern seems to confirm my opinion.

However this may be, and whatever may be the circumstances that have
brought them together in this place, Count d'Artigas' companions appear to
accept his all-powerful domination without question. On the other hand, if he
keeps them under his iron heel by enforcing the severest discipline, certain
advantages, some compensation, must accrue from the servitude to which they
bow. What can this compensation be?


Having turned that part of the bank under which the tunnel passes, I find
myself on the opposite side of the lagoon, where are situated the storerooms
containing the merchandise brought by the Ebba on each trip, and which contain
a great quantity of bales.

Beyond is the manufactory of electric energy. I gaze in at the windows as I
pass and notice that it contains machines of the latest invention and highest
attained perfection, which take up little space. Not one steam engine, with its
more or less complicated mechanism and need of fuel, is to be seen in the place.
As I had surmised, piles of extraordinary power supply the current to the lamps
in the cavern, as well as to the dynamos of the tug. No doubt the current is also
utilized for domestic purposes, such as warming the Beehive and cooking food, I
can see that in a neighboring cavity it is applied to the alembics used to produce
fresh water. At any rate the colonists of Back Cup are not reduced to catching the
rain water that falls so abundantly upon the exterior of the mountain.

A few paces from the electric power house is a large cistern that, save in the
matter of proportions, is the counterpart of those I visited in Bermuda. In the
latter place the cisterns have to supply the needs of over ten thousand people,
this one of a hundred--what?

I am not sure yet what to call them. That their chief had serious reasons for
choosing the bowels of this island for his abiding place is obvious. But what
were those reasons? I can understand monks shutting themselves behind their
monastery walls with the intention of separating themselves from the world, but
these subjects of the Count d'Artigas have nothing of the monk about them, and
would not be mistaken for such by the most simple-minded of mortals.

I continue my way through the pillars to the extremity of the cavern. No one
has sought to stop me, no one has spoken to me, not a soul apparently has taken
the very slightest notice of me. This portion of Back Cup is extremely curious,
and comparable to the most marvellous of the grottoes of Kentucky or the
Balearics. I need hardly say that nowhere is the labor of man apparent. All this is
the handiwork of nature, and it is not without wonder, mingled with awe, that I
reflect upon the telluric forces capable of engendering such prodigious
substructions. The daylight from the crater in the centre only strikes this part of
the cavern obliquely, so that it is very imperfectly lighted, but at night, when
illuminated by the electric lamps, its aspect must be positively fantastic.

I have examined the walls everywhere with minute attention, but have been
unable to discover any means of communicating with the outside.

Quite a colony of birds--gulls, sea-swallows and other feathery denizens of
the Bermudan beaches have made their home in the cavern. They have
apparently never been hunted, for they are in no way disturbed by the presence


of man.

But besides sea-birds, which are free to come and go as they please by the
orifice in the dome, there is a whole farmyard of domestic poultry, and cows and
pigs. The food supply is therefore no less assured than it is varied, when the fish
of all kinds that abound in the lagoon and around the island are taken into
consideration.

Moreover, a mere glance at the colonists of Back Cup amply suffices to show
that they are not accustomed to fare scantily. They are all vigorous, robust
seafaring men, weatherbeaten and seasoned in the burning beat of tropical
latitudes, whose rich blood is surcharged with oxygen by the breezes of the
ocean. There is not a youth nor an old man among them. They are all in their
prime, their ages ranging from thirty to fifty.

But why do they submit to such an existence? Do they never leave their
rocky retreat?

Perhaps I shall find out ere I am much older.


CHAPTER X.

KER KARRAJE.

The cell in which I reside is about a hundred paces from the habitation of the
Count d'Artigas, which is one of the end ones of this row of the Beehive. If I am
not to share it with Thomas Roch, I presume the latter's cell is not far off, for in
order that Warder Gaydon may continue to care for the ex-patient of Healthful
House, their respective apartments will have to be contiguous. However, I
suppose I shall soon be enlightened on this point.

Captain Spade and Engineer Serko reside separately in proximity to
D'Artigas' mansion.

Mansion? Yes, why not dignify it with the title since this habitation has been
arranged with a certain art? Skillful hands have carved an ornamental facade in
the rock. A large door affords access to it. Colored glass windows in wooden
frames let into the limestone walls admit the light. The interior comprises several
chambers, a dining-room and a drawing-room lighted by a stained-glass window,
the whole being perfectly ventilated. The furniture is of various styles and
shapes and of French, English and American make. The kitchen, larder, etc., are
in adjoining cells in rear of the Beehive.

In the afternoon, just as I issue from my cell with the firm intention of
"obtaining an audience" of the Count d'Artigas, I catch sight of him coming
along the shore of the lagoon towards the hive. Either he does not see me, or
wishes to avoid me, for he quickens his steps and I am unable to catch him.


"Well, he will have to receive me, anyhow!" I mutter to myself.

I hurry up to the door through which he has just disappeared and which has
closed behind him.

It is guarded by a gigantic, dark-skinned Malay, who orders me away in no
amiable tone of voice.

I decline to comply with his injunction, and repeat to him twice the following
request in my very best English:

"Tell the Count d'Artigas that I desire to be received immediately."

I might just as well have addressed myself to the surrounding rock. This
savage, no doubt, does not understand a word of English, for he scowls at me
and orders me away again with a menacing cry.

I have a good mind to attempt to force the door and shout so that the Count
d'Artigas cannot fail to hear me, but in all probability I shall only succeed in
rousing the wrath of the Malay, who appears to be endowed with herculean
strength. I therefore judge discretion to be the better part of valor, and put off the
explanation that is owing to me--and which, sooner or later, I will have--to a
more propitious occasion.

I meander off in front of the Beehive towards the east, and my thoughts
revert to Thomas Roch. I am surprised that I have not seen him yet. Can he be in
the throes of a fresh paroxysm?

This hypothesis is hardly admissible, for if the Count d'Artigas is to be
believed, he would in this event have summoned me to attend to the inventor.

A little farther on I encounter Engineer Serko.

With his inviting manner and usual good-humor this ironical individual
smiles when he perceives me, and does not seek to avoid me. If he knew I was a
colleague, an engineer--providing he himself really is one--perhaps he might
receive me with more cordiality than I have yet encountered, but I am not going
to be such a fool as to tell him who and what I am.

He stops, with laughing eyes and mocking mouth, and accompanies a "Good
day, how do you do?" with a gracious gesture of salutation.

I respond coldly to his politeness--a fact which he affects not to notice.

"May Saint Jonathan protect you, Mr. Gaydon!" he continues in his clear,
ringing voice. "You are not, I presume, disposed to regret the fortunate
circumstance by which you were permitted to visit this surpassingly marvellous
cavern--and it really is one of the finest, although the least known on this
spheroid."

This word of a scientific language used in conversation with a simple
hospital attendant surprises me, I admit, and I merely reply:

"I should have no reason to complain, Mr. Serko, if, after having had the


pleasure of visiting this cavern, I were at liberty to quit it."

"What! Already thinking of leaving us, Mr. Gaydon,--of returning to your
dismal pavilion at Healthful House? Why, you have scarcely had time to explore
our magnificent domain, or to admire the incomparable beauty with which
nature has endowed it."

"What I have seen suffices," I answer; "and should you perchance be talking
seriously I will assure you seriously that I do not want to see any more of it."

"Come, now, Mr. Gaydon, permit me to point out that you have not yet had
the opportunity of appreciating the advantages of an existence passed in such
unrivalled surroundings. It is a quiet life, exempt from care, with an assured
future, material conditions such as are not to be met with anywhere, an even
climate and no more to fear from the tempests which desolate the coasts in this
part of the Atlantic than from the cold of winter, or the heat of summer. This
temperate and salubrious atmosphere is scarcely affected by changes of season.
Here we have no need to apprehend the wrath of either Pluto or Neptune."

"Sir," I reply, "it is impossible that this climate can suit you, that you can
appreciate living in this grotto of----"

I was on the point of pronouncing the name of Back Cup. Fortunately I
restrained myself in time. What would happen if they suspected that I am aware
of the name of their island, and, consequently, of its position at the extremity of
the Bermuda group?

"However," I continue, "if this climate does not suit me, I have, I presume,
the right to make a change."

"The right, of course."

"I understand from your remark that I shall be furnished with the means of
returning to America when I want to go?"

"I have no reason for opposing your desires, Mr. Gaydon," Engineer Serko
replies, "and I regard your presumption as a very natural one. Observe, however,
that we live here in a noble and superb independence, that we acknowledge the
authority of no foreign power, that we are subject to no outside authority, that we
are the colonists of no state, either of the old or new world. This is worth
consideration by whomsoever has a sense of pride and independence. Besides,
what memories are evoked in a cultivated mind by these grottoes which seem to
have been chiselled by the hands of the gods and in which they were wont to
render their oracles by the mouth of Trophonius."

Decidedly, Engineer Serko is fond of citing mythology! Trophonius after
Pluto and Neptune? Does he imagine that Warder Gaydon ever heard of
Trophonius? It is clear this mocker continues to mock, and I have to exercise the
greatest patience in order not to reply in the same tone.


"A moment ago," I continue shortly, "I wanted to enter yon habitation,
which, if I mistake not, is that of the Count d'Artigas, but I was prevented."

"By whom, Mr. Gaydon?"

"By aman in the Count's employ."

"He probably had received strict orders about it."

"Possibly, yet whether he likes it or not, Count d'Artigas will have to see me
and listen to me."

"Maybe it would be difficult, and even impossible to get him to do so," says
Engineer Serko with a smile.

"Why so?"

"Because there is no such person as Count d'Artigas here."

"You are jesting, I presume; I have just seen him."

"Tt was not the Count d'Artigas whom you saw, Mr. Gaydon."

"Who was it then, may I ask?"

"The pirate Ker Karraje."

This name was thrown at me in a hard tone of voice, and Engineer Serko
walked off before I had presence of mind enough to detain him.

The pirate Ker Karraje!

Yes, this name is a revelation to me. I know it well, and what memories it
evokes! It by itself explains what has hitherto been inexplicable to me. I now
know into whose hands I have fallen.

With what I already knew, with what I have learned since my arrival in Back
Cup from Engineer Serko, this is what I am able to tell about the past and
present of Ker Karraje:

Eight or nine years ago, the West Pacific was infested by pirates who acted
with the greatest audacity. A band of criminals of various origins, composed of
escaped convicts, military and naval deserters, etc., operated with incredible
audacity under the orders of a redoubtable chief. The nucleus of the band had
been formed by men pertaining to the scum of Europe who had been attracted to
New South Wales, in Australia, by the discovery of gold there. Among these
gold-diggers, were Captain Spade and Engineer Serko, two outcasts, whom a
certain community of ideas and character soon bound together in close
friendship.

These intelligent, well educated, resolute men would most assuredly have
succeeded in any career. But being without conscience or scruples, and
determined to get rich at no matter what cost, deriving from gambling and
speculation what they might have earned by patient and steady work, they
engaged in all sorts of impossible adventures. One day they were rich, the next
day poor, like most of the questionable individuals who had hurried to the


goldfields in search of fortune.

Among the diggers in New South Wales was a man of incomparable
audacity, one of those men who stick at nothing--not even at crime--and whose
influence upon bad and violent natures is irresistible.

That man's name was Ker Karraje.

The origin or nationality or antecedents of this pirate were never established
by the investigations ordered in regard to him. He eluded all pursuit, and his
name--or at least the name he gave himself--was known all over the world, and
inspired horror and terror everywhere, as being that of a legendary personage, a
bogey, invisible and unseizable.

I have now reason to believe that Ker Karraje is a Malay. However, it is of
little consequence, after all. What is certain is that he was with reason regarded
as a formidable and dangerous villain who had many crimes, committed in
distant seas, to answer for.

After spending a few years on the Australian goldfields, where he made the
acquaintance of Engineer Serko and Captain Spade, Ker Karraje managed to
seize a ship in the port of Melbourne, in the province of Victoria. He was joined
by about thirty rascals whose number was speedily tripled. In that part of the
Pacific Ocean where piracy is still carried on with great facility, and I may say,
profit, the number of ships pillaged, crews massacred, and raids committed in
certain western islands which the colonists were unable to defend, cannot be
estimated.

Although the whereabouts of Ker Karraje's vessel, commanded by Captain
Spade, was several times made known to the authorities, all attempts to capture
it proved futile. The marauder would disappear among the innumerable islands
of which he knew every cove and creek, and it was impossible to come across
him.

He maintained a perfect reign of terror. England, France, Germany, Russia
and America vainly dispatched warships in pursuit of the phantom vessel which
disappeared, no one knew whither, after robberies and murders that could not be
prevented or punished had been committed by her crew.

One day this series of crimes came to an end, and no more was heard of Ker
Karraje. Had he abandoned the Pacific for other seas? Would this pirate break
out in a fresh place? It was argued that notwithstanding what they must have
spent in orgies and debauchery the pirate and his companions must still have an
enormous amount of wealth hidden in some place known only to themselves,
and that they were enjoying their ill-gotten gains.

Where had the band hidden themselves since they had ceased their
depredations? This was a question which everybody asked and none was able to


answer. All attempts to run them to earth were vain. Terror and uneasiness
having ceased with the danger, Ker Karraje's exploits soon began to be forgotten,
even in the West Pacific.

This is what had happened--and what will never be known unless I succeed
in escaping from Back Cup:

These wretches were, as a matter of fact, possessed of great wealth when
they abandoned the Southern Seas. Having destroyed their ship they dispersed in
different directions after having arranged to meet on the American continent.

Engineer Serko, who was well versed in his profession, and was a clever
mechanic to boot, and who had made a special study of submarine craft,
proposed to Ker Karraje that they should construct one of these boats in order to
continue their criminal exploits with greater secrecy and effectiveness.

Ker Karraje at once saw the practical nature of the proposition, and as they
had no lack of money the idea was soon carried out.

While the so-called Count d'Artigas ordered the construction of the schooner
Ebba at the shipyards of Gotteborg, in Sweden, he gave to the Cramps of
Philadelphia, in America, the plans of a submarine boat whose construction
excited no suspicion. Besides, as will be seen, it soon disappeared and was never
heard of again.

The boat was constructed from a model and under the personal supervision
of Engineer Serko, and fitted with all the known appliances of nautical science.
The screw was worked with electric piles of recent invention which imparted
enormous propulsive power to the motor.

It goes without saying that no one imagined that Count d'Artigas was none
other than Ker Karraje, the former pirate of the Pacific, and that Engineer Serko
was the most formidable and resolute of his accomplices. The former was
regarded as a foreigner of noble birth and great fortune, who for several months
had been frequenting the ports of the United States, the Ebba having been
launched long before the tug was ready.

Work upon the latter occupied fully eighteen months, and when the boat was
finished it excited the admiration of all those interested in these engines of
submarine navigation. By its external form, its interior arrangements, its air-
supply system, the rapidity with which it could be immersed, the facility with
which it could be handled and controlled, and its extraordinary speed, it was
conceded to be far superior to the Goubet, the Gymnote, the Zede, and other
similar boats which had made great strides towards perfection.

After several extremely successful experiments a public test was given in the
open sea, four miles off Charleston, in presence of several American and foreign
warships, merchant vessels, and pleasure boats invited for the occasion.


Of course the Ebba was among them, with the Count d'Artigas, Engineer
Serko, and Captain Spade on board, and the old crew as well, save half a dozen
men who manned the submarine machine, which was worked by a mechanical
engineer named Gibson, a bold and very clever Englishman.

The programme of this definite experiment comprised various evolutions on
the surface of the water, which were to be followed by an immersion to last
several hours, the boat being ordered not to rise again until a certain buoy
stationed many miles out at sea had been attained.

At the appointed time the lid was closed and the boat at first manoeuvred on
the surface. Her speed and the ease with which she turned and twisted were
loudly praised by all the technical spectators.

Then at a signal given on board the Ebba the tug sank slowly out of sight,
and several vessels started for the buoy where she was to reappear.

Three hours went by, but there was no sign of the boat.

No one could suppose that in accordance with instructions received from the
Count d'Artigas and Engineer Serko this submarine machine, which was
destined to act as the invisible tug of the schooner, would not emerge till it had
gone several miles beyond the rendezvous. Therefore, with the exception of
those who were in the secret, no one entertained any doubt that the boat and all
inside her had perished as the result of an accident either to her metallic covering
or machinery.

On board the Ebba consternation was admirably simulated. On board the
other vessels it was real. Drags were used and divers sent down along the course
the boat was supposed to have taken, but it could not be found, and it was agreed
that it had been swallowed up in the depths of the Atlantic.

Two days later the Count d'Artigas put to sea again, and in forty-eight hours
came up with the tug at the place appointed.

This is how Ker Karraje became possessed of the admirable vessel which
was to perform the double function of towing the schooner and attacking ships.
With this terrible engine of destruction, whose very existence was ignored, the
Count d'Artigas was able to recommence his career of piracy with security and
impunity.

These details I have learned from Engineer Serko, who is very proud of his
handiwork,--and also very positive that the prisoner of Back Cup will never be
able to disclose the secret.

It will easily be realized how powerful was the offensive weapon Ker
Karraje now possessed. During the night the tug would rush at a merchant
vessel, and bore a hole in her with its powerful ram. At the same time the
schooner which could not possibly have excited any suspicion, would run


alongside and her horde of cutthroats would pour on to the doomed vessel's deck
and massacre the helpless crew, after which they would hurriedly transfer that
part of the cargo that was worth taking to the Ebba. Thus it happened that ship
after ship was added to the long list of those that never reached port and were
classed as having gone down with all on board.

For a year after the odious comedy in the bay of Charleston Ker Karraje
operated in the Atlantic, and his wealth increased to enormous proportions. The
merchandise for which he had no use was disposed of in distant markets in
exchange for gold and silver. But what was sadly needed was a place where the
profits could be safely hidden pending the time when they were to be finally
divided.

Chance came to their aid. While exploring the bottom of the sea in the
neighborhood of the Bermudas, Engineer Serko and Driver Gibson discovered at
the base of Back Cup island the tunnel which led to the interior of the mountain.
Would it have been possible for Ker Karraje to have found a more admirable
refuge than this, absolutely safe as it was from any possible chance of discovery?
Thus it came to pass that one of the islands of the Archipelago of Bermuda,
erstwhile the haunt of buccaneers, became the lair of another gang a good deal
more to be dreaded.

This retreat having been definitely adopted, Count d'Artigas and his
companions set about getting their place in order. Engineer Serko installed an
electric power house, without having recourse to machines whose construction
abroad might have aroused suspicion, simply employing piles that could be
easily mounted and required but metal plates and chemical substances that the
Ebba procured during her visits to the American coast.

What happened on the night of the 19th inst. can easily be divined. If the
three-masted merchantman which lay becalmed was not visible at break of day it
was because she had been scuttled by the tug, boarded by the cutthroat band on
the Ebba, and sunk with all on board after being pillaged. The bales and things
that I had seen on the schooner were a part of her cargo, and all unknown to me
the gallant ship was lying at the bottom of the broad Atlantic!

How will this adventure end? Shall I ever be able to escape from Back Cup,
denounce the false Count d'Artigas and rid the seas of Ker Karraje's pirates?

And if Ker Karraje is terrible as it is, how much more so will he become if he
ever obtains possession of Roch's fulgurator! His power will be increased a
hundred-fold? If he were able to employ this new engine of destruction no
merchantman could resist him, no warship escape total destruction.

I remain for some time absorbed and oppressed by the reflections with which
the revelation of Ker Karraje's name inspires me. All that I have ever heard


about this famous pirate recurs to me--his existence when he skimmed the
Southern Seas, the useless expeditions organized by the maritime powers to hunt
him down. The unaccountable loss of so many vessels in the Atlantic during the
past few years is attributable to him. He had merely changed the scene of his
exploits. It was supposed that he had been got rid of, whereas he is continuing
his piratical practices in the most frequented ocean on the globe, by means of the
tug which is believed to be lying at the bottom of Charleston Bay.

"Now," I say to myself, "I know his real name and that of his lair--Ker
Karraje and Back Cup;" and I surmise that if Engineer Serko has let me into the
secret he must have been authorized to do so. Am I not meant to understand
from this that I must give up all hope of ever recovering my liberty?

Engineer Serko had manifestly remarked the impression created upon me by
this revelation. I remember that on leaving me he went towards Ker Karraje's
habitation, no doubt with the intention of apprising him of what had passed.

After a rather long walk around the lagoon I am about to return to my cell,
when I hear footsteps behind me. I turn and find myself face to face with the
Count d'Artigas, who is accompanied by Captain Spade. He glances at me
sharply, and in a burst of irritation that I cannot suppress, I exclaim:

"You are keeping me here, sir, against all right. If it was to wait upon
Thomas Roch that you carried me off from Healthful House, I refuse to attend to
him, and insist upon being sent back."

The pirate chief makes a gesture, but does not reply.

Then my temper gets the better of me altogether.

"Answer me, Count d'Artigas--or rather, for I know who you are--answer me,
Ker Karraje!" I shout.

"The Count d'Artigas is Ker Karraje," he coolly replies, "just as Warder
Gaydon is Engineer Simon Hart; and Ker Karraje will never restore to liberty
Engineer Simon Hart, who knows his secrets."


CHAPTER XI.

FIVE WEEKS IN BACK CUP.

The situation is plain. Ker Karraje knows who I am. He knew who I was
when he kidnapped Thomas Roch and his attendant.

How did this man manage to find out what I was able to keep from the staff
of Healthful House? How comes it that he knew that a French engineer was
performing the duties of attendant to Thomas Roch? I do not know how he
discovered it, but the fact remains that he did.

Evidently he had means of information which must have been costly, but


from which he has derived considerable profit. Besides, men of his kidney do
not count the cost when they wish to attain an end they have in view.

Henceforward Ker Karraje, or rather Engineer Serko, will replace me as
attendant upon Thomas Roch. Will he succeed better than I did? God grant that
he may not, that the civilized world may be spared such a misfortune!

I did not reply to Ker Karraje's Parthian shot, for I was stricken dumb. I did
not, however, collapse, as the alleged Count d'Artigas perhaps expected I would.

No! I looked him straight in the eyes, which glittered angrily, and crossed my
arms defiantly, as he had done. And yet he held my life in his hands! At a sign a
bullet would have laid me dead at his feet. Then my body, cast into the lagoon,
would have been borne out to sea through the tunnel and there would have been
an end of me.

After this scene I am left at liberty, just as before. No measure is taken
against me, I can walk among the pillars to the very end of the cavern, which--it
is only too clear--possesses no other issue except the tunnel.

When I return to my cell, at the extremity of the Beehive, a prey to a
thousand thoughts suggested by my situation, I say to myself:

"If Ker Karraje knows I am Simon Hart, the engineer, he must at any rate
never know that I am aware of the position of Back Cup Island."

As to the plan of confiding Thomas Roch to my care, I do not think he ever
seriously entertained it, seeing that my identity had been revealed to him. I regret
this, inasmuch as the inventor will indubitably be the object of pressing
solicitations, and as Engineer Serko will employ every means in his power to
obtain the composition of the explosive and deflagrator, of which he will make
such detestable use during future piratical exploits. Yes, it would have been far
better if I could have remained Thomas Roch's keeper here, as in Healthful
House.

For fifteen days I see nothing of my late charge. No one, I repeat, has placed
any obstacles in the way of my daily peregrinations. I have no need to occupy
myself about the material part of my existence. My meals are brought to me
regularly, direct from the kitchen of the Count d'Artigas--I cannot accustom
myself to calling him by any other name. The food leaves nothing to be desired,
thanks to the provisions that the Ebba brings on her return from each voyage.

It is very fortunate, too, that I have been supplied with all the writing
materials I require, for during my long hours of idleness I have been able to jot
down in my notebook the slightest incidents that have occurred since I was
abducted from Healthful House, and to keep a diary day by day. As long as I am
permitted to use a pen I shall continue my notes. Mayhap some day, they will
help to clear up the mysteries of Back Cup.


From July 5 to July 25.--A fortnight has passed, and all my attempts to get
near Thomas Roch have been frustrated. Orders have evidently been given to
keep him away from my influence, inefficacious though the latter has hitherto
been. My only hope is that the Count d'Artigas, Engineer Serko, and Captain
Spade will waste their time trying to get at the inventor's secrets.

Three or four times to my knowledge, at least, Thomas Roch and Engineer
Serko have walked together around the lagoon. As far as I have been able to
judge, the former listened with some attention to what the other was saying to
him. Serko has conducted him over the whole cavern, shown him the electric
power house and the mechanism of the tug. Thomas Roch's mental condition has
visibly improved since his departure from Healthful House.

Thomas Roch lives in a private room in Ker Karraje's "mansion." I have no
doubt that he is daily sounded in regard to his discoveries, especially by
Engineer Serko. Will he be able to resist the temptation if they offer him the
exorbitant price that he demands? Has he any idea of the value of money? These
wretches may dazzle him with the gold that they have accumulated by years of
rapine. In the present state of his mind may he not be induced to disclose the
composition of his fulgurator? They would then only have to fetch the necessary
substances and Thomas Roch would have plenty of time in Back Cup to devote
to his chemical combinations. As to the war-engines themselves nothing would
be easier than to have them made in sections in different parts of the American
continent. My hair stands on end when I think what they could and would do
with them if once they gained possession of them.

These intolerable apprehensions no longer leave me a minute's peace; they
are wearing me out and my health is suffering in consequence. Although the air
in the interior of Back Cup is pure, I become subject to attacks of suffocation,
and I feel as though my prison walls were falling upon me and crushing me
under their weight. I am, besides, oppressed by the feeling that I am cut off from
the world, as effectually as though I were no longer upon our planet,--for I know
nothing of what is going on outside.

Ah! if it were only possible to escape through that submarine tunnel, or
through the hole in the dome and slide to the base of the mountain!

On the morning of the 25th I at last encounter Thomas Roch. He is alone on
the other side of the lagoon, and I wonder, inasmuch as I have not seen them
since the previous day, whether Ker Karraje, Engineer Serko, and Captain Spade
have not gone off on some expedition.

I walk round towards Thomas Roch, and before he can see me I examine him
attentively.

His serious, thoughtful physiognomy is no longer that of a madman. He


walks slowly, with his eyes bent on the ground, and under his arm a drawing-
board upon which is stretched a sheet of paper covered with designs.

Suddenly he raises his head, advances a step and recognizes me.

"Ah! Gaydon, it is you, is it?" he cries, "I have then escaped from you! I am
free!"

He can, indeed, regard himself as being free--a good deal more at liberty in
Back Cup than he was in Healthful House. But maybe my presence evokes
unpleasant memories, and will bring on another fit, for he continues with
extraordinary animation:

"Yes, I know you, Gaydon.--Do not approach me! Stand off! stand off! You
would like to get me back in your clutches, incarcerate me again in your
dungeon! Never! I have friends here who will protect me. They are powerful,
they are rich. The Count d'Artigas is my backer and Engineer Serko is my
partner. We are going to exploit my invention! We are going to make my
fulgurator! Hence! Get you gone!"

Thomas Roch is in a perfect fury. He raises his voice, agitates his arms, and
finally pulls from his pockets many rolls of dollar bills and banknotes, and
handfuls of English, French, American and German gold coins, which slip
through his fingers and roll about the cavern.

How could he get all this money except from Ker Karraje, and as the price of
his secret? The noise he makes attracts a number of men to the scene. They
watch us for a moment, then seize Thomas Roch and drag him away. As soon as
I am out of his sight he ceases-to struggle and becomes calm again.

July 27.--Two hours after meeting with Thomas Roch, I went down to the
lagoon and walked out to the edge of the stone jetty.

The tug is not moored in its accustomed place, nor can I see it anywhere
about the lake. Ker Karraje and Engineer Serko had not gone yesterday, as I
supposed, for I saw them in the evening.

To-day, however, I have reason to believe that they really have gone away in
the tug with Captain Spade and the crew of the Ebba, and that the latter must be
sailing away.

Have they set out on a piracy expedition? Very likely. It is equally likely that
Ker Karraje, become once more the Count d'Artigas, travelling for pleasure on
board his yacht, intends to put into some port on the American coast to procure
the substances necessary to the preparation of Roch's fulgurator.

Ah! if it had only been possible for me to hide in the tug, to slip into the
Ebba's hold, and stow myself away there until the schooner arrived in port! Then
perchance I might have escaped and delivered the world from this band of
pirates.


It will be seen how tenaciously I cling to the thought of escape--of fleeing--
fleeing at any cost from this lair. But flight is impossible, except through the
tunnel, by means of a submarine boat. Is it not folly to think of such a thing?
Sheer folly, and yet what other way is there of getting out of Back Cup?

While I give myself up to these reflections the water of the lagoon opens a
few yards from me and the tug appears. The lid is raised and Gibson, the
engineer, and the men issue on to the platform. Other men come up and catch the
line that is thrown to them. They haul upon it, and the tug is soon moored in its
accustomed place.

This time, therefore, at any rate, the schooner is not being towed, and the tug
merely went out to put Ker Karraje and his companions aboard the Ebba.

This only confirms my impression that the sole object of their trip is to reach
an American port where the Count d'Artigas can procure the materials for
making the explosive, and order the machines in some foundry. On the day fixed
for their return the tug will go out through the tunnel again to meet the schooner
and Ker Karraje will return to Back Cup.

Decidedly, this evildoer is carrying out his designs and has succeeded sooner
than I thought would be possible.

August 3.--An incident occurred to-day of which the lagoon was the theatre--
a very curious incident that must be exceedingly rare.

Towards three o'clock in the afternoon there was a prodigious bubbling in the
water, which ceased for a minute or two and then recommenced in the centre of
the lagoon.

About fifteen pirates, whose attention had been attracted by this
unaccountable phenomenon, hurried down to the bank manifesting signs of
astonishment not unmingled with fear--at least I thought so.

The agitation of the water was not caused by the tug, as the latter was lying
alongside the jetty, and the idea that some other submarine boat had found its
way through the tunnel was highly improbable.

Almost at the same instant cries were heard on the opposite bank. The
newcomers shouted something in a hoarse voice to the men on the side where I
was Standing, and these immediately rushed off towards the Beehive.

I conjectured that they had caught sight of some sea-monster that had found
its way in, and was floundering in the lagoon, and that they had rushed off to
fetch arms and harpoons to try and capture it.

I was right, for they speedily returned with the latter weapons and rifles
loaded with explosive bullets.

The monster in question was a whale, of the species that is common enough
in Bermudan waters, which after swimming through the tunnel was plunging


about in the narrow limits of the lake. As it was constrained to take refuge in
Back Cup I concluded that it must have been hard pressed by whalers.

Some minutes elapsed before the monster rose to the surface. Then the green
shiny mass appeared spouting furiously and darting to and fro as though fighting
with some formidable enemy.

"If it was driven in here by whalers," I said to myself, "there must be a vessel
in proximity to Back Cup--peradventure within a stone's throw of it. Her boats
must have entered the western passes to the very foot of the mountain. And to
think I am unable to communicate with them! But even if I could, I fail to see
how I could go to them through these massive walls."

I soon found, however, that it was not fishers, but sharks that had driven the
whale through the tunnel, and which infest these waters in great numbers. I
could see them plainly as they darted about, turning upon their backs and
displaying their enormous mouths which were bristling with their cruel teeth.
There were five or six of the monsters, and they attacked the whale with great
viciousness. The latter's only means of defence was its tail, with which it lashed
at them with terrific force and rapidity. But the whale had received several
wounds and the water was tinged with its life-blood; for plunge and lash as it
would, it could not escape the bites of its enemies.

However, the voracious sharks were not permitted to vanquish their prey, for
man, far more powerful with his instruments of death, was about to take a hand
and snatch it from them. Gathered around the lagoon were the companions of
Ker Karraje, every whit as ferocious as the sharks themselves, and well
deserving the same name, for what else are they?

Standing amid a group, at the extremity of the jetty, and armed with a
harpoon, was the big Malay who had prevented me from entering Ker Karraje's
house. When the whale got within shot, he hurled the harpoon with great force
and skill, and it sank into the leviathan's flesh just under the left fin. The whale
plunged immediately, followed by the relentless sharks. The rope attached to the
weapon ran out for about sixty yards, and then slackened. The men at once
began to haul on it, and the monster rose to the surface again near the end of the
tunnel, struggling desperately in its death agony, and spurting great columns of
water tinged with blood. One blow of its tail struck a shark, and hurled it clean
out of water against the rocky side, where it dropped in again, badly, if not
fatally injured.

The harpoon was torn from the flesh by the jerk, and the whale went under. It
came up again for the last time, and lashed the water so that it washed up from
the tunnel end, disclosing the top of the orifice.

Then the sharks again rushed on their prey, but were scared off by a hail of


the explosive bullets. Two men then jumped into a boat and attached a line to the
dead monster. The latter was hauled into the jetty, and the Malays started to cut it
up with a dexterity that showed they were no novices at the work.

No more sharks were to be seen, but I concluded that it would be as well to
refrain from taking a bath in the lagoon for some days to come.

I now know exactly where the entrance to the tunnel is situated. The orifice
on this side is only ten feet below the edge of the western bank. But of what use
is this knowledge to me?

August 7.--Twelve days have elapsed since the Count d'Artigas, Engineer
Serko, and Captain Spade put to sea. There is nothing to indicate that their return
is expected, though the tug is always kept in readiness for immediate departure
by Gibson, the engine-driver. If the Ebba is not afraid to enter the ports of the
United States by day, I rather fancy she prefers to enter the rocky channel of
Back Cup at nightfall. I also fancy, somehow, that Ker Karraje and his
companions will return to-night.

August 10.--At ten o'clock last night, as I anticipated, the tug went under and
out, just in time to meet the Ebba and tow her through the channel to her creek,
after which she returned with Ker Karraje and the others.

When I look out this morning, I see Thomas Roch and Engineer Serko
walking down to the lagoon, and talking. What they are talking about I can
easily guess. I go forward and take a good look at my ex-patient. He is asking
questions of Engineer Serko With great animation. His eyes gleam, his face is
flushed, and he is all eagerness to reach the jetty. Engineer Serko can hardly
keep up with him.

The crew of the tug are unloading her, and they have just brought ashore ten
medium-sized boxes. These boxes bear a peculiar red mark, which Thomas Roch
examines closely.

Engineer Serko orders the men to transport them to the storehouses on the
left bank, and the boxes are forthwith loaded on a boat and rowed over.

In my opinion, these boxes contain the substances by the combination or
mixture of which, the fulgurator and deflagrator are to be made. The engines,
doubtless, are being made in an American foundry, and when they are ready, the
schooner will fetch them and bring them to Back Cup.

For once in a while, anyhow, the Ebba has not returned with any stolen
merchandise. She went out and has returned with a clear bill. But with what
terrible power Ker Karraje will be armed for both offensive and defensive
operations at sea! If Thomas Roch is to be credited, this fulgurator could shatter
the terrestrial spheroid at one blow. And who knows but what one day, he will
try the experiment?


CHAPTER XII.

ENGINEER SERKO'S ADVICE.

Thomas Roch has started work and spends hours and hours in a wooden shed
on the left bank of the lagoon that has been set apart as his laboratory and
workshop. No one enters it except himself. Does he insist upon preparing the
explosive in secret and does he intend to keep the formula thereof to himself? I
should not wonder.

The manner of employing Roch's fulgurator is, I believe, very simple indeed.
The projectile in which it is used requires neither gun nor mortar to launch it, nor
pneumatic tube like the Zalinski shell. It is autopropulsive, it projects itself, and
no ship within a certain zone when the engine explodes could escape utter
destruction. With such a weapon as this at his command Ker Karraje would be
invincible.

From August 11 to August 17.--During the past week Thomas Roch has been
working without intermission. Every morning the inventor goes to his laboratory
and does not issue therefrom till night. I have made no attempt to stop him or
speak to him, knowing that it would be useless to do so.

Although he is still indifferent to everything that does not touch upon his
work he appears to be perfectly self-possessed. Why should he not have
recovered his reason? Has he not obtained what he has so long sought for? Is he
not at last able to carry out the plans he formed years and years ago?

August 18.--At one o'clock this morning I was roused by several detonations.

"Has Back Cup been attacked?" was my first thought. "Has the schooner
excited suspicion, and been chased to the entrance to the passes? Is the island
being bombarded with a view to its destruction? Has justice at last overtaken
these evildoers ere Thomas Roch has been able to complete the manufacture of
his explosive, and before the autopropulsive engine could be fetched from the
continent?"

The detonations, which are very violent, continue, succeeding each other at
regular intervals, and it occurs to me that if the schooner has been destroyed, all
communication with the bases of supply being impossible, Back Cup cannot be
provisioned.

It is true the tug would be able to land the Count d'Artigas somewhere on the
American coast where, money being no object, he could easily buy or order
another vessel. But no matter. If Back Cup is only destroyed before Ker Karraje
has Roch's fulgurator at his disposal I shall render thanks to heaven.

A few hours later, at the usual time, I quit my cell. All is quiet at the Beehive.


The men are going about their business as usual. The tug is moored near the
jetty. Thomas Roch is going to his laboratory, and Ker Karraje and Engineer
Serko are tranquilly pacing backwards and forwards by the lake and chatting.
The island therefore could not have been attacked during the night. Yet I was
awakened by the report of cannon, this I will swear.

At this moment Ker Karraje goes off towards his abode and Engineer Serko,
smilingly ironical, as usual, advances to meet me.

"Well, Mr. Simon Hart," he says, "are you getting accustomed to your
tranquil existence? Do you appreciate at their just merit the advantages of this
enchanted grotto? Have you given up all hope of recovering your liberty some
day or other?"

What is the use of waxing wroth with this jester? I reply calmly:

"No, sir. I have not given up hope, and I still expect that I shall be released."

"What! Mr. Hart, separate ourselves from a man whom we all esteem--and I
from a colleague who perhaps, in the course of Thomas Roch's fits of delirium,
has learned some of his secrets? You are not serious!"

So this is why they are keeping me a prisoner in Back Cup! They suppose
that I am in part familiar with Koch's invention, and they hope to force me to tell
what I know if Thomas Koch refuses to give up his secret. This is the reason
why I was kidnapped with him, and why I have not been accommodated with an
involuntary plunge in the lagoon with a stone fastened to my neck. I see it all
now, and it is just as well to know it.

"Very serious," I affirm, in response to the last remark of my interlocutor.

"Well," he continues, "if I had the honor to be Simon Hart, the engineer, I
should reason as follows: 'Given, on the one hand, the personality of Ker
Karraje, the reasons which incited him to select such a mysterious retreat as this
cavern, the necessity of the said cavern being kept from any attempt to discover
it, not only in the interest of the Count d'Artigas, but in that of his companions--

"Of his accomplices, if you please."

"Of his accomplices,’ then--'and on the other hand, given the fact that I know
the real name of the Count d'Artigas and in what mysterious safe he keeps his
riches--""

"Riches stolen, and stained with blood, Mr. Serko."

Riches stolen and stained with blood,’ if you like--'I ought to understand
that this question of liberty cannot be settled in accordance with my desires."

It is useless to argue the point under these conditions, and I switch the
conversation on to another line.

"May I ask," I continue, "how you came to find out that Gaydon, the warder,


was Simon Hart, the engineer?"

"IT see no reason for keeping you in ignorance on the subject, my dear
colleague. It was largely by hazard. We had certain relations with the
manufactory in New Jersey with which you were connected, and which you
quitted suddenly one day under somewhat singular circumstances. Well, during a
visit I made to Healthful House some months before the Count d'Artigas went
there, I saw and recognized you."

"You?"

"My very self, and from that moment I promised myself the pleasure of
having you for a fellow-passenger on board the Ebba."

I do not recall ever having seen this Serko at Healthful House, but what he
says is very likely true.

"I hope your whim of having me for a companion will cost you dear, some
day or other," I say to myself.

Then, abruptly, I go on:

"If I am not mistaken, you have succeeded in inducing Thomas Roch to
disclose the secret of his fulgurator?"

"Yes, Mr. Hart. We paid millions for it. But millions, you know, are nothing
to us. We have only the trouble of taking them! Therefore we filled all his
pockets--covered him with millions!"

"Of what use are these millions to him if he is not allowed to enjoy them
outside?"

"That, Mr. Hart, is a matter that does not trouble him a little bit! This man of
genius thinks nothing of the future: he lives but in the present. While engines are
being constructed from his plans over yonder in America, he is preparing his
explosive with chemical substances with which he has been abundantly supplied.
He! he! What an invention it is, this autopropulsive engine, which flies through
the air of its own power and accelerates its speed till the goal is reached, thanks
to the properties of a certain powder of progressive combustion! Here we have
an invention that will bring about a radical change in the art of war."

"Defensive war, Mr. Serko."

"And offensive war, Mr. Hart."

"Naturally," I answer.


Then pumping him still more closely, I go on:

"So, what no one else has been able to obtain from Thomas Roch--"

"We obtained without much difficulty."

"By paying him."

"By paying him an incredible price--and, moreover, by causing to vibrate
what in him is a very sensitive chord."

"What chord?"

"That of vengeance!"

"Vengeance?--against whom?"

"Against all those who have made themselves his enemies by discouraging
him, by spurning him, expelling him, by constraining him to go a-begging from
country to country with an invention of incontestable superiority! Now all notion
of patriotism is extinct in his soul. He has now but one thought, one ferocious
desire: to avenge himself upon those who have denied him--and even upon all
mankind! Really, Mr. Hart, your governments of Europe and America committed
a stupendous blunder in refusing to pay Roch the price his fulgurator is worth!"

And Engineer Serko describes enthusiastically the various advantages of the
new explosive which, he says, is incontestably superior to any yet invented.

"And what a destructive effect it has," he adds. "It is analogous to that of the
Zalinski shell, but is a hundred times more powerful, and requires no machine
for firing it, as it flies through the air on its own wings, so to speak."

I listen in the hope that Engineer Serko will give away a part of the secret,
but in vain. He is careful not to say more than he wants to.

"Has Thomas Roch," I ask, "made you acquainted with the composition of
his explosive?"

"Yes, Mr. Hart--if it is all the same to you--and we shall shortly have
considerable quantities of it stored in a safe place."

"But will there not be a great and ever-impending danger in accumulating
large quantities of it? If an accident were to happen it would be all up with the
island of----!"

Once more the name of Back Cup was on the point of escaping me. They
might consider me too well-informed if they were aware that in addition to being
acquainted with the Count d'Artigas' real name I also know where his stronghold
is situated.

Luckily Engineer Serko has not remarked my reticence, and he replies:

"There will be no cause for alarm. Thomas Roch's explosive will not burn
unless subjected to a special deflagrator. Neither fire nor shock will explode it."

"And has Thomas Roch also sold you the secret of his deflagrator?"

"Not yet, Mr. Hart, but it will not be long before the bargain is concluded.


Therefore, I repeat, no danger is to be apprehended, and you need not keep
awake of nights on that account. A thousand devils, sir! We have no desire to be
blown up with our cavern and treasures! A few more years of good business and
we shall divide the profits, which will be large enough to enable each one of us
to live as he thinks proper and enjoy life to the top of his bent--after the
dissolution of the firm of Ker Karraje and Co. I may add that though there is no
danger of an explosion, we have everything to fear from a denunciation--which
you are in the position to make, Mr. Hart. Therefore, if you take my advice, you
will, like a sensible man, resign yourself to the inevitable until the disbanding of
the company. We shall then see what in the interest of our security is best to be
done with you!"

It will be admitted that these words are not exactly calculated to reassure me.
However, a lot of things may happen ere then. I have learned one good thing
from this conversation, and that is that if Thomas Roch has sold his explosive to
Ker Karraje and Co., he has at any rate, kept the secret of his deflagrator, without
which the explosive is of no more value than the dust of the highway.

But before terminating the interview I think I ought to make a very natural
observation to Mr. Serko.

"Sir," I say, "you are now acquainted with the composition of Thomas Roch's
explosive. Does it really possess the destructive power that the inventor
attributes to it? Has it ever been tried? May you not have purchased a
composition as inert as a pinch of snuff?"

"You are doubtless better informed upon this point than you pretend, Mr.
Hart. Nevertheless, I thank you for the interest you manifest in our affairs, and
am able to reassure you. The other night we made a series of decisive
experiments. With only a few grains of this substance great blocks of rock were
reduced to impalpable dust!"

This explanation evidently applies to the detonation I heard.

"Thus, my dear colleague," continues Engineer Serko, "I can assure you that
our expectations have been answered. The effects of the explosive surpass
anything that could have been imagined. A few thousand tons of it would burst
our spheroid and scatter the fragments into space. You can be absolutely certain
that it is capable of destroying no matter what vessel at a distance considerably
greater than that attained by present projectiles and within a zone of at least a
mile. The weak point in the invention is that rather too much time has to be
expended in regulating the firing."

Engineer Serko stops short, as though reluctant to give any further
information, but finally adds:

"Therefore, I end as I began, Mr. Hart. Resign yourself to the inevitable.


Accept your new existence without reserve. Give yourself up to the tranquil
delights of this subterranean life. If one is in good health, one preserves it; if one
has lost one's health, one recovers it here. That is what is happening to your
fellow countryman. Yes, the best thing you can do is to resign yourself to your
lot."

Thereupon this giver of good advice leaves me, after saluting me with a
friendly gesture, like a man whose good intentions merit appreciation. But what
irony there is in his words, in his glance, in his attitude. Shall I ever be able to
get even with him?

I now know that at any rate it is not easy to regulate the aim of Roch's
autopropulsive engine. It is probable that it always bursts at the same distance,
and that beyond the zone in which the effects of the fulgurator are so terrible,
and once it has been passed, a ship is safe from its effects. If I could only inform
the world of this vital fact!

August 20.--For two days no incident worth recording has occurred. I have
explored Back Cup to its extreme limits. At night when the long perspective of
arched columns are illuminated by the electric lamps, I am almost religiously
impressed when I gaze upon the natural wonders of this cavern, which has
become my prison. I have never given up hope of finding somewhere in the
walls a fissure of some kind of which the pirates are ignorant and through which
I could make my escape. It is true that once outside I should have to wait till a
passing ship hove in sight. My evasion would speedily be known at the Beehive,
and I should soon be recaptured, unless--a happy thought strikes me--unless I
could get at the Ebba's boat that was drawn up high and dry on the little sandy
beach in the creek. In this I might be able to make my way to St. George or
Hamilton.

This evening--it was about nine o'clock--I stretched myself on a bed of sand
at the foot of one of the columns, about one hundred yards to the east of the
lagoon. Shortly afterwards I heard footsteps, then voices. Hiding myself as best I
could behind the rocky base of the pillar, I listened with all my ears.

I recognized the voices as those of Ker Karraje and Engineer Serko. The two
men stopped close to where I was lying, and continued their conversation in
English--which is the language generally used in Back Cup. I was therefore able
to understand all that they said.

They were talking about Thomas Roch, or rather his fulgurator.

"In a week's time," said Ker Karraje, "I shall put to sea in the Ebba, and fetch
the sections of the engines that are being cast in that Virginian foundry."

"And when they are here,” observed Engineer Serko, "I will piece them
together and fix up the frames for firing them. But beforehand, there is a job to


be done which it seems to me is indispensable."

"What is that?"

"To cut a tunnel through the wall of the cavern."

"Through the wall of the cavern?"

"Oh! nothing but a narrow passage through which only one man at a time
could squeeze, a hole easy enough to block, and the outside end of which would
be hidden among the rocks."

"Of what use could it be to us, Serko?"

"I have often thought about the utility of having some other way of getting
out besides the submarine tunnel. We never know what the future may have in
store for us."

"But the walls are so thick and hard," objected Ker Karraje.

"Oh, with a few grains of Roch's explosive I undertake to reduce the rock to
such fine powder that we shall be able to blow it away with our breath," Serko
replied.

It can easily be imagined with what interest and eagermess I listened to this.
Here was a ray of hope. It. was proposed to open up communication with the
outside by a tunnel in the wall, and this held out the possibility of escape.

As this thought flashed through my mind, Ker Karraje said:

"Very well, Serko, and if it becomes necessary some day to defend Back Cup
and prevent any ship from approaching it----. It is true," he went on, without
finishing the reflection, "our retreat would have to have been discovered by
accident--or by denunciation."

"We have nothing to fear either from accident or denunciation," affirmed
Serko.

"By one of our band, no, of course not, but by Simon Hart, perhaps."

"Hart!" exclaimed Serko. "He would have to escape first and no one can
escape from Back Cup. I am, by the bye, interested in this Hart. He is a
colleague, after all, and I have always suspected that he knows more about
Roch's invention than he pretends. I will get round him so that we shall soon be
discussing physics, mechanics, and matters ballistic like a couple of friends."

"No matter," replied the generous and sensible Count d'Artigas, "when we
are in full possession of the secret we had better get rid of the fellow."

"We have plenty of time to do that, Ker Karraje."

"If God permits you to, you wretches," I muttered to myself, while my heart
thumped against my ribs.

And yet, without the intervention of Providence, what hope is there for me?

The conversation then took another direction.

"Now that we know the composition of the explosive, Serko," said Ker


Karraje, "we must, at all cost, get that of the deflagrator from Thomas Roch."

"Yes," replied Engineer Serko, "that is what I am trying to do. Unfortunately,
however, Roch positively refuses to discuss it. Still he has already made a few
drops of it with which those experiments were made, and he will furnish as with
some more to blow a hole through the wall."

"But what about our expeditions at sea?" queried Ker Karraje.

"Patience! We shall end by getting Roch's thunderbolts entirely in our own
hand, and then----"

"Are you sure, Serko?"

"Quite sure,--by paying the price, Ker Karraje."

The conversation dropped at this point, and they strolled off without having
seen me--very luckily for me, I guess. If Engineer Serko spoke up somewhat in
defence of a colleague, Ker Karraje is apparently animated with much less
benevolent sentiments in regard to me. On the least suspicion they would throw
me into the lake, and if I ever got through the tunnel, it would only be as a
corpse carried out by the ebbing tide.

August 21.--Engineer Serko has been prospecting with a view to piercing the
proposed passage through the wall, in such a way that its existence will never be
dreamed of outside. After a minute examination he decided to tunnel through the
northern end of the cavern about sixty feet from the first cells of the Beehive.

I am anxious for the passage to be made, for who knows but what it may be
the way to freedom for me? Ah! if I only knew how to swim, perhaps I should
have attempted to escape through the submarine tunnel, as since it was disclosed
by the lashing back of the waters by the whale in its death-struggle, I know
exactly where the orifice is situated. It seems to me that at the time of the great
tides, this orifice must be partly uncovered. At the full and new moon, when the
sea attains its maximum depression below the normal level, it is possible that--I
must satisfy myself about this.

I do not know how the fact will help me in any way, even if the entrance to
the tunnel is partly uncovered, but I cannot afford to miss any detail that may
possibly aid in my escape from Back Cup.

August 29.--This morning I am witnessing the departure of the tug. The
Count d'Artigas is, no doubt, going off in the Ebba to fetch the sections of
Thomas Roch's engines. Before embarking, the Count converses long and
earmestly with Engineer Serko, who, apparently, is not going to accompany him
on this trip, and is evidently giving him some recommendations, of which I may
be the object. Then, having stepped on to the platform, he goes below, the lid
shuts with a bang, and the tug sinks out of sight, leaving a trail of bubbles behind
it.


The hours go by, night is coming on, yet the tug does not return. I conclude
that it has gone to tow the schooner, and perhaps to destroy any merchant vessels
that may come in their way.

It cannot, however, be absent very long, as the trip to America and back will
not take more than a week.

Besides, if I can judge from the calm atmosphere in the interior of the
cavern, the Ebba must be favored with beautiful weather. This is, in fact, the fine
season in this part of the world. Ah! if only I could break out of my prison!


CHAPTER XIII.

GOD BE WITH IT.

From August 29 to September 10.--Thirteen days have gone by and the Ebba
has not returned. Did she then not make straight for the American coast? Has she
been delayed by a buccaneering cruise in the neighborhood of Back Cup? It
seems to me that Ker Karraje's only desire would be to get back with the sections
of Roch's engines as soon as possible. Maybe the Virginian foundry had not
quite finished them.

Engineer Serko does not display the least anxiety or impatience. He
continues to greet me with his accustomed ironical cordiality, and with a kindly
air that I distrust--with good reason. He affects to be solicitous as to my health,
urges me to make the best of a bad job, calls me Ali Baba, assures me that there
is not, in the whole world, such an enchanting spot as this Arabian Nights
cavern, observes that I am fed, warmed, lodged, and clothed, that I have no taxes
to pay, and that even the inhabitants of the favored principality of Monaco do not
enjoy an existence more free from care.

Sometimes this ironical verbiage brings the blood to my face, and I am
tempted to seize this cynical banterer by the throat and choke the life out of him.
They would kill me afterwards. Still, what would that matter! Would it not be
better to end in this way than to spend years and years amid these infernal and
infamous surroundings? However, while there is life there is hope, I reflect, and
this thought restrains me.

I have scarcely set eyes upon Thomas Roch since the Ebba went away. He
shuts himself up in his laboratory and works unceasingly. If he utilizes all the
substances placed at his disposition there will be enough to blow up Back Cup
and the whole Bermudan archipelago with it!

I cling to the hope that he will never consent to give up the secret of his
deflagrator, and that Engineer Serko's efforts to acquire it will remain futile.

September 3.--To-day I have been able to witness with my own eyes the


power of Roch's explosive, and also the manner in which the fulgurator is
employed.

During the morning the men began to pierce the passage through the wall of
the cavern at the spot fixed upon by Engineer Serko, who superintended the
work in person. The work began at the base, where the rock is as hard as granite.
To have continued it with pickaxes would have entailed long and arduous labor,
inasmuch as the wall at this place is not less than from twenty to thirty yards in
thickness, but thanks to Roch's fulgurator the passage will be completed easily
and rapidly.

I may well be astonished at what I have seen. The pickaxes hardly made any
impression on the rock, but its disaggregation was effected with really
remarkable facility by means of the fulgurator.

A few grains of this explosive shattered the rocky mass and reduced it to
almost impalpable powder that one's breath could disperse as easily as vapor.
The explosion produced an excavation measuring fully a cubic yard. It was
accompanied by a sharp detonation that may be compared to the report of a
cannon.

The first charge used, although a very small one, a mere pinch, blew the men
in every direction, and two of them were seriously injured. Engineer Serko
himself was projected several yards, and sustained some rather severe
contusions.

Here is how this substance, whose bursting force surpasses anything hitherto
conceived, is employed.

A small hole about an inch and a half in length is pierced obliquely in the
rock. A few grains of the explosive are then inserted, but no wad is used.

Then Thomas Roch steps forward. In his hand is a little glass phial
containing a bluish, oily liquid that congeals almost as soon as it comes in
contact with the air. He pours one drop on the entrance of the hole, and draws
back, but not with undue haste. It takes a certain time--about thirty-five seconds,
I reckon--before the combination of the fulgurator and deflagrator is effected.
But when the explosion does take place its power of disaggregation is such--I
repeat--that it may be regarded as unlimited. It is at any rate a thousand times
superior to that of any known explosive.

Under these circumstances it will probably not take more than a week to
complete the tunnel.

September 19.--For some time past I have observed that the tide rises and
falls twice every twenty-four hours, and that the ebb and flow produce a rather
swift current through the submarine tunnel. It is pretty certain therefore that a
floating object thrown into the lagoon when the top of the orifice is uncovered


would be carried out by the receding tide. It is just possible that during the
lowest equinoctial tides the top of the orifice is uncovered. This I shall be able to
ascertain, as this is precisely the time they occur. To-day, September 19, I could
almost distinguish the summit of the hole under the water. The day after to-
morrow, if ever, it will be uncovered.

Very well then, if I cannot myself attempt to get through, may be a bottle
thrown into the lagoon might be carried out during the last few minutes of the
ebb. And might not this bottle by chance--an ultra-providential chance, I must
avow--be picked up by a ship passing near Back Cup? Perhaps even it might be
borne away by a friendly current and cast upon one of the Bermudan beaches.
What if that bottle contained a letter?

I cannot get this thought out of my mind, and it works me up into a great
state of excitement. Then objections crop up--this one among others: the bottle
might be swept against the rocks and smashed ere ever it could get out of the
tunnel. Very true, but what if, instead of a bottle a diminutive, tightly closed keg
were used? It would not run any danger of being smashed and would besides
stand a much better chance of reaching the open sea.

September 20.--This evening, I, unperceived, entered one of the store houses
containing the booty pillaged from various ships and procured a keg very
suitable for my experiment.

I hid the keg under my coat, and returned to the Beehive and my cell. Then
without losing an instant I set to work. Paper, pen, ink, nothing was wanting, as
will be supposed from the fact that for three months I have been making notes
and dotting down my impressions daily.

I indite the following message:

"On June 15 last Thomas Roch and his keeper Gaydon, or rather Simon Hart,
the French engineer who occupied Pavilion No. 17, at Healthful House, near
New-Berne, North Carolina, United States of America, were kidnapped and
carried on board the schooner Ebba, belonging to the Count d'Artigas. Both are
now confined in the interior of a cavern which serves as a lair for the said Count
d'Artigas--who is really Ker Karraje, the pirate who some time ago carried on his
depredations in the West Pacific--and for about a hundred men of which his band
is composed.

"When he has obtained possession of Roch's fulgurator whose power is, so to
speak, without limit, Ker Karraje will be in a position to carry on his crimes with
complete impunity.

"It is therefore urgent that the states interested should destroy his lair without
delay.

"The cavern in which the pirate Ker Karraje has taken refuge is in the interior


of the islet of Back Cup, which is wrongly regarded as an active volcano. It is
situated at the western extremity of the archipelago of Bermuda, and on the east
is bounded by a range of reefs, but on the north, south, and west is open.

"Communication with the inside of the mountain is only possible through a
tunnel a few yards under water in a narrow pass on the west. A submarine
apparatus therefore is necessary to effect an entrance, at any rate until a tunnel
they are boring through the northwesterm wall of the cavern is completed.

"The pirate Ker Karraje employs an apparatus of this kind--the submarine
boat that the Count d'Artigas ordered of the Cramps and which was supposed to
have been lost during the public experiment with it in Charleston Bay. This boat
is used not only for the purpose of entering and issuing from Back Cup, but also
to tow the schooner and attack merchant vessels in Bermudan waters.

"This schooner Ebba, so well known on the American coast, is kept in a
small creek on the western side of the island, behind a mass of rocks, and is
invisible from the sea.

"The best place to land is on the west coast formerly occupied by the colony
of Bermudan fishers; but it would first be advisable to effect a breach in the side
of the cavern by means of the most powerful melinite shells.

"The fact that Ker Karraje may be in the position to use Roch's fulgurator for
the defence of the island must also be taken into consideration. Let it be well
borne in mind that if its destructive power surpasses anything ever conceived or
dreamed of, it extends over a zone not exceeding a mile in extent. The distance
of this dangerous zone is variable, but once the engines have been set, the
modification of the distance occupies some time, and a warship that succeeds in
passing the zone has nothing further to fear.

"This document is written on the twentieth day of September at eight o'clock
in the evening and is signed with my name

"THOMAS HART, Engineer."

The above is the text of the statement I have just drawn up. It says all that is
necessary about the island, whose exact situation is marked on all modern charts
and maps, and points out the expediency of acting without delay, and what to do
in case Ker Karraje is in the position to employ Roch's fulgurator.

I add a plan of the cavern showing its internal configuration, the situation of
the lagoon, the lay of the Beehive, Ker Karraje's habitation, my cell, and Thomas
Roch's laboratory.

I wrap the document in a piece of tarpaulin and insert the package in the little
keg, which measures six inches by three and a half. It is perfectly watertight and
will stand any amount of knocking about against the rocks.

There is one danger, however, and that is, that it may be swept back by the


returning tide, cast up on the island, and fall into the hands of the crew of the
Ebba when the schooner is hauled into her creek. If Ker Karraje ever gets hold of
it, it will be all up with me.

It will be readily conceived with what anxiety I have awaited the moment to
make the attempt: I am in a perfect fever of excitement, for it is a matter of life
or death to me. I calculate from previous observations that the tide will be very
low at about a quarter to nine. The top of the tunnel ought then to be a foot and a
half above water, which is more than enough to permit of the keg passing
through it. It will be another half hour at least before the flow sets in again, and
by that time the keg may be far enough away to escape being thrown back on the
coast.

I peer out of my cell. There is no one about, and I advance to the side of the
lagoon, where by the light of a nearby lamp, I perceive the arch of the tunnel,
towards which the current seems to be setting pretty swiftly.

I go down to the very edge, and cast in the keg which contains the precious
document and all my hopes.

"God be with it!" I fervently exclaim. "God be with it!"

For a minute or two the little barrel remains stationary, and then floats back
to the side again. I throw it out once more with all my strength.

This time it is in the track of the current, which to my great joy sweeps it
along and in twenty seconds, it has disappeared in the tunnel.

Yes, God be with it! May Heaven guide thee, little barrel! May it protect all
those whom Ker Karraje menaces and grant that this band of pirates may not
escape from the justice of man!


CHAPTER XIV.

BATTLE BETWEEN THE "SWORD" AND THE TUG.

Through all this sleepless night I have followed the keg in fancy. How many
times I seem to see it swept against the rocks in the tunnel into a creek, or some
excavation. I am in a cold perspiration from head to foot. Then I imagine that it
has been carried out to sea. Heavens! if the returning tide should sweep it back to
the entrance and then through the tunnel into the lagoon! I must be on the
lookout for it.

I rise before the sun and saunter down to the lagoon. Not a single object is
floating on its calm surface.

The work on the tunnel through the side of the cavern goes on, and at four
o'clock in the afternoon on September 23, Engineer Serko blows away the last
rock obstructing the issue, and communication with the outer world is


established. It is only a very narrow hole, and one has to stoop to go through it.
The exterior orifice is lost among the crannies of the rocky coast, and it would be
easy to obstruct it, if such a measure became necessary.

It goes without saying that the passage will be strictly guarded. No one
without special authorization will be able either to go out or come in, therefore
there is little hope of escape in that direction.

September 25.--This morning the tug rose from the depth of the lagoon to the
surface, and has now run alongside the jetty. The Count d'Artigas and Captain
Spade disembark, and the crew set to work to land the provisions--boxes of
canned meat, preserves, barrels of wine and spirits, and other things brought by
the Ebba, among which are several packages destined for Thomas Roch. The
men also land the various sections of Roch's engines which are discoid in shape.

The inventor watches their operations, and his eyes glisten with eagerness.
He seizes one of the sections, examines it, and nods approval. I notice that his
joy no longer finds expression in incoherent utterances, that he is completely
transformed from what he was while a patient at Healthful House. So much is
this the case that I begin to ask myself whether his madness which was asserted
to be incurable, has not been radically cured.

At last Thomas Roch embarks in the boat used for crossing the lake and is
rowed over to his laboratory. Engineer Serko accompanies him. In an hour's time
the tug's cargo has all been taken out and transported to the storehouses.

Ker Karraje exchanges a word or two with Engineer Serko and then enters
his mansion. Later, in the afternoon, I see them walking up and down in front of
the Beehive and talking earnestly together.

Then they enter the new tunnel, followed by Captain Spade. If I could but
follow them! If I could but breathe for awhile the bracing air of the Atlantic, of
which the interior of Back Cup only receives attenuated puffs, so to speak.

From September 26 to October 10.--Fifteen days have elapsed. Under the
directions of Engineer Serko and Thomas Roch the sections of the engines have
been fitted together. Then the construction of their supports is begun. These
supports are simple trestles, fitted with transverse troughs or grooves of various
degrees of inclination, and which could be easily installed on the deck of the
Ebba, or even on the platform of the tug, which can be kept on a level with the
surface.

Thus Ker Karraje, will be ruler of the seas, with his yacht. No warship,
however big, however powerful, will be able to cross the zone of danger,
whereas the Ebba will be out of range of its guns. If only my notice were found!
If only the existence of this lair of Back Cup were known! Means would soon be
found, if not of destroying the place, at least of starving the band into


submission!

October 20.--To my extreme surprise I find this morning that the tug has
gone away again. I recall that yesterday the elements of the piles were renewed,
but I thought it was only to keep them in order. In view of the fact that the
outside can now be reached through the new tunnel, and that Thomas Roch has
everything he requires, I can only conclude that the tug has gone off on another
marauding expedition.

Yet this is the season of the equinoctial gales, and the Bermudan waters are
swept by frequent tempests. This is evident from the violent gusts that drive back
the smoke through the crater and the heavy rain that accompanies it, as well as
by the water in the lagoon, which swells and washes over the brown rocks on its
shores.

But it is by no means sure that the Ebba has quitted her cove. However
staunch she may be, she is, it seems to me, of too light a build to face such
tempests as now rage, even with the help of the tug.

On the other hand, although the tug has nothing to fear from the heavy seas,
as it would be in calm water a few yards below the surface, it is hardly likely that
it has gone on a trip unless to accompany the schooner.

I do not know to what its departure can be attributed, but its absence is likely
to be prolonged, for it has not yet returned.

Engineer Serko has remained behind, but Ker Karraje, Captain Spade, and
the crew of the schooner, I find, have left.

Life in the cavern goes on with its usual dispiriting monotony. I pass hour
after hour in my cell, meditating, hoping, despairing, following in fancy the
voyage of my little barrel, tossed about at the mercy of the currents and whose
chances of being picked up, I fear, are becoming fainter each day, and killing
time by writing my diary, which will probably not survive me.

Thomas Roch is constantly occupied in his laboratory manufacturing his
deflagrator. I still entertain the conviction that nothing will ever induce him to
give up the secret of the liquid's composition; but I am perfectly aware that he
will not hesitate to place his invention at Ker Karraje's service.

I often meet Engineer Serko when my strolls take me in the direction of the
Beehive. He always shows himself disposed to chat with me, though, it is true,
he does so in a tone of impertinent frivolity. We converse upon all sorts of
subjects, but rarely of my position. Recrimination thereanent is useless and only
subjects me to renewed bantering.

October 22.--To-day I asked Engineer Serko whether the Ebba had put to sea
again with the tug.

"Yes, Mr. Simon Hart," he replied, "and though the clouds gather and loud


the tempest roars, be in no uneasiness in regard to our dear Ebba."

"Will she be gone long?"

"We expect her back within forty-eight hours. It is the last voyage Count
d'Artigas proposes to make before the winter gales render navigation in these
parts impracticable."

"Is her voyage one of business or pleasure?"

"Of business, Mr. Hart, of business," answered Engineer Serko with a smile.
"Our engines are now completed, and when the fine weather returns we shall
resume offensive operations."

"Against unfortunate merchantmen."

"As unfortunate as they are richly laden."

"Acts of piracy, whose impunity will, I trust, not always be assured," I cried..

"Calm yourself, dear colleague, be calm! Be calm! No one, you know, can
ever discover our retreat, and none can ever disclose the secret! Besides, with
these engines, which are so easily handled and are of such terrible power, it
would be easy for us to blow to pieces any ship that attempted to get within a
certain radius of the island."

"Providing," I said, "that Thomas Roch has sold you the composition of his
deflagrator as he has sold you that of his fulgurator."

"That he has done, Mr. Hart, and it behooves me to set your mind at rest
upon that point."

From this categorical response I ought to have concluded that the misfortune
had been consummated, but a certain hesitation in the intonation of his voice
warned me that implicit reliance was not to be placed upon Engineer Serko's
assertions.

October 25.--What a frightful adventure I have just been mixed up in, and
what a wonder I did not lose my life! It is only by a miracle that I am able to
resume these notes, which have been interrupted for forty-eight hours. With a
little luck, I should have been delivered! I should now be in one of the Bermudan
ports--St. George or Hamilton. The mysteries of Back Cup would have been
cleared up. The description of the schooner would have been wired all over the
world, and she would not dare to put into any port. The provisioning of Back
Cup would be impossible, and Ker Karraje's bandits would be condemned to
starve to death!

This is what occurred:

At eight o'clock in the evening on October 23, I quitted my cell in an
indefinable state of nervousness, and with a presentiment that a serious event
was imminent. In vain I had tried to seek calmness in sleep. It was impossible to
do so, and I rose and went out.


Outside Back Cup the weather must have been very rough. Violent gusts of
wind swept in through the crater and agitated the water of the lagoon.

I walked along the shore on the Beehive side. No one was about. It was
rather cold, and the air was damp. The pirates were all snugly ensconced in their
cells, with the exception of one man, who stood guard over the new passage,
notwithstanding that the outer entrance had been blocked. From where he was
this man could not see the lagoon, moreover there were only two lamps alight,
one on each side of the lake, and the forest of pillars was wrapt in the
profoundest obscurity.

I was walking about in the shadow, when some one passed me.

I saw that he was Thomas Roch.

He was walking slowly, absorbed by his thoughts, his brain at work, as usual.

Was this not a favorable opportunity to talk to him, to enlighten him about
what he was probably ignorant, namely, the character of the people into whose
hands he had fallen?

"He cannot," I argued, "know that the Count d'Artigas is none other than Ker
Karraje, the pirate. He cannot be aware that he has given up a part of his
invention to such a bandit. I must open his eyes to the fact that he will never be
able to enjoy his millions, that he is a prisoner in Back Cup, and will never be
allowed to leave it, any more than I shall. Yes, I will make an appeal to his
sentiments of humanity, and point out to him what frightful misfortunes he will
be responsible for if he does not keep the secret of his deflagrator."

All this I had said to myself, and was preparing to carry out my resolution,
when I suddenly felt myself seized from behind.

Two men held me by the arms, and another appeared in front of me.

Before I had time to cry out the man exclaimed in English:

"Hush! not a word! Are you not Simon Hart?"

"Yes, how did you know?"

"I saw you come out of your cell."

"Who are you, then?"

"Lieutenant Davon, of the British Navy, of H.M.S. Standard, which is
stationed at the Bermudas."

Emotion choked me so that it was impossible for me to utter a word.

"We have come to rescue you from Ker Karraje, and also propose to carry off
Thomas Roch," he added.

"Thomas Roch?" I stammered.

"Yes, the document signed by you was found on the beach at St. George----"

"In a keg, Lieutenant Davon, which I committed to the waters of the lagoon."

"And which contained," went on the officer, "the notice by which we were


apprised that the island of Back Cup served as a refuge for Ker Karraje and his
band--Ker Karraje, this false Count d'Artigas, the author of the double abduction
from Healthful House."

"Ah! Lieutenant Davon----"

"Now we have not a moment to spare, we must profit by the obscurity."

"One word, Lieutenant Davon, how did you penetrate to the interior of Back
Cup?"

"By means of the submarine boat Sword, with which we have been making
experiments at St. George for six months past."

"A submarine boat!"

"Yes, it awaits us at the foot of the rocks. And now, Mr. Hart, where is Ker
Karraje's tug?"

"Tt has been away for three weeks."

"Ker Karraje is not here, then?"

"No, but we expect him back every day--every hour, I might say."

"It matters little," replied Lieutenant Davon. "It is not after Ker Karraje, but
Thomas Roch, we have come--and you also, Mr. Hart. The Sword will not leave
the lagoon till you are both on board. If she does not turn up at St. George again,
they will know that I have failed--and they will try again."

"Where is the Sword, Lieutenant?"

"On this side, in the shadow of the bank, where it cannot be seen. Thanks to
your directions, I and my crew were able to locate the tunnel. We came through
all right, and ten minutes ago rose to the surface of the lake. Two men landed
with me. I saw you issue from the cell marked on your plan. Do you know where
Thomas Roch is?"

"A few paces off. He has just passed me, on his way to his laboratory."

"God be praised, Mr. Hart!"

"Amen, Lieutenant Davon."

The lieutenant, the two men and I took the path around the lagoon. We had
not gone far when we perceived Thomas Roch in front of us. To throw ourselves
upon him, gag him before he could utter a cry, bind him before he could offer
any resistance, and bear him off to the place where the Sword was moored was
the work of a minute.

The Sword was a submersible boat of only twelve tons, and consequently
much inferior to the tug, both in respect of dimensions and power. Her screw
was worked by a couple of dynamos fitted with accumulators that had been
charged twelve hours previously in the port of St. George. However, the Sword
would suffice to take us out of this prison, to restore us to liberty--that liberty of
which I had given up all hope. Thomas Roch was at last to be rescued from the


clutches of Ker Karraje and Engineer Serko. The rascals would not be able to
utilize his invention, and nothing could prevent the warships from landing a
storming party on the island, who would force the tunnel in the wall and secure
the pirates!

We saw no one while the two men were conveying Thomas Roch to the
Sword, and all got on board without incident. The lid was shut and secured, the
water compartments filled, and the Sword sank out of sight. We were saved!

The Sword was divided into three watertight compartments. The after one
contained the accumulators and machinery. The middle one, occupied by the
pilot, was surmounted by a periscope fitted with lenticular portholes, through
which an electric search-lamp lighted the way through the water. Forward, in the
other compartment, Thomas Roch and I were shut in.

My companion, though the gag which was choking him had been removed,
was still bound, and, I thought, knew what was going on.

But we were in a hurry to be off, and hoped to reach St. George that very
night if no obstacle was encountered.

I pushed open the door of the compartment and rejoined Lieutenant Davon,
who was standing by the man at the wheel. In the after compartment three other
men, including the engineer, awaited the lieutenant's orders to set the machinery
in motion.

"Lieutenant Davon," I said, "I do not think there is any particular reason why
I should stay in there with Roch. If I can help you to get through the tunnel, pray
command me."

"Yes, I shall be glad to have you by me, Mr. Hart."

It was then exactly thirty-seven minutes past eight.

The search-lamp threw a vague light through the water ahead of the Sword.
From where we were, we had to cross the lagoon through its entire length to get
to the tunnel. It would be pretty difficult to fetch it, we knew, but, if necessary,
we could hug the sides of the lake until we located it. Once outside the tunnel the
Sword would rise to the surface and make for St. George at full speed.

"At what depth are we now?" I asked the lieutenant.

"About a fathom."

"It is not necessary to go any lower," I said. "From what I was able to
observe during the equinoctial tides, I should think that we are in the axis of the
tunnel."

"All right," he replied.

Yes, it was all right, and I felt that Providence was speaking by the mouth of
the officer. Certainly Providence could not have chosen a better agent to work its
will.


In the light of the lamp I examined him. He was about thirty years of age,
cool, phlegmatic, with resolute physiognomy--the English officer in all his
native impassibility--no more disturbed than if he had been on board the
Standard, operating with extraordinary sang-froid, I might even say, with the
precision of a machine.

"On coming through the tunnel I estimated its length at about fifty yards," he
remarked.

"Yes, Lieutenant, about fifty yards from one extremity to the other."

This calculation must have been pretty exact, since the new tunnel cut on a
level with the coast is thirty-five feet in length.

The order was given to go ahead, and the Sword moved forward very slowly
for fear of colliding against the rocky side.

Sometimes we came near enough to it to distinguish a black mass ahead of it,
but a turn of the wheel put us in the right direction again. Navigating a
submarine boat in the open sea is difficult enough. How much more so in the
confines of a lagoon!

After five minutes' manoeuvring, the Sword, which was kept at about a
fathom below the surface, had not succeeded in sighting the orifice.

"Perhaps it would be better to return to the surface, Lieutenant," I said. "We
should then be able to see where we are."

"I think you are right, Mr. Hart, if you can point out just about where the
tunnel is located."

"T think I can."

"Very well, then."

As a precaution the light was turned off. The engineer set the pumps in
motion, and, lightened of its water ballast, the boat slowly rose in the darkness to
the surface.

I remained at my post so that I could peer through the lookouts.

At last the ascensional movement of the Sword stopped, and the periscope
emerged about a foot.

On one side of me, lighted by the lamp by the shore, I could see the Beehive.

"What is your opinion?" demanded the lieutenant.

"We are too far north. The orifice is in the west side of the cavern."

"Is anybody about?"

"Not a soul.”

"Capital, Mr. Hart. Then we will keep on a level with the surface, and when
we are in front of the tunnel, and you give the signal, we will sink."

It was the best thing to be done. We moved off again and the pilot kept her
head towards the tunnel.


When we were about twelve yards off I gave the signal to stop. As soon as
the current was turned off the Sword stopped, opened her water tanks and slowly
sank again.

Then the light in the lookout was turned on again, and there in front of us
was a black circle that did not reflect the lamp's rays.

"There it is, there is the tunnel!" I cried.

Was it not the door by which I was going to escape from my prison? Was not
liberty awaiting me on the other side?

Gently the Sword moved towards the orifice.

Oh! the horrible mischance! How have I survived it? How is it that my heart
is not broken?

A dim light appeared in the depth of the tunnel, about twenty-five yards in
front of us. The advancing light could be none other than that, projected through
the lookout of Ker Karraje's submarine boat.

"The tug! The tug!" I exclaimed. "Lieutenant, here is the tug returning to
Back Cup!"

"Full speed astern," ordered the officer, and the Sword drew back just as she
was about to enter the tunnel.

One chance remained. The lieutenant had swiftly tumed off the light, and it
was just possible that we had not been seen by the people in the tug. Perhaps, in
the dark waters of the lagoon, we should escape notice, and when the oncoming
boat had risen and moored to the jetty, we should be able to slip out unperceived.

We had backed close in to the south side and the Sword was about to stop,
but alas, for our hopes! Captain Spade had seen that another submarine boat was
about to issue through the tunnel, and he was making preparations to chase us.
How could a frail craft like the Sword defend itself against the attacks of Ker
Karraje's powerful machine?

Lieutenant Davon turned to me and said: "Go back to the compartment
where Thomas Roch is and shut yourself in. I will close the after-door. There is
just a chance that if the tug rams us the watertight compartments will keep us


up."

After shaking hands with the lieutenant, who was as cool as though we were
in no danger, I went forward and rejoined Thomas Roch. I closed the door and
awaited the issue in profound darkness.

Then I could feel the desperate efforts made by the Sword to escape from or
ram her enemy. I could feel her rushing, gyrating and plunging. Now she would
twist to avoid a collision. Now she would rise to the surface, then sink to the
bottom of the lagoon. Can any one conceive such a struggle as that in which, like
two marine monsters, these machines were engaged in beneath the troubled


waters of this inland lake?

A few minutes elapsed, and I began to think that the Sword had eluded the
tug and was rushing through the tunnel.

Suddenly there was a collision. The shock was not, it seemed to me, very
violent, but I could be under no illusion: the Sword had been struck on her
starboard quarter. Perhaps her plates had resisted, and if not, the water would
only invade one of her compartments, I thought.

Almost immediately after, however, there was another shock that pushed the
Sword with extreme violence. She was raised by the ram of the tug which sawed
and ripped its way into her side. Then I could feel her heel over and sink straight
down, stern foremost.

Thomas Roch and I were tumbled over violently by. this movement. There
was another bump, another ripping sound, and the Sword lay still.

Just what happened after that I am unable to say, for I lost consciousness.

I have since learned that all this occurred many hours ago.

I however distinctly remember that my last thought was:

"If I am to die, at any rate Thomas Roch and his secret perish with me--and
the pirates of Back Cup will not escape punishment for their crimes."


CHAPTER XV.

EXPECTATION.

As soon as I recover my senses I find myself lying on my bed in my cell,
where it appears I have been lying for thirty-six hours.

I am not alone. Engineer Serko is near me. He has attended to me himself,
not because he regards me as a friend, I surmise, but as a man from whom
indispensable explanations are awaited, and who afterwards can be done away
with if necessary.

I am still so weak that I could not walk a step. A little more and I should
have been asphyxiated in that narrow compartment of the Sword at the bottom of
the lagoon.

Am I in condition to reply to the questions that Engineer Serko is dying to
put to me? Yes--but I shall maintain the utmost reserve.

In the first place I wonder what has become of Lieutenant Davon and the
crew of the Sword. Did those brave Englishmen perish in the collision? Are they
safe and sound like us--for I suppose that Thomas Roch has also survived?

The first question that Engineer Serko puts to me is this:

"Will you explain to me what happened, Mr. Hart?"

Instead of replying it occurs to me to question him myself.


"And Thomas Roch?" I inquire.

"In good health, Mr. Hart." Then he adds in an imperious tone: "Tell me what
occurred!"

"In the first place, tell me what became of the others."

"What others?" replies Serko, glancing at me savagely.

"Why, those men who threw themselves upon Thomas Roch and me, who
gagged, bound, and carried us off and shut us up, I know not where?"

On reflection I had come to the conclusion that the best thing to do was to
pretend that I had been surprised before I knew where I was or who my
aggressors were.

"You will know what became of them later. But first, tell me how, the thing
was done."

By the threatening tone of his voice, as he for the third time puts this
question, I understand the nature of the suspicions entertained of me. Yet to be in
the position to accuse me of having had relations with the outside he would have
had to get possession of my keg. This he could not have done, seeing that it is in
the hands of the Bermudan authorities. The pirates cannot, I am convinced, have
a single proof to back up their suspicions.

I therefore recount how about eight o'clock on the previous evening I was
walking along the edge of the lagoon, after Thomas Roch had passed me, going
towards his laboratory, when I felt myself seized from behind; how having been
gagged, bound, and blindfolded, I felt myself carried off and lowered into a hole
with another person whom I thought I recognized from his groans as Thomas
Roch; how I soon felt that I was on board a boat of some description and
naturally concluded that it was the tug; how I felt it sink; how I felt a shock that
threw me violently against the side, and how I felt myself suffocating and lost
consciousness, since I remember nothing further.

Engineer Serko listens with profound attention, a stern look in his eyes and a
frown on his brow; and yet he can have no reason that authorizes him to doubt
my word.

"You claim that three men threw themselves upon you?" he asks.

"Yes. I thought they were some of your people, for I did not see them
coming. Who were they?"

"Strangers, as you must have known from their language."

"They did not utter a word!"

"Have you no idea as to their nationality?"

"Not the remotest."

Do you know what were their intentions in entering the cavern?"

"T do not."


"What is your opinion about it?"

"My opinion, Mr. Serko? I repeat I thought they were two or three of your
pirates who had come to throw me into the lagoon by the Count d'Artigas'
orders, and that they were going to do the same thing to Thomas Roch. I
supposed that having obtained his secrets--as you informed me was the case--
you had no further use for him and were about to get rid of us both."

"Is it possible, Mr. Hart, that you could have thought such a thing!"
continued Serko in his sarcastic way.

"I did, until having been able to remove the bandage from my eyes, I
perceived that I was in the tug."

"It was not the tug, but a boat of the same kind that had got through the
tunnel."

"A submarine boat?" I ejaculate.

"Yes, and manned by persons whose mission was to kidnap you and Thomas
Roch."

"Kidnap us?" I echo, continuing to feign surprise.

"And," adds Engineer Serko, "I want to know what you think about the
matter."

"What I think about it? Well, it appears to me that there is only one plausible
explanation possible. If the secret of your retreat has not been betrayed--and I
cannot conceive how you could have been betrayed or what imprudence you or
yours could have committed--my opinion is that this submarine boat was
exploring the bottom of the sea in this neighborhood, that she must have found
her way into the tunnel, that she rose to the surface of the lagoon, that her crew,
greatly surprised to find themselves inside an inhabited cavern, seized hold of
the first persons they came across, Thomas Roch and myself, and others as well
perhaps, for of course I do not know----"

Engineer Serko has become serious again. Does he realize the inanity of the
hypothesis I try to pass off on him? Does he think I know more than I will say?
However this may be, he accepts my professed view, and says:

"In effect, Mr. Hart, it must have happened as you suggest, and when the
stranger tried to make her way out through the tunnel just as the tug was
entering, there was a collision--a collision of which she was the victim. But we
are not the kind of people to allow our fellow-men to perish before our eyes.
Moreover, the disappearance of Thomas Roch and yourself was almost
immediately discovered. Two such valuable lives had to be saved at all hazards.
We set to work. There are many expert divers among our men. They hastily
donned their suits and descended to the bottom of the lagoon. They passed lines
around the hull of the Sword----"


"The Sword?" I exclaim.

"That is the name we saw painted on the bow of the vessel when we raised
her to the surface. What satisfaction we experienced when we recovered you--
unconscious, it is true, but still breathing--and were able to bring you back to
life! Unfortunately all our attentions to the officer who commanded the Sword,
and to his crew were useless. The shock had torn open the after and middle
compartments, and they paid with their lives the misfortune--due to chance, as
you observe--of having discovered our mysterious retreat."

On learning that Lieutenant Davon and his companions are dead, my heart is
filled with anguish; but to keep up my role--as they were persons with whom,
presumably, I was not acquainted, and had never seen--I am careful not to
display any emotion. I must, on no account, afford ground for the suspicion that
there was any connivance between the commander of the Sword and me. For
aught I know, Engineer Serko may have reason to be very skeptical about the
discovery of the tunnel being accidental.

What, however, I am most concerned about is that the unlooked-for occasion
to recover my liberty was lost. Shall I ever be afforded another chance? However
this may be, my notice reached the English authorities of the archipelago, and
they now know where Ker Karraje is to be found. When it is seen that the Sword
does not return to Bermuda, there can be no doubt that another attempt will be
made to get inside Back Cup, in which, had it not been for the inopportune
return of the tug, I should no longer be a prisoner.

I have resumed my usual existence, and having allayed all mistrust, am
permitted to wander freely about the cavern, as usual.

It is patent that the adventure has had no ill effect upon Thomas Roch.
Intelligent nursing brought him around, as it did me. In full possession of his
mental faculties he has returned to work, and spends the entire day in his
laboratory.

The Ebba brought back from her last trip bales, boxes, and a quantity of
objects of varied origin, and I conclude that a number of ships must have been
pillaged during this marauding expedition.

The work on the trestles for Roch's engine goes steadily forward, and there
are now no fewer than fifty engines. If Ker Karraje and Engineer Serko are
under the necessity of defending Back Cup, three or four will be sufficient to
render the island unapproachable, as they will cover a zone which no vessel
could enter without being blown to pieces. And it occurs to me that they intend
to put Back Cup in a state of defence after having argued as follows:

"If the appearance of the Sword in the lagoon was due to chance the situation
remains unchanged, and no power, not even England, will think of seeking for


the Sword inside the cavern. If, on the other hand, as the result of an
incomprehensible revelation, it has been learned that Back Cup is become the
retreat of Ker Karraje, if the expedition of the Sword was a first effort against the
island, another of a different kind--either a bombardment from a distance, or an
attack by a landing party--is to be expected. Therefore, ere we can quit Back Cup
and carry away our plunder, we shall have to defend ourselves by means of
Roch's fulgurator."

In my opinion the rascals must have gone on to reason still further in this
wise:

"Is there any connection between the disclosure of our secret--if it was, and
however it may have been made--and the double abduction from Healthful
House? Is it known that Thomas Roch and his keeper are confined in Back Cup?
Is it known that the abduction was effected in the interest of Ker Karraje? Have
Americans, English, French, Germans, and Russians reason to fear that an attack
in force against the island would be doomed to failure?"

Ker Karraje must know very well that these powers would not hesitate to
attack him, however great the danger might be. The destruction of his lair is an
urgent duty in the interest of public security and of humanity. After sweeping the
West Pacific the pirate and his companions are infesting the West Atlantic, and
must be wiped out at all costs.

In any case, it is imperative that the inhabitants of Back Cup should be on
their guard. This fact is realized, and, from the day on which the Sword was
destroyed, strict watch has been kept. Thanks to the new passage, they are able
to hide among the rocks without having recourse to the submarine tunnel to get
there, and day and night a dozen sentries are posted about the island. The
moment a ship appears in sight the fact is at once made known inside the cavern.

Nothing occurs for some days, and the latter succeed each other with
dreadful monotony. The pirates, however, feel that Back Cup no longer enjoys
its former security. Every moment an alarm from the sentries posted outside is
expected. The situation is no longer the same since the advent of the Sword.
Gallant Lieutenant Davon, gallant crew, may England, may the civilized nations,
never forget that you have sacrificed your lives in the cause of humanity!

It is evident that now, however powerful may be their means of defence,
even more powerful than a network of torpedoes, Engineer Serko and Captain
Spade are filled with an anxiety that they vainly essay to dissemble. They hold
frequent conferences together. Maybe they discuss the advisability of quitting
Back Cup with their wealth, for they are aware that if the existence of the cavern
is known means will be found to reduce it, even if the inmates have to be starved
out.


This is, of course, mere conjecture on my part. What is essential to me is that
they do not suspect me of having launched the keg that was so providentially
picked up at Bermuda. Never, I must say, has Engineer Serko ever made any
allusion to any such probability. No, I am not even suspected. If the contrary
were the case I am sufficiently acquainted with Ker Karraje to know that he
would long ago have sent me to rejoin Lieutenant Davon and the Sword at the
bottom of the lagoon.

The winter tempests have set in with a vengeance. The wind howls though
the hole in the roof, and rude gusts sweep through the forest of pillars producing
sonorous sounds, so sonorous, so deep, that one might sometimes almost fancy
they were produced by the firing of the guns of a squadron. Flocks of seabirds
take refuge in the cavern from the gale, and at intervals, when it lulls, almost
deafen us with their screaming.

It is to be presumed that in such weather the schooner will make no attempt
to put to sea, for the stock of provisions is ample enough to last all the season.
Moreover, I imagine the Count d'Artigas will not be so eager in future to show
his Ebba along the American coast, where he risks being received, not, as
hitherto, with the consideration due to a wealthy yachtsman, but in the manner
Ker Karraje so richly merits.

It occurs to me that if the apparition of the Sword was the commencement of
a campaign against the island, a question of great moment relative to the future
of Back Cup arises.

Therefore, one day, prudently, so as not to excite any suspicion, I ventured to
pump Engineer Serko about it.

We were in the neighborhood of Thomas Roch's laboratory, and had been
conversing for some time, when Engineer Serko touched upon the extraordinary
apparition of an English submarine boat in the lagoon. On this occasion he
seemed to incline to the view that it might have been a premeditated expedition
against Ker Karraje.

"That is not my opinion," I replied, in order to bring him to the question that
I wanted to put to him.

"Why?" he demanded.

"Because if your retreat were known a fresh attempt, if not to penetrate to the
cavern, at least to destroy Back Cup, would ere this have been made."

"Destroy it!" cried Serko. "It would be a dangerous undertaking, in view of
the means of defence of which we now dispose."

"They can know nothing about this matter, Mr. Serko. It is not imagined,
either in the new world or the old, that the abduction from Healthful House was
effected for your especial benefit, or that you have succeeded in coming to terms


with Thomas Roch for his invention."

Engineer Serko made no response to this observation, which, for that matter,
was unanswerable.

I continued:

"Therefore a squadron sent by the maritime powers who have an interest in
breaking up this island would not hesitate to approach and shell it. Now, I argue
from this that as this squadron has not yet appeared, it is not likely to come at all,
and that nothing is known as to Ker Karraje's whereabouts, and you must admit
that this hypothesis is the most cheerful one, as far as you are concemed."

"That may be," Engineer Serko replied, "but what is, is. Whether they are
aware of the fact or no, if warships approach within five or six miles of this
island they will be sunk before they have had time to fire a single shot!"

"Well, and what then?"

"What then? Why the probability is that no others would care to repeat the
experiment."

"That, again, may be. But these warships would invest you beyond the
dangerous zone, and the Ebba would not be able to put in to the ports she
previously visited with the Count d'Artigas. In this event, how would you be able
to provision the island?"

Engineer Serko remained silent.

This argument, which he must already have brooded over, was too logical to
be refuted or dismissed, and I have an idea that the pirates contemplate
abandoning Back Cup.

Nevertheless, not relishing being cornered, he continued:

"We should still have the tug, and what the Ebba could not do, this would."

"The tug?" I cried. "But if Ker Karraje's secrets are known, do you suppose
the powers are not also aware of the existence of the Count d'Artigas' submarine
boat?"

Engineer Serko looked at me suspiciously.

"Mr. Hart," he said, "you appear to me to carry your deductions rather far."

"T, Mr. Serko?"

"Yes, and I think you talk about all this like a man who knows more than he
ought to."

This remark brought me up abruptly. It was evident that my arguments might
give rise to the suspicion that I was not altogether irresponsible for the recent
incident. Engineer Serko scrutinized me sharply as though he would read my
innermost thoughts.

"Mr. Serko," I observed, "by profession, as well as by inclination, I am
accustomed to reason upon everything. This is why I communicated to you the


result of my reasoning, which you can take into consideration or not, as you
like."

Thereupon we separate. But I fancy my lack of reserve may have excited
suspicions which may not be easy to allay.

From this interview, however, I gleaned a precious bit of information,
namely, that the dangerous zone of Roch's fulgurator is between five and six
miles off. Perhaps, during the next equinoctial tides, another notice to this effect
in another keg may also reach a safe destination.

But how many weary months to wait before the orifice of the tunnel will
again be uncovered!

The rough weather continues, and the squalls are more violent than ever. Is it
the state of the sea that delays another campaign against Back Cup? Lieutenant
Davon certainly assured me that if his expedition failed, if the Sword did not
return to St. George, another attempt under different conditions would be made
with a view to breaking up this bandits' lair. Sooner or later the work of justice
must be done, and Back Cup be destroyed, even though I may not survive its
destruction.

Ah! why can I not go and breathe, if only for a single instant, the vivifying
air outside? Why am I not permitted to cast one glance over the ocean towards
the distant horizon of the Bermudas? My whole life is concentrated in one
desire: to get through the tunnel in the wall and hide myself among the rocks.
Perchance I might be the first to catch sight of the smoke of a squadron heading
for the island.

This project, alas! is unrealizable, as sentries are posted day and night at each
extremity of the passage. No one can enter it without Engineer Serko's
authorization. Were I to attempt it, I should risk being deprived of my liberty to
walk about the cavern, and even worse might happen to me.

Since our last conversation, Engineer Serko's attitude towards me has
undergone a change. His gaze has lost its old-time sarcasm and is distrustful,
suspicious, searching and as stern as Ker Karraje's.

November 17.--This afternoon there was a great commotion in the Beehive,
and the men rushed out of their cells with loud cries.

I was reclining on my bed, but immediately rose and hurried out.

All the pirates were making for the passage, in front of which were Ker
Karraje, Engineer Serko, Captain Spade, Boatswain Effrondat, Engine-driver
Gibson and the Count d'Artigas' big Malay attendant.

I soon learn the reason for the tumult, for the sentries rush in with shouts of
alarm.

Several vessels have been sighted to the northwest--warships steaming at full


speed in the direction of Back Cup.


CHAPTER XVI.

ONLY A FEW MORE HOURS.

What effect this news has upon me, and what emotion it awakens within my
soul! The end, I feel, is at hand. May it be such as civilization and humanity are
entitled to.

Up to the present I have indited my notes day by day. Henceforward it is
imperative that I should inscribe them hour by hour, minute by minute. Who
knows but what Thomas Roch's last secret may be revealed to me and that I shall
have time to commit it to paper! Should I die during the attack God grant that the
account of the five months I have passed in Back Cup may be found upon my
body!

At first Ker Karraje, Engineer Serko, Captain Spade, and several of their
companions took up position on the exterior base of the island. What would I not
give to be able follow to them, and in the friendly shelter of a rook watch the
oncoming warships!

An hour later they return after having left a score of men to keep watch. As
the days at this season of the year are very short there is nothing to fear before
the morrow. It is not likely that the ships will attempt a night attack and land a
storming party, for they must imagine that the place is in a thorough condition of
defence.

All night long the pirates work, installing the trestles at different points of the
coast. Six have been taken through the passage to places selected in advance.

This done, Engineer Serko joins Thomas Roch in his laboratory. Is he going
to tell him what is passing, that a squadron is in view of Back Cup, and that his
fulgurator will be employed to defend the island?

What is certain is that half a hundred engines, each charged with several
pounds of the explosive and of the substance that ensures a trajectory superior to
that of any other projectile, are ready for their work of destruction.

As to the deflagrator liquid, Thomas Roch has a certain number of phials of
it, and--I know only too well--will not refuse to help Ker Karraje's pirates with it.

During these preparations night has come on. Only the lamps of the Beehive
are lighted and a semi-obscurity reigns in the cavern.

I return to my cell. It is to my interest to keep out of the way as much as
possible, for Engineer Serko's suspicions might be revived now that the squadron
is approaching Back Cup.

But will the vessels sighted continue on their course in this direction? May


they not be merely passing on their way to Bermuda? For an instant this doubt
enters my mind. No, no, it cannot be! Besides, I have just heard Captain Spade
declare that they are lying to in view of the island.

To what nation do they belong? Have the English, desirous of avenging the
destruction of the Sword, alone undertaken the expedition? May not cruisers of
other nations be with them? I know not, and it is impossible to ascertain. And
what does it matter, after all, so long as this haunt is destroyed, even though I
should perish in the ruins like the heroic Lieutenant Davon and his brave crew?

Preparations for defence continue with coolness and method under Engineer
Serko's superintendence. These pirates are obviously certain that they will be
able to annihilate their assailants as soon as the latter enter the dangerous zone.
Their confidence in Roch's fulgurator is absolute. Absorbed by the idea that
these warship are powerless against them, they think neither of the difficulties
nor menaces held out by the future.

I surmise that the trestles have been set up on the northwest coast with the
grooves turned to send the engines to the north, west, and south. On the east, as
already stated, the island is defended by the chain of reefs that stretches away to
the Bermudas.

About nine o'clock I venture out of my cell. They will pay little attention to
me, and perhaps I may escape notice in the obscurity. Ah! if I could get through
that passage and hide behind some rock, so that I could witness what goes on at
daybreak! And why should I not succeed now that Ker Karraje, Engineer Serko,
Captain Spade, and the pirates have taken their posts outside?

The shores of the lake are deserted, but the entrance to the passage is kept by
Count d'Artigas' Malay. I saunter, without any fixed idea, towards Thomas
Roch's laboratory. This reminds me of my compatriot. I am, on reflection,
disposed to think that he knows nothing about the presence of a squadron off
Back Cup. Probably not until the last moment will Engineer Serko apprise him
of its proximity, not till he brusquely points out to him the vengeance he can
accomplish.

Then I conceive the idea of enlightening Thomas Roch, myself, of the
responsibility he is incurring and of revealing to him in this supreme hour the
character of the men who want him to co-operate in their criminal projects.

Yes, I will, attempt it, and may I succeed in fanning into a flame any spark of
patriotism that may still linger in his rebellious soul!

Roch is shut up in his laboratory. He must be alone, for never does he allow
any one to enter while he is preparing his deflagrator.

As I pass the jetty I notice that the tug is moored in its accustomed place.
Here I judge it prudent to walk behind the first row of pillars and approach the


laboratory laterally--which will enable me to see whether anybody is with him.
When I have gone a short distance along the sombre avenue I see a bright light
on the opposite side of the lagoon. It is the electric light in Roch's laboratory as
seen through a narrow window in the front.

Except in that particular spot, the southern shore of the lake is in darkness,
whereas, in the opposite direction, the Beehive is lit up to its extremity at the
northern wall. Through the opening in the dome, over the lake I can see the stars
shining. The sky is clear, the tempest has abated, and the squalls no longer
penetrate to the interior of Back Cup.

When near the laboratory, I creep along the wall and peep in at the window.

Thomas Roch is there alone. The light shines full on his face. If it is
somewhat drawn, and the lines on the forehead are more pronounced, his
physiognomy, at least, denotes perfect calmness and self-possession. No, he is
no longer the inmate of Pavilion No. 17, the madman of Healthful House, and I
ask myself whether he is not radically cured, whether there is no further danger
of his reason collapsing in a final paroxysm.

He has just laid two glass phials upon the table, and holds a third in his hand.
He holds it up to the light, and observes the limpidity of the liquid it contains.

I have half a mind to rush in, seize the tubes and smash them, but I reflect
that he would have time to make some more of the stuff. Better stick to my first
plan.

I push the door open and enter.

"Thomas Roch!" I exclaim.

He has not heard, nor has he seen me.

"Thomas Roch!" I repeat.

He raises his head, turns and gazes at me.

"Ah! it is you, Simon Hart!" he replies calmly, even indifferently.

He knows my name. Engineer Serko must have informed him that it was
Simon Hart, and not Keeper Gaydon who was watching over him at Healthful
House.

"You know who I am?" I say.

"Yes, as I know what your object was in undertaking such a position. You
lived in hopes of surprising a secret that they would not pay for at its just value!"

Thomas Roch knows everything, and perhaps it is just as well, in view of
what I am going to say.

"Well, you did not succeed, Simon Hart, and as far as this is concerned," he
added, flourishing the phial, "no one else has succeeded, or ever will succeed."

As I conjectured, he has not, then, made known the composition of his
deflagrator.


Looking him straight in the face, I reply:

"You know who I am, Thomas Roch, but do you know in whose place you
are?"

"In my own place!" he cries.

That is what Ker Karraje has permitted him to believe. The inventor thinks
he is at home in Back Cup, that the riches accumulated in this cavern are his, and
that if an attack is made upon the place, it will be with the object of stealing what
belongs to him! And he will defend it under the impression that he has the right
to do so!

"Thomas Roch," I continue, "listen to me."

"What do you want to say to me, Simon Hart?"

"This cavern into which we have been dragged, is occupied by a band of
pirates, and--"

Roch does not give me time to complete the sentence--I doubt even whether
he has understood me.

"I repeat," he interrupts vehemently, "that the treasures stored here are the
price of my invention. They have paid me what I asked for my fulgurator--what I
was everywhere else refused--even in my own country--which is also yours--and
I will not allow myself to be despoiled!"

What can I reply to such insensate assertions? I, however, go on:

"Thomas Roch, do you remember Healthful House?"

"Healthful House, where I was sequestrated after Warder Gaydon had been
entrusted with the mission of spying upon me in order to rob me of my secret? I
do, indeed."

"IT never dreamed of depriving you of the benefit of your secret, Thomas
Roch. I would never have accepted such a mission. But you were ill, your reason
was affected, and your invention was too valuable to be lost. Yes, had you
disclosed the secret during one of your fits you would have preserved all the
benefit and all the honor of it."

"Really, Simon Hart!" Roch replies disdainfully. "Honor and benefit! Your
assurances come somewhat late in the day. You forget that on the pretext of
insanity, I was thrown into a dungeon. Yes, it was a pretext; for my reason has
never left me, even for an hour, as you can see from what I have accomplished
since I am free."

"Free! Do you imagine you are free, Thomas Roch? Are you not more
closely confined within the walls of this cavern than you ever were at Healthful
House?"

"A man who is in his own home," he replies angrily, "goes out as he likes and
when he likes. I have only to say the word and all the doors will open before me.


This place is mine. Count d'Artigas gave it to me with everything it contains.
Woe to those who attempt to attack it. I have here the wherewithal to annihilate
them, Simon Hart!" The inventor waves the phial feverishly as he speaks."

"The Count d'Artigas has deceived you," I cry, "as he has deceived so many
others. Under this name is dissembled one of the most formidable monsters who
ever scoured the Pacific and Atlantic oceans. He is a bandit steeped in crime--he
is the odious Ker Karraje!"

"Ker Karraje!" echoes Thomas Roch.

And I wonder if this name has not impressed him, if he remembers who the
man is who bears it. If it did impress him, it was only momentarily.

"I do not know this Ker Karraje," he says, pointing towards the door to order
me out. "I only know the Count d'Artigas."

"Thomas Roch," I persist, in a final effort, "the Count d'Artigas and Ker
Karraje are one and the same person. If this man has purchased your secret, it is
with the intention of ensuring impunity for his crimes and facilities for
committing fresh ones. He is the chief of these pirates."

"Pirates!" cries Roch, whose irritation increases the more I press him. "The
real pirates are those who dare to menace me even in this retreat, who tried it on
with the Sword--for Serko has told me everything--who sought to steal in my
own home what belongs to me, what is but the just price of my discovery."

"No, Thomas Roch, the pirates are those who have imprisoned you in this
cavern of Back Cup, who will utilize your genius to defend it, and who will get
rid of you when they are in entire possession of your secrets!"

Thomas Roch here interrupts me. He does not appear to listen to what I say.
He has a fixed idea, that of vengeance, which has been skilfully worked upon by
Engineer Serko, and in which his hatred is concentrated to the exclusion of
everything else.

"The bandits," he hisses, "are those who spurned me without a hearing, who
heaped injustice and ignominy upon me, who drove me from country to country,
whereas I offered them superiority, invincibleness, omnipotence!"

It is the eternal story of the unappreciated inventor, to whom the indifferent
or envious refuse the means of testing his inventions, to pay him the value he
sets upon them. I know it well--and also know all the exaggeration that has been
written upon this subject.

It is clearly no time for reasoning with Thomas Roch. My arguments are
entirely lost upon the hapless dupe of Ker Karraje and his accomplices. In
revealing to him the real name of the Count d'Artigas, and denouncing to him
this band and their chief I had hoped to wean him from their influence and make
him realize the criminal end they have in view. My hope was vain. He does not


believe me. And then what does he care whether the brigand's name is Count
'd'Artigas or Ker Karraje? Is not he, Thomas Roch, master of Back Cup? Is he
not the owner of these riches accumulated by twenty years of murder and
rapine?

Disarmed before such moral degeneracy, knowing not how I can touch his
ulcerated, irresponsible heart, I turn towards the door. It only remains for me to
withdraw. What is to be, will be, since it is out of my power to prevent the
frightful dénouement that will occur in a few hours.

Thomas Roch takes no more notice of me. He seems to have forgotten that I
am here. He has resumed his manipulations without realizing that he is not
alone.

There is only one means of preventing the imminent catastrophe. Throw
myself upon Roch, place him beyond the power of doing harm--strike him--kill
him--yes, kill him! It is my right--it is my duty!

I have no arms, but on a near-by shelf I see some tools--a chisel and a
hammer. What is to prevent me from knocking his brains out? Once he is dead I
have but to smash the phials and his invention dies with him. The warships can
approach, land their men upon the island, demolish Back Cup with their shells.
Ker Karraje and his band will be killed to a man. Can I hesitate at a murder that
will bring about the chastisement of so many crimes?

I advance to the shelf and stretch forth my hand to seize the chisel.

As I do so, Thomas Roch turns round.

It is too late to strike. A struggle would ensue. The noise and his cries would
be heard, for there are still some pirates not far off, I can even now hear some
one approaching, and have only just time to fly if I would not be seen.

Nevertheless, I make one last attempt to awaken the sentiment of patriotism
within him.

"Thomas Roch," I say, "warships are in sight. They have come to destroy this
lair. Maybe one of them flies the French flag!"

He gazes at me. He was not aware that Back Cup is going to be attacked, and
I have just apprised him of the fact. His brow darkens and his eyes flash.

"Thomas Roch, would you dare to fire upon your country's flag--the tricolor
flag?"

He raises his head, shakes it nervously, and with a disdainful gesture:

"What do you mean by ‘your country?’ I no longer have any country, Simon
Hart. The inventor spurned no longer has a country. Where he finds an asylum,
there is his fatherland! They seek to take what is mine. I will defend it, and woe,
woe to those who dare to attack me!"

Then rushing to the door of the laboratory and throwing it violently open he


shouts so loudly that he must be heard at the Beehive:
"Go! Get you gone!"
I have not a second to lose, and I dash out.


CHAPTER XVII.

ONE AGAINST FIVE.

For a whole hour I wander about among Back Cup's dark vaults, amid the
stone trees, to the extreme limit of the cavern. It is here that I have so often
sought an issue, a crevice, a crack through which I might squeeze to the shore of
the island.

My search has been futile. In my present condition, a prey to indefinable
hallucinations it seems to me that these walls are thicker than ever, that they are
gradually closing in upon and will crush me.

How long this mental trouble lasts I cannot say. But I afterwards find myself
on the Beehive side, opposite the cell in which I cannot hope for either repose or
sleep. Sleep, when my brain is in a whirl of excitement? Sleep, when I am near
the end of a situation that threatened to be prolonged for years and years?

What will the end be as far as I am personally concerned? What am I to
expect from the attack upon Back Cup, the success of which I have been unable
to assure by placing Thomas Roch beyond the possibility of doing harm? His
engines are ready to be launched, and as soon as the vessels have reached the
dangerous zone they will be blown to atoms.

However this may be, I am condemned to pass the remaining hours of the
night in my cell. The time has come for me to go in. At daybreak I shall see what
is best for me to do. Meanwhile, for aught I know I may hear the thunder of
Roch's fulgurator as it destroys the ships approaching to make a night attack.

I take a last look round. On the opposite side a light, a single light, is
burning. It is the lamp in Roch's laboratory and it casts its reflection upon the
waters of the lake.

No one is about, and it occurs to me that the pirates must have taken up their
lighting positions outside and that the Beehive is empty.

Then, impelled by an irresistible instinct, instead of returning to my cell, I
creep along the wall, listening, spying, ready to hide if I hear voices or footsteps.

I at length reach the passage.

God in heaven! No one is on guard there--the passage is free!

Without giving myself time to reflect I dart into the dark hole, and grope my
way along it. Soon I feel a fresher air--the salt, vivifying air of the sea, that I
have not breathed for five months. I inspire it with avidity, with all the power of


my lungs.

The outer extremity of the passage appears against the star-studded sky.
There is not even a shadow in the way. Perhaps I shall be able to get outside.

I lay down, and crawl along noiselessly to the orifice and peer out.

Not a soul is in sight!

By skirting the rocks towards the east, to the side which cannot be
approached from the sea on account of the reefs and which is not likely to be
watched, I reach a narrow excavation about two hundred and twenty-five yards
from where the point of the coast extends towards the northwest.

At last I am out of the cavern. I am not free, but it is the beginning of
freedom.

On the point the forms of a few sentries stand out against the clear sky, so
motionless that they might be mistaken for pieces of the rock.

On the horizon to the west the position lights of the warship show in a
luminous line.

From a few gray patches discernable in the east, I calculate that it must be
about five o'clock in the morning.

November 18.--It is now light enough for me to be able to complete my
notes relating the details of my visit to Thomas Roch's laboratory--the last lines
my hand will trace, perhaps.

I have begun to write, and shall dot down the incidents of the attack as they
occur.

The light damp mist that hangs over the water soon lifts under the influence
of the breeze, and at last I can distinguish the warships.

There are five of them, and they are lying in a line about six miles off, and
consequently beyond the range of Roch's engines.

My fear that after passing in sight of the Bermudas the squadron would
continue on its way to the Antilles or Mexico was therefore unfounded. No,
there it is, awaiting broad daylight in order to attack Back Cup.

There is a movement on the coast. Three or four pirates emerge from the
rocks, the sentries are recalled and draw in, and the entire band is soon
assembled. They do not seek shelter inside the cavern, knowing full well that the
ships can never get near enough for the shells of the big guns to reach, the island.

I run no risk of being discovered, for only my head protrudes above the hole
in the rock and no one is likely to come this way. The only thing that worries me
is that Serko, or somebody else may take it into his head to see if I am in my
cell, and if necessary to lock me in, though what they have to fear from me I
cannot conceive.

At twenty-five minutes past seven: Ker Karraje, Engineer Serko and Captain


Spade advance to the extremity of the point, where they sweep the northwestern
horizon with their telescopes. Behind them the six trestles are installed, in the
grooves of which are Roch's autopropulsive engines.

Thirty-five minutes past seven: Smoke arises from the stacks of the warships,
which are getting under way and will soon be within range of the engines.

Horrible cries of joy, salvos of hurrahs--howls of wild beasts I might more
appropriately say--arise from the pirate horde.

At this moment Engineer Serko quits Ker Karraje, whom he leaves with
Captain Spade, and enters the cavern, no doubt to fetch Thomas Roch.

When Ker Karraje orders the latter to launch his engines against the ships
will he remember what I told him? Will not his crime appear to him in all its
horror? Will he refuse to obey? No, I am only too convinced of the contrary. It is
useless to entertain any illusion on the subject. The inventor believes he is on his
own property. They are going to attack it. He will defend it.

The five warships slowly advance, making for the point. Perhaps they
imagine on board that Thomas Roch has not given up his last and greatest secret
to the pirates--and, as a matter of fact, he had not done so when I threw the keg
into the lagoon. If the commanders propose to land storming parties and the
ships advance into the zone of danger there will soon be nothing left of them but
bits of shapeless floating wreckage.

Here comes Thomas Roch accompanied by Engineer Serko. On issuing from
the passage both go to the trestle that is pointing towards the leading warship.

Ker Karraje and Captain Spade are awaiting them.

As far as I am able to judge, Roch is calm. He knows what he is going to do.
No hesitation troubles the soul of the hapless man whom hatred has led astray.

Between his fingers shines the glass phial containing the deflagrator liquid.

He then gazes towards the nearest ship, which is about five miles’ distant.

She is a cruiser of about two thousand five hundred tons--not more.

She flies no flag, but from her build I take her to belong to a nation for which
no Frenchman can entertain any particular regard.

The four other warships remain behind.

It is this cruiser which is to begin the attack.

Let her use her guns, then, since the pirates allow her to approach, and may
the first of her projectiles strike Thomas Roch!

While Engineer Serko is estimating the distance, Roch places himself behind
the trestle. Three engines are resting on it, charged with the explosive, and which
are assured a long trajectory by the fusing matter without it being necessary to
impart a gyratory movement to them--as in the case of Inventor Turpin's
gyroscopic projectiles. Besides, if they drop within a few hundred yards of the


vessel, they will be quite near enough to utterly destroy it.

The time has come.

"Thomas Roch!" Engineer Serko cries, and points to the cruiser.

The latter is steaming slowly towards the northwestern point of the island
and is between four and five miles off.

Roch nods assent, and waves them back from the trestle.

Ker Karraje, Captain Spade and the others draw back about fifty paces.

Thomas Roch then takes the stopper from the phial which he holds in his
right hand, and successively pours into a hole in the rear-end of each engine a
few drops of the liquid, which mixes with the fusing matter.

Forty-five seconds elapse--the time necessary for the combination to be
effected--forty-five seconds during which it seems to me that my heart ceases to
beat.

A frightful whistling is then heard, and the three engines tear through the air,
describing a prolonged curve at a height of three hundred feet, and pass the
cruiser.

Have they missed it? Is the danger over?

No! the engines, after the manner of Artillery Captain Chapel's discoid
projectile, return towards the doomed vessel like an Australian boomerang.

The next instant the air is shaken with a violence comparable to that which
would be caused by the explosion of a magazine of melinite or dynamite, Back
Cup Island trembles to its very foundations.

The cruiser has disappeared,--blown to pieces. The effect is that of the
Zalinski shell, but centupled by the infinite power of Roch's fulgurator.

What shouts the bandits raise as they rush towards the extremity of the point!
Ker Karraje, Engineer Serko, and Captain Spade remain rooted to the spot,
hardly able to credit the evidence of their own eyes.

As to Thomas Roch, he stands with folded arms, and flashing eyes, his face
radiant with pride and triumph.

I understand, while I abhor his feelings.

If the other warships approach they will share the same fate as the cruiser.
They will inevitably be destroyed. Oh! if they would but give up the struggle and
withdraw to safety, even though my last hope would go with them! The nations
can consult and arrive at some other plan for destroying the island. They can
surround the place with a belt of ships that the pirates cannot break through and
starve them to death like so many rats in a hole.

But I know that the warships will not retire, even though they know they are
going to certain death. One after the other they will all make the attempt.

And I am right. Signals are exchanged between them. Almost immediately


clouds of black smoke arise and the vessels again advance.

One of them, under forced draught, distances the others in her anxiety to
bring her big guns quickly into action.

At all risks I issue from my hole, and gaze at the oncoming warship with
feverish eyes, awaiting, without being able to prevent it, another catastrophe.

This vessel, which visibly grows larger as it comes nearer, is a cruiser of
about the same tonnage as the one that preceded her. No flag is flying and I
cannot guess her nationality. She continues steaming at full speed in an effort to
pass the zone of danger before other engines can be launched. But how can she
escape them since they will swoop back upon her?

Thomas Roch places himself behind the second trestle as the cruiser passes
on to the surface of the abysm in which she will in turn soon be swallowed up.

No sound disturbs the stillness.

Suddenly the rolling of drums and the blare of bugles is heard on board the
warship.

I know those bugle calls: they are French bugles! Great God! She is one of
the ships of my own country's navy and a French inventor is about to destroy
her!

No! it shall not be. I will rush towards Thomas Roch--shout to him that she is
a French ship. He does not, cannot, know it.

At a sign from Engineer Serko the inventor has raised the phial.

The bugles sound louder and more strident. It is the salute to the flag. A flag
unfurls to the breeze--the tricolor, whose blue, white and red sections stand out
luminously against the sky.

Ah! What is this? I understand! Thomas Roch is fascinated at the sight of his
national emblem. Slowly he lowers his arm as the flag flutters up to the mast-
head. Then he draws back and covers his eyes with his hand.

Heavens above! All sentiment of patriotism is not then dead in his ulcerated
heart, seeing that it beats at the sight of his country's flag!

My emotion is not less than his. At the risk of being seen--and what do I now
care if I am seen?--I creep over the rocks. I will be there to sustain Thomas Roch
and prevent him from weakening. If I pay for it with my life I will once more
adjure him in the name of his country. I will cry to him:

"Frenchman, it is the tricolor that flies on yonder ship! Frenchman, it is a
very part of France that is approaching you! Frenchman, would you be so
criminal as to strike it?”

But my intervention will not be necessary. Thomas Roch is not a prey to one
of the fits to which he was formerly subject. He is perfectly sane.

When he found himself facing the flag he understood--and drew back.


A few pirates approach to lead him to the trestle again. He struggles and
pushes them from him.

Ker Karraje and Engineer Serko run up. They point to the rapidly advancing
ship. They order him to launch his engines.

Thomas Roch refuses.

Captain Spade and the others, mad with rage, menace him--curse him--strike
him--try to wrest the phial from him.

Roch throws it on the ground and crushes it under foot.

Then panic seizes upon the crowd of wretches. The cruiser has passed the
zone and they cannot return her fire. Shells begin to rain all over the island,
bursting the rocks in every direction.

But where is Thomas Roch? Has he been killed by one of the projectiles?
No, I see him for the last time as he dashes into the passage.

Ker Karraje, Engineer Serko and the others follow him to seek shelter inside
of Back Cup.

I will not return to the cavern at any price, even if I get killed by staying
where I am.

I will jot down my final notes and when the French sailors land on the point I
will go--

END OF ENGINEER SIMON HART'S NOTES.


CHAPTER XVIII.

ON BOARD THE "TONNANT."

After the failure of Lieutenant Davon's mission with the Sword, the English
authorities waited in vain for the expedition to return, and the conviction at
length gained ground that the bold sailors had perished; but whether the Sword
had been lost by striking against a rock or had been destroyed by Ker Karraje's
pirates, could not, of course, be ascertained.

The object of the expedition, based upon the indications of the document
found in the keg that was thrown up on the shore at St. George, was to carry off
Thomas Roch ere his engines were completed. The French inventor having been
recovered--without forgetting Engineer Simon Hart--he was to be handed over to
the care of the Bermudan authorities. That done, there would be nothing to fear
from his fulgurator when the island was attacked.

When, however, the Sword had been given up for lost, another expedition of
a different kind, was decided upon.

The time that had elapsed--nearly eight weeks--from the date of the
document found in the keg, had to be taken into consideration. It was thought


that during the interval, Ker Karraje might have gained possession of Roch's
secrets.

An entente concluded between the maritime powers, resulted in the sending
of five warships to Bermudan waters. As there was a vast cavern inside Back
Cup mountain, it was decided to attempt to bring the latter down like the walls of
a bastion, by bombarding it with powerful modern artillery.

The squadron assembled at the entrance to the Chesapeake, in Virginia, and
sailed for the archipelago, which was sighted on the evening of November 17.

The next morning the vessel selected for the first attack, steamed forward. It
was about four and a half miles from the island, when three engines, after
passing the vessel, swerved round and exploded about sixty yards from her. She
sank immediately.

The effect of the explosion, which was superior to any previously obtained
by new explosives, was instantaneous. Even at the distance they were from the
spot where it occurred, the four remaining ships felt the shock severely.

Two things were to be deduced from this sudden catastrophe:

1.--The pirate Ker Karraje was in possession of Roch's fulgurator.

2.--The new engine possessed the destructive power attributed to it by its
inventor.

After the disappearance of the unfortunate cruiser, the other vessels lowered
boats to pick up a few survivors who were clinging to the floating wreckage.

Then it was that the signals were exchanged and the warships started towards
the island.

The swiftest of them, the Tonnant, a French cruiser, forged ahead while the
others forced their draught in an effort to catch up with her.

The Tonnant, at the risk of being blown to pieces in turn, penetrated the
danger zone half a mile, and then ran up her flag while manoeuvring to bring her
heavy guns into action.

From the bridge the officers could see Ker Karraje's band scattered on the
rocks of the island.

The occasion was an excellent one for getting a shot at them before the
bombardment of their retreat was begun, and fire was opened with the result that
the pirates made a rush to get into the cavern.

A few minutes later there was a shock terrific enough to shake the sky down.

Where the mountain had been, naught but a heap of smoking, crumbling
rocks was to be seen. Back Cup had become a group of jagged reefs against
which the sea, that had been thrown back like a gigantic tidal wave, was beating
and frothing.

What was the cause of the explosion?


Had it been voluntarily caused by the pirates when they realized that escape
was impossible?

The Tonnant had not been seriously damaged by the flying rocks. Her boats
were lowered and made towards all that was left of Back Cup.

The landing parties explored the ruins, and found a few horribly mangled
corpses. Not a vestige of the cavern was to be seen.

One body, and one only, was found intact. It was lying on the northeast side
of the reefs. In one hand, tightly clasped, was a note-book, the last line of which
was incomplete.

A close examination showed that the man was still breathing. He was
conveyed on board the Tonnant, where it was learned from the note-book that he
was Simon Hart.

For some time his life was despaired of, but he was eventually brought
round, and from the answers made to the questions addressed to him the
following conclusion was reached:

Moved to his very soul at the sight of the tricolor flag, being at last conscious
of the crime of lése-patrie he was about to commit, Thomas Roch rushed through
the passage to the magazine where a considerable quantity of his explosive was
stored. Then, before he could be prevented, brought about the terrible explosion
which destroyed the island of Back Cup.

And now Ker Karraje and his pirates have disappeared--and with them
Thomas Roch and the secret of his invention.

THE END.


End of the Voyage Extraordinaire


FIVE WEEKS IN A BALLOON;

OR,

JOURNEYS AND DISCOVERIES IN AFRICA BY THREE
ENGLISHMEN.


BY JULES VERNE


CHAPTER FIRST.

The End of a much-applauded Speech.--The Presentation of Dr. Samuel
Ferguson.--Excelsior.--Full-length Portrait of the Doctor.--A Fatalist convinced.-
-A Dinner at the Travellers' Club.--Several Toasts for the Occasion.

There was a large audience assembled on the 14th of January, 1862, at the
session of the Royal Geographical Society, No. 3 Waterloo Place, London. The
president, Sir Francis M----, made an important communication to his
colleagues, in an address that was frequently interrupted by applause.

This rare specimen of eloquence terminated with the following sonorous
phrases bubbling over with patriotism:

"England has always marched at the head of nations" (for, the reader will
observe, the nations always march at the head of each other), "by the intrepidity
of her explorers in the line of geographical discovery." (General assent). "Dr.
Samuel Ferguson, one of her most glorious sons, will not reflect discredit on his
origin.” ("No, indeed!" from all parts of the hall.)

"This attempt, should it succeed" ("It will succeed!"), "will complete and link
together the notions, as yet disjointed, which the world entertains of African
cartology" (vehement applause); "and, should it fail, it will, at least, remain on
record as one of the most daring conceptions of human genius!" (Tremendous
cheering.)

"Huzza! huzza!" shouted the immense audience, completely electrified by
these inspiring words.

"Huzza for the intrepid Ferguson!" cried one of the most excitable of the
enthusiastic crowd.

The wildest cheering resounded on all sides; the name of Ferguson was in
every mouth, and we may safely believe that it lost nothing in passing through
English throats. Indeed, the hall fairly shook with it.

And there were present, also, those fearless travellers and explorers whose
energetic temperaments had borne them through every quarter of the globe,
many of them grown old and worn out in the service of science. All had, in some
degree, physically or morally, undergone the sorest trials. They had escaped
shipwreck; conflagration; Indian tomahawks and war-clubs; the fagot and the
stake; nay, even the cannibal maws of the South Sea Islanders. But still their
hearts beat high during Sir Francis M----'s address, which certainly was the
finest oratorical success that the Royal Geographical Society of London had yet


achieved.

But, in England, enthusiasm does not stop short with mere words. It strikes
off money faster than the dies of the Royal Mint itself. So a subscription to
encourage Dr. Ferguson was voted there and then, and it at once attained the
handsome amount of two thousand five hundred pounds. The sum was made
commensurate with the importance of the enterprise.

A member of the Society then inquired of the president whether Dr. Ferguson
was not to be officially introduced.

"The doctor is at the disposition of the meeting,” replied Sir Francis.

"Let him come in, then! Bring him in!" shouted the audience. "We'd like to
see a man of such extraordinary daring, face to face!"

"Perhaps this incredible proposition of his is only intended to mystify us,"
growled an apoplectic old admiral.

"Suppose that there should turn out to be no such person as Dr. Ferguson?"
exclaimed another voice, with a malicious twang.

"Why, then, we'd have to invent one!" replied a facetious member of this
grave Society.

"Ask Dr. Ferguson to come in," was the quiet remark of Sir Francis M----.

And come in the doctor did, and stood there, quite unmoved by the thunders
of applause that greeted his appearance.

He was a man of about forty years of age, of medium height and physique.
His sanguine temperament was disclosed in the deep color of his cheeks. His
countenance was coldly expressive, with regular features, and a large nose--one
of those noses that resemble the prow of a ship, and stamp the faces of men
predestined to accomplish great discoveries. His eyes, which were gentle and
intelligent, rather than bold, lent a peculiar charm to his physiognomy. His arms
were long, and his feet were planted with that solidity which indicates a great
pedestrian.

A calm gravity seemed to surround the doctor's entire person, and no one
would dream that he could become the agent of any mystification, however
harmless.

Hence, the applause that greeted him at the outset continued until he, with a
friendly gesture, claimed silence on his own behalf. He stepped toward the seat
that had been prepared for him on his presentation, and then, standing erect and
motionless, he, with a determined glance, pointed his right forefinger upward,
and pronounced aloud the single word--

"Excelsior!"

Never had one of Bright's or Cobden's sudden onslaughts, never had one of
Palmerston's abrupt demands for funds to plate the rocks of the English coast


with iron, made such a sensation. Sir Francis M----'s address was completely
overshadowed. The doctor had shown himself moderate, sublime, and self-
contained, in one; he had uttered the word of the situation--

"Excelsior!"

The gouty old admiral who had been finding fault, was completely won over
by the singular man before him, and immediately moved the insertion of Dr.
Ferguson's speech in "The Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society of
London."

Who, then, was this person, and what was the enterprise that he proposed?

Ferguson's father, a brave and worthy captain in the English Navy, had
associated his son with him, from the young man's earliest years, in the perils
and adventures of his profession. The fine little fellow, who seemed to have
never known the meaning of fear, early revealed a keen and active mind, an
investigating intelligence, and a remarkable turn for scientific study; moreover,
he disclosed uncommon address in extricating himself from difficulty; he was
never perplexed, not even in handling his fork for the first time--an exercise in
which children generally have so little success.

His fancy kindled early at the recitals he read of daring enterprise and
maritime adventure, and he followed with enthusiasm the discoveries that
signalized the first part of the nineteenth century. He mused over the glory of the
Mungo Parks, the Bruces, the Caillies, the Levaillants, and to some extent, I
verily believe, of Selkirk (Robinson Crusoe), whom he considered in no wise
inferior to the rest. How many a well-employed hour he passed with that hero on
his isle of Juan Fernandez! Often he criticised the ideas of the shipwrecked
sailor, and sometimes discussed his plans and projects. He would have done
differently, in such and such a case, or quite as well at least--of that he felt
assured. But of one thing he was satisfied, that he never should have left that
pleasant island, where he was as happy as a king without subjects-- no, not if the
inducement held out had been promotion to the first lordship in the admiralty!

It may readily be conjectured whether these tendencies were developed
during a youth of adventure, spent in every nook and corner of the Globe.
Moreover, his father, who was a man of thorough instruction, omitted no
opportunity to consolidate this keen intelligence by serious studies in
hydrography, physics, and mechanics, along with a slight tincture of botany,
medicine, and astronomy.

Upon the death of the estimable captain, Samuel Ferguson, then twenty-two
years of age, had already made his voyage around the world. He had enlisted in
the Bengalese Corps of Engineers, and distinguished himself in several affairs;
but this soldier's life had not exactly suited him; caring but little for command,


he had not been fond of obeying. He, therefore, sent in his resignation, and half
botanizing, half playing the hunter, he made his way toward the north of the
Indian Peninsula, and crossed it from Calcutta to Surat--a mere amateur trip for
him.

From Surat we see him going over to Australia, and in 1845 participating in
Captain Sturt's expedition, which had been sent out to explore the new Caspian
Sea, supposed to exist in the centre of New Holland.

Samuel Ferguson returned to England about 1850, and, more than ever
possessed by the demon of discovery, he spent the intervening time, until 1853,
in accompanying Captain McClure on the expedition that went around the
American Continent from Behring's Straits to Cape Farewell.

Notwithstanding fatigues of every description, and in all climates, Ferguson's
constitution continued marvellously sound. He felt at ease in the midst of the
most complete privations; in fine, he was the very type of the thoroughly
accomplished explorer whose stomach expands or contracts at will; whose limbs
grow longer or shorter according to the resting-place that each stage of a journey
may bring; who can fall asleep at any hour of the day or awake at any hour of the
night.

Nothing, then, was less surprising, after that, than to find our traveller, in the
period from 1855 to 1857, visiting the whole region west of the Thibet, in
company with the brothers Schlagintweit, and bringing back some curious
ethnographic observations from that expedition.

During these different journeys, Ferguson had been the most active and
interesting correspondent of the Daily Telegraph, the penny newspaper whose
circulation amounts to 140,000 copies, and yet scarcely suffices for its many
legions of readers. Thus, the doctor had become well known to the public,
although he could not claim membership in either of the Royal Geographical
Societies of London, Paris, Berlin, Vienna, or St. Petersburg, or yet with the
Travellers’ Club, or even the Royal Polytechnic Institute, where his friend the
statistician Cockburn ruled in state.

The latter savant had, one day, gone so far as to propose to him the following
problem: Given the number of miles travelled by the doctor in making the circuit
of the Globe, how many more had his head described than his feet, by reason of
the different lengths of the radii?--or, the number of miles traversed by the
doctor's head and feet respectively being given, required the exact height of that
gentleman?

This was done with the idea of complimenting him, but the doctor had held
himself aloof from all the learned bodies--belonging, as he did, to the church
militant and not to the church polemical. He found his time better employed in


seeking than in discussing, in discovering rather than discoursing.

There is a story told of an Englishman who came one day to Geneva,
intending to visit the lake. He was placed in one of those odd vehicles in which
the passengers sit side by side, as they do in an omnibus. Well, it so happened
that the Englishman got a seat that left him with his back turned toward the lake.
The vehicle completed its circular trip without his thinking to turn around once,
and he went back to London delighted with the Lake of Geneva.

Doctor Ferguson, however, had turned around to look about him on his
journeyings, and turned to such good purpose that he had seen a great deal. In
doing so, he had simply obeyed the laws of his nature, and we have good reason
to believe that he was, to some extent, a fatalist, but of an orthodox school of
fatalism withal, that led him to rely upon himself and even upon Providence. He
claimed that he was impelled, rather than drawn by his own volition, to journey
as he did, and that he traversed the world like the locomotive, which does not
direct itself, but is guided and directed by the track it runs on.

"I do not follow my route;" he often said, "it is my route that follows me."

The reader will not be surprised, then, at the calmness with which the doctor
received the applause that welcomed him in the Royal Society. He was above all
such trifles, having no pride, and less vanity. He looked upon the proposition
addressed to him by Sir Francis M---- as the simplest thing in the world, and
scarcely noticed the immense effect that it produced.

When the session closed, the doctor was escorted to the rooms of the
Travellers’ Club, in Pall Mall. A superb entertainment had been prepared there in
his honor. The dimensions of the dishes served were made to correspond with
the importance of the personage entertained, and the boiled sturgeon that figured
at this magnificent repast was not an inch shorter than Dr. Ferguson himself.

Numerous toasts were offered and quaffed, in the wines of France, to the
celebrated travellers who had made their names illustrious by their explorations
of African territory. The guests drank to their health or to their memory, in
alphabetical order, a good old English way of doing the thing. Among those
remembered thus, were: Abbadie, Adams, Adamson, Anderson, Arnaud, Baikie,
Baldwin, Barth, Batouda, Beke, Beltram, Du Berba, Bimbachi, Bolognesi,
Bolwik, Belzoni, Bonnemain, Brisson, Browne, Bruce, Brun-Rollet, Burchell,
Burckhardt, Burton, Cailland, Caillie, Campbell, Chapman, Clapperton, Clot-
Bey, Colomieu, Courval, Cumming, Cuny, Debono, Decken, Denham,
Desavanchers, Dicksen, Dickson, Dochard, Du Chaillu, Duncan, Durand,
Duroule, Duveyrier, D'Escayrac, De Lauture, Erhardt, Ferret, Fresnel, Galinier,
Galton, Geoffroy, Golberry, Hahn, Halm, Harnier, Hecquart, Heuglin,
Hornemann, Houghton, Imbert, Kauffmann, Knoblecher, Krapf, Kummer,


Lafargue, Laing, Lafaille, Lambert, Lamiral, Lampriere, John Lander, Richard
Lander, Lefebvre, Lejean, Levaillant, Livingstone, MacCarthy, Maggiar, Maizan,
Malzac, Moffat, Mollien, Monteiro, Morrison, Mungo Park, Neimans, Overweg,
Panet, Partarrieau, Pascal, Pearse, Peddie, Penney, Petherick, Poncet, Prax,
Raffenel, Rabh, Rebmann, Richardson, Riley, Ritchey, Rochet d'Hericourt,
Rongawi, Roscher, Ruppel, Saugnier, Speke, Steidner, Thibaud, Thompson,
Thornton, Toole, Tousny, Trotter, Tuckey, Tyrwhitt, Vaudey, Veyssiere, Vincent,
Vinco, Vogel, Wahlberg, Warrington, Washington, Werne, Wild, and last, but not
least, Dr. Ferguson, who, by his incredible attempt, was to link together the
achievements of all these explorers, and complete the series of African
discovery.


CHAPTER SECOND.

The Article in the Daily Telegraph.--War between the Scientific Journals.--
Mr. Petermann backs his Friend Dr. Ferguson.--Reply of the Savant Koner. --
Bets made.--Sundry Propositions offered to the Doctor.

On the next day, in its number of January 15th, the Daily Telegraph
published an article couched in the following terms:

"Africa is, at length, about to surrender the secret of her vast solitudes; a
modern OEdipus is to give us the key to that enigma which the learned men of
sixty centuries have not been able to decipher. In other days, to seek the sources
of the Nile--fontes Nili quoerere--was regarded as a mad endeavor, a chimera
that could not be realized.

"Dr. Barth, in following out to Soudan the track traced by Denham and
Clapperton; Dr. Livingstone, in multiplying his fearless explorations from the
Cape of Good Hope to the basin of the Zambesi; Captains Burton and Speke, in
the discovery of the great interior lakes, have opened three highways to modern
civilization. THEIR POINT OF INTERSECTION, which no traveller has yet
been able to reach, is the very heart of Africa, and it is thither that all efforts
should now be directed.

"The labors of these hardy pioneers of science are now about to be knit
together by the daring project of Dr. Samuel Ferguson, whose fine explorations
our readers have frequently had the opportunity of appreciating.

"This intrepid discoverer proposes to traverse all Africa from east to west IN
A BALLOON. If we are well informed, the point of departure for this surprising
journey is to be the island of Zanzibar, upon the eastern coast. As for the point of
arrival, it is reserved for Providence alone to designate.

"The proposal for this scientific undertaking was officially made, yesterday,


at the rooms of the Royal Geographical Society, and the sum of twenty-five
hundred pounds was voted to defray the expenses of the enterprise.

"We shall keep our readers informed as to the progress of this enterprise,
which has no precedent in the annals of exploration."

As may be supposed, the foregoing article had an enormous echo among
scientific people. At first, it stirred up a storm of incredulity; Dr. Ferguson
passed for a purely chimerical personage of the Barnum stamp, who, after
having gone through the United States, proposed to "do" the British Isles.

A humorous reply appeared in the February number of the Bulletins de la
Societe Geographique of Geneva, which very wittily showed up the Royal
Society of London and their phenomenal sturgeon.

But Herr Petermann, in his Mittheilungen, published at Gotha, reduced the
Geneva journal to the most absolute silence. Herr Petermann knew Dr. Ferguson
personally, and guaranteed the intrepidity of his dauntless friend.

Besides, all manner of doubt was quickly put out of the question:
preparations for the trip were set on foot at London; the factories of Lyons
received a heavy order for the silk required for the body of the balloon; and,
finally, the British Government placed the transport-ship Resolute, Captain
Bennett, at the disposal of the expedition.

At once, upon word of all this, a thousand encouragements were offered, and
felicitations came pouring in from all quarters. The details of the undertaking
were published in full in the bulletins of the Geographical Society of Paris; a
remarkable article appeared in the Nouvelles Annales des Voyages, de la
Geographie, de I'Histoire, et de l'Archaeologie de M. V. A. Malte-Brun ("New
Annals of Travels, Geography, History, and Archaeology, by M. V. A. Malte-
Brun"); and a searching essay in the Zeitschrift fur Allgemeine Erdkunde, by Dr.
W. Koner, triumphantly demonstrated the feasibility of the journey, its chances
of success, the nature of the obstacles existing, the immense advantages of the
aerial mode of locomotion, and found fault with nothing but the selected point of
departure, which it contended should be Massowah, a small port in Abyssinia,
whence James Bruce, in 1768, started upon his explorations in search of the
sources of the Nile. Apart from that, it mentioned, in terms of unreserved
admiration, the energetic character of Dr. Ferguson, and the heart, thrice
panoplied in bronze, that could conceive and undertake such an enterprise.

The North American Review could not, without some displeasure,
contemplate so much glory monopolized by England. It therefore rather
ridiculed the doctor's scheme, and urged him, by all means, to push his
explorations as far as America, while he was about it.

In a word, without going over all the journals in the world, there was not a


scientific publication, from the Journal of Evangelical Missions to the Revue
Algerienne et Coloniale, from the Annales de la Propagation de la Foi to the
Church Missionary Intelligencer, that had not something to say about the affair
in all its phases.

Many large bets were made at London and throughout England generally,
first, as to the real or supposititious existence of Dr. Ferguson; secondly, as to the
trip itself, which, some contended, would not be undertaken at all, and which
was really contemplated, according to others; thirdly, upon the success or failure
of the enterprise; and fourthly, upon the probabilities of Dr. Ferguson's return.
The betting-books were covered with entries of immense sums, as though the
Epsom races were at stake.

Thus, believers and unbelievers, the learned and the ignorant, alike had their
eyes fixed on the doctor, and he became the lion of the day, without knowing
that he carried such a mane. On his part, he willingly gave the most accurate
information touching his project. He was very easily approached, being naturally
the most affable man in the world. More than one bold adventurer presented
himself, offering to share the dangers as well as the glory of the undertaking; but
he refused them all, without giving his reasons for rejecting them.

Numerous inventors of mechanism applicable to the guidance of balloons
came to propose their systems, but he would accept none; and, when he was
asked whether he had discovered something of his own for that purpose, he
constantly refused to give any explanation, and merely busied himself more
actively than ever with the preparations for his journey.


CHAPTER THIRD.

The Doctor's Friend.--The Origin of their Friendship.--Dick Kennedy at
London.--An unexpected but not very consoling Proposal.--A Proverb by no
means cheering.--A few Names from the African Martyrology.--The Advantages
of a Balloon.--Dr. Ferguson's Secret.

Dr. Ferguson had a friend--not another self, indeed, an alter ego, for
friendship could not exist between two beings exactly alike.

But, if they possessed different qualities, aptitudes, and temperaments, Dick
Kennedy and Samuel Ferguson lived with one and the same heart, and that gave
them no great trouble. In fact, quite the reverse.

Dick Kennedy was a Scotchman, in the full acceptation of the word--open,
resolute, and headstrong. He lived in the town of Leith, which is near Edinburgh,
and, in truth, is a mere suburb of Auld Reekie. Sometimes he was a fisherman,
but he was always and everywhere a determined hunter, and that was nothing


remarkable for a son of Caledonia, who had known some little climbing among
the Highland mountains. He was cited as a wonderful shot with the rifle, since
not only could he split a bullet on a knife-blade, but he could divide it into two
such equal parts that, upon weighing them, scarcely any difference would be
perceptible.

Kennedy's countenance strikingly recalled that of Herbert Glendinning, as
Sir Walter Scott has depicted it in "The Monastery"; his stature was above six
feet; full of grace and easy movement, he yet seemed gifted with herculean
strength; a face embrowned by the sun; eyes keen and black; a natural air of
daring courage; in fine, something sound, solid, and reliable in his entire person,
spoke, at first glance, in favor of the bonny Scot.

The acquaintanceship of these two friends had been formed in India, when
they belonged to the same regiment. While Dick would be out in pursuit of the
tiger and the elephant, Samuel would be in search of plants and insects. Each
could call himself expert in his own province, and more than one rare botanical
specimen, that to science was as great a victory won as the conquest of a pair of
ivory tusks, became the doctor's booty.

These two young men, moreover, never had occasion to save each other's
lives, or to render any reciprocal service. Hence, an unalterable friendship.
Destiny sometimes bore them apart, but sympathy always united them again.

Since their return to England they had been frequently separated by the
doctor's distant expeditions; but, on his return, the latter never failed to go, not to
ASK for hospitality, but to bestow some weeks of his presence at the home of his
crony Dick.

The Scot talked of the past; the doctor busily prepared for the future. The one
looked back, the other forward. Hence, a restless spirit personified in Ferguson;
perfect calmness typified in Kennedy--such was the contrast.

After his journey to the Thibet, the doctor had remained nearly two years
without hinting at new explorations; and Dick, supposing that his friend's instinct
for travel and thirst for adventure had at length died out, was perfectly
enchanted. They would have ended badly, some day or other, he thought to
himself; no matter what experience one has with men, one does not travel always
with impunity among cannibals and wild beasts. So, Kennedy besought the
doctor to tie up his bark for life, having done enough for science, and too much
for the gratitude of men.

The doctor contented himself with making no reply to this. He remained
absorbed in his own reflections, giving himself up to secret calculations, passing
his nights among heaps of figures, and making experiments with the strangest-
looking machinery, inexplicable to everybody but himself. It could readily be


guessed, though, that some great thought was fermenting in his brain.

"What can he have been planning?" wondered Kennedy, when, in the month
of January, his friend quitted him to return to London.

He found out one morning when he looked into the Daily Telegraph.

"Merciful Heaven!" he exclaimed, "the lunatic! the madman! Cross Africa in
a balloon! Nothing but that was wanted to cap the climax! That's what he's been
bothering his wits about these two years past!"

Now, reader, substitute for all these exclamation points, as many ringing
thumps with a brawny fist upon the table, and you have some idea of the manual
exercise that Dick went through while he thus spoke.

When his confidential maid-of-all-work, the aged Elspeth, tried to insinuate
that the whole thing might be a hoax--

"Not a bit of it!" said he. "Don't I know my man? Isn't it just like him? Travel
through the air! There, now, he's jealous of the eagles, next! No! I warrant you,
he'll not do it! I'll find a way to stop him! He! why if they'd let him alone, he'd
start some day for the moon!"

On that very evening Kennedy, half alarmed, and half exasperated, took the
train for London, where he arrived next morning.

Three-quarters of an hour later a cab deposited him at the door of the doctor's
modest dwelling, in Soho Square, Greek Street. Forthwith he bounded up the
steps and announced his arrival with five good, hearty, sounding raps at the door.

Ferguson opened, in person.

"Dick! you here?" he exclaimed, but with no great expression of surprise,
after all.

"Dick himself!" was the response.

"What, my dear boy, you at London, and this the mid-season of the winter
shooting?"

"Yes! here I am, at London!"

"And what have you come to town for?"

"To prevent the greatest piece of folly that ever was conceived."

"Folly!" said the doctor.

"Is what this paper says, the truth?" rejoined Kennedy, holding out the copy
of the Daily Telegraph, mentioned above.

"Ah! that's what you mean, is it? These newspapers are great tattlers! But, sit
down, my dear Dick."

"No, I won't sit down!--Then, you really intend to attempt this journey?"

"Most certainly! all my preparations are getting along finely, and I--"

"Where are your traps? Let me have a chance at them! I'll make them fly! I'll
put your preparations in fine order." And so saying, the gallant Scot gave way to


a genuine explosion of wrath.

"Come, be calm, my dear Dick!" resumed the doctor. "You're angry at me
because I did not acquaint you with my new project."

"He calls this his new project!"

"I have been very busy," the doctor went on, without heeding the
interruption; "I have had so much to look after! But rest assured that I should not
have started without writing to you."

"Oh, indeed! I'm highly honored."

"Because it is my intention to take you with me."

Upon this, the Scotchman gave a leap that a wild goat would not have been
ashamed of among his native crags.

"Ah! really, then, you want them to send us both to Bedlam!"

"I have counted positively upon you, my dear Dick, and I have picked you
out from all the rest."

Kennedy stood speechless with amazement.

"After listening to me for ten minutes," said the doctor, "you will thank me!"

"Are you speaking seriously?"

"Very seriously."

"And suppose that I refuse to go with you?"

"But you won't refuse."

"But, suppose that I were to refuse?"

"Well, I'd go alone."

"Let us sit down," said Kennedy, "and talk without excitement. The moment
you give up jesting about it, we can discuss the thing."

"Let us discuss it, then, at breakfast, if you have no objections, my dear
Dick."

The two friends took their seats opposite to each other, at a little table with a
plate of toast and a huge tea-urn before them.

"My dear Samuel," said the sportsman, "your project is insane! it is
impossible! it has no resemblance to anything reasonable or practicable!"

"That's for us to find out when we shall have tried it!"

"But trying it is exactly what you ought not to attempt."

"Why so, if you please?"

"Well, the risks, the difficulty of the thing.”

"As for difficulties," replied Ferguson, in a serious tone, "they were made to
be overcome; as for risks and dangers, who can flatter himself that he is to
escape them? Every thing in life involves danger; it may even be dangerous to sit
down at one's own table, or to put one's hat on one's own head. Moreover, we
must look upon what is to occur as having already occurred, and see nothing but


the present in the future, for the future is but the present a little farther on."

"There it is!" exclaimed Kennedy, with a shrug. "As great a fatalist as ever!"

"Yes! but in the good sense of the word. Let us not trouble ourselves, then,
about what fate has in store for us, and let us not forget our good old English
proverb: "The man who was born to be hung will never be drowned!"

There was no reply to make, but that did not prevent Kennedy from resuming
a series of arguments which may be readily conjectured, but which were too long
for us to repeat.

"Well, then," he said, after an hour's discussion, "if you are absolutely
determined to make this trip across the African continent--if it is necessary for
your happiness, why not pursue the ordinary routes?"

"Why?" ejaculated the doctor, growing animated. "Because, all attempts to
do so, up to this time, have utterly failed. Because, from Mungo Park,
assassinated on the Niger, to Vogel, who disappeared in the Wadai country; from
Oudney, who died at Murmur, and Clapperton, lost at Sackatou, to the
Frenchman Maizan, who was cut to pieces; from Major Laing, killed by the
Touaregs, to Roscher, from Hamburg, massacred in the beginning of 1860, the
names of victim after victim have been inscribed on the lists of African
martyrdom! Because, to contend successfully against the elements; against
hunger, and thirst, and fever; against savage beasts, and still more savage men, is
impossible! Because, what cannot be done in one way, should be tried in another.
In fine, because what one cannot pass through directly in the middle, must be
passed by going to one side or overhead!"

"If passing over it were the only question!" interposed Kennedy; "but passing
high up in the air, doctor, there's the rub!"

"Come, then," said the doctor, "what have I to fear? You will admit that I
have taken my precautions in such manner as to be certain that my balloon will
not fall; but, should it disappoint me, I should find myself on the ground in the
normal conditions imposed upon other explorers. But, my balloon will not
deceive me, and we need make no such calculations."

"Yes, but you must take them into view."

"No, Dick. I intend not to be separated from the balloon until I reach the
western coast of Africa. With it, every thing is possible; without it, I fall back
into the dangers and difficulties as well as the natural obstacles that ordinarily
attend such an expedition: with it, neither heat, nor torrents, nor tempests, nor
the simoom, nor unhealthy climates, nor wild animals, nor savage men, are to be
feared! If I feel too hot, I can ascend; if too cold, I can come down. Should there
be a mountain, I can pass over it; a precipice, I can sweep across it; a river, I can
sail beyond it; a storm, I can rise away above it; a torrent, I can skim it like a


bird! I can advance without fatigue, I can halt without need of repose! I can soar
above the nascent cities! I can speed onward with the rapidity of a tornado,
sometimes at the loftiest heights, sometimes only a hundred feet above the soil,
while the map of Africa unrolls itself beneath my gaze in the great atlas of the
world."

Even the stubborn Kennedy began to feel moved, and yet the spectacle thus
conjured up before him gave him the vertigo. He riveted his eyes upon the
doctor with wonder and admiration, and yet with fear, for he already felt himself
swinging aloft in space.

"Come, come," said he, at last. "Let us see, Samuel. Then you have
discovered the means of guiding a balloon?"

"Not by any means. That is a Utopian idea."

"Then, you will go--"

"Whithersoever Providence wills; but, at all events, from east to west."

"Why so?"

"Because I expect to avail myself of the trade-winds, the direction of which
is always the same."

"Ah! yes, indeed!" said Kennedy, reflecting; "the trade-winds--yes--truly--
one might--there's something in that!"

"Something in it--yes, my excellent friend--there'’s EVERY THING in it. The
English Government has placed a transport at my disposal, and three or four
vessels are to cruise off the western coast of Africa, about the presumed period
of my arrival. In three months, at most, I shall be at Zanzibar, where I will inflate
my balloon, and from that point we shall launch ourselves."

"We!" said Dick.

"Have you still a shadow of an objection to offer? Speak, friend Kennedy."

"An objection! I have a thousand; but among other things, tell me, if you
expect to see the country. If you expect to mount and descend at pleasure, you
cannot do so, without losing your gas. Up to this time no other means have been
devised, and it is this that has always prevented long journeys in the air."

"My dear Dick, I have only one word to answer--I shall not lose one particle
of gas."

"And yet you can descend when you please?"

"T shall descend when I please."

"And how will you do that?"

"Ah, ha! therein lies my secret, friend Dick. Have faith, and let my device be
yours--'Excelsior!""

Excelsior’ be it then," said the sportsman, who did not understand a word of
Latin.


But he made up his mind to oppose his friend's departure by all means in his
power, and so pretended to give in, at the same time keeping on the watch. As
for the doctor, he went on diligently with his preparations.


CHAPTER FOURTH.

African Explorations.--Barth, Richardson, Overweg, Werne, Brun-Rollet,
Penney, Andrea, Debono, Miani, Guillaume Lejean, Bruce, Krapf and Rebmann,
Maizan, Roscher, Burton and Speke.

The aerial line which Dr. Ferguson counted upon following had not been
chosen at random; his point of departure had been carefully studied, and it was
not without good cause that he had resolved to ascend at the island of Zanzibar.
This island, lying near to the eastern coast of Africa, is in the sixth degree of
south latitude, that is to say, four hundred and thirty geographical miles below
the equator.

From this island the latest expedition, sent by way of the great lakes to
explore the sources of the Nile, had just set out.

But it would be well to indicate what explorations Dr. Ferguson hoped to link
together. The two principal ones were those of Dr. Barth in 1849, and of
Lieutenants Burton and Speke in 1858.

Dr. Barth is a Hamburger, who obtained permission for himself and for his
countryman Overweg to join the expedition of the Englishman Richardson. The
latter was charged with a mission in the Soudan.

This vast region is situated between the fifteenth and tenth degrees of north
latitude; that is to say, that, in order to approach it, the explorer must penetrate
fifteen hundred miles into the interior of Africa.

Until then, the country in question had been known only through the
journeys of Denham, of Clapperton, and of Oudney, made from 1822 to 1824.
Richardson, Barth, and Overweg, jealously anxious to push their investigations
farther, arrived at Tunis and Tripoli, like their predecessors, and got as far as
Mourzouk, the capital of Fezzan.

They then abandoned the perpendicular line, and made a sharp turn westward
toward Ghat, guided, with difficulty, by the Touaregs. After a thousand scenes of
pillage, of vexation, and attacks by armed forces, their caravan arrived, in
October, at the vast oasis of Asben. Dr. Barth separated from his companions,
made an excursion to the town of Aghades, and rejoined the expedition, which
resumed its march on the 12th of December. At length it reached the province of
Damerghou; there the three travellers parted, and Barth took the road to Kano,
where he arrived by dint of perseverance, and after paying considerable tribute.


In spite of an intense fever, he quitted that place on the 7th of March,
accompanied by a single servant. The principal aim of his journey was to
reconnoitre Lake Tchad, from which he was still three hundred and fifty miles
distant. He therefore advanced toward the east, and reached the town of
Zouricolo, in the Bornou country, which is the core of the great central empire of
Africa. There he heard of the death of Richardson, who had succumbed to
fatigue and privation. He next arrived at Kouka, the capital of Bornou, on the
borders of the lake. Finally, at the end of three weeks, on the 14th of April,
twelve months after having quitted Tripoli, he reached the town of Ngornou.

We find him again setting forth on the 29th of March, 1851, with Overweg,
to visit the kingdom of Adamaoua, to the south of the lake, and from there he
pushed on as far as the town of Yola, a little below nine degrees north latitude.
This was the extreme southern limit reached by that daring traveller.

He returned in the month of August to Kouka; from there he successively
traversed the Mandara, Barghimi, and Klanem countries, and reached his
extreme limit in the east, the town of Masena, situated at seventeen degrees
twenty minutes west longitude.

On the 25th of November, 1852, after the death of Overweg, his last
companion, he plunged into the west, visited Sockoto, crossed the Niger, and
finally reached Timbuctoo, where he had to languish, during eight long months,
under vexations inflicted upon him by the sheik, and all kinds of ill-treatment
and wretchedness. But the presence of a Christian in the city could not long be
tolerated, and the Foullans threatened to besiege it. The doctor, therefore, left it
on the 17th of March, 1854, and fled to the frontier, where he remained for
thirty-three days in the most abject destitution. He then managed to get back to
Kano in November, thence to Kouka, where he resumed Denham's route after
four months' delay. He regained Tripoli toward the close of August, 1855, and
arrived in London on the 6th of September, the only survivor of his party.

Such was the venturesome journey of Dr. Barth.

Dr. Ferguson carefully noted the fact, that he had stopped at four degrees
north latitude and seventeen degrees west longitude.

Now let us see what Lieutenants Burton and Speke accomplished in Eastern
Africa.

The various expeditions that had ascended the Nile could never manage to
reach the mysterious source of that river. According to the narrative of the
German doctor, Ferdinand Werne, the expedition attempted in 1840, under the
auspices of Mehemet Ali, stopped at Gondokoro, between the fourth and fifth
parallels of north latitude.

In 1855, Brun-Rollet, a native of Savoy, appointed consul for Sardinia in


Eastern Soudan, to take the place of Vaudey, who had just died, set out from
Karthoum, and, under the name of Yacoub the merchant, trading in gums and
ivory, got as far as Belenia, beyond the fourth degree, but had to return in ill-
health to Karthoum, where he died in 1857.

Neither Dr. Penney--the head of the Egyptian medical service, who, in a
small steamer, penetrated one degree beyond Gondokoro, and then came back to
die of exhaustion at Karthoum--nor Miani, the Venetian, who, turing the
cataracts below Gondokoro, reached the second parallel-- nor the Maltese trader,
Andrea Debono, who pushed his journey up the Nile still farther--could work
their way beyond the apparently impassable limit.

In 1859, M. Guillaume Lejean, intrusted with a mission by the French
Government, reached Karthoum by way of the Red Sea, and embarked upon the
Nile with a retinue of twenty-one hired men and twenty soldiers, but he could
not get past Gondokoro, and ran extreme risk of his life among the negro tribes,
who were in full revolt. The expedition directed by M. d'Escayrac de Lauture
made an equally unsuccessful attempt to reach the famous sources of the Nile.

This fatal limit invariably brought every traveller to a halt. In ancient times,
the ambassadors of Nero reached the ninth degree of latitude, but in eighteen
centuries only from five to six degrees, or from three hundred to three hundred
and sixty geographical miles, were gained.

Many travellers endeavored to reach the sources of the Nile by taking their
point of departure on the eastern coast of Africa.

Between 1768 and 1772 the Scotch traveller, Bruce, set out from Massowah,
a port of Abyssinia, traversed the Tigre, visited the ruins of Axum, saw the
sources of the Nile where they did not exist, and obtained no serious result.

In 1844, Dr. Krapf, an Anglican missionary, founded an establishment at
Monbaz, on the coast of Zanguebar, and, in company with the Rev. Dr.
Rebmann, discovered two mountain-ranges three hundred miles from the coast.
These were the mountains of Kilimandjaro and Kenia, which Messrs. de Heuglin
and Thornton have partly scaled so recently.

In 1845, Maizan, the French explorer, disembarked, alone, at Bagamayo,
directly opposite to Zanzibar, and got as far as Deje-la-Mhora, where the chief
caused him to be put to death in the most cruel torment.

In 1859, in the month of August, the young traveller, Roscher, from
Hamburg, set out with a caravan of Arab merchants, reached Lake Nyassa, and
was there assassinated while he slept.

Finally, in 1857, Lieutenants Burton and Speke, both officers in the Bengal
army, were sent by the London Geographical Society to explore the great
African lakes, and on the 17th of June they quitted Zanzibar, and plunged


directly into the west.

After four months of incredible suffering, their baggage having been
pillaged, and their attendants beaten and slain, they arrived at Kazeh, a sort of
central rendezvous for traders and caravans. They were in the midst of the
country of the Moon, and there they collected some precious documents
concerning the manners, government, religion, fauna, and flora of the region.
They next made for the first of the great lakes, the one named Tanganayika,
situated between the third and eighth degrees of south latitude. They reached it
on the 14th of February, 1858, and visited the various tribes residing on its
banks, the most of whom are cannibals.

They departed again on the 26th of May, and reentered Kazeh on the 20th of
June. There Burton, who was completely worn out, lay ill for several months,
during which time Speke made a push to the northward of more than three
hundred miles, going as far as Lake Okeracua, which he came in sight of on the
3d of August; but he could descry only the opening of it at latitude two degrees
thirty minutes.

He reached Kazeh, on his return, on the 25th of August, and, in company
with Burton, again took up the route to Zanzibar, where they arrived in the
month of March in the following year. These two daring explorers then
reembarked for England; and the Geographical Society of Paris decreed them its
annual prize medal.

Dr. Ferguson carefully remarked that they had not gone beyond the second
degree of south latitude, nor the twenty-ninth of east longitude.

The problem, therefore, was how to link the explorations of Burton and
Speke with those of Dr. Barth, since to do so was to undertake to traverse an
extent of more than twelve degrees of territory.


CHAPTER FIFTH.

Kennedy's Dreams.--Articles and Pronouns in the  Plural.--Dick's
Insinuations. --A Promenade over the Map of Africa.--What is contained
between two Points of the Compass.--Expeditions now on foot.--Speke and
Grant.--Krapf, De Decken, and De Heuglin.

Dr. Ferguson energetically pushed the preparations for his departure, and in
person superintended the construction of his balloon, with certain modifications;
in regard to which he observed the most absolute silence. For a long time past he
had been applying himself to the study of the Arab language and the various
Mandingoe idioms, and, thanks to his talents as a polyglot, he had made rapid
progress.


In the mean while his friend, the sportsman, never let him out of his sight--
afraid, no doubt, that the doctor might take his departure, without saying a word
to anybody. On this subject, he regaled him with the most persuasive arguments,
which, however, did NOT persuade Samuel Ferguson, and wasted his breath in
pathetic entreaties, by which the latter seemed to be but slightly moved. In fine,
Dick felt that the doctor was slipping through his fingers.

The poor Scot was really to be pitied. He could not look upon the azure vault
without a sombre terror: when asleep, he felt oscillations that made his head reel;
and every night he had visions of being swung aloft at immeasurable heights.

We must add that, during these fearful nightmares, he once or twice fell out
of bed. His first care then was to show Ferguson a severe contusion that he had
received on the cranium. "And yet," he would add, with warmth, "that was at the
height of only three feet--not an inch more--and such a bump as this! Only think,
then!"

This insinuation, full of sad meaning as it was, did not seem to touch the
doctor's heart.

"We'll not fall," was his invariable reply.

"But, still, suppose that we WERE to fall!"

"We will NOT fall!"

This was decisive, and Kennedy had nothing more to say.

What particularly exasperated Dick was, that the doctor seemed completely
to lose sight of his personality-- of his--Kennedy's--and to look upon him as
irrevocably destined to become his aerial companion. Not even the shadow of a
doubt was ever suggested; and Samuel made an intolerable misuse of the first
person plural:

'"We' are getting along; 'we' shall be ready on the ----; 'we' shall start on the --
--," etc., etc.

And then there was the singular possessive adjective:

™Our' balloon; ‘our’ car; ‘our’ expedition."

And the same in the plural, too:

Our' preparations; 'our' discoveries; 'our' ascensions."

Dick shuddered at them, although he was determined not to go; but he did
not want to annoy his friend. Let us also disclose the fact that, without knowing
exactly why himself, he had sent to Edinburgh for a certain selection of heavy
clothing, and his best hunting-gear and fire-arms.

One day, after having admitted that, with an overwhelming run of good-luck,
there MIGHT be one chance of success in a thousand, he pretended to yield
entirely to the doctor's wishes; but, in order to still put off the journey, he opened
the most varied series of subterfuges. He threw himself back upon questioning


the utility of the expedition--its opportuneness, etc. This discovery of the sources
of the Nile, was it likely to be of any use?--Would one have really labored for the
welfare of humanity?-- When, after all, the African tribes should have been
civilized, would they be any happier?--Were folks certain that civilization had
not its chosen abode there rather than in Europe?--Perhaps!--And then, couldn't
one wait a little longer?--The trip across Africa would certainly be accomplished
some day, and in a less hazardous manner.-- In another month, or in six months
before the year was over, some explorer would undoubtedly come in--etc., etc.

These hints produced an effect exactly opposite to what was desired or
intended, and the doctor trembled with impatience.

"Are you willing, then, wretched Dick--are you willing, false friend--that this
glory should belong to another? Must I then be untrue to my past history; recoil
before obstacles that are not serious; requite with cowardly hesitation what both
the English Government and the Royal Society of London have done for me?"

"But," resumed Kennedy, who made great use of that conjunction.

"But," said the doctor, "are you not aware that my journey is to compete with
the success of the expeditions now on foot? Don't you know that fresh explorers
are advancing toward the centre of Africa?"

"Still--"

"Listen to me, Dick," and cast your eyes over that map."

Dick glanced over it, with resignation.

"Now, ascend the course of the Nile."

"I have ascended it," replied the Scotchman, with docility.

"Stop at Gondokoro."

"T am there."

And Kennedy thought to himself how easy such a trip was--on the map!

"Now, take one of the points of these dividers and let it rest upon that place
beyond which the most daring explorers have scarcely gone."

"T have done so."

"And now look along the coast for the island of Zanzibar, in latitude six
degrees south."

"T have it."

"Now, follow the same parallel and arrive at Kazeh."

"T have done so."

"Run up again along the thirty-third degree of longitude to the opening of
Lake Oukereoue, at the point where Lieutenant Speke had to halt."

"T am there; a little more, and I should have tumbled into the lake."

"Very good! Now, do you know what we have the right to suppose,
according to the information given by the tribes that live along its shores?"


"T haven't the least idea."

"Why, that this lake, the lower extremity of which is in two degrees and
thirty minutes, must extend also two degrees and a half above the equator."

"Really!"

"Well from this northern extremity there flows a stream which must
necessarily join the Nile, if it be not the Nile itself."

"That is, indeed, curious."

"Then, let the other point of your dividers rest upon that extremity of Lake
Oukereoue."

"Tt is done, friend Ferguson."

"Now, how many degrees can you count between the two points?"

"Scarcely two."

"And do you know what that means, Dick?"

"Not the least in the world."

"Why, that makes scarcely one hundred and twenty miles--in other words, a
nothing.”

"Almost nothing, Samuel."

"Well, do you know what is taking place at this moment?"

"No, upon my honor, I do not."

"Very well, then, I'll tell you. The Geographical Society regard as very
important the exploration of this lake of which Speke caught a glimpse. Under
their auspices, Lieutenant (now Captain) Speke has associated with him Captain
Grant, of the army in India; they have put themselves at the head of a numerous
and well-equipped expedition; their mission is to ascend the lake and return to
Gondokoro; they have received a subsidy of more than five thousand pounds,
and the Governor of the Cape of Good Hope has placed Hottentot soldiers at
their disposal; they set out from Zanzibar at the close of October, 1860. In the
mean while John Petherick, the English consul at the city of Karthoum, has
received about seven hundred pounds from the foreign office; he is to equip a
steamer at Karthoum, stock it with sufficient provisions, and make his way to
Gondokoro; there, he will await Captain Speke's caravan, and be able to
replenish its supplies to some extent."

"Well planned," said Kennedy.

"You can easily see, then, that time presses if we are to take part in these
exploring labors. And that is not all, since, while some are thus advancing with
sure steps to the discovery of the sources of the Nile, others are penetrating to
the very heart of Africa."

"On foot?" said Kennedy.

"Yes, on foot," rejoined the doctor, without noticing the insinuation. "Doctor


Krapf proposes to push forward, in the west, by way of the Djob, a river lying
under the equator. Baron de Decken has already set out from Monbaz, has
reconnoitred the mountains of Kenaia and Kilimandjaro, and is now plunging in
toward the centre."

"But all this time on foot?"

"On foot or on mules."

"Exactly the same, so far as I am concerned," ejaculated Kennedy.

"Lastly," resumed the doctor, "M. de Heuglin, the Austrian vice-consul at
Karthoum, has just organized a very important expedition, the first aim of which
is to search for the traveller Vogel, who, in 1853, was sent into the Soudan to
associate himself with the labors of Dr. Barth. In 1856, he quitted Bornou, and
determined to explore the unknown country that lies between Lake Tchad and
Darfur. Nothing has been seen of him since that time. Letters that were received
in Alexandria, in 1860, said that he was killed at the order of the King of Wadai;
but other letters, addressed by Dr. Hartmann to the traveller's father, relate that,
according to the recital of a felatah of Bornou, Vogel was merely held as a
prisoner at Wara. All hope is not then lost. Hence, a committee has been
organized under the presidency of the Regent of Saxe-Cogurg-Gotha; my friend
Petermann is its secretary; a national subscription has provided for the expense
of the expedition, whose strength has been increased by the voluntary accession
of several learned men, and M. de Heuglin set out from Massowah, in the month
of June. While engaged in looking for Vogel, he is also to explore all the country
between the Nile and Lake Tchad, that is to say, to knit together the operations of
Captain Speke and those of Dr. Barth, and then Africa will have been traversed
from east to west."*

* After the departure of Dr. Ferguson, it was ascertained that M. de Heuglin,
owing to some disagreement, took a route different from the one assigned to his
expedition, the command of the latter having been transferred to Mr. Muntzinger.

"Well," said the canny Scot, "since every thing is getting on so well, what's
the use of our going down there?"

Dr. Ferguson made no reply, but contented himself with a significant shrug
of the shoulders.


CHAPTER SIXTH.

A Servant--match him!--He can see the Satellites of Jupiter.--Dick and Joe
hard at it.--Doubt and Faith.--The Weighing Ceremony.--Joe and Wellington.--
He gets a Half-crown.

Dr. Ferguson had a servant who answered with alacrity to the name of Joe.


He was an excellent fellow, who testified the most absolute confidence in his
master, and the most unlimited devotion to his interests, even anticipating his
wishes and orders, which were always intelligently executed. In fine, he was a
Caleb without the growling, and a perfect pattern of constant good-humor. Had
he been made on purpose for the place, it could not have been better done.
Ferguson put himself entirely in his hands, so far as the ordinary details of
existence were concerned, and he did well. Incomparable, whole-souled Joe! a
servant who orders your dinner; who likes what you like; who packs your trunk,
without forgetting your socks or your linen; who has charge of your keys and
your secrets, and takes no advantage of all this!

But then, what a man the doctor was in the eyes of this worthy Joe! With
what respect and what confidence the latter received all his decisions! When
Ferguson had spoken, he would be a fool who should attempt to question the
matter. Every thing he thought was exactly right; every thing he said, the
perfection of wisdom; every thing he ordered to be done, quite feasible; all that
he undertook, practicable; all that he accomplished, admirable. You might have
cut Joe to pieces--not an agreeable operation, to be sure--and yet he would not
have altered his opinion of his master.

So, when the doctor conceived the project of crossing Africa through the air,
for Joe the thing was already done; obstacles no longer existed; from the
moment when the doctor had made up his mind to start, he had arrived --along
with his faithful attendant, too, for the noble fellow knew, without a word uttered
about it, that he would be one of the party.

Moreover, he was just the man to render the greatest service by his
intelligence and his wonderful agility. Had the occasion arisen to name a
professor of gymnastics for the monkeys in the Zoological Garden (who are
smart enough, by-the-way!), Joe would certainly have received the appointment.
Leaping, climbing, almost flying-- these were all sport to him.

If Ferguson was the head and Kennedy the arm, Joe was to be the right hand
of the expedition. He had, already, accompanied his master on several journeys,
and had a smattering of science appropriate to his condition and style of mind,
but he was especially remarkable for a sort of mild philosophy, a charming turn
of optimism. In his sight every thing was easy, logical, natural, and,
consequently, he could see no use in complaining or grumbling.

Among other gifts, he possessed a strength and range of vision that were
perfectly surprising. He enjoyed, in common with Moestlin, Kepler's professor,
the rare faculty of distinguishing the satellites of Jupiter with the naked eye, and
of counting fourteen of the stars in the group of Pleiades, the remotest of them
being only of the ninth magnitude. He presumed none the more for that; on the


contrary, he made his bow to you, at a distance, and when occasion arose he
bravely knew how to use his eyes.

With such profound faith as Joe felt in the doctor, it is not to be wondered at
that incessant discussions sprang up between him and Kennedy, without any lack
of respect to the latter, however.

One doubted, the other believed; one had a prudent foresight, the other blind
confidence. The doctor, however, vibrated between doubt and confidence; that is
to say, he troubled his head with neither one nor the other.

"Well, Mr. Kennedy," Joe would say.

"Well, my boy?"

"The moment's at hand. It seems that we are to sail for the moon."

"You mean the Mountains of the Moon, which are not quite so far off. But,
never mind, one trip is just as dangerous as the other!"

"Dangerous! What! with a man like Dr. Ferguson?"

"I don't want to spoil your illusions, my good Joe; but this undertaking of his
is nothing more nor less than the act of a madman. He won't go, though!"

"He won't go, eh? Then you haven't seen his balloon at Mitchell's factory in
the Borough?"

"T'll take precious good care to keep away from it!"

"Well, you'll lose a fine sight, sir. What a splendid thing it is! What a pretty
shape! What a nice car! How snug we'll feel in it!"

"Then you really think of going with your master?"

"T?" answered Joe, with an accent of profound conviction. "Why, I'd go with
him wherever he pleases! Who ever heard of such a thing? Leave him to go off
alone, after we've been all over the world together! Who would help him, when
he was tired? Who would give him a hand in climbing over the rocks? Who
would attend him when he was sick? No, Mr. Kennedy, Joe will always stick to
the doctor!"

"You're a fine fellow, Joe!"

"But, then, you're coming with us!"

"Oh! certainly," said Kennedy; "that is to say, I will go with you up to the last
moment, to prevent Samuel even then from being guilty of such an act of folly! I
will follow him as far as Zanzibar, so as to stop him there, if possible."

"You'll stop nothing at all, Mr. Kennedy, with all respect to you, sir. My
master is no hare-brained person; he takes a long time to think over what he
means to do, and then, when he once gets started, the Evil One himself couldn't
make him give it up."

"Well, we'll see about that."

"Don't flatter yourself, sir--but then, the main thing is, to have you with us.


For a hunter like you, sir, Africa's a great country. So, either way, you won't be
sorry for the trip."

"No, that's a fact, I shan't be sorry for it, if I can get this crazy man to give up
his scheme."

"By-the-way," said Joe, "you know that the weighing comes off to-day."

"The weighing--what weighing?"

"Why, my master, and you, and I, are all to be weighed to-day!"

"What! like horse-jockeys?"

"Yes, like jockeys. Only, never fear, you won't be expected to make yourself
lean, if you're found to be heavy. You'll go as you are."

"Well, I can tell you, I am not going to let myself be weighed," said
Kennedy, firmly.

"But, sir, it seems that the doctor's machine requires it."

"Well, his machine will have to do without it."

"Humph! and suppose that it couldn't go up, then?"

"Egad! that's all I want!"

"Come! come, Mr. Kennedy! My master will be sending for us directly."

"T shan't go."

"Oh! now, you won't vex the doctor in that way!"

"Aye! that I will."

"Well!" said Joe with a laugh, "you say that because he's not here; but when
he says to your face, ‘Dick!’ (with all respect to you, sir,) ‘Dick, I want to know
exactly how much you weigh,’ you'll go, I warrant it."

"No, I will NOT go!"

At this moment the doctor entered his study, where this discussion had been
taking place; and, as he came in, cast a glance at Kennedy, who did not feel
altogether at his ease.

"Dick," said the doctor, "come with Joe; I want to know how much you both
weigh."

"But--"

"You may keep your hat on. Come!" And Kennedy went.

They repaired in company to the workshop of the Messrs. Mitchell, where
one of those so-called "Roman" scales was in readiness. It was necessary, by the
way, for the doctor to know the weight of his companions, so as to fix the
equilibrium of his balloon; so he made Dick get up on the platform of the scales.
The latter, without making any resistance, said, in an undertone:

"Oh! well, that doesn't bind me to any thing."

"One hundred and fifty-three pounds," said the doctor, noting it down on his
tablets.


"Am I too heavy?"

"Why, no, Mr. Kennedy!" said Joe; "and then, you know, I am light to make
up for it."

So saying, Joe, with enthusiasm, took his place on the scales, and very nearly
upset them in his ready haste. He struck the attitude of Wellington where he is
made to ape Achilles, at Hyde-Park entrance, and was superb in it, without the
shield.

"One hundred and twenty pounds," wrote the doctor.

"Ah! ha!" said Joe, with a smile of satisfaction And why did he smile? He
never could tell himself.

"It's my turn now," said Ferguson--and he put down one hundred and thirty-
five pounds to his own account.

"All three of us," said he, "do not weigh much more than four hundred
pounds."

"But, sir," said Joe, "if it was necessary for your expedition, I could make
myself thinner by twenty pounds, by not eating so much."

"Useless, my boy!" replied the doctor. "You may eat as much as you like, and
here's half-a-crown to buy you the ballast."


CHAPTER SEVENTH.

Geometrical Details.--Calculation of the Capacity of the Balloon.--The
Double Receptacle.--The Covering.--The Car.--The Mysterious Apparatus. --The
Provisions and Stores.--The Final Summing up.

Dr. Ferguson had long been engaged upon the details of his expedition. It is
easy to comprehend that the balloon --that marvellous vehicle which was to
convey him through the air--was the constant object of his solicitude.

At the outset, in order not to give the balloon too ponderous dimensions, he
had decided to fill it with hydrogen gas, which is fourteen and a half times
lighter than common air. The production of this gas is easy, and it has given the
greatest satisfaction hitherto in aerostatic experiments.

The doctor, according to very accurate calculations, found that, including the
articles indispensable to his journey and his apparatus, he should have to carry a
weight of 4,000 pounds; therefore he had to find out what would be the
ascensional force of a balloon capable of raising such a weight, and,
consequently, what would be its capacity.

A weight of four thousand pounds is represented by a displacement of the air
amounting to forty-four thousand eight hundred and forty-seven cubic feet; or, in
other words, forty-four thousand eight hundred and forty-seven cubic feet of air


weigh about four thousand pounds.

By giving the balloon these cubic dimensions, and filling it with hydrogen
gas, instead of common air--the former being fourteen and a half times lighter
and weighing therefore only two hundred and seventy-six pounds--a difference
of three thousand seven hundred and twenty-four pounds in equilibrium is
produced; and it is this difference between the weight of the gas contained in the
balloon and the weight of the surrounding atmosphere that constitutes the
ascensional force of the former.

However, were the forty-four thousand eight hundred and forty-seven cubic
feet of gas of which we speak, all introduced into the balloon, it would be
entirely filled; but that would not do, because, as the balloon continued to mount
into the more rarefied layers of the atmosphere, the gas within would dilate, and
soon burst the cover containing it. Balloons, then, are usually only two-thirds
filled.

But the doctor, in carrying out a project known only to himself, resolved to
fill his balloon only one-half; and, since he had to carry forty-four thousand eight
hundred and forty-seven cubic feet of gas, to give his balloon nearly double
capacity he arranged it in that elongated, oval shape which has come to be
preferred. The horizontal diameter was fifty feet, and the vertical diameter
seventy-five feet. He thus obtained a spheroid, the capacity of which amounted,
in round numbers, to ninety thousand cubic feet.

Could Dr. Ferguson have used two balloons, his chances of success would
have been increased; for, should one burst in the air, he could, by throwing out
ballast, keep himself up with the other. But the management of two balloons
would, necessarily, be very difficult, in view of the problem how to keep them
both at an equal ascensional force.

After having pondered the matter carefully, Dr. Ferguson, by an ingenious
arrangement, combined the advantages of two balloons, without incurring their
inconveniences. He constructed two of different sizes, and inclosed the smaller
in the larger one. His external balloon, which had the dimensions given above,
contained a less one of the same shape, which was only forty-five feet in
horizontal, and sixty-eight feet in vertical diameter. The capacity of this interior
balloon was only sixty-seven thousand cubic feet: it was to float in the fluid
surrounding it. A valve opened from one balloon into the other, and thus enabled
the aeronaut to communicate with both.

This arrangement offered the advantage, that if gas had to be let off, so as to
descend, that which was in the outer balloon would go first; and, were it
completely emptied, the smaller one would still remain intact. The outer
envelope might then be cast off as a useless encumbrance; and the second


balloon, left free to itself, would not offer the same hold to the currents of air as
a half-inflated one must needs present.

Moreover, in case of an accident happening to the outside balloon, such as
getting torn, for instance, the other would remain intact.

The balloons were made of a strong but light Lyons silk, coated with gutta
percha. This gummy, resinous substance is absolutely water-proof, and also
resists acids and gas perfectly. The silk was doubled, at the upper extremity of
the oval, where most of the strain would come.

Such an envelope as this could retain the inflating fluid for any length of
time. It weighed half a pound per nine square feet. Hence the surface of the
outside balloon being about eleven thousand six hundred square feet, its
envelope weighed six hundred and fifty pounds. The envelope of the second or
inner balloon, having nine thousand two hundred square feet of surface, weighed
only about five hundred and ten pounds, or say eleven hundred and sixty pounds
for both.

The network that supported the car was made of very strong hempen cord,
and the two valves were the object of the most minute and careful attention, as
the rudder of a ship would be.

The car, which was of a circular form and fifteen feet in diameter, was made
of wicker-work, strengthened with a slight covering of iron, and protected below
by a system of elastic springs, to deaden the shock of collision. Its weight, along
with that of the network, did not exceed two hundred and fifty pounds.

In addition to the above, the doctor caused to be constructed two sheet-iron
chests two lines in thickness. These were connected by means of pipes furnished
with stopcocks. He joined to these a spiral, two inches in diameter, which
terminated in two branch pieces of unequal length, the longer of which, however,
was twenty-five feet in height and the shorter only fifteen feet.

These sheet-iron chests were embedded in the car in such a way as to take up
the least possible amount of space. The spiral, which was not to be adjusted until
some future moment, was packed up, separately, along with a very strong
Buntzen electric battery. This apparatus had been so ingeniously combined that it
did not weigh more than seven hundred pounds, even including twenty-five
gallons of water in another receptacle.

The instruments provided for the journey consisted of two barometers, two
thermometers, two compasses, a sextant, two chronometers, an artificial horizon,
and an altazimuth, to throw out the height of distant and inaccessible objects.

The Greenwich Observatory had placed itself at the doctor's disposal. The
latter, however, did not intend to make experiments in physics; he merely wanted
to be able to know in what direction he was passing, and to determine the


position of the principal rivers, mountains, and towns.

He also provided himself with three thoroughly tested iron anchors, and a
light but strong silk ladder fifty feet in length.

He at the same time carefully weighed his stores of provision, which
consisted of tea, coffee, biscuit, salted meat, and pemmican, a preparation which
comprises many nutritive elements in a small space. Besides a sufficient stock of
pure brandy, he arranged two water-tanks, each of which contained twenty-two
gallons.

The consumption of these articles would necessarily, little by little, diminish
the weight to be sustained, for it must be remembered that the equilibrium of a
balloon floating in the atmosphere is extremely sensitive. The loss of an almost
insignificant weight suffices to produce a very noticeable displacement.

Nor did the doctor forget an awning to shelter the car, nor the coverings and
blankets that were to be the bedding of the journey, nor some fowling pieces and
rifles, with their requisite supply of powder and ball.

Here is the summing up of his various items, and their weight, as he
computed it:


FeTQuSOM..........cecccessecesesees 135 pounds. Kennedy............cccccceseeees 153°
 (eleeerreerrere yecerrre 120 " Weight of the outside balloon...... 650 " Weight of
the second balloon....... 510 " Car and network............0.000.. 280 " Anchors,
instruments, awnings, and sundry utensils, guns, Coverings, etC..............00 190"
Meat, pemmican, biscuits, tea, coffee, brandy................... 386 ="
WALES a cases tcunuitecadavncsacvise 400 " ApparatuS...........cccccceeseeees 700 " Weight of the
hydrogen............. 276. Ballastsacautnwssnea tsar 200 " ----- 4,000 pounds.


Such were the items of the four thousand pounds that Dr. Ferguson proposed
to carry up with him. He took only two hundred pounds of ballast for
"unforeseen emergencies," as he remarked, since otherwise he did not expect to
use any, thanks to the peculiarity of his apparatus.


CHAPTER EIGHTH.

Joe's Importance.--The Commander of the Resolute.--Kennedy's Arsenal.--
Mutual Amenities.--The Farewell Dinner.--Departure on the 21st of February.--
The Doctor's Scientific Sessions.-- Duveyrier.--Livingstone.--Details of the
Aerial Voyage.--Kennedy silenced.

About the 10th of February, the preparations were pretty well completed; and
the balloons, firmly secured, one within the other, were altogether finished. They
had been subjected to a powerful pneumatic pressure in all parts, and the test
gave excellent evidence of their solidity and of the care applied in their


construction.

Joe hardly knew what he was about, with delight. He trotted incessantly to
and fro between his home in Greek Street, and the Mitchell establishment,
always full of business, but always in the highest spirits, giving details of the
affair to people who did not even ask him, so proud was he, above all things, of
being permitted to accompany his master. I have even a shrewd suspicion that
what with showing the balloon, explaining the plans and views of the doctor,
giving folks a glimpse of the latter, through a half-opened window, or pointing
him out as he passed along the streets, the clever scamp earned a few half-
crowns, but we must not find fault with him for that. He had as much right as
anybody else to speculate upon the admiration and curiosity of his
contemporaries.

On the 16th of February, the Resolute cast anchor near Greenwich. She was a
screw propeller of eight hundred tons, a fast sailer, and the very vessel that had
been sent out to the polar regions, to revictual the last expedition of Sir James
Ross. Her commander, Captain Bennet, had the name of being a very amiable
person, and he took a particular interest in the doctor's expedition, having been
one of that gentleman's admirers for a long time. Bennet was rather a man of
science than a man of war, which did not, however, prevent his vessel from
carrying four carronades, that had never hurt any body, to be sure, but had
performed the most pacific duty in the world.

The hold of the Resolute was so arranged as to find a stowing-place for the
balloon. The latter was shipped with the greatest precaution on the 18th of
February, and was then carefully deposited at the bottom of the vessel in such a
way as to prevent accident. The car and its accessories, the anchors, the cords,
the supplies, the water-tanks, which were to be filled on arriving, all were
embarked and put away under Ferguson's own eyes.

Ten tons of sulphuric acid and ten tons of iron filings, were put on board for
the future production of the hydrogen gas. The quantity was more than enough,
but it was well to be provided against accident. The apparatus to be employed in
manufacturing the gas, including some thirty empty casks, was also stowed away
in the hold.

These various preparations were terminated on the 18th of February, in the
evening. Two state-rooms, comfortably fitted up, were ready for the reception of
Dr. Ferguson and his friend Kennedy. The latter, all the while swearing that he
would not go, went on board with a regular arsenal of hunting weapons, among
which were two double-barrelled breech-loading fowling-pieces, and a rifle that
had withstood every test, of the make of Purdey, Moore & Dickson, at
Edinburgh. With such a weapon a marksman would find no difficulty in lodging


a bullet in the eye of a chamois at the distance of two thousand paces. Along
with these implements, he had two of Colt's six-shooters, for unforeseen
emergencies. His powder-case, his cartridge-pouch, his lead, and his bullets, did
not exceed a certain weight prescribed by the doctor.

The three travellers got themselves to rights on board during the working-
hours of February 19th. They were received with much distinction by the captain
and his officers, the doctor continuing as reserved as ever, and thinking of
nothing but his expedition. Dick seemed a good deal moved, but was unwilling
to betray it; while Joe was fairly dancing and breaking out in laughable remarks.
The worthy fellow soon became the jester and merry-andrew of the boatswain's
mess, where a berth had been kept for him.

On the 20th, a grand farewell dinner was given to Dr. Ferguson and Kennedy
by the Royal Geographical Society. Commander Bennet and his officers were
present at the entertainment, which was signalized by copious libations and
numerous toasts. Healths were drunk, in sufficient abundance to guarantee all the
guests a lifetime of centuries. Sir Francis M---- presided, with restrained but
dignified feeling.

To his own supreme confusion, Dick Kennedy came in for a large share in
the jovial felicitations of the night. After having drunk to the "intrepid Ferguson,
the glory of England," they had to drink to "the no less courageous Kennedy, his
daring companion."

Dick blushed a good deal, and that passed for modesty; whereupon the
applause redoubled, and Dick blushed again.

A message from the Queen arrived while they were at dessert. Her Majesty
offered her compliments to the two travellers, and expressed her wishes for their
safe and successful journey. This, of course, rendered imperative fresh toasts to
"Her most gracious Majesty."

At midnight, after touching farewells and warm shaking of hands, the guests
separated.

The boats of the Resolute were in waiting at the stairs of Westminster
Bridge. The captain leaped in, accompanied by his officers and passengers, and
the rapid current of the Thames, aiding the strong arms of the rowers, bore them
swiftly to Greenwich. In an hour's time all were asleep on board.

The next morning, February 21st, at three o'clock, the furnaces began to roar;
at five, the anchors were weighed, and the Resolute, powerfully driven by her
screw, began to plough the water toward the mouth of the Thames.

It is needless to say that the topic of conversation with every one on board
was Dr. Ferguson's enterprise. Seeing and hearing the doctor soon inspired
everybody with such confidence that, in a very short time, there was no one,


excepting the incredulous Scotchman, on the steamer who had the least doubt of
the perfect feasibility and success of the expedition.

During the long, unoccupied hours of the voyage, the doctor held regular
sittings, with lectures on geographical science, in the officers' mess-room. These
young men felt an intense interest in the discoveries made during the last forty
years in Africa; and the doctor related to them the explorations of Barth, Burton,
Speke, and Grant, and depicted the wonders of this vast, mysterious country,
now thrown open on all sides to the investigations of science. On the north, the
young Duveyrier was exploring Sahara, and bringing the chiefs of the Touaregs
to Paris. Under the inspiration of the French Government, two expeditions were
preparing, which, descending from the north, and coming from the west, would
cross each other at Timbuctoo. In the south, the indefatigable Livingstone was
still advancing toward the equator; and, since March, 1862, he had, in company
with Mackenzie, ascended the river Rovoonia. The nineteenth century would,
assuredly, not pass, contended the doctor, without Africa having been compelled
to surrender the secrets she has kept locked up in her bosom for six thousand
years.

But the interest of Dr. Ferguson's hearers was excited to the highest pitch
when he made known to them, in detail, the preparations for his own journey.
They took pleasure in verifying his calculations; they discussed them; and the
doctor frankly took part in the discussion.

As a general thing, they were surprised at the limited quantity of provision
that he took with him; and one day one of the officers questioned him on that
subject.

"That peculiar point astonishes you, does it?" said Ferguson.

"Tt does, indeed."

"But how long do you think my trip is going to last? Whole months? If so,
you are greatly mistaken. Were it to be a long one, we should be lost; we should
never get back. But you must know that the distance from Zanzibar to the coast
of Senegal is only thirty-five hundred--say four thousand miles. Well, at the rate
of two hundred and forty miles every twelve hours, which does not come near
the rapidity of our railroad trains, by travelling day and night, it would take only
seven days to cross Africa!"

"But then you could see nothing, make no geographical observations, or
reconnoitre the face of the country."

"Ah!" replied the doctor, "if Iam master of my balloon--if I can ascend and
descend at will, I shall stop when I please, especially when too violent currents
of air threaten to carry me out of my way with them."

"And you will encounter such," said Captain Bennet. "There are tornadoes


that sweep at the rate of more than two hundred and forty miles per hour."

"You see, then, that with such speed as that, we could cross Africa in twelve
hours. One would rise at Zanzibar, and go to bed at St. Louis!"

"But," rejoined the officer, "could any balloon withstand the wear and tear of
such velocity?"

"It has happened before," replied Ferguson.

"And the balloon withstood it?"

"Perfectly well. It was at the time of the coronation of Napoleon, in 1804.
The aeronaut, Gemerin, sent up a balloon at Paris, about eleven o'clock in the
evening. It bore the following inscription, in letters of gold: 'Paris, 25 Frimaire;
year XIII; Coronation of the Emperor Napoleon by his Holiness, Pius VII.’ On
the next morning, the inhabitants of Rome saw the same balloon soaring above
the Vatican, whence it crossed the Campagna, and finally fluttered down into the
lake of Bracciano. So you see, gentlemen, that a balloon can resist such
velocities."

"A balloon--that might be; but a man?" insinuated Kennedy.

"Yes, a man, too!--for the balloon is always motionless with reference to the
air that surrounds it. What moves is the mass of the atmosphere itself: for
instance, one may light a taper in the car, and the flame will not even waver. An
aeronaut in Garnerin's balloon would not have suffered in the least from the
speed. But then I have no occasion to attempt such velocity; and if I can anchor
to some tree, or some favorable inequality of the ground, at night, I shall not fail
to do so. Besides, we take provision for two months with us, after all; and there
is nothing to prevent our skilful huntsman here from furnishing game in
abundance when we come to alight."

"Ah! Mr. Kennedy," said a young midshipman, with envious eyes, "what
splendid shots you'll have!"

"Without counting,” said another, "that you'll have the glory as well as the
sport!"

"Gentlemen," replied the hunter, stammering with confusion, "I greatly--
appreciate--your compliments-- but they--don't--belong to me."

"You!" exclaimed every body, "don't you intend to go?"

"I am not going!"

"You won't accompany Dr. Ferguson?"

"Not only shall I not accompany him, but I am here so as to be present at the
last moment to prevent his going."

Every eye was now turmed to the doctor.

"Never mind him!" said the latter, calmly. "This is a matter that we can't
argue with him. At heart he knows perfectly well that he IS going."


"By Saint Andrew!" said Kennedy, "I swear--"

"Swear to nothing, friend Dick; you have been ganged and weighed--you and
your powder, your guns, and your bullets; so don't let us say anything more
about it."

And, in fact, from that day until the arrival at Zanzibar, Dick never opened
his mouth. He talked neither about that nor about anything else. He kept
absolutely silent.


CHAPTER NINTH.

They double the Cape.--The Forecastle.--A Course of Cosmography by
Professor Joe.--Concerning the Method of guiding Balloons.--How to seek out
Atmospheric Currents.--Eureka.

The Resolute plunged along rapidly toward the Cape of Good Hope, the
weather continuing fine, although the sea ran heavier.

On the 30th of March, twenty-seven days after the departure from London,
the Table Mountain loomed up on the horizon. Cape City lying at the foot of an
amphitheatre of hills, could be distinguished through the ship's glasses, and soon
the Resolute cast anchor in the port. But the captain touched there only to
replenish his coal bunkers, and that was but a day's job. On the morrow, he
steered away to the south'ard, so as to double the southernmost point of Africa,
and enter the Mozambique Channel.

This was not Joe's first sea-voyage, and so, for his part, he soon found
himself at home on board; every body liked him for his frankness and good-
humor. A considerable share of his master's renown was reflected upon him. He
was listened to as an oracle, and he made no more mistakes than the next one.

So, while the doctor was pursuing his descriptive course of lecturing in the
officers' mess, Joe reigned supreme on the forecastle, holding forth in his own
peculiar manner, and making history to suit himself--a style of procedure
pursued, by the way, by the greatest historians of all ages and nations.

The topic of discourse was, naturally, the aerial voyage. Joe had experienced
some trouble in getting the rebellious spirits to believe in it; but, once accepted
by them, nothing connected with it was any longer an impossibility to the
imaginations of the seamen stimulated by Joe's harangues.


Our dazzling narrator persuaded his hearers that, after this trip, many others
still more wonderful would be undertaken. In fact, it was to be but the first of a
long series of superhuman expeditions.

"You see, my friends, when a man has had a taste of that kind of travelling,
he can't get along afterward with any other; so, on our next expedition, instead of
going off to one side, we'll go right ahead, going up, too, all the time."

"Humph! then you'll go to the moon!" said one of the crowd, with a stare of
amazement.

"To the moon!" exclaimed Joe, "To the moon! pooh! that's too common.
Every body might go to the moon, that way. Besides, there's no water there, and
you have to carry such a lot of it along with you. Then you have to take air along
in bottles, so as to breathe."

"Ay! ay! that's all right! But can a man get a drop of the real stuff there?"
said a sailor who liked his toddy.

"Not a drop!" was Joe's answer. "No! old fellow, not in the moon. But we're
going to skip round among those little twinklers up there--the stars--and the
splendid planets that my old man so often talks about. For instance, we'll
commence with Saturn--"

"That one with the ring?" asked the boatswain.

"Yes! the wedding-ring--only no one knows what's become of his wife!"

"What? will you go so high up as that?" said one of the ship-boys, gaping
with wonder. "Why, your master must be Old Nick himself."

"Oh! no, he's too good for that."

"But, after Saturn--what then?" was the next inquiry of his impatient
audience.

"After Saturn? Well, we'll visit Jupiter. A funny place that is, too, where the
days are only nine hours and a half long--a good thing for the lazy fellows--and
the years, would you believe it--last twelve of ours, which is fine for folks who
have only six months to live. They get off a little longer by that."

"Twelve years!" ejaculated the boy.

"Yes, my youngster; so that in that country you'd be toddling after your
mammy yet, and that old chap yonder, who looks about fifty, would only be a
little shaver of four and a half."

"Blazes! that's a good 'un!" shouted the whole forecastle together.

"Solemn truth!" said Joe, stoutly.

"But what can you expect? When people will stay in this world, they learn
nothing and keep as ignorant as bears. But just come along to Jupiter and you'll
see. But they have to look out up there, for he's got satellites that are not just the
easiest things to pass."


All the men laughed, but they more than half believed him. Then he went on
to talk about Neptune, where seafaring men get a jovial reception, and Mars,
where the military get the best of the sidewalk to such an extent that folks can
hardly stand it. Finally, he drew them a heavenly picture of the delights of Venus.

"And when we get back from that expedition," said the indefatigable
narrator, "they'll decorate us with the Southern Cross that shines up there in the
Creator's button-hole."

"Ay, and you'd have well earned it!" said the sailors.

Thus passed the long evenings on the forecastle in merry chat, and during the
same time the doctor went on with his instructive discourses.

One day the conversation turned upon the means of directing balloons, and
the doctor was asked his opinion about it.

"I don't think," said he, "that we shall succeed in finding out a system of
directing them. I am familiar with all the plans attempted and proposed, and not
one has succeeded, not one is practicable. You may readily understand that I
have occupied my mind with this subject, which was, necessarily, so interesting
to me, but I have not been able to solve the problem with the appliances now
known to mechanical science. We would have to discover a motive power of
extraordinary force, and almost impossible lightness of machinery. And, even
then, we could not resist atmospheric currents of any considerable strength. Until
now, the effort has been rather to direct the car than the balloon, and that has
been one great error."

"Still there are many points of resemblance between a balloon and a ship
which is directed at will."

"Not at all," retorted the doctor, "there is little or no similarity between the
two cases. Air is infinitely less dense than water, in which the ship is only half
submerged, while the whole bulk of a balloon is plunged in the atmosphere, and
remains motionless with reference to the element that surrounds it."

"You think, then, that aerostatic science has said its last word?"

"Not at all! not at all! But we must look for another point in the case, and if
we cannot manage to guide our balloon, we must, at least, try to keep it in
favorable aerial currents. In proportion as we ascend, the latter become much
more uniform and flow more constantly in one direction. They are no longer
disturbed by the mountains and valleys that traverse the surface of the globe, and
these, you know, are the chief cause of the variations of the wind and the
inequality of their force. Therefore, these zones having been once determined,
the balloon will merely have to be placed in the currents best adapted to its
destination."

"But then,” continued Captain Bennet, "in order to reach them, you must


keep constantly ascending or descending. That is the real difficulty, doctor."

"And why, my dear captain?"

"Let us understand one another. It would be a difficulty and an obstacle only
for long journeys, and not for short aerial excursions."

"And why so, if you please?"

"Because you can ascend only by throwing out ballast; you can descend only
after letting off gas, and by these processes your ballast and your gas are soon
exhausted."

"My dear sir, that's the whole question. There is the only difficulty that
science need now seek to overcome. The problem is not how to guide the
balloon, but how to take it up and down without expending the gas which is its
strength, its life-blood, its soul, if I may use the expression."

"You are right, my dear doctor; but this problem is not yet solved; this means
has not yet been discovered."

"I beg your pardon, it HAS been discovered."

"By whom?"

"By me!"

"By you?"

"You may readily believe that otherwise I should not have risked this
expedition across Africa in a balloon. In twenty-four hours I should have been
without gas!"

"But you said nothing about that in England?"

"No! I did not want to have myself overhauled in public. I saw no use in that.
I made my preparatory experiments in secret and was satisfied. I have no
occasion, then, to learn any thing more from them."

"Well! doctor, would it be proper to ask what is your secret?"

"Here it is, gentlemen--the simplest thing in the world!"

The attention of his auditory was now directed to the doctor in the utmost
degree as he quietly proceeded with his explanation.


CHAPTER TENTH.

Former Experiments.--The Doctor's Five Receptacles.--The Gas Cylinder.--
The Calorifere.--The System of Manoeuvring.--Success certain.

"The attempt has often been made, gentlemen," said the doctor, "to rise and
descend at will, without losing ballast or gas from the balloon. A French
aeronaut, M. Meunier, tried to accomplish this by compressing air in an inner
receptacle. A Belgian, Dr. Van Hecke, by means of wings and paddles, obtained
a vertical power that would have sufficed in most cases, but the practical results


secured from these experiments have been insignificant.

"I therefore resolved to go about the thing more directly; so, at the start, I
dispensed with ballast altogether, excepting as a provision for cases of special
emergency, such as the breakage of my apparatus, or the necessity of ascending
very suddenly, so as to avoid unforeseen obstacles.

"My means of ascent and descent consist simply in dilating or contracting
the gas that is in the balloon by the application of different temperatures, and
here is the method of obtaining that result.

"You saw me bring on board with the car several cases or receptacles, the use
of which you may not have understood. They are five in number.

"The first contains about twenty-five gallons of water, to which I add a few
drops of sulphuric acid, so as to augment its capacity as a conductor of
electricity, and then I decompose it by means of a powerful Buntzen battery.
Water, as you know, consists of two parts of hydrogen to one of oxygen gas.

"The latter, through the action of the battery, passes at its positive pole into
the second receptacle. A third receptacle, placed above the second one, and of
double its capacity, receives the hydrogen passing into it by the negative pole.

"Stopcocks, of which one has an orifice twice the size of the other,
communicate between these receptacles and a fourth one, which is called the
mixture reservoir, since in it the two gases obtained by the decomposition of the
water do really commingle. The capacity of this fourth tank is about forty-one
cubic feet.

"On the upper part of this tank is a platinum tube provided with a stopcock.

"You will now readily understand, gentlemen, the apparatus that I have
described to you is really a gas cylinder and blow-pipe for oxygen and hydrogen,
the heat of which exceeds that of a forge fire.

"This much established, I proceed to the second part of my apparatus. From
the lowest part of my balloon, which is hermetically closed, issue two tubes a
little distance apart. The one starts among the upper layers of the hydrogen gas,
the other amid the lower layers.

"These two pipes are provided at intervals with strong jointings of india-
rubber, which enable them to move in harmony with the oscillations of the
balloon.

"Both of them run down as far as the car, and lose themselves in an iron
receptacle of cylindrical form, which is called the heat-tank. The latter is closed
at its two ends by two strong plates of the same metal.

"The pipe running from the lower part of the balloon runs into this
cylindrical receptacle through the lower plate; it penetrates the latter and then
takes the form of a helicoidal or screw-shaped spiral, the rings of which, rising


one over the other, occupy nearly the whole of the height of the tank. Before
again issuing from it, this spiral runs into a small cone with a concave base, that
is turned downward in the shape of a spherical cap.

"It is from the top of this cone that the second pipe issues, and it runs, as I
have said, into the upper beds of the balloon.

"The spherical cap of the small cone is of platinum, so as not to melt by the
action of the cylinder and blow-pipe, for the latter are placed upon the bottom of
the iron tank in the midst of the helicoidal spiral, and the extremity of their flame
will slightly touch the cap in question.

"You all know, gentlemen, what a calorifere, to heat apartments, is. You
know how it acts. The air of the apartments is forced to pass through its pipes,
and is then released with a heightened temperature. Well, what I have just
described to you is nothing more nor less than a calorifere.

"In fact, what is it that takes place? The cylinder once lighted, the hydrogen
in the spiral and in the concave cone becomes heated, and rapidly ascends
through the pipe that leads to the upper part of the balloon. A vacuum is created
below, and it attracts the gas in the lower parts; this becomes heated in its turn,
and is continually replaced; thus, an extremely rapid current of gas is established
in the pipes and in the spiral, which issues from the balloon and then returns to
it, and is heated over again, incessantly.

"Now, the cases increase 1/480 of their volume for each degree of heat
applied. If, then, I force the temperature 18 degrees, the hydrogen of the balloon
will dilate 18/480 or 1614 cubic feet, and will, therefore, displace 1614 more
cubic feet of air, which will increase its ascensional power by 160 pounds. This
is equivalent to throwing out that weight of ballast. If I augment the temperature
by 180 degrees, the gas will dilate 180/480 and will displace 16,740 cubic feet
more, and its ascensional force will be augmented by 1,600 pounds.

"Thus, you see, gentlemen, that I can easily effect very considerable changes
of equilibrium. The volume of the balloon has been calculated in such manner
that, when half inflated, it displaces a weight of air exactly equal to that of the
envelope containing the hydrogen gas, and of the car occupied by the
passengers, and all its apparatus and accessories. At this point of inflation, it is in
exact equilibrium with the air, and neither mounts nor descends.

"In order, then, to effect an ascent, I give the gas a temperature superior to
the temperature of the surrounding air by means of my cylinder. By this excess
of heat it obtains a larger distention, and inflates the balloon more. The latter,
then, ascends in proportion as I heat the hydrogen.

"The descent, of course, is effected by lowering the heat of the cylinder, and
letting the temperature abate. The ascent would be, usually, more rapid than the


descent; but that is a fortunate circumstance, since it is of no importance to me to
descend rapidly, while, on the other hand, it is by a very rapid ascent that I avoid
obstacles. The real danger lurks below, and not above.

"Besides, as I have said, I have a certain quantity of ballast, which will
enable me to ascend more rapidly still, when necessary. My valve, at the top of
the balloon, is nothing more nor less than a safety-valve. The balloon always
retains the same quantity of hydrogen, and the variations of temperature that I
produce in the midst of this shut-up gas are, of themselves, sufficient to provide
for all these ascending and descending movements.

"Now, gentlemen, as a practical detail, let me add this:

"The combustion of the hydrogen and of the oxygen at the point of the
cylinder produces solely the vapor or steam of water. I have, therefore, provided
the lower part of the cylindrical iron box with a scape-pipe, with a valve
operating by means of a pressure of two atmospheres; consequently, so soon as
this amount of pressure is attained, the steam escapes of itself.

"Here are the exact figures: 25 gallons of water, separated into its constituent
elements, yield 200 pounds of oxygen and 25 pounds of hydrogen. This
represents, at atmospheric tension, 1,800 cubic feet of the former and 3,780
cubic feet of the latter, or 5,670 cubic feet, in all, of the mixture. Hence, the
stopcock of my cylinder, when fully open, expends 27 cubic feet per hour, with a
flame at least six times as strong as that of the large lamps used for lighting
streets. On an average, then, and in order to keep myself at a very moderate
elevation, I should not burn more than nine cubic feet per hour, so that my
twenty-five gallons of water represent six hundred and thirty-six hours of aerial
navigation, or a little more than twenty-six days.

"Well, as I can descend when I please, to replenish my stock of water on the
way, my trip might be indefinitely prolonged.

"Such, gentlemen, is my secret. It is simple, and, like most simple things, it
cannot fail to succeed. The dilation and contraction of the gas in the balloon is
my means of locomotion, which calls for neither cumbersome wings, nor any
other mechanical motor. A calorifere to produce the changes of temperature, and
a cylinder to generate the heat, are neither inconvenient nor heavy. I think,
therefore, that I have combined all the elements of success."

Dr. Ferguson here terminated his discourse, and was most heartily applauded.
There was not an objection to make to it; all had been foreseen and decided.

"However," said the captain, "the thing may prove dangerous."

"What matters that," replied the doctor, "provided that it be practicable?"


CHAPTER ELEVENTH.

The Arrival at Zanzibar.--The English Consul.--Ill-will of the Inhabitants.--
The Island of Koumbeni.--The Rain-Makers.--Inflation of the Balloon.--
Departure on the 18th of April.--The last Good-by. --The Victoria.

An invariably favorable wind had accelerated the progress of the Resolute
toward the place of her destination. The navigation of the Mozambique Channel
was especially calm and pleasant. The agreeable character of the trip by sea was
regarded as a good omen of the probable issue of the trip through the air. Every
one looked forward to the hour of arrival, and sought to give the last touch to the
doctor's preparations.

At length the vessel hove in sight of the town of Zanzibar, upon the island of
the same name, and, on the 15th of April, at 11 o'clock in the morning, she
anchored in the port.

The island of Zanzibar belongs to the Imaum of Muscat, an ally of France
and England, and is, undoubtedly, his finest settlement. The port is frequented by
a great many vessels from the neighboring countries.

The island is separated from the African coast only by a channel, the greatest
width of which is but thirty miles.

It has a large trade in gums, ivory, and, above all, in "ebony," for Zanzibar is
the great slave-market. Thither converges all the booty captured in the battles
which the chiefs of the interior are continually fighting. This traffic extends
along the whole eastern coast, and as far as the Nile latitudes. Mr. G. Lejean
even reports that he has seen it carried on, openly, under the French flag.

Upon the arrival of the Resolute, the English consul at Zanzibar came on
board to offer his services to the doctor, of whose projects the European
newspapers had made him aware for a month past. But, up to that moment, he
had remained with the numerous phalanx of the incredulous.

"I doubted," said he, holding out his hand to Dr. Ferguson, "but now I doubt
no longer."

He invited the doctor, Kennedy, and the faithful Joe, of course, to his own
dwelling. Through his courtesy, the doctor was enabled to have knowledge of the
various letters that he had received from Captain Speke. The captain and his
companions had suffered dreadfully from hunger and bad weather before
reaching the Ugogo country. They could advance only with extreme difficulty,
and did not expect to be able to communicate again for a long time.

"Those are perils and privations which we shall manage to avoid," said the
doctor.

The baggage of the three travellers was conveyed to the consul's residence.
Arrangements were made for disembarking the balloon upon the beach at


Zanzibar. There was a convenient spot, near the signal-mast, close by an
immense building, that would serve to shelter it from the east winds. This huge
tower, resembling a tun standing on one end, beside which the famous
Heidelberg tun would have seemed but a very ordinary barrel, served as a
fortification, and on its platform were stationed Belootchees, armed with lances.
These Belootchees are a kind of brawling, good-for-nothing Janizaries.

But, when about to land the balloon, the consul was informed that the
population of the island would oppose their doing so by force. Nothing is so
blind as fanatical passion. The news of the arrival of a Christian, who was to
ascend into the air, was received with rage. The negroes, more exasperated than
the Arabs, saw in this project an attack upon their religion. They took it into their
heads that some mischief was meant to the sun and the moon. Now, these two
luminaries are objects of veneration to the African tribes, and they determined to
oppose so sacrilegious an enterprise.

The consul, informed of their intentions, conferred with Dr. Ferguson and
Captain Bennet on the subject. The latter was unwilling to yield to threats, but
his friend dissuaded him from any idea of violent retaliation.

"We shall certainly come out winners," he said. "Even the imaum's soldiers
will lend us a hand, if we need it. But, my dear captain, an accident may happen
in a moment, and it would require but one unlucky blow to do the balloon an
irreparable injury, so that the trip would be totally defeated; therefore we must
act with the greatest caution."

"But what are we to do? If we land on the coast of Africa, we shall encounter
the same difficulties. What are we to do?"

"Nothing is more simple," replied the consul. "You observe those small
islands outside of the port; land your balloon on one of them; surround it with a
guard of sailors, and you will have no risk to run."

"Just the thing!" said the doctor, "and we shall be entirely at our ease in
completing our preparations."

The captain yielded to these suggestions, and the Resolute was headed for
the island of Koumbeni. During the moming of the 16th April, the balloon was
placed in safety in the middle of a clearing in the great woods, with which the
soil is studded.

Two masts, eighty feet in height, were raised at the same distance from each
other. Blocks and tackle, placed at their extremities, afforded the means of
elevating the balloon, by the aid of a transverse rope. It was then entirely
uninflated. The interior balloon was fastened to the exterior one, in such manner
as to be lifted up in the same way. To the lower end of each balloon were fixed
the pipes that served to introduce the hydrogen gas.


The whole day, on the 17th, was spent in arranging the apparatus destined to
produce the gas; it consisted of some thirty casks, in which the decomposition of
water was effected by means of iron-filings and sulphuric acid placed together in
a large quantity of the first-named fluid. The hydrogen passed into a huge central
cask, after having been washed on the way, and thence into each balloon by the
conduit-pipes. In this manner each of them received a certain accurately-
ascertained quantity of gas. For this purpose, there had to be employed eighteen
hundred and sixty-six pounds of sulphuric acid, sixteen thousand and fifty
pounds of iron, and nine thousand one hundred and sixty-six gallons of water.
This operation commenced on the following night, about three A.M., and lasted
nearly eight hours. The next day, the balloon, covered with its network,
undulated gracefully above its car, which was held to the ground by numerous
sacks of earth. The inflating apparatus was put together with extreme care, and
the pipes issuing from the balloon were securely fitted to the cylindrical case.

The anchors, the cordage, the instruments, the travelling-wraps, the awning,
the provisions, and the arms, were put in the place assigned to them in the car.
The supply of water was procured at Zanzibar. The two hundred pounds of
ballast were distributed in fifty bags placed at the bottom of the car, but within
arm's-reach.

These preparations were concluded about five o'clock in the evening, while
sentinels kept close watch around the island, and the boats of the Resolute
patrolled the channel.

The blacks continued to show their displeasure by grimaces and contortions.
Their obi-men, or wizards, went up and down among the angry throngs, pouring
fuel on the flame of their fanaticism; and some of the excited wretches, more
furious and daring than the rest, attempted to get to the island by swimming, but
they were easily driven off.

Thereupon the sorceries and incantations commenced; the "rain-makers,"
who pretend to have control over the clouds, invoked the storms and the "stone-
showers," as the blacks call hail, to their aid. To compel them to do so, they
plucked leaves of all the different trees that grow in that country, and boiled
them over a slow fire, while, at the same time, a sheep was killed by thrusting a
long needle into its heart. But, in spite of all their ceremonies, the sky remained
clear and beautiful, and they profited nothing by their slaughtered sheep and
their ugly grimaces.

The blacks then abandoned themselves to the most furious orgies, and got
fearfully drunk on "tembo," a kind of ardent spirits drawn from the cocoa-nut
tree, and an extremely heady sort of beer called "togwa." Their chants, which
were destitute of all melody, but were sung in excellent time, continued until far


into the night.

About six o'clock in the evening, the captain assembled the travellers and the
officers of the ship at a farewell repast in his cabin. Kennedy, whom nobody
ventured to question now, sat with his eyes riveted on Dr. Ferguson, murmuring
indistinguishable words. In other respects, the dinner was a gloomy one. The
approach of the final moment filled everybody with the most serious reflections.
What had fate in store for these daring adventurers? Should they ever again find
themselves in the midst of their friends, or seated at the domestic hearth? Were
their travelling apparatus to fail, what would become of them, among those
ferocious savage tribes, in regions that had never been explored, and in the midst
of boundless deserts?

Such thoughts as these, which had been dim and vague until then, or but
slightly regarded when they came up, returned upon their excited fancies with
intense force at this parting moment. Dr. Ferguson, still cold and impassible,
talked of this, that, and the other; but he strove in vain to overcome this
infectious gloominess. He utterly failed.

As some demonstration against the personal safety of the doctor and his
companions was feared, all three slept that night on board the Resolute. At six
o'clock in the morning they left their cabin, and landed on the island of
Koumbeni.

The balloon was swaying gently to and fro in the morning breeze; the sand-
bags that had held it down were now replaced by some twenty strong-armed
sailors, and Captain Bennet and his officers were present to witness the solemn
departure of their friends.

At this moment Kennedy went right up to the doctor, grasped his hand, and
said:

"Samuel, have you absolutely determined to go?"

"Solemnly determined, my dear Dick."

"I have done every thing that I could to prevent this expedition, have I not?"

"Every thing!"

"Well, then, my conscience is clear on that score, and I will go with you."

"I was sure you would!" said the doctor, betraying in his features swift traces
of emotion.

At last the moment of final leave-taking arrived. The captain and his officers
embraced their dauntless friends with great feeling, not excepting even Joe, who,
worthy fellow, was as proud and happy as a prince. Every one in the party
insisted upon having a final shake of the doctor's hand.

At nine o'clock the three travellers got into their car. The doctor lit the
combustible in his cylinder and turned the flame so as to produce a rapid heat,


and the balloon, which had rested on the ground in perfect equipoise, began to
rise in a few minutes, so that the seamen had to slacken the ropes they held it by.
The car then rose about twenty feet above their heads.

"My friends!" exclaimed the doctor, standing up between his two
companions, and taking off his hat, "let us give our aerial ship a name that will
bring her good luck! let us christen her Victoria!"

This speech was answered with stentorian cheers of "Huzza for the Queen!
Huzza for Old England!"

At this moment the ascensional force of the balloon increased prodigiously,
and Ferguson, Kennedy, and Joe, waved a last good-by to their friends.

"Let go all!" shouted the doctor, and at the word the Victoria shot rapidly up
into the sky, while the four carronades on board the Resolute thundered forth a
parting salute in her honor.


CHAPTER TWELFTH


Crossing the Strait.--The Mrima.--Dick's Remark and Joe's Proposition.--A
Recipe for Coffee-making.--The Uzaramo.--The Unfortunate Maizan.--Mount
Dathumi.--The Doctor's Cards.--Night under a Nopal.

The air was pure, the wind moderate, and the balloon ascended almost
perpendicularly to a height of fifteen hundred feet, as indicated by a depression
of two inches in the barometric column.

At this height a more decided current carried the balloon toward the
southwest. What a magnificent spectacle was then outspread beneath the gaze of
the travellers! The island of Zanzibar could be seen in its entire extent, marked
out by its deeper color upon a vast planisphere; the fields had the appearance of
patterns of different colors, and thick clumps of green indicated the groves and
thickets.

The inhabitants of the island looked no larger than insects. The huzzaing and
shouting were little by little lost in the distance, and only the discharge of the
ship's guns could be heard in the concavity beneath the balloon, as the latter sped
on its flight.

"How fine that is!" said Joe, breaking silence for the first time.

He got no reply. The doctor was busy observing the variations of the
barometer and noting down the details of his ascent.

Kennedy looked on, and had not eyes enough to take in all that he saw.

The rays of the sun coming to the aid of the heating cylinder, the tension of
the gas increased, and the Victoria attained the height of twenty-five hundred
feet.

The Resolute looked like a mere cockle-shell, and the African coast could be
distinctly seen in the west marked out by a fringe of foam.

"You don't talk?" said Joe, again.

"We are looking!" said the doctor, directing his spy-glass toward the
mainland.

"For my part, I must talk!"

"As much as you please, Joe; talk as much as you like!"

And Joe went on alone with a tremendous volley of exclamations. The "ohs!"
and the "ahs!" exploded one after the other, incessantly, from his lips.

During his passage over the sea the doctor deemed it best to keep at his
present elevation. He could thus reconnoitre a greater stretch of the coast. The
thermometer and the barometer, hanging up inside of the half-opened awning,


were always within sight, and a second barometer suspended outside was to
serve during the night watches.

At the end of about two hours the Victoria, driven along at a speed of a little
more than eight miles, very visibly neared the coast of the mainland. The doctor,
thereupon, determined to descend a little nearer to the ground. So he moderated
the flame of his cylinder, and the balloon, in a few moments, had descended to
an altitude only three hundred feet above the soil.

It was then found to be passing just over the Mrima country, the name of this
part of the eastern coast of Africa. Dense borders of mango-trees protected its
margin, and the ebb-tide disclosed to view their thick roots, chafed and gnawed
by the teeth of the Indian Ocean. The sands which, at an earlier period, formed
the coast-line, rounded away along the distant horizon, and Mount Nguru reared
aloft its sharp summit in the northwest.

The Victoria passed near to a village which the doctor found marked upon
his chart as Kaole. Its entire population had assembled in crowds, and were
yelling with anger and fear, at the same time vainly directing their arrows against
this monster of the air that swept along so majestically away above all their
powerless fury.

The wind was setting to the southward, but the doctor felt no concern on that
score, since it enabled him the better to follow the route traced by Captains
Burton and Speke.

Kennedy had, at length, become as talkative as Joe, and the two kept up a
continual interchange of admiring interjections and exclamations.

"Out upon stage-coaches!" said one.

"Steamers indeed!" said the other.

"Railroads! eh? rubbish!" put in Kennedy, "that you travel on, without seeing
the country!"

"Balloons! they're the sort for me!" Joe would add. "Why, you don't feel
yourself going, and Nature takes the trouble to spread herself out before one's
eyes!"

"What a splendid sight! What a spectacle! What a delight! a dream in a
hammock!"

"Suppose we take our breakfast?" was Joe's unpoetical change of tune, at
last, for the keen, open air had mightily sharpened his appetite.

"Good idea, my boy!"

"Oh! it won't take us long to do the cooking--biscuit and potted meat?"

"And as much coffee as you like," said the doctor. "I give you leave to
borrow a little heat from my cylinder. There's enough and to spare, for that
matter, and so we shall avoid the risk of a conflagration."


"That would be a dreadful misfortune!" ejaculated Kennedy. "It's the same as
a powder-magazine suspended over our heads."

"Not precisely," said Ferguson, "but still if the gas were to take fire it would
bur up gradually, and we should settle down on the ground, which would be
disagreeable; but never fear--our balloon is hermetically sealed."

"Let us eat a bite, then," replied Kennedy.

"Now, gentlemen," put in Joe, "while doing the same as you, I'm going to get
you up a cup of coffee that I think you'll have something to say about."

"The fact is," added the doctor, "that Joe, along with a thousand other virtues,
has a remarkable talent for the preparation of that delicious beverage: he
compounds it of a mixture of various origin, but he never would reveal to me the
ingredients."

"Well, master, since we are so far above-ground, I can tell you the secret. It is
just to mix equal quantities of Mocha, of Bourbon coffee, and of Rio Nunez."

A few moments later, three steaming cups of coffee were served, and topped
off a substantial breakfast, which was additionally seasoned by the jokes and
repartees of the guests. Each one then resumed his post of observation.

The country over which they were passing was remarkable for its fertility.
Narrow, winding paths plunged in beneath the overarching verdure. They swept
along above cultivated fields of tobacco, maize, and barley, at full maturity, and
here and there immense rice-fields, full of straight stalks and purple blossoms.
They could distinguish sheep and goats too, confined in large cages, set up on
piles to keep them out of reach of the leopards' fangs. Luxuriant vegetation
spread in wild profuseness over this prodigal soil.

Village after village rang with yells of terror and astonishment at the sight of
the Victoria, and Dr. Ferguson prudently kept her above the reach of the
barbarian arrows. The savages below, thus baffled, ran together from their
huddle of huts and followed the travellers with their vain imprecations while
they remained in sight.

At noon, the doctor, upon consulting his map, calculated that they were
passing over the Uzaramo* country. The soil was thickly studded with cocoa-
nut, papaw, and cotton-wood trees, above which the balloon seemed to disport
itself like a bird. Joe found this splendid vegetation a matter of course, seeing
that they were in Africa. Kennedy descried some hares and quails that asked
nothing better than to get a good shot from his fowling-piece, but it would have
been powder wasted, since there was no time to pick up the game.

* U and Ou signify country in the language of that region.

The aeronauts swept on with the speed of twelve miles per hour, and soon
were passing in thirty-eight degrees twenty minutes east longitude, over the


village of Tounda.

"Tt was there," said the doctor, "that Burton and Speke were seized with
violent fevers, and for a moment thought their expedition ruined. And yet they
were only a short distance from the coast, but fatigue and privation were
beginning to tell upon them severely."

In fact, there is a perpetual malaria reigning throughout the country in
question. Even the doctor could hope to escape its effects only by rising above
the range of the miasma that exhales from this damp region whence the blazing
rays of the sun pump up its poisonous vapors. Once in a while they could descry
a caravan resting in a "kraal," awaiting the freshness and cool of the evening to
resume its route. These kraals are wide patches of cleared land, surrounded by
hedges and jungles, where traders take shelter against not only the wild beasts,
but also the robber tribes of the country. They could see the natives running and
scattering in all directions at the sight of the Victoria. Kennedy was keen to get a
closer look at them, but the doctor invariably held out against the idea.

"The chiefs are armed with muskets," he said, "and our balloon would be too
conspicuous a mark for their bullets."

"Would a bullet-hole bring us down?" asked Joe.

"Not immediately; but such a hole would soon become a large torn orifice
through which our gas would escape."

"Then, let us keep at a respectful distance from yon miscreants. What must
they think as they see us sailing in the air? I'm sure they must feel like
worshipping us!"

"Let them worship away, then," replied the doctor, "but at a distance. There
is no harm done in getting as far away from them as possible. See! the country is
already changing its aspect: the villages are fewer and farther between; the
mango-trees have disappeared, for their growth ceases at this latitude. The soil is
becoming hilly and portends mountains not far off."

"Yes," said Kennedy, "it seems to me that I can see some high land on this
side."

"In the west--those are the nearest ranges of the Ourizara--Mount Duthumi,
no doubt, behind which I hope to find shelter for the night. I'll stir up the heat in
the cylinder a little, for we must keep at an elevation of five or six hundred feet."

"That was a grant idea of yours, sir," said Joe. "It's mighty easy to manage it;
you turn a cock, and the thing's done."

"Ah! here we are more at our ease," said the sportsman, as the balloon
ascended; "the reflection of the sun on those red sands was getting to be
insupportable."

"What splendid trees!" cried Joe. "They're quite natural, but they are very


fine! Why a dozen of them would make a forest!"

"Those are baobabs," replied Dr. Ferguson. "See, there's one with a trunk
fully one hundred feet in circumference. It was, perhaps, at the foot of that very
tree that Maizan, the French traveller, expired in 1845, for we are over the
village of Deje-la-Mhora, to which he pushed on alone. He was seized by the
chief of this region, fastened to the foot of a baobab, and the ferocious black then
severed all his joints while the war-song of his tribe was chanted; he then made a
gash in the prisoner's neck, stopped to sharpen his knife, and fairly tore away the
poor wretch's head before it had been cut from the body. The unfortunate
Frenchman was but twenty-six years of age."

"And France has never avenged so hideous a crime?" said Kennedy.

"France did demand satisfaction, and the Said of Zanzibar did all in his
power to capture the murderer, but in vain."

"I move that we don't stop here!" urged Joe; "let us go up, master, let us go
up higher by all means."

"All the more willingly, Joe, that there is Mount Duthumi right ahead of us.
If my calculations be right we shall have passed it before seven o'clock in the
evening.”

"Shall we not travel at night?" asked the Scotchman.

"No, as little as possible. With care and vigilance we might do so safely, but
it is not enough to sweep across Africa. We want to see it."

"Up to this time we have nothing to complain of, master. The best cultivated
and most fertile country in the world instead of a desert! Believe the geographers
after that!"

Let us wait, Joe! we shall see by-and-by."

About half-past six in the evening the Victoria was directly opposite Mount
Duthumi; in order to pass, it had to ascend to a height of more than three
thousand feet, and to accomplish that the doctor had only to raise the
temperature of his gas eighteen degrees. It might have been correctly said that he
held his balloon in his hand. Kennedy had only to indicate to him the obstacles
to be surmounted, and the Victoria sped through the air, skimming the summits
of the range.

At eight o'clock it descended the farther slope, the acclivity of which was
much less abrupt. The anchors were thrown out from the car and one of them,
coming in contact with the branches of an enormous nopal, caught on it firmly.
Joe at once let himself slide down the rope and secured it. The silk ladder was
then lowered to him and he remounted to the car with agility. The balloon now
remained perfectly at rest sheltered from the eastern winds.

The evening meal was got ready, and the aeronauts, excited by their day's


journey, made a heavy onslaught upon the provisions.

"What distance have we traversed to-day?" asked Kennedy, disposing of
some alarming mouthfuls.

The doctor took his bearings, by means of lunar observations, and consulted
the excellent map that he had with him for his guidance. It belonged to the Atlas
of "Der Neuester Endeckungen in Afrika" ("The Latest Discoveries in Africa"),
published at Gotha by his learned friend Dr. Petermann, and by that savant sent
to him. This Atlas was to serve the doctor on his whole journey; for it contained
the itinerary of Burton and Speke to the great lakes; the Soudan, according to Dr.
Barth; the Lower Senegal, according to Guillaume Lejean; and the Delta of the
Niger, by Dr. Blaikie.

Ferguson had also provided himself with a work which combined in one
compilation all the notions already acquired concerning the Nile. It was entitled
"The Sources of the Nile; being a General Survey of the Basin of that River and
of its Head-Stream, with the History of the Nilotic Discovery, by Charles Beke,
D.D."

He also had the excellent charts published in the "Bulletins of the
Geographical Society of London;" and not a single point of the countries already
discovered could, therefore, escape his notice.

Upon tracing on his maps, he found that his latitudinal route had been two
degrees, or one hundred and twenty miles, to the westward.

Kennedy remarked that the route tended toward the south; but this direction
was Satisfactory to the doctor, who desired to reconnoitre the tracks of his
predecessors as much as possible. It was agreed that the night should be divided
into three watches, so that each of the party should take his turn in watching over
the safety of the rest. The doctor took the watch commencing at nine o'clock;
Kennedy, the one commencing at midnight; and Joe, the three o'clock morning
watch.

So Kennedy and Joe, well wrapped in their blankets, stretched themselves at
full length under the awning, and slept quietly; while Dr. Ferguson kept on the
lookout.


CHAPTER THIRTEENTH.

Change of Weather.--Kennedy has the Fever.--The Doctor's Medicine. --
Travels on Land.--The Basin of Imenge.--Mount Rubeho.--Six Thousand Feet
Elevation.--A Halt in the Daytime.

The night was calm. However, on Saturday morning, Kennedy, as he awoke,
complained of lassitude and feverish chills. The weather was changing. The sky,


covered with clouds, seemed to be laying in supplies for a fresh deluge. A
gloomy region is that Zungomoro country, where it rains continually, excepting,
perhaps, for a couple of weeks in the month of January.

A violent shower was not long in drenching our travellers. Below them, the
roads, intersected by "nullahs," a sort of instantaneous torrent, were soon
rendered impracticable, entangled as they were, besides, with thorny thickets and
gigantic lianas, or creeping vines. The sulphuretted hydrogen emanations, which
Captain Burton mentions, could be distinctly smelt.

"According to his statement, and I think he's right," said the doctor, "one
could readily believe that there is a corpse hidden behind every thicket."

"An ugly country this!" sighed Joe; "and it seems to me that Mr. Kennedy is
none the better for having passed the night in it."

"To tell the truth, I have quite a high fever," said the sportsman.

"There's nothing remarkable about that, my dear Dick, for we are in one of
the most unhealthy regions in Africa; but we shall not remain here long; so let's
be off."

Thanks to a skilful manoeuvre achieved by Joe, the anchor was disengaged,
and Joe reascended to the car by means of the ladder. The doctor vigorously
dilated the gas, and the Victoria resumed her flight, driven along by a spanking
breeze.

Only a few scattered huts could be seen through the pestilential mists; but the
appearance of the country soon changed, for it often happens in Africa that some
of the unhealthiest districts lie close beside others that are perfectly salubrious.

Kennedy was visibly suffering, and the fever was mastering his vigorous
constitution.

"It won't do to fall ill, though," he grumbled; and so saying, he wrapped
himself in a blanket, and lay down under the awning.

"A little patience, Dick, and you'll soon get over this," said the doctor.

"Get over it! Egad, Samuel, if you've any drug in your travelling-chest that
will set me on my feet again, bring it without delay. I'll swallow it with my eyes
shut!"

"Oh, I can do better than that, friend Dick; for I can give you a febrifuge that
won't cost any thing."

"And how will you do that?"

"Very easily. I am simply going to take you up above these clouds that are
now deluging us, and remove you from this pestilential atmosphere. I ask for
only ten minutes, in order to dilate the hydrogen."

The ten minutes had scarcely elapsed ere the travellers were beyond the rainy
belt of country.


"Wait a little, now, Dick, and you'll begin to feel the effect of pure air and
sunshine."

"There's a cure for you!" said Joe; "why, it's wonderful!"

"No, it's merely natural."

"Oh! natural; yes, no doubt of that!"

"I bring Dick into good air, as the doctors do, every day, in Europe, or, as I
would send a patient at Martinique to the Pitons, a lofty mountain on that island,
to get clear of the yellow fever."

"Ah! by Jove, this balloon is a paradise!" exclaimed Kennedy, feeling much
better already.

"Tt leads to it, anyhow!" replied Joe, quite gravely.

It was a curious spectacle--that mass of clouds piled up, at the moment, away
below them! The vapors rolled over each other, and mingled together in
confused masses of superb brilliance, as they reflected the rays of the sun. The
Victoria had attained an altitude of four thousand feet, and the thermometer
indicated a certain diminution of temperature. The land below could no longer
be seen. Fifty miles away to the westward, Mount Rubeho raised its sparkling
crest, marking the limit of the Ugogo country in east longitude thirty-six degrees
twenty minutes. The wind was blowing at the rate of twenty miles an hour, but
the aeronauts felt nothing of this increased speed. They observed no jar, and had
scarcely any sense of motion at all.

Three hours later, the doctor's prediction was fully verified. Kennedy no
longer felt a single shiver of the fever, but partook of some breakfast with an
excellent appetite.

That beats sulphate of quinine!" said the energetic Scot, with hearty
emphasis and much satisfaction.

"Positively," said Joe, "this is where I'll have to retire to when I get old!"

About ten o'clock in the morning the atmosphere cleared up, the clouds
parted, and the country beneath could again be seen, the Victoria meanwhile
rapidly descending. Dr. Ferguson was in search of a current that would carry him
more to the northeast, and he found it about six hundred feet from the ground.
The country was becoming more broken, and even mountainous. The
Zungomoro district was fading out of sight in the east with the last cocoa-nut-
trees of that latitude.

Ere long, the crests of a mountain-range assumed a more decided
prominence. A few peaks rose here and there, and it became necessary to keep a
sharp lookout for the pointed cones that seemed to spring up every moment.

"We're right among the breakers!" said Kennedy.

"Keep cool, Dick. We shan't touch them," was the doctor's quiet answer.


"It's a jolly way to travel, anyhow!" said Joe, with his usual flow of spirits.

In fact, the doctor managed his balloon with wondrous dexterity.

"Now, if we had been compelled to go afoot over that drenched soil," said he,
"we should still be dragging along in a pestilential mire. Since our departure
from Zanzibar, half our beasts of burden would have died with fatigue. We
should be looking like ghosts ourselves, and despair would be seizing on our
hearts. We should be in continual squabbles with our guides and porters, and
completely exposed to their unbridled brutality. During the daytime, a damp,
penetrating, unendurable humidity! At night, a cold frequently intolerable, and
the stings of a kind of fly whose bite pierces the thickest cloth, and drives the
victim crazy! All this, too, without saying any thing about wild beasts and
ferocious native tribes!"

"I move that we don't try it!" said Joe, in his droll way.

"I exaggerate nothing," continued Ferguson, "for, upon reading the narratives
of such travellers as have had the hardihood to venture into these regions, your
eyes would fill with tears."

About eleven o'clock they were passing over the basin of Imenge, and the
tribes scattered over the adjacent hills were impotently menacing the Victoria
with their weapons. Finally, she sped along as far as the last undulations of the
country which precede Rubeho. These form the last and loftiest chain of the
mountains of Usagara.

The aeronauts took careful and complete note of the orographic
conformation of the country. The three ramifications mentioned, of which the
Duthumi forms the first link, are separated by immense longitudinal plains.
These elevated summits consist of rounded cones, between which the soil is
bestrewn with erratic blocks of stone and gravelly bowlders. The most abrupt
declivity of these mountains confronts the Zanzibar coast, but the western slopes
are merely inclined planes. The depressions in the soil are covered with a black,
rich loam, on which there is a vigorous vegetation. Various water-courses filter
through, toward the east, and work their way onward to flow into the Kingani, in
the midst of gigantic clumps of sycamore, tamarind, calabash, and palmyra trees.

"Attention!" said Dr. Ferguson. "We are approaching Rubeho, the name of
which signifies, in the language of the country, the 'Passage of the Winds,’ and
we would do well to double its jagged pinnacles at a certain height. If my chart
be exact, we are going to ascend to an elevation of five thousand feet."

"Shall we often have occasion to reach those far upper belts of the
atmosphere?"

"Very seldom: the height of the African mountains appears to be quite
moderate compared with that of the European and Asiatic ranges; but, in any


case, our good Victoria will find no difficulty in passing over them."

In a very little while, the gas expanded under the action of the heat, and the
balloon took a very decided ascensional movement. Besides, the dilation of the
hydrogen involved no danger, and only three-fourths of the vast capacity of the
balloon was filled when the barometer, by a depression of eight inches,
announced an elevation of six thousand feet.

"Shall we go this high very long?" asked Joe.

"The atmosphere of the earth has a height of six thousand fathoms," said the
doctor; "and, with a very large balloon, one might go far. That is what Messrs.
Brioschi and Gay-Lussac did; but then the blood burst from their mouths and
ears. Respirable air was wanting. Some years ago, two fearless Frenchmen,
Messrs. Barral and Bixio, also ventured into the very lofty regions; but their
balloon burst--"

"And they fell?" asked Kennedy, abruptly.

"Certainly they did; but as learned men should always fall--namely, without
hurting themselves."

"Well, gentlemen," said Joe, "you may try their fall over again, if you like;
but, as for me, who am but a dolt, I prefer keeping at the medium height--neither
too far up, nor too low down. It won't do to be too ambitious."

At the height of six thousand feet, the density of the atmosphere has already
greatly diminished; sound is conveyed with difficulty, and the voice is not so
easily heard. The view of objects becomes confused; the gaze no longer takes in
any but large, quite ill-distinguishable masses; men and animals on the surface
become absolutely invisible; the roads and rivers get to look like threads, and the
lakes dwindle to ponds.

The doctor and his friends felt themselves in a very anomalous condition; an
atmospheric current of extreme velocity was bearing them away beyond arid
mountains, upon whose summits vast fields of snow surprised the gaze; while
their convulsed appearance told of Titanic travail in the earliest epoch of the
world's existence.

The sun shone at the zenith, and his rays fell perpendicularly upon those
lonely summits. The doctor took an accurate design of these mountains, which
form four distinct ridges almost in a straight line, the northernmost being the
longest.

The Victoria soon descended the slope opposite to the Rubeho, skirting an
acclivity covered with woods, and dotted with trees of very deep-green foliage.
Then came crests and ravines, in a sort of desert which preceded the Ugogo
country; and lower down were yellow plains, parched and fissured by the intense
heat, and, here and there, bestrewn with saline plants and brambly thickets.


Some underbrush, which, farther on, became forests, embellished the
horizon. The doctor went nearer to the ground; the anchors were thrown out, and
one of them soon caught in the boughs of a huge sycamore.

Joe, slipping nimbly down the tree, carefully attached the anchor, and the
doctor left his cylinder at work to a certain degree in order to retain sufficient
ascensional force in the balloon to keep it in the air. Meanwhile the wind had
suddenly died away.

"Now," said Ferguson, "take two guns, friend Dick-- one for yourself and one
for Joe--and both of you try to bring back some nice cuts of antelope-meat; they
will make us a good dinner."

"Off to the hunt!" exclaimed Kennedy, joyously.

He climbed briskly out of the car and descended. Joe had swung himself
down from branch to branch, and was waiting for him below, stretching his
limbs in the mean time.

"Don't fly away without us, doctor!" shouted Joe.

"Never fear, my boy!--I am securely lashed. I'll spend the time getting my
notes into shape. A good hunt to you! but be careful. Besides, from my post here,
I can observe the face of the country, and, at the least suspicious thing I notice,
I'll fire a signal-shot, and with that you must rally home."

"Agreed!" said Kennedy; and off they went.


CHAPTER FOURTEENTH.

The Forest of Gum-Trees.--The Blue Antelope.--The Rallying-Signal. --An
Unexpected Attack.--The Kanyeme.--A Night in the Open Air.--The
Mabunguru.--Jihoue-la-Mkoa.--A Supply of Water.--Arrival at Kazeh.

The country, dry and parched as it was, consisting of a clayey soil that
cracked open with the heat, seemed, indeed, a desert: here and there were a few
traces of caravans; the bones of men and animals, that had been half-gnawed
away, mouldering together in the same dust.

After half an hour's walking, Dick and Joe plunged into a forest of gum-
trees, their eyes alert on all sides, and their fingers on the trigger. There was no
foreseeing what they might encounter. Without being a rifleman, Joe could
handle fire-arms with no trifling dexterity.

"A walk does one good, Mr. Kennedy, but this isn't the easiest ground in the
world," he said, kicking aside some fragments of quartz with which the soil was
bestrewn.

Kennedy motioned to his companion to be silent and to halt. The present
case compelled them to dispense with hunting-dogs, and, no matter what Joe's


agility might be, he could not be expected to have the scent of a setter or a
greyhound.

A herd of a dozen antelopes were quenching their thirst in the bed of a
torrent where some pools of water had lodged. The graceful creatures, snuffing
danger in the breeze, seemed to be disturbed and uneasy. Their beautiful heads
could be seen between every draught, raised in the air with quick and sudden
motion as they sniffed the wind in the direction of our two hunters, with their
flexible nostrils.

Kennedy stole around behind some clumps of shrubbery, while Joe remained
motionless where he was. The former, at length, got within gunshot and fired.

The herd disappeared in the twinkling of an eye; one male antelope only, that
was hit just behind the shoulder-joint, fell headlong to the ground, and Kennedy
leaped toward his booty.

It was a blauwbok, a superb animal of a pale-bluish color shading upon the
gray, but with the belly and the inside of the legs as white as the driven snow.

"A splendid shot!" exclaimed the hunter. "It's a very rare species of the
antelope, and I hope to be able to prepare his skin in such a way as to keep it."

"Indeed!" said Joe, "do you think of doing that, Mr. Kennedy?"

"Why, certainly I do! Just see what a fine hide it is!"

"But Dr. Ferguson will never allow us to take such an extra weight!"

"You're right, Joe. Still it is a pity to have to leave such a noble animal."

"The whole of it? Oh, we won't do that, sir; we'll take all the good eatable
parts of it, and, if you'll let me, I'll cut him up just as well as the chairman of the
honorable corporation of butchers of the city of London could do."

"As you please, my boy! But you know that in my hunter's way I can just as
easily skin and cut up a piece of game as kill it."

"I'm sure of that, Mr. Kennedy. Well, then, you can build a fireplace with a
few stones; there's plenty of dry dead-wood, and I can make the hot coals tell in
a few minutes."

"Oh! that won't take long," said Kennedy, going to work on the fireplace,
where he had a brisk flame crackling and sparkling in a minute or two.

Joe had cut some of the nicest steaks and the best parts of the tenderloin from
the carcass of the antelope, and these were quickly transformed to the most
savory of broils.

"There, those will tickle the doctor!" said Kennedy.

"Do you know what I was thinking about?" said Joe.

"Why, about the steaks you're broiling, to be sure!" replied Dick.

"Not the least in the world. I was thinking what a figure we'd cut if we
couldn't find the balloon again."


"By George, what an idea! Why, do you think the doctor would desert us?"

"No; but suppose his anchor were to slip!"

"Impossible! and, besides, the doctor would find no difficulty in coming
down again with his balloon; he handles it at his ease."

"But suppose the wind were to sweep it off, so that he couldn't come back
toward us?"

"Come, come, Joe! a truce to your suppositions; they're any thing but
pleasant."

"Ah! sir, every thing that happens in this world is natural, of course; but,
then, any thing may happen, and we ought to look out beforehand."

At this moment the report of a gun rang out upon the air.

"What's that?" exclaimed Joe.

"It's my rifle, I know the ring of her!" said Kennedy.

"A signal!"

"Yes; danger for us!"

"For him, too, perhaps."

"Let's be off!"

And the hunters, having gathered up the product of their expedition, rapidly
made their way back along the path that they had marked by breaking boughs
and bushes when they came. The density of the underbrush prevented their
seeing the balloon, although they could not be far from it.

A second shot was heard.

"We must hurry!" said Joe.

"There! a third report!"

"Why, it sounds to me as if he was defending himself against something."

"Let us make haste!"

They now began to run at the top of their speed. When they reached the
outskirts of the forest, they, at first glance, saw the balloon in its place and the
doctor in the car.

"What's the matter?" shouted Kennedy.

"Good God!" suddenly exclaimed Joe.

"What do you see?"

"Down there! look! a crowd of blacks surrounding the balloon!"

And, in fact, there, two miles from where they were, they saw some thirty
wild natives close together, yelling, gesticulating, and cutting all kinds of antics
at the foot of the sycamore. Some, climbing into the tree itself, were making
their way to the topmost branches. The danger seemed pressing.

"My master is lost!" cried Joe.

"Come! a little more coolness, Joe, and let us see how we stand. We hold the


lives of four of those villains in our hands. Forward, then!"

They had made a mile with headlong speed, when another report was heard
from the car. The shot had, evidently, told upon a huge black demon, who had
been hoisting himself up by the anchor-rope. A lifeless body fell from bough to
bough, and hung about twenty feet from the ground, its arms and legs swaying to
and fro in the air.

"Ha!" said Joe, halting, "what does that fellow hold by?"

"No matter what!" said Kennedy; "let us run! let us run!"

"Ah! Mr. Kennedy," said Joe, again, in a roar of laughter, "by his tail! by his
tail! it's an ape! They're all apes!"

"Well, they're worse than men!" said Kennedy, as he dashed into the midst of
the howling crowd.

It was, indeed, a troop of very formidable baboons of the dog-faced species.
These creatures are brutal, ferocious, and horrible to look upon, with their dog-
like muzzles and savage expression. However, a few shots scattered them, and
the chattering horde scampered off, leaving several of their number on the
ground.

In a moment Kennedy was on the ladder, and Joe, clambering up the
branches, detached the anchor; the car then dipped to where he was, and he got
into it without difficulty. A few minutes later, the Victoria slowly ascended and
soared away to the eastward, wafted by a moderate wind.

"That was an attack for you!" said Joe.

"We thought you were surrounded by natives."

"Well, fortunately, they were only apes," said the doctor.

"At a distance there's no great difference," remarked Kennedy.

"Nor close at hand, either," added Joe.

"Well, however that may be," resumed Ferguson, "this attack of apes might
have had the most serious consequences. Had the anchor yielded to their
repeated efforts, who knows whither the wind would have carried me?"

"What did I tell you, Mr. Kennedy?"

"You were right, Joe; but, even right as you may have been, you were, at that
moment, preparing some antelope-steaks, the very sight of which gave me a
monstrous appetite."

"I believe you!" said the doctor; "the flesh of the antelope is exquisite."

"You may judge of that yourself, now, sir, for supper's ready."

"Upon my word as a sportsman, those venison-steaks have a gamy flavor
that's not to be sneezed at, I tell you."

"Good!" said Joe, with his mouth full, "I could live on antelope all the days
of my life; and all the better with a glass of grog to wash it down."


So saying, the good fellow went to work to prepare a jorum of that fragrant
beverage, and all hands tasted it with satisfaction.

"Every thing has gone well thus far," said he.

"Very well indeed!" assented Kennedy.

"Come, now, Mr. Kennedy, are you sorry that you came with us?"

"T'd like to see anybody prevent my coming!"

It was now four o'clock in the afternoon. The Victoria had struck a more
rapid current. The face of the country was gradually rising, and, ere long, the
barometer indicated a height of fifteen hundred feet above the level of the sea.
The doctor was, therefore, obliged to keep his balloon up by a quite considerable
dilation of gas, and the cylinder was hard at work all the time.

Toward seven o'clock, the balloon was sailing over the basin of Kanyeme.
The doctor immediately recognized that immense clearing, ten miles in extent,
with its villages buried in the midst of baobab and calabash trees. It is the
residence of one of the sultans of the Ugogo country, where civilization is,
perhaps, the least backward. The natives there are less addicted to selling
members of their own families, but still, men and animals all live together in
round huts, without frames, that look like haystacks.

Beyond Kanyeme the soil becomes arid and stony, but in an hour's journey,
in a fertile dip of the soil, vegetation had resumed all its vigor at some distance
from Mdaburu. The wind fell with the close of the day, and the atmosphere
seemed to sleep. The doctor vainly sought for a current of air at different heights,
and, at last, seeing this calm of all nature, he resolved to pass the night afloat,
and, for greater safety, rose to the height of one thousand feet, where the balloon
remained motionless. The night was magnificent, the heavens glittering with
stars, and profoundly silent in the upper air.

Dick and Joe stretched themselves on their peaceful couch, and were soon
sound asleep, the doctor keeping the first watch. At twelve o'clock the latter was
relieved by Kennedy.

"Should the slightest accident happen, waken me," said Ferguson,
above all things, don't lose sight of the barometer. To us it is the compass!"

The night was cold. There were twenty-seven degrees of difference between
its temperature and that of the daytime. With nightfall had begun the nocturnal
concert of animals driven from their hiding-places by hunger and thirst. The
frogs struck in their guttural soprano, redoubled by the yelping of the jackals,
while the imposing bass of the African lion sustained the accords of this living
orchestra.

Upon resuming his post, in the moming, the doctor consulted his compass,
and found that the wind had changed during the night. The balloon had been


W


and,


bearing about thirty miles to the northwest during the last two hours. It was then
passing over Mabunguru, a stony country, strewn with blocks of syenite of a fine
polish, and knobbed with huge bowlders and angular ridges of rock; conic
masses, like the rocks of Karnak, studded the soil like so many Druidic dolmens;
the bones of buffaloes and elephants whitened it here and there; but few trees
could be seen, excepting in the east, where there were dense woods, among
which a few villages lay half concealed.

Toward seven o'clock they saw a huge round rock nearly two miles in extent,
like an immense tortoise.

"We are on the right track," said Dr. Ferguson. "There's Jihoue-la-Mkoa,
where we must halt for a few minutes. I am going to renew the supply of water
necessary for my cylinder, and so let us try to anchor somewhere."

"There are very few trees," replied the hunger.

"Never mind, let us try. Joe, throw out the anchors!"

The balloon, gradually losing its ascensional force, approached the ground;
the anchors ran along until, at last, one of them caught in the fissure of a rock,
and the balloon remained motionless.

It must not be supposed that the doctor could entirely extinguish his cylinder,
during these halts. The equilibrium of the balloon had been calculated at the
level of the sea; and, as the country was continually ascending, and had reached
an elevation of from six to seven hundred feet, the balloon would have had a
tendency to go lower than the surface of the soil itself. It was, therefore,
necessary to sustain it by a certain dilation of the gas. But, in case the doctor, in
the absence of all wind, had let the car rest upon the ground, the balloon, thus
relieved of a considerable weight, would have kept up of itself, without the aid
of the cylinder.

The maps indicated extensive ponds on the western slope of the Jihoue-la-
Mkoa. Joe went thither alone with a cask that would hold about ten gallons. He
found the place pointed out to him, without difficulty, near to a deserted village;
got his stock of water, and returned in less than three-quarters of an hour. He had
seen nothing particular excepting some immense elephant-pits. In fact, he came
very near falling into one of them, at the bottom of which lay a half-eaten
carcass.

He brought back with him a sort of clover which the apes eat with avidity.
The doctor recognized the fruit of the "mbenbu"-tree which grows in profusion,
on the western part of Jihoue-la-Mkoa. Ferguson waited for Joe with a certain
feeling of impatience, for even a short halt in this inhospitable region always
inspires a degree of fear.

The water was got aboard without trouble, as the car was nearly resting on


the ground. Joe then found it easy to loosen the anchor and leaped lightly to his
place beside the doctor. The latter then replenished the flame in the cylinder, and
the balloon majestically soared into the air.

It was then about one hundred miles from Kazeh, an important establishment
in the interior of Africa, where, thanks to a south-southeasterly current, the
travellers might hope to arrive on that same day. They were moving at the rate of
fourteen miles per hour, and the guidance of the balloon was becoming difficult,
as they dared not rise very high without extreme dilation of the gas, the country
itself being at an average height of three thousand feet. Hence, the doctor
preferred not to force the dilation, and so adroitly followed the sinuosities of a
pretty sharply-inclined plane, and swept very close to the villages of Thembo
and Tura-Wels. The latter forms part of the Unyamwezy, a magnificent country,
where the trees attain enormous dimensions; among them the cactus, which
grows to gigantic size.

About two o'clock, in magnificent weather, but under a fiery sun that
devoured the least breath of air, the balloon was floating over the town of Kazeh,
situated about three hundred and fifty miles from the coast.

"We left Zanzibar at nine o'clock in the morning," said the doctor, consulting
his notes, "and, after two days' passage, we have, including our deviations,
travelled nearly five hundred geographical miles. Captains Burton and Speke
took four months and a half to make the same distance!"


CHAPTER FIFTEENTH.

Kazeh.--The Noisy Market-place.--The Appearance of the Balloon.--The
Wangaga.--The Sons of the Moon.--The Doctor's Walk.--The Population of the
Place.--The Royal Tembe.--The Sultan's Wives.--A Royal Drunken-Bout.-- Joe
an Object of Worship.--How they Dance in the Moon.--A Reaction.-- Two
Moons in one Sky.--The Instability of Divine Honors.

Kazeh, an important point in Central Africa, is not a city; in truth, there are
no cities in the interior. Kazeh is but a collection of six extensive excavations.
There are enclosed a few houses and slave-huts, with little courtyards and small
gardens, carefully cultivated with onions, potatoes, cucumbers, pumpkins, and
mushrooms, of perfect flavor, growing most luxuriantly.

The Unyamwezy is the country of the Moon--above all the rest, the fertile
and magnificent garden-spot of Africa. In its centre is the district of Unyanembe-
-a delicious region, where some families of Omani, who are of very pure Arabic
origin, live in luxurious idleness.

They have, for a long period, held the commerce between the interior of


Africa and Arabia: they trade in gums, ivory, fine muslin, and slaves. Their
caravans traverse these equatorial regions on all sides; and they even make their
way to the coast in search of those articles of luxury and enjoyment which the
wealthy merchants covet; while the latter, surrounded by their wives and their
attendants, lead in this charming country the least disturbed and most horizontal
of lives--always stretched at full length, laughing, smoking, or sleeping.

Around these excavations are numerous native dwellings; wide, open spaces
for the markets; fields of cannabis and datura; superb trees and depths of freshest
shade--such is Kazeh!

There, too, is held the general rendezvous of the caravans --those of the
south, with their slaves and their freightage of ivory; and those of the west,
which export cotton, glassware, and trinkets, to the tribes of the great lakes.

So in the market-place there reigns perpetual excitement, a nameless hubbub,
made up of the cries of mixed-breed porters and carriers, the beating of drums,
and the twanging of horns, the neighing of mules, the braying of donkeys, the
singing of women, the squalling of children, and the banging of the huge rattan,
wielded by the jemadar or leader of the caravans, who beats time to this pastoral
symphony.

There, spread forth, without regard to order--indeed, we may say, in
charming disorder--are the showy stuffs, the glass beads, the ivory tusks, the
rhinoceros'-teeth, the shark's-teeth, the honey, the tobacco, and the cotton of
these regions, to be purchased at the strangest of bargains by customers in whose
eyes each article has a price only in proportion to the desire it excites to possess
it.

All at once this agitation, movement and noise stopped as though by magic.
The balloon had just come in sight, far aloft in the sky, where it hovered
majestically for a few moments, and then descended slowly, without deviating
from its perpendicular. Men, women, children, merchants and slaves, Arabs and
negroes, as suddenly disappeared within the "tembes" and the huts.

"My dear doctor," said Kennedy, "if we continue to produce such a sensation
as this, we shall find some difficulty in establishing commercial relations with
the people hereabouts."

"There's one kind of trade that we might carry on, though, easily enough,"
said Joe; "and that would be to go down there quietly, and walk off with the best
of the goods, without troubling our heads about the merchants; we'd get rich that
way!"

"Ah!" said the doctor, "these natives are a little scared at first; but they won't
be long in coming back, either through suspicion or through curiosity."

"Do you really think so, doctor?"


"Well, we'll see pretty soon. But it wouldn't be prudent to go too near to
them, for the balloon is not iron-clad, and is, therefore, not proof against either
an arrow or a bullet."

"Then you expect to hold a parley with these blacks?"

"If we can do so safely, why should we not? There must be some Arab
merchants here at Kazeh, who are better informed than the rest, and not so
barbarous. I remember that Burton and Speke had nothing but praises to utter
concerning the hospitality of these people; so we might, at least, make the
venture."

The balloon having, meanwhile, gradually approached the ground, one of the
anchors lodged in the top of a tree near the market-place.

By this time the whole population had emerged from their hiding-places
stealthily, thrusting their heads out first. Several "Wwaganga," recognizable by
their badges of conical shellwork, came boldly forward. They were the sorcerers
of the place. They bore in their girdles small gourds, coated with tallow, and
several other articles of witchcraft, all of them, by-the-way, most professionally
filthy.

Little by little the crowd gathered beside them, the women and children
grouped around them, the drums renewed their deafening uproar, hands were
violently clapped together, and then raised toward the sky.

"That's their style of praying,” said the doctor; "and, if I'm not mistaken,
we're going to be called upon to play a great part."

"Well, sir, play it!"

"You, too, my good Joe--perhaps you're to be a god!"

"Well, master, that won't trouble me much. I like a little flattery!"

At this moment, one of the sorcerers, a "Myanga," made a sign, and all the
clamor died away into the profoundest silence. He then addressed a few words to
the strangers, but in an unknown tongue.

Dr. Ferguson, not having understood them, shouted some sentences in
Arabic, at a venture, and was immediately answered in that language.

The speaker below then delivered himself of a very copious harangue, which
was also very flowery and very gravely listened to by his audience. From it the
doctor was not slow in learning that the balloon was mistaken for nothing less
than the moon in person, and that the amiable goddess in question had
condescended to approach the town with her three sons--an honor that would
never be forgotten in this land so greatly loved by the god of day.

The doctor responded, with much dignity, that the moon made her provincial
tour every thousand years, feeling the necessity of showing herself nearer at
hand to her worshippers. He, therefore, begged them not to be disturbed by her


presence, but to take advantage of it to make known all their wants and longings.

The sorcerer, in his turn, replied that the sultan, the "mwani," who had been
sick for many years, implored the aid of heaven, and he invited the son of the
moon to visit him.

The doctor acquainted his companions with the invitation.

"And you are going to call upon this negro king?" asked Kennedy.

"Undoubtedly so; these people appear well disposed; the air is calm; there is
not a breath of wind, and we have nothing to fear for the balloon?"

"But, what will you do?"

"Be quiet on that score, my dear Dick. With a little medicine, I shall work
my way through the affair!"

Then, addressing the crowd, he said:

"The moon, taking compassion on the sovereign who is so dear to the
children of Unyamwezy, has charged us to restore him to health. Let him prepare
to receive us!"

The clamor, the songs and demonstrations of all kinds increased twofold, and
the whole immense ants' nest of black heads was again in motion.

"Now, my friends," said Dr. Ferguson, "we must look out for every thing
beforehand; we may be forced to leave this at any moment, unexpectedly, and be
off with extra speed. Dick had better remain, therefore, in the car, and keep the
cylinder warm so as to secure a sufficient ascensional force for the balloon. The
anchor is solidly fastened, and there is nothing to fear in that respect. I shall
descend, and Joe will go with me, only that he must remain at the foot of the
ladder."

"What! are you going alone into that blackamoor's den?"

"How! doctor, am I not to go with you?"

"No! I shall go alone; these good folks imagine that the goddess of the moon
has come to see them, and their superstition protects me; so have no fear, and
each one remain at the post that I have assigned to him."

"Well, since you wish it," sighed Kennedy.

"Look closely to the dilation of the gas."

"Agreed!"

By this time the shouts of the natives had swelled to double volume as they
vehemently implored the aid of the heavenly powers.

"There, there," said Joe, "they're rather rough in their orders to their good
moon and her divine sons."

The doctor, equipped with his travelling medicine-chest, descended to the
ground, preceded by Joe, who kept a straight countenance and looked as grave
and knowing as the circumstances of the case required. He then seated himself at


the foot of the ladder in the Arab fashion, with his legs crossed under him, and a
portion of the crowd collected around him in a circle, at respectful distances.

In the meanwhile the doctor, escorted to the sound of savage instruments,
and with wild religious dances, slowly proceeded toward the royal "tembe,"
situated a considerable distance outside of the town. It was about three o'clock,
and the sun was shining brilliantly. In fact, what less could it do upon so grand
an occasion!

The doctor stepped along with great dignity, the waganga surrounding him
and keeping off the crowd. He was soon joined by the natural son of the sultan, a
handsomely-built young fellow, who, according to the custom of the country,
was the sole heir of the paternal goods, to the exclusion of the old man's
legitimate children. He prostrated himself before the son of the moon, but the
latter graciously raised him to his feet.

Three-quarters of an hour later, through shady paths, surrounded by all the
luxuriance of tropical vegetation, this enthusiastic procession arrived at the
sultan's palace, a sort of square edifice called ititenya, and situated on the slope
of a hill.

A kind of veranda, formed by the thatched roof, adorned the outside,
supported upon wooden pillars, which had some pretensions to being carved.
Long lines of dark-red clay decorated the walls in characters that strove to
reproduce the forms of men and serpents, the latter better imitated, of course,
than the former. The roofing of this abode did not rest directly upon the walls,
and the air could, therefore, circulate freely, but windows there were none, and
the door hardly deserved the name.

Dr. Ferguson was received with all the honors by the guards and favorites of
the sultan; these were men of a fine race, the Wanyamwezi so-called, a pure type
of the central African populations, strong, robust, well-made, and in splendid
condition. Their hair, divided into a great number of small tresses, fell over their
shoulders, and by means of black-and-blue incisions they had tattooed their
cheeks from the temples to the mouth. Their ears, frightfully distended, held
dangling to them disks of wood and plates of gum copal. They were clad in
brilliantly-painted cloths, and the soldiers were armed with the saw-toothed war-
club, the bow and arrows barbed and poisoned with the juice of the euphorbium,
the cutlass, the "sima," a long sabre (also with saw-like teeth), and some small
battle-axes.

The doctor advanced into the palace, and there, notwithstanding the sultan's
illness, the din, which was terrific before, redoubled the instant that he arrived.
He noticed, at the lintels of the door, some rabbits' tails and zebras' manes,
suspended as talismans. He was received by the whole troop of his majesty's


wives, to the harmonious accords of the "upatu," a sort of cymbal made of the
bottom of a copper kettle, and to the uproar of the "kilindo," a drum five feet
high, hollowed out from the trunk of a tree, and hammered by the ponderous,
horny fists of two jet-black virtuosi.

Most of the women were rather good-looking, and they laughed and
chattered merrily as they smoked their tobacco and "thang" in huge black pipes.
They seemed to be well made, too, under the long robes that they wore
gracefully flung about their persons, and carried a sort of "kilt" woven from the
fibres of calabash fastened around their girdles.

Six of them were not the least merry of the party, although put aside from the
rest, and reserved for a cruel fate. On the death of the sultan, they were to be
buried alive with him, so as to occupy and divert his mind during the period of
eternal solitude.

Dr. Ferguson, taking in the whole scene at a rapid glance, approached the
wooden couch on which the sultan lay reclining. There he saw a man of about
forty, completely brutalized by orgies of every description, and in a condition
that left little or nothing to be done. The sickness that had afflicted him for so
many years was simply perpetual drunkenness. The royal sot had nearly lost all
consciousness, and all the ammonia in the world would not have set him on his
feet again.

His favorites and the women kept on bended knees during this solemn visit.
By means of a few drops of powerful cordial, the doctor for a moment
reanimated the imbruted carcass that lay before him. The sultan stirred, and, for
a dead body that had given no sign whatever of life for several hours previously,
this symptom was received with a tremendous repetition of shouts and cries in
the doctor's honor.

The latter, who had seen enough of it by this time, by a rapid motion put
aside his too demonstrative admirers and went out of the palace, directing his
steps immediately toward the balloon, for it was now six o'clock in the evening.

Joe, during his absence, had been quietly waiting at the foot of the ladder,
where the crowd paid him their most humble respects. Like a genuine son of the
moon, he let them keep on. For a divinity, he had the air of a very clever sort of
fellow, by no means proud, nay, even pleasingly familiar with the young
negresses, who seemed never to tire of looking at him. Besides, he went so far as
to chat agreeably with them.

"Worship me, ladies! worship me!" he said to them. "I'm a clever sort of
devil, if I am the son of a goddess."

They brought him propitiatory gifts, such as are usually deposited in the
fetich huts or mzimu. These gifts consisted of stalks of barley and of "pombe."


Joe considered himself in duty bound to taste the latter species of strong beer,
but his palate, although accustomed to gin and whiskey, could not withstand the
strength of the new beverage, and he had to make a horrible grimace, which his
dusky friends took to be a benevolent smile.

Thereupon, the young damsels, conjoining their voices in a drawling chant,
began to dance around him with the utmost gravity.

"Ah! you're dancing, are you?" said he. "Well, I won't be behind you in
politeness, and so I'll give you one of my country reels."

So at it he went, in one of the wildest jigs that ever was seen, twisting,
turning, and jerking himself in all directions; dancing with his hands, dancing
with his body, dancing with his knees, dancing with his feet; describing the most
fearful contortions and extravagant evolutions; throwing himself into incredible
attitudes; grimacing beyond all belief, and, in fine giving his savage admirers a
strange idea of the style of ballet adopted by the deities in the moon.

Then, the whole collection of blacks, naturally as imitative as monkeys, at
once reproduced all his airs and graces, his leaps and shakes and contortions;
they did not lose a single gesticulation; they did not forget an attitude; and the
result was, such a pandemonium of movement, noise, and excitement, as it
would be out of the question even feebly to describe. But, in the very midst of
the fun, Joe saw the doctor approaching.

The latter was coming at full speed, surrounded by a yelling and disorderly
throng. The chiefs and sorcerers seemed to be highly excited. They were close
upon the doctor's heels, crowding and threatening him.

Singular reaction! What had happened? Had the sultan unluckily perished in
the hands of his celestial physician?

Kennedy, from his post of observation, saw the danger without knowing
what had caused it, and the balloon, powerfully urged by the dilation of the gas,
strained and tugged at the ropes that held it as though impatient to soar away.

The doctor had got as far as the foot of the ladder. A superstitious fear still
held the crowd aloof and hindered them from committing any violence on his
person. He rapidly scaled the ladder, and Joe followed him with his usual agility.

"Not a moment to lose!" said the doctor. "Don't attempt to let go the anchor!
We'll cut the cord! Follow me!"

"But what's the matter?" asked Joe, clambering into the car.

"What's happened?" questioned Kennedy, rifle in hand.

"Look!" replied the doctor, pointing to the horizon.

"Well?" ejaculated the Scot.

"Well! the moon!"

And, in fact, there was the moon rising red and magnificent, a globe of fire in


a field of blue! It was she, indeed--she and the balloon!--both in one sky!

Either there were two moons, then, or these strangers were imposters,
designing scamps, false deities!

Such were the very natural reflections of the crowd, and hence the reaction in
their feelings.

Joe could not, for the life of him, keep in a roar of laughter; and the
population of Kazeh, comprehending that their prey was slipping through their
clutches, set up prolonged howlings, aiming, the while, their bows and muskets
at the balloon.

But one of the sorcerers made a sign, and all the weapons were lowered. He
then began to climb into the tree, intending to seize the rope and bring the
machine to the ground.

Joe leaned out with a hatchet ready. "Shall I cut away?" said he.

"No; wait a moment," replied the doctor.

"But this black?"

"We may, perhaps, save our anchor--and I hold a great deal by that. There'll
always be time enough to cut loose."

The sorcerer, having climbed to the right place, worked so vigorously that he
succeeded in detaching the anchor, and the latter, violently jerked, at that
moment, by the start of the balloon, caught the rascal between the limbs, and
carried him off astride of it through the air.

The stupefaction of the crowd was indescribable as they saw one of their
waganga thus whirled away into space.

"Huzza!" roared Joe, as the balloon--thanks to its ascensional force--shot up
higher into the sky, with increased rapidity.

"He holds on well," said Kennedy; "a little trip will do him good."

"Shall we let this darky drop all at once?" inquired Joe.

"Oh no," replied the doctor, "we'll let him down easily; and I warrant me
that, after such an adventure, the power of the wizard will be enormously
enhanced in the sight of his comrades."

"Why, I wouldn't put it past them to make a god of him!" said Joe, with a
laugh.

The Victoria, by this time, had risen to the height of one thousand feet, and
the black hung to the rope with desperate energy. He had become completely
silent, and his eyes were fixed, for his terror was blended with amazement. A
light west wind was sweeping the balloon right over the town, and far beyond it.

Half an hour later, the doctor, seeing the country deserted, moderated the
flame of his cylinder, and descended toward the ground. At twenty feet above
the turf, the affrighted sorcerer made up his mind in a twinkling: he let himself


drop, fell on his feet, and scampered off at a furious pace toward Kazeh; while
the balloon, suddenly relieved of his weight, again shot up on her course.


CHAPTER SIXTEENTH.

Symptoms of a Storm.--The Country of the Moon.--The Future of the
African Continent.--The Last Machine of all.--A View of the Country at Sunset.-
- Flora and Fauna.--The Tempest.--The Zone of Fire.--The Starry Heavens.

"See," said Joe, "what comes of playing the sons of the moon without her
leave! She came near serving us an ugly trick. But say, master, did you damage
your credit as a physician?"

"Yes, indeed," chimed in the sportsman. "What kind of a dignitary was this
Sultan of Kazeh?"

"An old half-dead sot," replied the doctor, "whose loss will not be very
severely felt. But the moral of all this is that honors are fleeting, and we must not
take too great a fancy to them."

"So much the worse!" rejoined Joe. "I liked the thing--to be worshipped!--
Play the god as you like! Why, what would any one ask more than that? By-the-
way, the moon did come up, too, and all red, as if she was in a rage."

While the three friends went on chatting of this and other things, and Joe
examined the luminary of night from an entirely novel point of view, the heavens
became covered with heavy clouds to the northward, and the lowering masses
assumed a most sinister and threatening look. Quite a smart breeze, found about
three hundred feet from the earth, drove the balloon toward the north-northeast;
and above it the blue vault was clear; but the atmosphere felt close and dull.

The aeronauts found themselves, at about eight in the evening, in thirty-two
degrees forty minutes east longitude, and four degrees seventeen minutes
latitude. The atmospheric currents, under the influence of a tempest not far off,
were driving them at the rate of from thirty to thirty-five miles an hour; the
undulating and fertile plains of Mfuto were passing swiftly beneath them. The
spectacle was one worthy of admiration--and admire it they did.

"We are now right in the country of the Moon," said Dr. Ferguson; "for it has
retained the name that antiquity gave it, undoubtedly, because the moon has been
worshipped there in all ages. It is, really, a superb country."

"It would be hard to find more splendid vegetation."

"If we found the like of it around London it would not be natural, but it
would be very pleasant," put in Joe. "Why is it that such savage countries get all
these fine things?"

"And who knows," said the doctor, "that this country may not, one day,


become the centre of civilization? The races of the future may repair hither,
when Europe shall have become exhausted in the effort to feed her inhabitants."

"Do you think so, really?" asked Kennedy.

"Undoubtedly, my dear Dick. Just note the progress of events: consider the
migrations of races, and you will arrive at the same conclusion assuredly. Asia
was the first nurse of the world, was she not? For about four thousand years she
travailed, she grew pregnant, she produced, and then, when stones began to
cover the soil where the golden harvests sung by Homer had flourished, her
children abandoned her exhausted and barren bosom. You next see them
precipitating themselves upon young and vigorous Europe, which has nourished
them for the last two thousand years. But already her fertility is beginning to die
out; her productive powers are diminishing every day. Those new diseases that
annually attack the products of the soil, those defective crops, those insufficient
resources, are all signs of a vitality that is rapidly wearing out and of an
approaching exhaustion. Thus, we already see the millions rushing to the
luxuriant bosom of America, as a source of help, not inexhaustible indeed, but
not yet exhausted. In its turn, that new continent will grow old; its virgin forests
will fall before the axe of industry, and its soil will become weak through having
too fully produced what had been demanded of it. Where two harvests bloomed
every year, hardly one will be gathered from a soil completely drained of its
strength. Then, Africa will be there to offer to new races the treasures that for
centuries have been accumulating in her breast. Those climates now so fatal to
strangers will be purified by cultivation and by drainage of the soil, and those
scattered water supplies will be gathered into one common bed to form an artery
of navigation. Then this country over which we are now passing, more fertile,
richer, and fuller of vitality than the rest, will become some grand realm where
more astonishing discoveries than steam and electricity will be brought to light."

"Ah! sir," said Joe, "I'd like to see all that."

"You got up too early in the moming, my boy!"

"Besides," said Kennedy, "that may prove to be a very dull period when
industry will swallow up every thing for its own profit. By dint of inventing
machinery, men will end in being eaten up by it! I have always fancied that the
end of the earth will be when some enormous boiler, heated to three thousand
millions of atmospheric pressure, shall explode and blow up our Globe!"

"And I add that the Americans," said Joe, "will not have been the last to
work at the machine!"

"In fact," assented the doctor, "they are great boiler-makers! But, without
allowing ourselves to be carried away by such speculations, let us rest content
with enjoying the beauties of this country of the Moon, since we have been


permitted to see it."

The sun, darting his last rays beneath the masses of heaped-up cloud,
adorned with a crest of gold the slightest inequalities of the ground below;
gigantic trees, arborescent bushes, mosses on the even surface--all had their
share of this luminous effulgence. The soil, slightly undulating, here and there
rose into little conical hills; there were no mountains visible on the horizon;
immense brambly palisades, impenetrable hedges of thorny jungle, separated the
clearings dotted with numerous villages, and immense euphorbiae surrounded
them with natural fortifications, interlacing their trunks with the coral-shaped
branches of the shrubbery and undergrowth.

Ere long, the Malagazeri, the chief tributary of Lake Tanganayika, was seen
winding between heavy thickets of verdure, offering an asylum to many water-
courses that spring from the torrents formed in the season of freshets, or from
ponds hollowed in the clayey soil. To observers looking from a height, it was a
chain of waterfalls thrown across the whole western face of the country.

Animals with huge humps were feeding in the luxuriant prairies, and were
half hidden, sometimes, in the tall grass; spreading forests in bloom redolent of
spicy perfumes presented themselves to the gaze like immense bouquets; but, in
these bouquets, lions, leopards, hyenas, and tigers, were then crouching for
shelter from the last hot rays of the setting sun. From time to time, an elephant
made the tall tops of the undergrowth sway to and fro, and you could hear the
crackling of huge branches as his ponderous ivory tusks broke them in his way.

"What a sporting country!" exclaimed Dick, unable longer to restrain his
enthusiasm; "why, a single ball fired at random into those forests would bring
down game worthy of it. Suppose we try it once!"

"No, my dear Dick; the night is close at hand--a threatening night with a
tempest in the background--and the storms are awful in this country, where the
heated soil is like one vast electric battery."

"You are right, sir," said Joe, "the heat has got to be enough to choke one,
and the breeze has died away. One can feel that something's coming."

"The atmosphere is saturated with electricity," replied the doctor; "every
living creature is sensible that this state of the air portends a struggle of the
elements, and I confess that I never before was so full of the fluid myself."

"Well, then," suggested Dick, "would it not be advisable to alight?"

"On the contrary, Dick, I'd rather go up, only that I am afraid of being carried
out of my course by these counter-currents contending in the atmosphere."

"Have you any idea, then, of abandoning the route that we have followed
since we left the coast?"

"If I can manage to do so," replied the doctor, "I will turn more directly


northward, by from seven to eight degrees; I shall then endeavor to ascend
toward the presumed latitudes of the sources of the Nile; perhaps we may
discover some traces of Captain Speke's expedition or of M. de Heuglin's
caravan. Unless I am mistaken, we are at thirty-two degrees forty minutes east
longitude, and I should like to ascend directly north of the equator."

"Look there!" exclaimed Kennedy, suddenly, "see those hippopotami sliding
out of the pools--those masses of blood-colored flesh--and those crocodiles
snuffing the air aloud!"

"They're choking!" ejaculated Joe. "Ah! what a fine way to travel this is; and
how one can snap his fingers at all that vermin!--Doctor! Mr. Kennedy! see those
packs of wild animals hurrying along close together. There are fully two
hundred. Those are wolves."

"No! Joe, not wolves, but wild dogs; a famous breed that does not hesitate to
attack the lion himself. They are the worst customers a traveller could meet, for
they would instantly tear him to pieces."

"Well, it isn't Joe that'll undertake to muzzle them!" responded that amiable
youth. "After all, though, if that's the nature of the beast, we mustn't be too hard
on them for it!"

Silence gradually settled down under the influence of the impending storm:
the thickened air actually seemed no longer adapted to the transmission of
sound; the atmosphere appeared MUFFLED, and, like a room hung with
tapestry, lost all its sonorous reverberation. The "rover bird" so-called, the
coroneted crane, the red and blue jays, the mocking-bird, the flycatcher,
disappeared among the foliage of the immense trees, and all nature revealed
symptoms of some approaching catastrophe.

At nine o'clock the Victoria hung motionless over Msene, an extensive group
of villages scarcely distinguishable in the gloom. Once in a while, the reflection
of a wandering ray of light in the dull water disclosed a succession of ditches
regularly arranged, and, by one last gleam, the eye could make out the calm and
sombre forms of palm-trees, sycamores, and gigantic euphorbiae.

"I am stifling!" said the Scot, inhaling, with all the power of his lungs, as
much as possible of the rarefied air. "We are not moving an inch! Let us
descend!"

"But the tempest!" said the doctor, with much uneasiness.

"If you are afraid of being carried away by the wind, it seems to me that
there is no other course to pursue.”

"Perhaps the storm won't burst to-night," said Joe; "the clouds are very high."

"That is just the thing that makes me hesitate about going beyond them; we
should have to rise still higher, lose sight of the earth, and not know all night


whether we were moving forward or not, or in what direction we were going."

"Make up your mind, dear doctor, for time presses!"

"It's a pity that the wind has fallen," said Joe, again; "it would have carried us
clear of the storm."

"It is, indeed, a pity, my friends," rejoined the doctor. "The clouds are
dangerous for us; they contain opposing currents which might catch us in their
eddies, and lightnings that might set on fire. Again, those perils avoided, the
force of the tempest might hurl us to the ground, were we to cast our anchor in
the tree-tops."

"Then what shall we do?"

"Well, we must try to get the balloon into a medium zone of the atmosphere,
and there keep her suspended between the perils of the heavens and those of the
earth. We have enough water for the cylinder, and our two hundred pounds of
ballast are untouched. In case of emergency I can use them."

"We will keep watch with you," said the hunter.

"No, my friends, put the provisions under shelter, and lie down; I will rouse
you, if it becomes necessary."

"But, master, wouldn't you do well to take some rest yourself, as there's no
danger close on us just now?" insisted poor Joe.

"No, thank you, my good fellow, I prefer to keep awake. We are not moving,
and should circumstances not change, we'll find ourselves to-morrow in exactly
the same place."

"Good-night, then, sir!"

"Good-night, if you can only find it so!"

Kennedy and Joe stretched themselves out under their blankets, and the
doctor remained alone in the immensity of space.

However, the huge dome of clouds visibly descended, and the darkness
became profound. The black vault closed in upon the earth as if to crush it in its
embrace.

All at once a violent, rapid, incisive flash of lightning pierced the gloom, and
the rent it made had not closed ere a frightful clap of thunder shook the celestial
depths.

"Up! up! turn out!" shouted Ferguson.

The two sleepers, aroused by the terrible concussion, were at the doctor's
orders in a moment.

"Shall we descend?" said Kennedy.

"No! the balloon could not stand it. Let us go up before those clouds dissolve
in water, and the wind is let loose!" and, so saying, the doctor actively stirred up
the flame of the cylinder, and turned it on the spirals of the serpentine siphon.


The tempests of the tropics develop with a rapidity equalled only by their
violence. A second flash of lightning rent the darkness, and was followed by a
score of others in quick succession. The sky was crossed and dotted, like the
zebra's hide, with electric sparks, which danced and flickered beneath the great
drops of rain.

"We have delayed too long," exclaimed the doctor; "Wwe must now pass
through a zone of fire, with our balloon filled as it is with inflammable gas!"

"But let us descend, then! let us descend!" urged Kennedy.

"The risk of being struck would be just about even, and we should soon be
torn to pieces by the branches of the trees!"

"We are going up, doctor!"

"Quicker, quicker still!"

In this part of Africa, during the equatorial storms, it is not rare to count from
thirty to thirty-five flashes of lightning per minute. The sky is literally on fire,
and the crashes of thunder are continuous.

The wind burst forth with frightful violence in this burning atmosphere; it
twisted the blazing clouds; one might have compared it to the breath of some
gigantic bellows, fanning all this conflagration.

Dr. Ferguson kept his cylinder at full heat, and the balloon dilated and went
up, while Kennedy, on his knees, held together the curtains of the awning. The
balloon whirled round wildly enough to make their heads turn, and the aeronauts
got some very alarming jolts, indeed, as their machine swung and swayed in all
directions. Huge cavities would form in the silk of the balloon as the wind
fiercely bent it in, and the stuff fairly cracked like a pistol as it flew back from
the pressure. A sort of hail, preceded by a rumbling noise, hissed through the air
and rattled on the covering of the Victoria. The latter, however, continued to
ascend, while the lightning described tangents to the convexity of her
circumference; but she bore on, right through the midst of the fire.

"God protect us!" said Dr. Ferguson, solemnly, "we are in His hands; He
alone can save us--but let us be ready for every event, even for fire--our fall
could not be very rapid."

The doctor's voice could scarcely be heard by his companions; but they could
see his countenance calm as ever even amid the flashing of the lightnings; he
was watching the phenomena of phosphorescence produced by the fires of St.
Elmo, that were now skipping to and fro along the network of the balloon.

The latter whirled and swung, but steadily ascended, and, ere the hour was
over, it had passed the stormy belt. The electric display was going on below it
like a vast crown of artificial fireworks suspended from the car.

Then they enjoyed one of the grandest spectacles that Nature can offer to the


gaze of man. Below them, the tempest; above them, the starry firmament,
tranquil, mute, impassible, with the moon projecting her peaceful rays over these
angry clouds.

Dr. Ferguson consulted the barometer; it announced twelve thousand feet of
elevation. It was then eleven o'clock at night.

"Thank Heaven, all danger is past; all we have to do now, is, to keep
ourselves at this height," said the doctor.

"It was frightful!" remarked Kennedy.

"Oh!" said Joe, "it gives a little variety to the trip, and I'm not sorry to have
seen a storm from a trifling distance up in the air. It's a fine sight!"


CHAPTER SEVENTEENTH.

The Mountains of the Moon.--An Ocean of Verdure.--They cast Anchor.--
The Towing Elephant.--A Running Fire.--Death of the Monster.--The Field-
Oven.--A Meal on the Grass.--A Night on the Ground.

About four in the morning, Monday, the sun reappeared in the horizon; the
clouds had dispersed, and a cheery breeze refreshed the morning dawn.

The earth, all redolent with fragrant exhalations, reappeared to the gaze of
our travellers. The balloon, whirled about by opposing currents, had hardly
budged from its place, and the doctor, letting the gas contract, descended so as to
get a more northerly direction. For a long while his quest was fruitless; the wind
carried him toward the west until he came in sight of the famous Mountains of
the Moon, which grouped themselves in a semicircle around the extremity of
Lake Tanganayika; their ridges, but slightly indented, stood out against the
bluish horizon, so that they might have been mistaken for a natural fortification,
not to be passed by the explorers of the centre of Africa. Among them were a
few isolated cones, revealing the mark of the eternal snows.

"Here we are at last," said the doctor, "in an unexplored country! Captain
Burton pushed very far to the westward, but he could not reach those celebrated
mountains; he even denied their existence, strongly as it was affirmed by Speke,
his companion. He pretended that they were born in the latter's fancy; but for us,
my friends, there is no further doubt possible."

"Shall we cross them?" asked Kennedy.

"Not, if it please God. I am looking for a wind that will take me back toward
the equator. I will even wait for one, if necessary, and will make the balloon like
a ship that casts anchor, until favorable breezes come up."

But the foresight of the doctor was not long in bringing its reward; for, after
having tried different heights, the Victoria at length began to sail off to the


northeastward with medium speed.

"We are in the right track," said the doctor, consulting his compass, "and
scarcely two hundred feet from the surface; lucky circumstances for us, enabling
us, as they do, to reconnoitre these new regions. When Captain Speke set out to
discover Lake Ukereoue, he ascended more to the eastward in a straight line
above Kazeh."

"Shall we keep on long in this way?" inquired the Scot.

"Perhaps. Our object is to push a point in the direction of the sources of the
Nile; and we have more than six hundred miles to make before we get to the
extreme limit reached by the explorers who came from the north."

"And we shan't set foot on the solid ground?" murmured Joe; "it's enough to
cramp a fellow's legs!"

"Oh, yes, indeed, my good Joe," said the doctor, reassuring him; "we have to
economize our provisions, you know; and on the way, Dick, you must get us
some fresh meat."

"Whenever you like, doctor."

"We shall also have to replenish our stock of water. Who knows but we may
be carried to some of the dried-up regions? So we cannot take too many
precautions."

At noon the Victoria was at twenty-nine degrees fifteen minutes east
longitude, and three degrees fifteen minutes south latitude. She passed the
village of Uyofu, the last northern limit of the Unyamwezi, opposite to the Lake
Ukereoue, which could still be seen.

The tribes living near to the equator seem to be a little more civilized, and
are governed by absolute monarchs, whose control is an unlimited despotism.
Their most compact union of power constitutes the province of Karagwah.

It was decided by the aeronauts that they would alight at the first favorable
place. They found that they should have to make a prolonged halt, and take a
careful inspection of the balloon: so the flame of the cylinder was moderated,
and the anchors, flung out from the car, ere long began to sweep the grass of an
immense prairie, that, from a certain height, looked like a shaven lawn, but the
growth of which, in reality, was from seven to eight feet in height.

The balloon skimmed this tall grass without bending it, like a gigantic
butterfly: not an obstacle was in sight; it was an ocean of verdure without a
single breaker.

"We might proceed a long time in this style," remarked Kennedy; "I don't see
one tree that we could approach, and I'm afraid that our hunt's over."

"Wait, Dick; you could not hunt anyhow in this grass, that grows higher than
your head. We'll find a favorable place presently."


W


In truth, it was a charming excursion that they were making now--a veritable
navigation on this green, almost transparent sea, gently undulating in the breath
of the wind. The little car seemed to cleave the waves of verdure, and, from time
to time, coveys of birds of magnificent plumage would rise fluttering from the
tall herbage, and speed away with joyous cries. The anchors plunged into this
lake of flowers, and traced a furrow that closed behind them, like the wake of a
ship.

All at once a sharp shock was felt--the anchor had caught in the fissure of
some rock hidden in the high grass.

"We are fast!" exclaimed Joe.

These words had scarcely been uttered when a shrill cry rang through the air,
and the following phrases, mingled with exclamations, escaped from the lips of
our travellers:

"What's that?”

"A strange cry!"

"Look! Why, we're moving!"

"The anchor has slipped!"

"No; it holds, and holds fast too!" said Joe, who was tugging at the rope.

"It's the rock, then, that's moving!"

An immense rustling was noticed in the grass, and soon an elongated,
winding shape was seen rising above it.

"A serpent!" shouted Joe.

"A serpent!" repeated Kennedy, handling his rifle.

"No," said the doctor, "it's an elephant's trunk!"

"An elephant, Samuel?"

And, as Kennedy said this, he drew his rifle to his shoulder.

"Wait, Dick; wait!"

"That's a fact! The animal's towing us!"

"And in the right direction, Joe--in the right direction."

The elephant was now making some headway, and soon reached a clearing
where his whole body could be seen. By his gigantic size, the doctor recognized
a male of a superb species. He had two whitish tusks, beautifully curved, and
about eight feet in length; and in these the shanks of the anchor had firmly
caught. The animal was vainly trying with his trunk to disengage himself from
the rope that attached him to the car.

"Get up--go ahead, old fellow!" shouted Joe, with delight, doing his best to
urge this rather novel team. "Here is a new style of travelling!--no more horses
for me. An elephant, if you please!"

"But where is he taking us to?" said Kennedy, whose rifle itched in his grasp.


"He's taking us exactly to where we want to go, my dear Dick. A little
patience!"

'"Wig-a-more! wig-a-more!' as the Scotch country folks say," shouted Joe, in
high glee. "Gee-up! gee-up there!"

The huge animal now broke into a very rapid gallop. He flung his trunk from
side to side, and his monstrous bounds gave the car several rather heavy thumps.
Meanwhile the doctor stood ready, hatchet in hand, to cut the rope, should need
arise.

"But," said he, "we shall not give up our anchor until the last moment."

This drive, with an elephant for the team, lasted about an hour and a half; yet
the animal did not seem in the least fatigued. These immense creatures can go
over a great deal of ground, and, from one day to another, are found at enormous
distances from there they were last seen, like the whales, whose mass and speed
they rival.

"In fact," said Joe, "it's a whale that we have harpooned; and we're only
doing just what whalemen do when out fishing."

But a change in the nature of the ground compelled the doctor to vary his
style of locomotion. A dense grove of calmadores was descried on the horizon,
about three miles away, on the north of the prairie. So it became necessary to
detach the balloon from its draught-animal at last.

Kennedy was intrusted with the job of bringing the elephant to a halt. He
drew his rifle to his shoulder, but his position was not favorable to a successful
shot; so that the first ball fired flattened itself on the animal's skull, as it would
have done against an iron plate. The creature did not seem in the least troubled
by it; but, at the sound of the discharge, he had increased his speed, and now was
going as fast as a horse at full gallop.

"The deuce!" ejaculated Kennedy.

"What a solid head!" commented Joe.

"We'll try some conical balls behind the shoulder-joint," said Kennedy,
reloading his rifle with care. In another moment he fired.

The animal gave a terrible cry, but went on faster than ever.

"Come!" said Joe, taking aim with another gun, "I must help you, or we'll
never end it." And now two balls penetrated the creature's side.

The elephant halted, lifted his trunk, and resumed his run toward the wood
with all his speed; he shook his huge head, and the blood began to gush from his
wounds.

"Let us keep up our fire, Mr. Kennedy."

"And a continuous fire, too," urged the doctor, "for we are close on the
woods."


Ten shots more were discharged. The elephant made a fearful bound; the car
and balloon cracked as though every thing were going to pieces, and the shock
made the doctor drop his hatchet on the ground.

The situation was thus rendered really very alarming; the anchor-rope, which
had securely caught, could not be disengaged, nor could it yet be cut by the
knives of our aeronauts, and the balloon was rushing headlong toward the wood,
when the animal received a ball in the eye just as he lifted his head. On this he
halted, faltered, his knees bent under him, and he uncovered his whole flank to
the assaults of his enemies in the balloon.

"A bullet in his heart!" said Kennedy, discharging one last rifle-shot.

The elephant uttered a long bellow of terror and agony, then raised himself
up for a moment, twirling his trunk in the air, and finally fell with all his weight
upon one of his tusks, which he broke off short. He was dead.

"His tusk's broken!" exclaimed Kennedy--"ivory too that in England would
bring thirty-five guineas per hundred pounds."

"As much as that?" said Joe, scrambling down to the ground by the anchor-
rope.

"What's the use of sighing over it, Dick?" said the doctor. "Are we ivory
merchants? Did we come hither to make money?"

Joe examined the anchor and found it solidly attached to the unbroken tusk.
The doctor and Dick leaped out on the ground, while the balloon, now half
emptied, hovered over the body of the huge animal.

"What a splendid beast!" said Kennedy, "what a mass of flesh! I never saw
an elephant of that size in India!"

"There's nothing surprising about that, my dear Dick; the elephants of
Central Africa are the finest in the world. The Andersons and the Cummings
have hunted so incessantly in the neighborhood of the Cape, that these animals
have migrated to the equator, where they are often met with in large herds."

"In the mean while, I hope," added Joe, "that we'll taste a morsel of this
fellow. I'll undertake to get you a good dinner at his expense. Mr. Kennedy will
go off and hunt for an hour or two; the doctor will make an inspection of the
balloon, and, while they're busy in that way, I'll do the cooking."

"A good arrangement!" said the doctor; "so do as you like, Joe."

"As for me," said the hunter, "I shall avail myself of the two hours' recess
that Joe has condescended to let me have."

"Go, my friend, but no imprudence! Don't wander too far away."

"Never fear, doctor!" and, so saying, Dick, shouldering his gun, plunged into
the woods.

Forthwith Joe went to work at his vocation. At first he made a hole in the


ground two feet deep; this he filled with the dry wood that was so abundantly
scattered about, where it had been strewn by the elephants, whose tracks could
be seen where they had made their way through the forest. This hole filled, he
heaped a pile of fagots on it a foot in height, and set fire to it.

Then he went back to the carcass of the elephant, which had fallen only
about a hundred feet from the edge of the forest; he next proceeded adroitly to
cut off the trunk, which might have been two feet in diameter at the base; of this
he selected the most delicate portion, and then took with it one of the animal's
spongy feet. In fact, these are the finest morsels, like the hump of the bison, the
paws of the bear, and the head of the wild boar.

When the pile of fagots had been thoroughly consumed, inside and outside,
the hole, cleared of the cinders and hot coals, retained a very high temperature.
The pieces of elephant-meat, surrounded with aromatic leaves, were placed in
this extempore oven and covered with hot coals. Then Joe piled up a second
heap of sticks over all, and when it had burned out the meat was cooked to a
turn.

Then Joe took the viands from the oven, spread the savory mess upon green
leaves, and arranged his dinner upon a magnificent patch of greensward. He
finally brought out some biscuit, some coffee, and some cognac, and got a can of
pure, fresh water from a neighboring streamlet.

The repast thus prepared was a pleasant sight to behold, and Joe, without
being too proud, thought that it would also be pleasant to eat.

"A journey without danger or fatigue," he soliloquized; "your meals when
you please; a swinging hammock all the time! What more could a man ask? And
there was Kennedy, who didn't want to come!"

On his part, Dr. Ferguson was engrossed in a serious and thorough
examination of the balloon. The latter did not appear to have suffered from the
storm; the silk and the gutta percha had resisted wonderfully, and, upon
estimating the exact height of the ground and the ascensional force of the
balloon, our aeronaut saw, with satisfaction, that the hydrogen was in exactly the
same quantity as before. The covering had remained completely waterproof.

It was now only five days since our travellers had quitted Zanzibar; their
pemmican had not yet been touched; their stock of biscuit and potted meat was
enough for a long trip, and there was nothing to be replenished but the water.

The pipes and spiral seemed to be in perfect condition, since, thanks to their
india-rubber jointings, they had yielded to all the oscillations of the balloon. His
examination ended, the doctor betook himself to setting his notes in order. He
made a very accurate sketch of the surrounding landscape, with its long prairie
stretching away out of sight, the forest of calmadores, and the balloon resting


motionless over the body of the dead elephant.

At the end of his two hours, Kennedy returned with a string of fat partridges
and the haunch of an oryx, a sort of gemsbok belonging to the most agile species
of antelopes. Joe took upon himself to prepare this surplus stock of provisions
for a later repast.

"But, dinner's ready!" he shouted in his most musical voice.

And the three travellers had only to sit down on the green turf. The trunk and
feet of the elephant were declared to be exquisite. Old England was toasted, as
usual, and delicious Havanas perfumed this charming country for the first time.

Kennedy ate, drank, and chatted, like four; he was perfectly delighted with
his new life, and seriously proposed to the doctor to settle in this forest, to
construct a cabin of boughs and foliage, and, there and then, to lay the
foundation of a Robinson Crusoe dynasty in Africa.

The proposition went no further, although Joe had, at once, selected the part
of Man Friday for himself.

The country seemed so quiet, so deserted, that the doctor resolved to pass the
night on the ground, and Joe arranged a circle of watch-fires as an indispensable
barrier against wild animals, for the hyenas, cougars, and jackals, attracted by
the smell of the dead elephant, were prowling about in the neighborhood.
Kennedy had to fire his rifle several times at these unceremonious visitors, but
the night passed without any untoward occurrence.


CHAPTER EIGHTEENTH.

The Karagwah.--Lake Ukereoue.--A Night on an Island.--The Equator.--
Crossing the Lake.--The Cascades.--A View of the Country.--The Sources of the
Nile.--The Island of Benga.--The Signature of Andrea Debono.--The Flag with
the Arms of England.

At five o'clock in the morning, preparations for departure commenced. Joe,
with the hatchet which he had fortunately recovered, broke the elephant's tusks.
The balloon, restored to liberty, sped away to the northwest with our travellers,
at the rate of eighteen miles per hour.

The doctor had carefully taken his position by the altitude of the stars, during
the preceding night. He knew that he was in latitude two degrees forty minutes
below the equator, or at a distance of one hundred and sixty geographical miles.
He swept along over many villages without heeding the cries that the appearance
of the balloon excited; he took note of the conformation of places with quick
sights; he passed the slopes of the Rubemhe, which are nearly as abrupt as the
summits of the Ousagara, and, farther on, at Tenga, encountered the first


projections of the Karagwah chains, which, in his opinion, are direct spurs of the
Mountains of the Moon. So, the ancient legend which made these mountains the
cradle of the Nile, came near to the truth, since they really border upon Lake
Ukereoue, the conjectured reservoir of the waters of the great river.

From Kafuro, the main district of the merchants of that country, he descried,
at length, on the horizon, the lake so much desired and so long sought for, of
which Captain Speke caught a glimpse on the 3d of August, 1858.

Samuel Ferguson felt real emotion: he was almost in contact with one of the
principal points of his expedition, and, with his spy-glass constantly raised, he
kept every nook and corner of the mysterious region in sight. His gaze wandered
over details that might have been thus described:

"Beneath him extended a country generally destitute of cultivation; only here
and there some ravines seemed under tillage; the surface, dotted with peaks of
medium height, grew flat as it approached the lake; barley-fields took the place
of rice-plantations, and there, too, could be seen growing the species of plantain
from which the wine of the country is drawn, and mwani, the wild plant which
supplies a substitute for coffee. A collection of some fifty or more circular huts,
covered with a flowering thatch, constituted the capital of the Karagwah
country."

He could easily distinguish the astonished countenances of a rather fine-
looking race of natives of yellowish-brown complexion. Women of incredible
corpulence were dawdling about through the cultivated grounds, and the doctor
greatly surprised his companions by informing them that this rotundity, which is
highly esteemed in that region, was obtained by an obligatory diet of curdled
milk.

At noon, the Victoria was in one degree forty-five minutes south latitude, and
at one o'clock the wind was driving her directly toward the lake.

This sheet of water was christened Uyanza Victoria, or Victoria Lake, by
Captain Speke. At the place now mentioned it might measure about ninety miles
in breadth, and at its southern extremity the captain found a group of islets,
which he named the Archipelago of Bengal. He pushed his survey as far as
Muanza, on the eastern coast, where he was received by the sultan. He made a
triangulation of this part of the lake, but he could not procure a boat, either to
cross it or to visit the great island of Ukereoue which is very populous, is
governed by three sultans, and appears to be only a promontory at low tide.

The balloon approached the lake more to the northward, to the doctor's great
regret, for it had been his wish to determine its lower outlines. Its shores seemed
to be thickly set with brambles and thomy plants, growing together in wild
confusion, and were literally hidden, sometimes, from the gaze, by myriads of


mosquitoes of a light-brown hue. The country was evidently habitable and
inhabited. Troops of hippopotami could be seen disporting themselves in the
forests of reeds, or plunging beneath the whitish waters of the lake.

The latter, seen from above, presented, toward the west, so broad an horizon
that it might have been called a sea; the distance between the two shores is so
great that communication cannot be established, and storms are frequent and
violent, for the winds sweep with fury over this elevated and unsheltered basin.

The doctor experienced some difficulty in guiding his course; he was afraid
of being carried toward the east, but, fortunately, a current bore him directly
toward the north, and at six o'clock in the evening the balloon alighted on a small
desert island in thirty minutes south latitude, and thirty-two degrees fifty-two
minutes east longitude, about twenty miles from the shore.

The travellers succeeded in making fast to a tree, and, the wind having fallen
calm toward evening, they remained quietly at anchor. They dared not dream of
taking the ground, since here, as on the shores of the Uyanza, legions of
mosquitoes covered the soil in dense clouds. Joe even came back, from securing
the anchor in the tree, speckled with bites, but he kept his temper, because he
found it quite the natural thing for mosquitoes to treat him as they had done.

Nevertheless, the doctor, who was less of an optimist, let out as much rope as
he could, so as to escape these pitiless insects, that began to rise toward him with
a threatening hum.

The doctor ascertained the height of the lake above the level of the sea, as it
had been determined by Captain Speke, say three thousand seven hundred and
fifty feet.

"Here we are, then, on an island!" said Joe, scratching as though he'd tear his
nails out.

"We could make the tour of it in a jiffy," added Kennedy, "and, excepting
these confounded mosquitoes, there's not a living being to be seen on it."

"The islands with which the lake is dotted," replied the doctor, "are nothing,
after all, but the tops of submerged hills; but we are lucky to have found a retreat
among them, for the shores of the lake are inhabited by ferocious tribes. Take
your sleep, then, since Providence has granted us a tranquil night."

"Won't you do the same, doctor?"

"No, I could not close my eyes. My thoughts would banish sleep. To-
morrow, my friends, should the wind prove favorable, we shall go due north, and
we shall, perhaps, discover the sources of the Nile, that grand secret which has
so long remained impenetrable. Near as we are to the sources of the renowned
river, I could not sleep."

Kennedy and Joe, whom scientific speculations failed to disturb to that


extent, were not long in falling into sound slumber, while the doctor held his
post.

On Wednesday, April 23d, the balloon started at four o'clock in the morning,
with a grayish sky overhead; night was slow in quitting the surface of the lake,
which was enveloped in a dense fog, but presently a violent breeze scattered all
the mists, and, after the balloon had been swung to and fro for a moment, in
opposite directions, it at length veered in a straight line toward the north.

Dr. Ferguson fairly clapped his hands for joy.

"We are on the right track!" he exclaimed. "To-day or never we shall see the
Nile! Look, my friends, we are crossing the equator! We are entering our own
hemisphere!"

"Ah!" said Joe, "do you think, doctor, that the equator passes here?"

"Just here, my boy!"

"Well, then, with all respect to you, sir, it seems to me that this is the very
time to moisten it."

"Good!" said the doctor, laughing. "Let us have a glass of punch. You have a
way of comprehending cosmography that is any thing but dull."

And thus was the passage of the Victoria over the equator duly celebrated.

The balloon made rapid headway. In the west could be seen a low and but
slightly-diversified coast, and, farther away in the background, the elevated
plains of the Uganda and the Usoga. At length, the rapidity of the wind became
excessive, approaching thirty miles per hour.

The waters of the Nyanza, violently agitated, were foaming like the billows
of a sea. By the appearance of certain long swells that followed the sinking of
the waves, the doctor was enabled to conclude that the lake must have great
depth of water. Only one or two rude boats were seen during this rapid passage.

"This lake is evidently, from its elevated position, the natural reservoir of the
rivers in the eastern part of Africa, and the sky gives back to it in rain what it
takes in vapor from the streams that flow out of it. I am certain that the Nile must
here take its rise."

"Well, we shall see!" said Kennedy.

About nine o'clock they drew nearer to the western coast. It seemed deserted,
and covered with woods; the wind freshened a little toward the east, and the
other shore of the lake could be seen. It bent around in such a curve as to end in
a wide angle toward two degrees forty minutes north latitude. Lofty mountains
uplifted their arid peaks at this extremity of Nyanza; but, between them, a deep
and winding gorge gave exit to a turbulent and foaming river.

While busy managing the balloon, Dr. Ferguson never ceased reconnoitring
the country with eager eyes.


"Look!" he exclaimed, "look, my friends! the statements of the Arabs were
correct! They spoke of a river by which Lake Ukereoue discharged its waters
toward the north, and this river exists, and we are descending it, and it flows
with a speed analogous to our own! And this drop of water now gliding away
beneath our feet is, beyond all question, rushing on, to mingle with the
Mediterranean! It is the Nile!"

"It is the Nile!" reeechoed Kennedy, carried away by the enthusiasm of his
friend.

"Hurrah for the Nile!" shouted Joe, glad, and always ready to cheer for
something.

Enormous rocks, here and there, embarrassed the course of this mysterious
river. The water foamed as it fell in rapids and cataracts, which confirmed the
doctor in his preconceived ideas on the subject. From the environing mountains
numerous torrents came plunging and seething down, and the eye could take
them in by hundreds. There could be seen, starting from the soil, delicate jets of
water scattering in all directions, crossing and recrossing each other, mingling,
contending in the swiftness of their progress, and all rushing toward that nascent
stream which became a river after having drunk them in.

"Here is, indeed, the Nile!" reiterated the doctor, with the tone of profound
conviction. "The origin of its name, like the origin of its waters, has fired the
imagination of the learned; they have sought to trace it from the Greek, the
Coptic, the Sanscrit; but all that matters littlke now, since we have made it
surrender the secret of its source!"

"But," said the Scotchman, "how are you to make sure of the identity of this
river with the one recognized by the travellers from the north?"

"We shall have certain, irrefutable, convincing, and infallible proof," replied
Ferguson, "should the wind hold another hour in our favor!"

The mountains drew farther apart, revealing in their place numerous villages,
and fields of white Indian corn, doura, and sugar-cane. The tribes inhabiting the
region seemed excited and hostile; they manifested more anger than adoration,
and evidently saw in the aeronauts only obtrusive strangers, and not
condescending deities. It appeared as though, in approaching the sources of the
Nile, these men came to rob them of something, and so the Victoria had to keep
out of range of their muskets.

"To land here would be a ticklish matter!" said the Scot.

"Well!" said Joe, "so much the worse for these natives. They'll have to do
without the pleasure of our conversation."

"Nevertheless, descend I must," said the doctor, "were it only for a quarter of
an hour. Without doing so I cannot verify the results of our expedition."


"It is indispensable, then, doctor?"

"Indispensable; and we will descend, even if we have to do so with a volley
of musketry."

"The thing suits me," said Kennedy, toying with his pet rifle.

"And I'm ready, master, whenever you say the word!" added Joe, preparing
for the fight.

"It would not be the first time," remarked the doctor, "that science has been
followed up, sword in hand. The same thing happened to a French savant among
the mountains of Spain, when he was measuring the terrestrial meridian."

"Be easy on that score, doctor, and trust to your two body-guards."

"Are we there, master?"

"Not yet. In fact, I shall go up a little, first, in order to get an exact idea of the
configuration of the country."

The hydrogen expanded, and in less than ten minutes the balloon was soaring
at a height of twenty-five hundred feet above the ground.

From that elevation could be distinguished an inextricable network of
smaller streams which the river received into its bosom; others came from the
west, from between numerous hills, in the midst of fertile plains.

"We are not ninety miles from Gondokoro," said the doctor, measuring off
the distance on his map, "and less than five miles from the point reached by the
explorers from the north. Let us descend with great care."

And, upon this, the balloon was lowered about two thousand feet.

"Now, my friends, let us be ready, come what may."

"Ready it is!" said Dick and Joe, with one voice.

"Good!"

In a few moments the balloon was advancing along the bed of the river, and
scarcely one hundred feet above the ground. The Nile measured but fifty
fathoms in width at this point, and the natives were in great excitement, rushing
to and fro, tumultuously, in the villages that lined the banks of the stream. At the
second degree it forms a perpendicular cascade of ten feet in height, and
consequently impassable by boats.

"Here, then, is the cascade mentioned by Debono!" exclaimed the doctor.

The basin of the river spread out, dotted with numerous islands, which Dr.
Ferguson devoured with his eyes. He seemed to be seeking for a point of
reference which he had not yet found.

By this time, some blacks, having ventured in a boat just under the balloon,
Kennedy saluted them with a shot from his rifle, that made them regain the bank
at their utmost speed.

"A good journey to you," bawled Joe, "and if I were in your place, I wouldn't


try coming back again. I should be mightily afraid of a monster that can hurl
thunderbolts when he pleases."

But, all at once, the doctor snatched up his spy-glass, and directed it toward
an island reposing in the middle of the river.

"Four trees!" he exclaimed; "look, down there!" Sure enough, there were
four trees standing alone at one end of it.

"It is Bengal Island! It is the very same," repeated the doctor, exultingly.

"And what of that?" asked Dick.

"It is there that we shall alight, if God permits."

"But, it seems to be inhabited, doctor."

"Joe is right; and, unless I'm mistaken, there is a group of about a score of
natives on it now."

"We'll make them scatter; there'll be no great trouble in that," responded
Ferguson.

"So be it," chimed in the hunter.

The sun was at the zenith as the balloon approached the island.

The blacks, who were members of the Makado tribe, were howling lustily,
and one of them waved his bark hat in the air. Kennedy took aim at him, fired,
and his hat flew about him in pieces. Thereupon there was a general scamper.
The natives plunged headlong into the river, and swam to the opposite bank.
Immediately, there came a shower of balls from both banks, along with a perfect
cloud of arrows, but without doing the balloon any damage, where it rested with
its anchor snugly secured in the fissure of a rock. Joe lost no time in sliding to
the ground.

"The ladder!" cried the doctor. "Follow me, Kennedy."

"What do you wish, sir?"

"Let us alight. I want a witness."

"Here I am!"

"Mind your post, Joe, and keep a good lookout."

"Never fear, doctor; I'll answer for all that."

"Come, Dick," said the doctor, as he touched the ground.

So saying, he drew his companion along toward a group of rocks that rose
upon one point of the island; there, after searching for some time, he began to
rummage among the brambles, and, in so doing, scratched his hands until they
bled.

Suddenly he grasped Kennedy's arm, exclaiming: "Look! look!"

"Letters!"

Yes; there, indeed, could be descried, with perfect precision of outline, some
letters carved on the rock. It was quite easy to make them out:


"A.D."

"A.D.!" repeated Dr. Ferguson. "Andrea Debono-- the very signature of the
traveller who farthest ascended the current of the Nile."

"No doubt of that, friend Samuel," assented Kennedy.

"Are you now convinced?"

"Tt is the Nile! We cannot entertain a doubt on that score now," was the reply.

The doctor, for the last time, examined those precious initials, the exact form
and size of which he carefully noted.

"And now," said he--"now for the balloon!"

"Quickly, then, for I see some of the natives getting ready to recross the
river."

"That matters little to us now. Let the wind but send us northward for a few
hours, and we shall reach Gondokoro, and press the hands of some of our
countrymen."

Ten minutes more, and the balloon was majestically ascending, while Dr.
Ferguson, in token of success, waved the English flag triumphantly from his car.


CHAPTER NINETEENTH.

The Nile.--The Trembling Mountain.--A Remembrance of the Country.--The
Narratives of the Arabs.--The Nyam-Nyams.--Joe's Shrewd Cogitations.--The
Balloon runs the Gantlet.--Aerostatic Ascensions.--Madame Blanchard.

"Which way do we head?" asked Kennedy, as he saw his friend consulting
the compass.

"North-northeast."

"The deuce! but that's not the north?"

"No, Dick; and I'm afraid that we shall have some trouble in getting to
Gondokoro. I am sorry for it; but, at last, we have succeeded in connecting the
explorations from the east with those from the north; and we must not
complain."

The balloon was now receding gradually from the Nile.

"One last look," said the doctor, "at this impassable latitude, beyond which
the most intrepid travellers could not make their way. There are those intractable
tribes, of whom Petherick, Arnaud, Miuni, and the young traveller Lejean, to
whom we are indebted for the best work on the Upper Nile, have spoken."

"Thus, then," added Kennedy, inquiringly, "our discoveries agree with the
speculations of science."

"Absolutely so. The sources of the White Nile, of the Bahr-el-Abiad, are
immersed in a lake as large as a sea; it is there that it takes its rise. Poesy,


undoubtedly, loses something thereby. People were fond of ascribing a celestial
origin to this king of rivers. The ancients gave it the name of an ocean, and were
not far from believing that it flowed directly from the sun; but we must come
down from these flights from time to time, and accept what science teaches us.
There will not always be scientific men, perhaps; but there always will be poets."

"We can still see cataracts," said Joe.

"Those are the cataracts of Makedo, in the third degree of latitude. Nothing
could be more accurate. Oh, if we could only have followed the course of the
Nile for a few hours!"

"And down yonder, below us, I see the top of a mountain,” said the hunter.

"That is Mount Longwek, the Trembling Mountain of the Arabs. This whole
country was visited by Debono, who went through it under the name of Latif-
Effendi. The tribes living near the Nile are hostile to each other, and are
continually waging a war of extermination. You may form some idea, then, of
the difficulties he had to encounter."

The wind was carrying the balloon toward the northwest, and, in order to
avoid Mount Longwek, it was necessary to seek a more slanting current.

"My friends," said the doctor, "here is where OUR passage of the African
Continent really commences; up to this time we have been following the traces
of our predecessors. Henceforth we are to launch ourselves upon the unknown.
We shall not lack the courage, shall we?"

"Never!" said Dick and Joe together, almost in a shout.

"Onward, then, and may we have the help of Heaven!"

At ten o'clock at night, after passing over ravines, forests, and scattered
villages, the aeronauts reached the side of the Trembling Mountain, along whose
gentle slopes they went quietly gliding. In that memorable day, the 23d of April,
they had, in fifteen hours, impelled by a rapid breeze, traversed a distance of
more than three hundred and fifteen miles.

But this latter part of the journey had left them in dull spirits, and complete
silence reigned in the car. Was Dr. Ferguson absorbed in the thought of his
discoveries? Were his two companions thinking of their trip through those
unknown regions? There were, no doubt, mingled with these reflections, the
keenest reminiscences of home and distant friends. Joe alone continued to
manifest the same careless philosophy, finding it QUITE NATURAL that home
should not be there, from the moment that he left it; but he respected the silent
mood of his friends, the doctor and Kennedy.

About ten the balloon anchored on the side of the Trembling Mountain, so
called, because, in Arab tradition, it is said to tremble the instant that a
Mussulman sets foot upon it. The travellers then partook of a substantial meal,


and all quietly passed the night as usual, keeping the regular watches.

On awaking the next morning, they all had pleasanter feelings. The weather
was fine, and the wind was blowing from the right quarter; so that a good
breakfast, seasoned with Joe's merry pranks, put them in high good-humor.

The region they were now crossing is very extensive. It borders on the
Mountains of the Moon on one side, and those of Darfur on the other--a space
about as broad as Europe.

"We are, no doubt, crossing what is supposed to be the kingdom of Usoga.
Geographers have pretended that there existed, in the centre of Africa, a vast
depression, an immense central lake. We shall see whether there is any truth in
that idea," said the doctor.

"But how did they come to think so?" asked Kennedy.

"From the recitals of the Arabs. Those fellows are great narrators--too much
so, probably. Some travellers, who had got as far as Kazeh, or the great lakes,
saw Slaves that had been brought from this region; interrogated them concerning
it, and, from their different narratives, made up a jumble of notions, and deduced
systems from them. Down at the bottom of it all there is some appearance of
truth; and you see that they were right about the sources of the Nile."

"Nothing could be more correct," said Kennedy. "It was by the aid of these
documents that some attempts at maps were made, and so I am going to try to
follow our route by one of them, rectifying it when need be."

"Is all this region inhabited?" asked Joe.

"Undoubtedly; and disagreeably inhabited, too."

"T thought so."

"These scattered tribes come, one and all, under the title of Nyam-Nyams,
and this compound word is only a sort of nickname. It imitates the sound of
chewing."

"That's it! Excellent!" said Joe, champing his teeth as though he were eating;
"Nyam-Nyam."

"My good Joe, if you were the immediate object of this chewing, you
wouldn't find it so excellent."

"Why, what's the reason, sir?"

"These tribes are considered man-eaters."

"Is that really the case?"

"Not a doubt of it! It has also been asserted that these natives had tails, like
mere quadrupeds; but it was soon discovered that these appendages belonged to
the skins of animals that they wore for clothing."

"More's the pity! a tail's a nice thing to chase away mosquitoes."

"That may be, Joe; but we must consign the story to the domain of fable, like


the dogs’ heads which the traveller, Brun-Rollet, attributed to other tribes."

"Dogs' heads, eh? Quite convenient for barking, and even for man-eating!"

"But one thing that has been, unfortunately, proven true, is, the ferocity of
these tribes, who are really very fond of human flesh, and devour it with
avidity."

"I only hope that they won't take such a particular fancy to mine!" said Joe,
with comic solemnity.

"See that!" said Kennedy.

"Yes, indeed, sir; if I have to be eaten, in a moment of famine, I want it to be
for your benefit and my master's; but the idea of feeding those black fellows--
gracious! I'd die of shame!"

"Well, then, Joe," said Kennedy, "that's understood; we count upon you in
case of need!"

"At your service, gentlemen!"

"Joe talks in this way so as to make us take good care of him, and fatten him


up."

"Maybe so!" said Joe. "Every man for himself."

In the afternoon, the sky became covered with a warm mist, that oozed from
the soil; the brownish vapor scarcely allowed the beholder to distinguish objects,
and so, fearing collision with some unexpected mountain-peak, the doctor, about
five o'clock, gave the signal to halt.

The night passed without accident, but in such profound obscurity, that it was
necessary to use redoubled vigilance.

The monsoon blew with extreme violence during all the next morning. The
wind buried itself in the lower cavities of the balloon and shook the appendage
by which the dilating-pipes entered the main apparatus. They had, at last, to be
tied up with cords, Joe acquitting himself very skilfully in performing that
operation.

He had occasion to observe, at the same time, that the orifice of the balloon
still remained hermetically sealed.

"That is a matter of double importance for us," said the doctor; "in the first
place, we avoid the escape of precious gas, and then, again, we do not leave
behind us an inflammable train, which we should at last inevitably set fire to,
and so be consumed."

"That would be a disagreeable travelling incident!" said Joe.

"Should we be hurled to the ground?" asked Kennedy.

"Hurled! No, not quite that. The gas would burn quietly, and we should
descend little by little. A similar accident happened to a French aeronaut,
Madame Blanchard. She ignited her balloon while sending off fireworks, but she


did not fall, and she would not have been killed, probably, had not her car dashed
against a chimney and precipitated her to the ground."

"Let us hope that nothing of the kind may happen to us," said the hunter. "Up
to this time our trip has not seemed to me very dangerous, and I can see nothing
to prevent us reaching our destination."

"Nor can I either, my dear Dick; accidents are generally caused by the
imprudence of the aeronauts, or the defective construction of their apparatus.
However, in thousands of aerial ascensions, there have not been twenty fatal
accidents. Usually, the danger is in the moment of leaving the ground, or of
alighting, and therefore at those junctures we should never omit the utmost
precaution."

"It's breakfast-time," said Joe; "we'll have to put up with preserved meat and
coffee until Mr. Kennedy has had another chance to get us a good slice of
venison."


CHAPTER TWENTIETH.

The Celestial Bottle.--The Fig-Palms.--The Mammoth Trees.--The Tree of
War.--The Winged Team.--Two Native Tribes in Battle.--A Massacre.--An
Intervention from above.

The wind had become violent and irregular; the balloon was running the
gantlet through the air. Tossed at one moment toward the north, at another
toward the south, it could not find one steady current.

"We are moving very swiftly without advancing much," said Kennedy,
remarking the frequent oscillations of the needle of the compass.

"The balloon is rushing at the rate of at least thirty miles an hour. Lean over,
and see how the country is gliding away beneath us!" said the doctor.

"See! that forest looks as though it were precipitating itself upon us!"

"The forest has become a clearing!" added the other.

"And the clearing a village!" continued Joe, a moment or two later. "Look at
the faces of those astonished darkys!"

"Oh! it's natural enough that they should be astonished," said the doctor.
"The French peasants, when they first saw a balloon, fired at it, thinking that it
was an aerial monster. A Soudan negro may be excused, then, for opening his
eyes VERY wide!"

"Faith!" said Joe, as the Victoria skimmed closely along the ground, at
scarcely the elevation of one hundred feet, and immediately over a village, "I'll
throw them an empty bottle, with your leave, doctor, and if it reaches them safe
and sound, they'll worship it; if it breaks, they'll make talismans of the pieces."


So saying, he flung out a bottle, which, of course, was broken into a
thousand fragments, while the negroes scampered into their round huts, uttering
shrill cries.

A little farther on, Kennedy called out: "Look at that strange tree! The upper
part is of one kind and the lower part of another!"

"Well!" said Joe, "here's a country where the trees grow on top of each
other."

"It's simply the trunk of a fig-tree," replied the doctor, "on which there is a
little vegetating earth. Some fine day, the wind left the seed of a palm on it, and
the seed has taken root and grown as though it were on the plain ground."

"A fine new style of gardening,” said Joe, "and I'll import the idea to
England. It would be just the thing in the London parks; without counting that it
would be another way to increase the number of fruit-trees. We could have
gardens up in the air; and the small house-owners would like that!"

At this moment, they had to raise the balloon so as to pass over a forest of
trees that were more than three hundred feet in height--a kind of ancient banyan.

"What magnificent trees!" exclaimed Kennedy. "I never saw any thing so
fine as the appearance of these venerable forests. Look, doctor!"

"The height of these banyans is really remarkable, my dear Dick; and yet,
they would be nothing astonishing in the New World."

"Why, are there still loftier trees in existence?"

"Undoubtedly; among the 'mammoth trees' of California, there is a cedar four
hundred and eighty feet in height. It would overtop the Houses of Parliament,
and even the Great Pyramid of Egypt. The trunk at the surface of the ground was
one hundred and twenty feet in circumference, and the concentric layers of the
wood disclosed an age of more than four thousand years."

"But then, sir, there was nothing wonderful in it! When one has lived four
thousand years, one ought to be pretty tall!" was Joe's remark.

Meanwhile, during the doctor's recital and Joe's response, the forest had
given place to a large collection of huts surrounding an open space. In the middle
of this grew a solitary tree, and Joe exclaimed, as he caught sight of it:

"Well! if that tree has produced such flowers as those, for the last four
thousand years, I have to offer it my compliments, anyhow," and he pointed to a
gigantic sycamore, whose whole trunk was covered with human bones. The
flowers of which Joe spoke were heads freshly severed from the bodies, and
suspended by daggers thrust into the bark of the tree.

"The war-tree of these cannibals!" said the doctor; "the Indians merely carry
off the scalp, but these negroes take the whole head."

"A mere matter of fashion!" said Joe. But, already, the village and the


bleeding heads were disappearing on the horizon. Another place offered a still
more revolting spectacle--half-devoured corpses; skeletons mouldering to dust;
human limbs scattered here and there, and left to feed the jackals and hyenas.

"No doubt, these are the bodies of criminals; according to the custom in
Abyssinia, these people have left them a prey to the wild beasts, who kill them
with their terrible teeth and claws, and then devour them at their leisure.

"Not a whit more cruel than hanging!" said the Scot; "filthier, that's all!"

"In the southern regions of Africa, they content themselves," resumed the
doctor, "with shutting up the criminal in his own hut with his cattle, and
sometimes with his family. They then set fire to the hut, and the whole party are
bumed together. I call that cruel; but, like friend Kennedy, I think that the
gallows is quite as cruel, quite as barbarous."

Joe, by the aid of his keen sight, which he did not fail to use continually,
noticed some flocks of birds of prey flitting about the horizon.

"They are eagles!" exclaimed Kennedy, after reconnoitring them through the
glass, "magnificent birds, whose flight is as rapid as ours."

"Heaven preserve us from their attacks!" said the doctor, "they are more to be
feared by us than wild beasts or savage tribes."

"Bah!" said the hunter, "we can drive them off with a few rifle-shots."

"Nevertheless, I would prefer, dear Dick, not having to rely upon your skill,
this time, for the silk of our balloon could not resist their sharp beaks;
fortunately, the huge birds will, I believe, be more frightened than attracted by
our machine."

"Yes! but a new idea, and I have dozens of them," said Joe; "if we could only
manage to capture a team of live eagles, we could hitch them to the balloon, and
they'd haul us through the air!"

"The thing has been seriously proposed," replied the doctor, "but I think it
hardly practicable with creatures naturally so restive."

"Oh! we'd tame them," said Joe. "Instead of driving them with bits, we'd do it
with eye-blinkers that would cover their eyes. Half blinded in that way, they'd go
to the right or to the left, as we desired; when blinded completely, they would
stop."

"Allow me, Joe, to prefer a favorable wind to your team of eagles. It costs
less for fodder, and is more reliable."

"Well, you may have your choice, master, but I stick to my idea."

It now was noon. The Victoria had been going at a more moderate speed for
some time; the country merely passed below it; it no longer flew.

Suddenly, shouts and whistlings were heard by our aeronauts, and, leaning
over the edge of the car, they saw on the open plain below them an exciting


spectacle.

Two hostile tribes were fighting furiously, and the air was dotted with volleys
of arrows. The combatants were so intent upon their murderous work that they
did not notice the arrival of the balloon; there were about three hundred mingled
confusedly in the deadly struggle: most of them, red with the blood of the
wounded, in which they fairly wallowed, were horrible to behold.

As they at last caught sight of the balloon, there was a momentary pause; but
their yells redoubled, and some arrows were shot at the Victoria, one of them
coming close enough for Joe to catch it with his hand.

"Let us rise out of range," exclaimed the doctor; "there must be no rashness!
We are forbidden any risk."

Meanwhile, the massacre continued on both sides, with battle-axes and war-
clubs; as quickly as one of the combatants fell, a hostile warrior ran up to cut off
his head, while the women, mingling in the fray, gathered up these bloody
trophies, and piled them together at either extremity of the battle-field. Often,
too, they even fought for these hideous spoils.

"What a frightful scene!" said Kennedy, with profound disgust.

"They're ugly acquaintances!" added Joe; "but then, if they had uniforms
they'd be just like the fighters of all the rest of the world!"

"IT have a keen hankering to take a hand in at that fight," said the hunter,
brandishing his rifle.

"No! no!" objected the doctor, vehemently; "no, let us not meddle with what
don't concern us. Do you know which is right or which is wrong, that you would
assume the part of the Almighty? Let us, rather, hurry away from this revolting
spectacle. Could the great captains of the world float thus above the scenes of
their exploits, they would at last, perhaps, conceive a disgust for blood and
conquest."

The chieftain of one of the contending parties was remarkable for his athletic
proportions, his great height, and herculean strength. With one hand he plunged
his spear into the compact ranks of his enemies, and with the other mowed large
spaces in them with his battle-axe. Suddenly he flung away his war-club, red
with blood, rushed upon a wounded warrior, and, chopping off his arm at a
single stroke, carried the dissevered member to his mouth, and bit it again and
again.

"Ah!" ejaculated Kennedy, "the horrible brute! I can hold back no longer,"
and, as he spoke, the huge savage, struck full in the forehead with a rifle-ball,
fell headlong to the ground.

Upon this sudden mishap of their leader, his warriors seemed struck dumb
with amazement; his supernatural death awed them, while it reanimated the


courage and ardor of their adversaries, and, in a twinkling, the field was
abandoned by half the combatants.

"Come, let us look higher up for a current to bear us away. I am sick of this
spectacle," said the doctor.

But they could not get away so rapidly as to avoid the sight of the victorious
tribe rushing upon the dead and the wounded, scrambling and disputing for the
still warm and reeking flesh, and eagerly devouring it.

"Faugh!" uttered Joe, "it's sickening."

The balloon rose as it expanded; the howlings of the brutal horde, in the
delirium of their orgy, pursued them for a few minutes; but, at length, borne
away toward the south, they were carried out of sight and hearing of this horrible
spectacle of cannibalism.

The surface of the country was now greatly varied, with numerous streams of
water, bearing toward the east. The latter, undoubtedly, ran into those affluents of
Lake Nu, or of the River of the Gazelles, concerning which M. Guillaume
Lejean has given such curious details.

At nightfall, the balloon cast anchor in twenty-seven degrees east longitude,
and four degrees twenty minutes north latitude, after a day's trip of one hundred
and fifty miles.


CHAPTER TWENTY-FIRST.

Strange Sounds.--A Night Attack.--Kennedy and Joe in the Tree.--Two
Shots.--"Help! help!"--Reply in French.--The Morning.--The Missionary. --The
Plan of Rescue.

The night came on very dark. The doctor had not been able to reconnoitre the
country. He had made fast to a very tall tree, from which he could distinguish
only a confused mass through the gloom.

As usual, he took the nine-o'clock watch, and at midnight Dick relieved him.

"Keep a sharp lookout, Dick!" was the doctor's good-night injunction.

"Is there any thing new on the carpet?"

"No; but I thought that I heard vague sounds below us, and, as I don't exactly
know where the wind has carried us to, even an excess of caution would do no
harm."

"You've probably heard the cries of wild beasts."

"No! the sounds seemed to me something altogether different from that; at all
events, on the least alarm don't fail to waken us."

"T'll do so, doctor; rest easy."

After listening attentively for a moment or two longer, the doctor, hearing


nothing more, threw himself on his blankets and went asleep.

The sky was covered with dense clouds, but not a breath of air was stirring;
and the balloon, kept in its place by only a single anchor, experienced not the
slightest oscillation.

Kennedy, leaning his elbow on the edge of the car, so as to keep an eye on
the cylinder, which was actively at work, gazed out upon the calm obscurity; he
eagerly scanned the horizon, and, as often happens to minds that are uneasy or
possessed with preconceived notions, he fancied that he sometimes detected
vague gleams of light in the distance.

At one moment he even thought that he saw them only two hundred paces
away, quite distinctly, but it was a mere flash that was gone as quickly as it
came, and he noticed nothing more. It was, no doubt, one of those luminous
illusions that sometimes impress the eye in the midst of very profound darkness.

Kennedy was getting over his nervousness and falling into his wandering
meditations again, when a sharp whistle pierced his ear.

Was that the cry of an animal or of a night-bird, or did it come from human
lips?

Kennedy, perfectly comprehending the gravity of the situation, was on the
point of waking his companions, but he reflected that, in any case, men or
animals, the creatures that he had heard must be out of reach. So he merely saw
that his weapons were all right, and then, with his night-glass, again plunged his
gaze into space.

It was not long before he thought he could perceive below him vague forms
that seemed to be gliding toward the tree, and then, by the aid of a ray of
moonlight that shot like an electric flash between two masses of cloud, he
distinctly made out a group of human figures moving in the shadow.

The adventure with the dog-faced baboons returned to his memory, and he
placed his hand on the doctor's shoulder.

The latter was awake in a moment.

"Silence!" said Dick. "Let us speak below our breath."

"Has any thing happened?"

"Yes, let us waken Joe."

The instant that Joe was aroused, Kennedy told him what he had seen.

"Those confounded monkeys again!" said Joe.

"Possibly, but we must be on our guard."

"Joe and I," said Kennedy, "will climb down the tree by the ladder."

"And, in the meanwhile," added the doctor, "I will take my measures so that
we can ascend rapidly at a moment's warning."

"Agreed!"


"Let us go down, then!" said Joe.

"Don't use your weapons, excepting at the last extremity! It would be a
useless risk to make the natives aware of our presence in such a place as this."

Dick and Joe replied with signs of assent, and then letting themselves slide
noiselessly toward the tree, took their position in a fork among the strong
branches where the anchor had caught.

For some moments they listened minutely and motionlessly among the
foliage, and ere long Joe seized Kenedy's hand as he heard a sort of rubbing
sound against the bark of the tree.

"Don't you hear that?" he whispered.

"Yes, and it's coming nearer."

"Suppose it should be a serpent? That hissing or whistling that you heard
before--"

"No! there was something human in it."

"I'd prefer the savages, for I have a horror of those snakes."

"The noise is increasing,” said Kennedy, again, after a lapse of a few
moments.

"Yes! something's coming up toward us--climbing."

"Keep watch on this side, and I'll take care of the other."

"Very good!"

There they were, isolated at the top of one of the larger branches shooting out
in the midst of one of those miniature forests called baobab-trees. The darkness,
heightened by the density of the foliage, was profound; however, Joe, leaning
over to Kennedy's ear and pointing down the tree, whispered:

"The blacks! They're climbing toward us."

The two friends could even catch the sound of a few words uttered in the
lowest possible tones.

Joe gently brought his rifle to his shoulder as he spoke.

"Wait!" said Kennedy.

Some of the natives had really climbed the baobab, and now they were seen
rising on all sides, winding along the boughs like reptiles, and advancing slowly
but surely, all the time plainly enough discernible, not merely to the eye but to
the nostrils, by the horrible odors of the rancid grease with which they bedaub
their bodies.

Ere long, two heads appeared to the gaze of Kennedy and Joe, on a level
with the very branch to which they were clinging.

"Attention!" said Kennedy. "Fire!"

The double concussion resounded like a thunderbolt and died away into cries
of rage and pain, and in a moment the whole horde had disappeared.


But, in the midst of these yells and howls, a strange, unexpected--nay what
seemed an impossible--cry had been heard! A human voice had, distinctly, called
aloud in the French language--

"Help! help!"

Kennedy and Joe, dumb with amazement, had regained the car immediately.

"Did you hear that?" the doctor asked them.

"Undoubtedly, that supernatural cry, 'A moi! a moi!’ comes from a
Frenchman in the hands of these barbarians!"

"A traveller."

"A missionary, perhaps."

"Poor wretch!" said Kennedy, "they're assassinating him--making a martyr of
him!"

The doctor then spoke, and it was impossible for him to conceal his
emotions.

"There can be no doubt of it," he said; "some unfortunate Frenchman has
fallen into the hands of these savages. We must not leave this place without
doing all in our power to save him. When he heard the sound of our guns, he
recognized an unhoped-for assistance, a providential interposition. We shall not
disappoint his last hope. Are such your views?"

"They are, doctor, and we are ready to obey you."

"Let us, then, lay our heads together to devise some plan, and in the moming
we'll try to rescue him."

"But how shall we drive off those abominable blacks?" asked Kennedy.

"It's quite clear to me, from the way in which they made off, that they are
unacquainted with fire-arms. We must, therefore, profit by their fears; but we
shall await daylight before acting, and then we can form our plans of rescue
according to circumstances."

"The poor captive cannot be far off," said Joe, "because--"

"Help! help!" repeated the voice, but much more feebly this time.

"The savage wretches!" exclaimed Joe, trembling with indignation. "Suppose
they should kill him to-night!"

"Do you hear, doctor," resumed Kennedy, seizing the doctor's hand.
"Suppose they should kill him to-night!"

"It is not at all likely, my friends. These savage tribes kill their captives in
broad daylight; they must have the sunshine."

"Now, if I were to take advantage of the darkness to slip down to the poor
fellow?" said Kennedy.

"And I'll go with you," said Joe, warmly.

"Pause, my friends--pause! The suggestion does honor to your hearts and to


your courage; but you would expose us all to great peril, and do still greater
harm to the unfortunate man whom you wish to aid."

"Why so?" asked Kennedy. "These savages are frightened and dispersed:
they will not return."

"Dick, I implore you, heed what I say. I am acting for the common good; and
if by any accident you should be taken by surprise, all would be lost."

"But, think of that poor wretch, hoping for aid, waiting there, praying, calling
aloud. Is no one to go to his assistance? He must think that his senses deceived
him; that he heard nothing!"

"We can reassure him, on that score," said Dr. Ferguson --and, standing erect,
making a speaking-trumpet of his hands, he shouted at the top of his voice, in
French: "Whoever you are, be of good cheer! Three friends are watching over
you."

A terrific howl from the savages responded to these words--no doubt
drowning the prisoner's reply.

"They are murdering him! they are murdering him!" exclaimed Kennedy.
"Our interference will have served no other purpose than to hasten the hour of
his doom. We must act!"

"But how, Dick? What do you expect to do in the midst of this darkness?"

"Oh, if it was only daylight!" sighed Joe.

"Well, and suppose it were daylight?" said the doctor, in a singular tone.

"Nothing more simple, doctor," said Kennedy. "I'd go down and scatter all
these savage villains with powder and ball!"

"And you, Joe, what would you do?"

"I, master? why, I'd act more prudently, maybe, by telling the prisoner to
make his escape in a certain direction that we'd agree upon."

"And how would you get him to know that?"

"By means of this arrow that I caught flying the other day. I'd tie a note to it,
or I'd just call out to him in a loud voice what you want him to do, because these
black fellows don't understand the language that you'd speak in!"

"Your plans are impracticable, my dear friends. The greatest difficulty would
be for this poor fellow to escape at all--even admitting that he should manage to
elude the vigilance of his captors. As for you, my dear Dick, with determined
daring, and profiting by their alarm at our fire-arms, your project might possibly
succeed; but, were it to fail, you would be lost, and we should have two persons
to save instead of one. No! we must put ALL the chances on OUR side, and go
to work differently."

"But let us act at once!" said the hunter.

"Perhaps we may," said the doctor, throwing considerable stress upon the


words.

"Why, doctor, can you light up such darkness as this?"

"Who knows, Joe?"

"Ah! if you can do that, you're the greatest learned man in the world!"

The doctor kept silent for a few moments; he was thinking. His two
companions looked at him with much emotion, for they were greatly excited by
the strangeness of the situation. Ferguson at last resumed:

"Here is my plan: We have two hundred pounds of ballast left, since the bags
we brought with us are still untouched. I'll suppose that this prisoner, who is
evidently exhausted by suffering, weighs as much as one of us; there will still
remain sixty pounds of ballast to throw out, in case we should want to ascend
suddenly."

"How do you expect to manage the balloon?" asked Kennedy.

"This is the idea, Dick: you will admit that if I can get to the prisoner, and
throw out a quantity of ballast, equal to his weight, I shall have in nowise altered
the equilibrium of the balloon. But, then, if I want to get a rapid ascension, so as
to escape these savages, I must employ means more energetic than the cylinder.
Well, then, in throwing out this overplus of ballast at a given moment, I am
certain to rise with great rapidity."

"That's plain enough."

"Yes; but there is one drawback: it consists in the fact that, in order to
descend after that, I should have to part with a quantity of gas proportionate to
the surplus ballast that I had thrown out. Now, the gas is precious; but we must
not haggle over it when the life of a fellow-creature is at stake."

"You are right, sir; we must do every thing in our power to save him."

"Let us work, then, and get these bags all arranged on the rim of the car, so
that they may be thrown overboard at one movement."

"But this darkness?"

"It hides our preparations, and will be dispersed only when they are finished.
Take care to have all our weapons close at hand. Perhaps we may have to fire; so
we have one shot in the rifle; four for the two muskets; twelve in the two
revolvers; or seventeen in all, which might be fired in a quarter of a minute. But
perhaps we shall not have to resort to all this noisy work. Are you ready?"

"We're ready," responded Joe.

The sacks were placed as requested, and the arms were put in good order.

"Very good!" said the doctor. "Have an eye to every thing. Joe will see to
throwing out the ballast, and Dick will carry off the prisoner; but let nothing be
done until I give the word. Joe will first detach the anchor, and then quickly
make his way back to the car."


Joe let himself slide down by the rope; and, in a few moments, reappeared at
his post; while the balloon, thus liberated, hung almost motionless in the air.

In the mean time the doctor assured himself of the presence of a sufficient
quantity of gas in the mixing-tank to feed the cylinder, if necessary, without
there being any need of resorting for some time to the Buntzen battery. He then
took out the two perfectly-isolated conducting-wires, which served for the
decomposition of the water, and, searching in his travelling-sack, brought forth
two pieces of charcoal, cut down to a sharp point, and fixed one at the end of
each wire.

His two friends looked on, without knowing what he was about, but they
kept perfectly silent. When the doctor had finished, he stood up erect in the car,
and, taking the two pieces of charcoal, one in each hand, drew their points nearly
together.

In a twinkling, an intense and dazzling light was produced, with an
insupportable glow between the two pointed ends of charcoal, and a huge jet of
electric radiance literally broke the darkness of the night.

"Oh!" ejaculated the astonished friends.

"Not a word!" cautioned the doctor.


CHAPTER TWENTY-SECOND.

The Jet of Light.--The Missionary.--The Rescue in a Ray of Electricity.--A
Lazarist Priest.--But littlke Hope.--The Doctor's Care.--A Life of Self-Denial. --
Passing a Volcano.

Dr. Ferguson darted his powerful electric jet toward various points of space,
and caused it to rest on a spot from which shouts of terror were heard. His
companions fixed their gaze eagerly on the place.

The baobab, over which the balloon was hanging almost motionless, stood in
the centre of a clearing, where, between fields of Indian-corn and sugar-cane,
were seen some fifty low, conical huts, around which swarmed a numerous tribe.

A hundred feet below the balloon stood a large post, or stake, and at its foot
lay a human being--a young man of thirty years or more, with long black hair,
half naked, wasted and wan, bleeding, covered with wounds, his head bowed
over upon his breast, as Christ's was, when He hung upon the cross.

The hair, cut shorter on the top of his skull, still indicated the place of a half-
effaced tonsure.

"A missionary! a priest!" exclaimed Joe.

"Poor, unfortunate man!" said Kennedy.

"We must save him, Dick!" responded the doctor; "we must save him!"


The crowd of blacks, when they saw the balloon over their heads, like a huge
comet with a train of dazzling light, were seized with a terror that may be readily
imagined. Upon hearing their cries, the prisoner raised his head. His eyes
gleamed with sudden hope, and, without too thoroughly comprehending what
was taking place, he stretched out his hands to his unexpected deliverers.

"He is alive!" exclaimed Ferguson. "God be praised! The savages have got a
fine scare, and we shall save him! Are you ready, friends?"

"Ready, doctor, at the word."

"Joe, shut off the cylinder!"

The doctor's order was executed. An almost imperceptible breath of air
impelled the balloon directly over the prisoner, at the same time that it gently
lowered with the contraction of the gas. For about ten minutes it remained
floating in the midst of luminous waves, for Ferguson continued to flash right
down upon the throng his glowing sheaf of rays, which, here and there, marked
out swift and vivid sheets of light. The tribe, under the influence of an
indescribable terror, disappeared little by little in the huts, and there was
complete solitude around the stake. The doctor had, therefore, been right in
counting upon the fantastic appearance of the balloon throwing out rays, as vivid
as the sun's, through this intense gloom.

The car was approaching the ground; but a few of the savages, more
audacious than the rest, guessing that their victim was about to escape from their
clutches, came back with loud yells, and Kennedy seized his rifle. The doctor,
however, besought him not to fire.


The priest, on his knees, for he had not the strength to stand erect, was not
even fastened to the stake, his weakness rendering that precaution superfluous.
At the instant when the car was close to the ground, the brawny Scot, laying
aside his rifle, and seizing the priest around the waist, lifted him into the car,
while, at the same moment, Joe tossed over the two hundred pounds of ballast.

The doctor had expected to ascend rapidly, but, contrary to his calculations,
the balloon, after going up some three or four feet, remained there perfectly
motionless.

"What holds us?" he asked, with an accent of terror.

Some of the savages were running toward them, uttering ferocious cries.

"Ah, ha!" said Joe, "one of those cursed blacks is hanging to the car!"

"Dick! Dick!" cried the doctor, "the water-tank!"

Kennedy caught his friend's idea on the instant, and, snatching up with
desperate strength one of the water-tanks weighing about one hundred pounds,
he tossed it overboard. The balloon, thus suddenly lightened, made a leap of
three hundred feet into the air, amid the howlings of the tribe whose prisoner
thus escaped them in a blaze of dazzling light.

"Hurrah!" shouted the doctor's comrades.

Suddenly, the balloon took a fresh leap, which carried it up to an elevation of
a thousand feet.

"What's that?" said Kennedy, who had nearly lost his balance.

"Oh! nothing; only that black villain leaving us!" replied the doctor,
tranquilly, and Joe, leaning over, saw the savage that had clung to the car
whirling over and over, with his arms outstretched in the air, and presently
dashed to pieces on the ground. The doctor then separated his electric wires, and
every thing was again buried in profound obscurity. It was now one o'clock in
the morning.

The Frenchman, who had swooned away, at length opened his eyes.

"You are saved!" were the doctor's first words.

"Saved!" he with a sad smile replied in English, "saved from a cruel death!
My brethren, I thank you, but my days are numbered, nay, even my hours, and I
have but little longer to live."

With this, the missionary, again yielding to exhaustion, relapsed into his
fainting-fit.

"He is dying!" said Kennedy.

"No," replied the doctor, bending over him, "but he is very weak; so let us
lay him under the awning."

And they did gently deposit on their blankets that poor, wasted body, covered
with scars and wounds, still bleeding where fire and steel had, in twenty places,


left their agonizing marks. The doctor, taking an old handkerchief, quickly
prepared a little lint, which he spread over the wounds, after having washed
them. These rapid attentions were bestowed with the celerity and skill of a
practised surgeon, and, when they were complete, the doctor, taking a cordial
from his medicine-chest, poured a few drops upon his patient's lips.

The latter feebly pressed his kind hands, and scarcely had the strength to say,
"Thank you! thank you!"

The doctor comprehended that he must be left perfectly quiet; so he closed
the folds of the awning and resumed the guidance of the balloon.

The latter, after taking into account the weight of the new passenger, had
been lightened of one hundred and eighty pounds, and therefore kept aloft
without the aid of the cylinder. At the first dawn of day, a current drove it gently
toward the west-northwest. The doctor went in under the awning for a moment
or two, to look at his still sleeping patient.

"May Heaven spare the life of our new companion! Have you any hope?"
said the Scot.

"Yes, Dick, with care, in this pure, fresh atmosphere."

"How that man has suffered!" said Joe, with feeling. "He did bolder things
than we've done, in venturing all alone among those savage tribes!"

"That cannot be questioned," assented the hunter.

During the entire day the doctor would not allow the sleep of his patient to
be disturbed. It was really a long stupor, broken only by an occasional murmur
of pain that continued to disquiet and agitate the doctor greatly.

Toward evening the balloon remained stationary in the midst of the gloom,
and during the night, while Kennedy and Joe relieved each other in carefully
tending the sick man, Ferguson kept watch over the safety of all.

By the morning of the next day, the balloon had moved, but very slightly, to
the westward. The dawn came up pure and magnificent. The sick man was able
to call his friends with a stronger voice. They raised the curtains of the awning,
and he inhaled with delight the keen morning air.

"How do you feel to-day?" asked the doctor.

"Better, perhaps," he replied. "But you, my friends, I have not seen you yet,
excepting in a dream! I can, indeed, scarcely recall what has occurred. Who are
you --that your names may not be forgotten in my dying prayers?"

"We are English travellers," replied Ferguson. "We are trying to cross Africa
in a balloon, and, on our way, we have had the good fortune to rescue you."

"Science has its heroes," said the missionary.

"But religion its martyrs!" rejoined the Scot.

"Are you a missionary?" asked the doctor.


"I am a priest of the Lazarist mission. Heaven sent you to me--Heaven be
praised! The sacrifice of my life had been accomplished! But you come from
Europe; tell me about Europe, about France! I have been without news for the
last five years!"

"Five years! alone! and among these savages!" exclaimed Kennedy with
amazement.

"They are souls to redeem! ignorant and barbarous brethren, whom religion
alone can instruct and civilize."

Dr. Ferguson, yielding to the priest's request, talked to him long and fully
about France. He listened eagerly, and his eyes filled with tears. He seized
Kennedy's and Joe's hands by turns in his own, which were burning with fever.
The doctor prepared him some tea, and he drank it with satisfaction. After that,
he had strength enough to raise himself up a little, and smiled with pleasure at
seeing himself borne along through so pure a sky.

"You are daring travellers!" he said, "and you will succeed in your bold
enterprise. You will again behold your relatives, your friends, your country--you-

At this moment, the weakness of the young missionary became so extreme
that they had to lay him again on the bed, where a prostration, lasting for several
hours, held him like a dead man under the eye of Dr. Ferguson. The latter could
not suppress his emotion, for he felt that this life now in his charge was ebbing
away. Were they then so soon to lose him whom they had snatched from an
agonizing death? The doctor again washed and dressed the young martyr's
frightful wounds, and had to sacrifice nearly his whole stock of water to refresh
his burning limbs. He surrounded him with the tenderest and most intelligent
care, until, at length, the sick man revived, little by little, in his arms, and
recovered his consciousness if not his strength.

The doctor was able to gather something of his history from his broken
murmurs.

"Speak in your native language," he said to the sufferer; "I understand it, and
it will fatigue you less."

The missionary was a poor young man from the village of Aradon, in
Brittany, in the Morbihan country. His earliest instincts had drawn him toward an
ecclesiastical career, but to this life of self-sacrifice he was also desirous of
joining a life of danger, by entering the mission of the order of priesthood of
which St. Vincent de Paul was the founder, and, at twenty, he quitted his country
for the inhospitable shores of Africa. From the sea-coast, overcoming obstacles,
little by little, braving all privations, pushing onward, afoot, and praying, he had
advanced to the very centre of those tribes that dwell among the tributary


streams of the Upper Nile. For two years his faith was spurned, his zeal denied
recognition, his charities taken in ill part, and he remained a prisoner to one of
the cruelest tribes of the Nyambarra, the object of every species of maltreatment.
But still he went on teaching, instructing, and praying. The tribe having been
dispersed and he left for dead, in one of those combats which are so frequent
between the tribes, instead of retracing his steps, he persisted in his evangelical
mission. His most tranquil time was when he was taken for a madman.
Meanwhile, he had made himself familiar with the idioms of the country, and he
catechised in them. At length, during two more long years, he traversed these
barbarous regions, impelled by that superhuman energy that comes from God.
For a year past he had been residing with that tribe of the Nyam-Nyams known
as the Barafri, one of the wildest and most ferocious of them all. The chief
having died a few days before our travellers appeared, his sudden death was
attributed to the missionary, and the tribe resolved to immolate him. His
sufferings had already continued for the space of forty hours, and, as the doctor
had supposed, he was to have perished in the blaze of the noonday sun. When he
heard the sound of fire-arms, nature got the best of him, and he had cried out,
"Help! help!" He then thought that he must have been dreaming, when a voice,
that seemed to come from the sky, had uttered words of consolation.

"I have no regrets," he said, "for the life that is passing away from me; my
life belongs to God!"

"Hope still!" said the doctor; "we are near you, and we will save you now, as
we saved you from the tortures of the stake."

"I do not ask so much of Heaven," said the priest, with resignation. "Blessed
be God for having vouchsafed to me the joy before I die of having pressed your
friendly hands, and having heard, once more, the language of my country!"

The missionary here grew weak again, and the whole day went by between
hope and fear, Kennedy deeply moved, and Joe drawing his hand over his eyes
more than once when he thought that no one saw him.

The balloon made little progress, and the wind seemed as though unwilling
to jostle its precious burden.

Toward evening, Joe discovered a great light in the west. Under more
elevated latitudes, it might have been mistaken for an immense aurora borealis,
for the sky appeared on fire. The doctor very attentively examined the
phenomenon.

"It is, perhaps, only a volcano in full activity," said he.

"But the wind is carrying us directly over it," replied Kennedy.

"Very well, we shall cross it then at a safe height!" said the doctor.

Three hours later, the Victoria was right among the mountains. Her exact


position was twenty-four degrees fifteen minutes east longitude, and four
degrees forty-two minutes north latitude, and four degrees forty-two minutes
north latitude. In front of her a volcanic crater was pouring forth torrents of
melted lava, and hurling masses of rock to an enormous height. There were jets,
too, of liquid fire that fell back in dazzling cascades--a superb but dangerous
spectacle, for the wind with unswerving certainty was carrying the balloon
directly toward this blazing atmosphere.

This obstacle, which could not be turned, had to be crossed, so the cylinder
was put to its utmost power, and the balloon rose to the height of six thousand
feet, leaving between it and the volcano a space of more than three hundred
fathoms.

From his bed of suffering, the dying missionary could contemplate that fiery
crater from which a thousand jets of dazzling flame were that moment escaping.

"How grand it is!" said he, "and how infinite is the power of God even in its
most terrible manifestations!"

This overflow of blazing lava wrapped the sides of the mountain with a
veritable drapery of flame; the lower half of the balloon glowed redly in the
upper night; a torrid heat ascended to the car, and Dr. Ferguson made all possible
haste to escape from this perilous situation.

By ten o'clock the volcano could be seen only as a red point on the horizon,
and the balloon tranquilly pursued her course in a less elevated zone of the
atmosphere.


CHAPTER TWENTY-THIRD.

Joe in a Fit of Rage.--The Death of a Good Man.--The Night of watching by
the Body.--Barrenness and Drought.--The Burial.--The Quartz Rocks. --Joe's
Hallucinations.--A Precious Ballast.--A Survey of the Gold-bearing Mountains.--
The Beginning of Joe's Despair.

A magnificent night overspread the earth, and the missionary lay quietly
asleep in utter exhaustion.

"He'll not get over it!" sighed Joe. "Poor young fellow--scarcely thirty years
of age!"

"He'll die in our arms. His breathing, which was so feeble before, is growing
weaker still, and I can do nothing to save him," said the doctor, despairingly.

"The infamous scoundrels!" exclaimed Joe, grinding his teeth, in one of
those fits of rage that came over him at long intervals; "and to think that, in spite
of all, this good man could find words only to pity them, to excuse, to pardon
them!"


"Heaven has given him a lovely night, Joe--his last on earth, perhaps! He
will suffer but little more after this, and his dying will be only a peaceful falling
asleep."

The dying man uttered some broken words, and the doctor at once went to
him. His breathing became difficult, and he asked for air. The curtains were
drawn entirely back, and he inhaled with rapture the light breezes of that clear,
beautiful night. The stars sent him their trembling rays, and the moon wrapped
him in the white winding-sheet of its effulgence.

"My friends,” said he, in an enfeebled voice, "I am going. May God requite
you, and bring you to your safe harbor! May he pay for me the debt of gratitude
that I owe to you!"

"You must still hope," replied Kennedy. "This is but a passing fit of
weakness. You will not die. How could any one die on this beautiful summer
night?"

"Death is at hand," replied the missionary, "I know it! Let me look it in the
face! Death, the commencement of things eternal, is but the end of earthly cares.
Place me upon my knees, my brethren, I beseech you!"

Kennedy lifted him up, and it was distressing to see his weakened limbs bend
under him.

"My God! my God!" exclaimed the dying apostle, "have pity on me!"

His countenance shone. Far above that earth on which he had known no joys;
in the midst of that night which sent to him its softest radiance; on the way to
that heaven toward which he uplifted his spirit, as though in a miraculous
assumption, he seemed already to live and breathe in the new existence.

His last gesture was a supreme blessing on his new friends of only one day.
Then he fell back into the arms of Kennedy, whose countenance was bathed in
hot tears.

"Dead!" said the doctor, bending over him, "dead!" And with one common
accord, the three friends knelt together in silent prayer.

"To-morrow," resumed the doctor, "we shall bury him in the African soil
which he has besprinkled with his blood."

During the rest of the night the body was watched, turn by turn, by the three
travellers, and not a word disturbed the solemn silence. Each of them was
weeping.

The next day the wind came from the south, and the balloon moved slowly
over a vast plateau of mountains: there, were extinct craters; here, barren
ravines; not a drop of water on those parched crests; piles of broken rocks; huge
stony masses scattered hither and thither, and, interspersed with whitish marl, all
indicated the most complete sterility.


Toward noon, the doctor, for the purpose of burying the body, decided to
descend into a ravine, in the midst of some plutonic rocks of primitive
formation. The surrounding mountains would shelter him, and enable him to
bring his car to the ground, for there was no tree in sight to which he could make
it fast.

But, as he had explained to Kennedy, it was now impossible for him to
descend, except by releasing a quantity of gas proportionate to his loss of ballast
at the time when he had rescued the missionary. He therefore opened the valve of
the outside balloon. The hydrogen escaped, and the Victoria quietly descended
into the ravine.

As soon as the car touched the ground, the doctor shut the valve. Joe leaped
out, holding on the while to the rim of the car with one hand, and with the other
gathering up a quantity of stones equal to his own weight. He could then use
both hands, and had soon heaped into the car more than five hundred pounds of
stones, which enabled both the doctor and Kennedy, in their turn, to get out.
Thus the Victoria found herself balanced, and her ascensional force insufficient
to raise her.

Moreover, it was not necessary to gather many of these stones, for the blocks
were extremely heavy, so much so, indeed, that the doctor's attention was
attracted by the circumstance. The soil, in fact, was bestrewn with quartz and
porphyritic rocks.

"This is a singular discovery!" said the doctor, mentally.

In the mean while, Kennedy and Joe had strolled away a few paces, looking
up a proper spot for the grave. The heat was extreme in this ravine, shut in as it
was like a sort of furnace. The noonday sun poured down its rays
perpendicularly into it.

The first thing to be done was to clear the surface of the fragments of rock
that encumbered it, and then a quite deep grave had to be dug, so that the wild
animals should not be able to disinter the corpse.

The body of the martyred missionary was then solemnly placed in it. The
earth was thrown in over his remains, and above it masses of rock were
deposited, in rude resemblance to a tomb.

The doctor, however, remained motionless, and lost in his reflections. He did
not even heed the call of his companions, nor did he return with them to seek a
shelter from the heat of the day.

"What are you thinking about, doctor?" asked Kennedy.

"About a singular freak of Nature, a curious effect of chance. Do you know,
now, in what kind of soil that man of self-denial, that poor one in spirit, has just
been buried?"


"No! what do you mean, doctor?"

"That priest, who took the oath of perpetual poverty, now reposes in a gold-
mine!"

"A gold-mine!" exclaimed Kennedy and Joe in one breath.

"Yes, a gold-mine,"” said the doctor, quietly. "Those blocks which you are
trampling under foot, like worthless stones, contain gold-ore of great purity."

"Impossible! impossible!" repeated Joe.

"You would not have to look long among those fissures of slaty schist
without finding peptites of considerable value."

Joe at once rushed like a crazy man among the scattered fragments, and
Kennedy was not long in following his example.

"Keep cool, Joe," said his master.

"Why, doctor, you speak of the thing quite at your ease."

"What! a philosopher of your mettle--"

"Ah, master, no philosophy holds good in this case!"

"Come! come! Let us reflect a little. What good would all this wealth do
you? We cannot carry any of it away with us."

"We can't take any of it with us, indeed?"

"It's rather too heavy for our car! I even hesitated to tell you any thing about
it, for fear of exciting your regret!"

"What!" said Joe, again, "abandon these treasures --a fortune for us!--really
for us--our own--leave it behind!"

"Take care, my friend! Would you yield to the thirst for gold? Has not this
dead man whom you have just helped to bury, taught you the vanity of human
affairs?"

"All that is true," replied Joe, "but gold! Mr. Kennedy, won't you help to
gather up a trifle of all these millions?"

"What could we do with them, Joe?" said the hunter, unable to repress a
smile. "We did not come hither in search of fortune, and we cannot take one
home with us."

"The millions are rather heavy, you know," resumed the doctor, "and cannot
very easily be put into one's pocket."

"But, at least," said Joe, driven to his last defences, "couldn't we take some of
that ore for ballast, instead of sand?"

"Very good! I consent," said the doctor, "but you must not make too many
wry faces when we come to throw some thousands of crowns' worth overboard."

"Thousands of crowns!" echoed Joe; "is it possible that there is so much gold
in them, and that all this is the same?"

"Yes, my friend, this is a reservoir in which Nature has been heaping up her


wealth for centuries! There is enough here to enrich whole nations! An Australia
and a California both together in the midst of the wilderness!"

"And the whole of it is to remain useless!"

"Perhaps! but at all events, here's what I'll do to console you."

"That would be rather difficult to do!" said Joe, with a contrite air.

"Listen! I will take the exact bearings of this spot, and give them to you, so
that, upon your return to England, you can tell our countrymen about it, and let
them have a share, if you think that so much gold would make them happy."

"Ah! master, I give up; I see that you are right, and that there is nothing else
to be done. Let us fill our car with the precious mineral, and what remains at the
end of the trip will be so much made."

And Joe went to work. He did so, too, with all his might, and soon had
collected more than a thousand pieces of quartz, which contained gold enclosed
as though in an extremely hard crystal casket.

The doctor watched him with a smile; and, while Joe went on, he took the
bearings, and found that the missionary's grave lay in twenty-two degrees
twenty-three minutes east longitude, and four degrees fifty-five minutes north
latitude.

Then, casting one glance at the swelling of the soil, beneath which the body
of the poor Frenchman reposed, he went back to his car.

He would have erected a plain, rude cross over the tomb, left solitary thus in
the midst of the African deserts, but not a tree was to be seen in the environs.

"God will recognize it!" said Kennedy.

An anxiety of another sort now began to steal over the doctor's mind. He
would have given much of the gold before him for a little water--for he had to
replace what had been thrown overboard when the negro was carried up into the
air. But it was impossible to find it in these arid regions; and this reflection gave
him great uneasiness. He had to feed his cylinder continually; and he even began
to find that he had not enough to quench the thirst of his party. Therefore he
determined to lose no opportunity of replenishing his supply.

Upon getting back to the car, he found it burdened with the quartz-blocks
that Joe's greed had heaped in it. He got in, however, without saying any thing.
Kennedy took his customary place, and Joe followed, but not without casting a
covetous glance at the treasures in the ravine.

The doctor rekindled the light in the cylinder; the spiral became heated; the
current of hydrogen came in a few minutes, and the gas dilated; but the balloon
did not stir an inch.

Joe looked on uneasily, but kept silent.

"Joe!" said the doctor.


Joe made no reply.

"Joe! Don't you hear me?"

Joe made a sign that he heard; but he would not understand.

"Do me the kindness to throw out some of that quartz!"

"But, doctor, you gave me leave--"

"I gave you leave to replace the ballast; that was all!"

"But--"

"Do you want to stay forever in this desert?"

Joe cast a despairing look at Kennedy; but the hunter put on the air of a man
who could do nothing in the matter.

"Well, Joe?"

"Then your cylinder don't work," said the obstinate fellow.

"My cylinder? It is lit, as you perceive. But the balloon will not rise until you
have thrown off a little ballast."

Joe scratched his ear, picked up a piece of quartz, the smallest in the lot,
weighed and reweighed it, and tossed it up and down in his hand. It was a
fragment of about three or four pounds. At last he threw it out.

But the balloon did not budge.

"Humph!" said he; "we're not going up yet."

"Not yet," said the doctor. "Keep on throwing."

Kennedy laughed. Joe now threw out some ten pounds, but the balloon stood
still.

Joe got very pale.

"Poor fellow!" said the doctor. "Mr. Kennedy, you and I weigh, unless I am
mistaken, about four hundred pounds--so that you'll have to get rid of at least
that weight, since it was put in here to make up for us."

"Throw away four hundred pounds!" said Joe, piteously.

"And some more with it, or we can't rise. Come, courage, Joe!"

The brave fellow, heaving deep sighs, began at last to lighten the balloon;
but, from time to time, he would stop, and ask:

"Are you going up?"

"No, not yet,” was the invariable response.

"It moves!" said he, at last.

"Keep on!" replied the doctor.

"It's going up; I'm sure."

"Keep on yet," said Kennedy.

And Joe, picking up one more block, desperately tossed it out of the car. The
balloon rose a hundred feet or so, and, aided by the cylinder, soon passed above
the surrounding summits.


"Now, Joe," resumed the doctor, "there still remains a handsome fortune for
you; and, if we can only keep the rest of this with us until the end of our trip,
there you are--rich for the balance of your days!"

Joe made no answer, but stretched himself out luxuriously on his heap of
quartz.

"See, my dear Dick!" the doctor went on. "Just see the power of this metal
over the cleverest lad in the world! What passions, what greed, what crimes, the
knowledge of such a mine as that would cause! It is sad to think of it!"

By evening the balloon had made ninety miles to the westward, and was, ina
direct line, fourteen hundred miles from Zanzibar.


CHAPTER TWENTY-FOURTH.

The Wind dies away.--The Vicinity of the Desert.--The Mistake in the Water-
Supply.--The Nights of the Equator.--Dr. Ferguson's Anxieties. --The Situation
flatly stated.--Energetic Replies of Kennedy and Joe. --One Night more.

The balloon, having been made fast to a solitary tree, almost completely
dried up by the aridity of the region in which it stood, passed the night in perfect
quietness; and the travellers were enabled to enjoy a little of the repose which
they so greatly needed. The emotions of the day had left sad impressions on their
minds.

Toward morning, the sky had resumed its brilliant purity and its heat. The
balloon ascended, and, after several ineffectual attempts, fell into a current that,
although not rapid, bore them toward the northwest.

"We are not making progress," said the doctor. "If I am not mistaken, we
have accomplished nearly half of our journey in ten days; but, at the rate at
which we are going, it would take months to end it; and that is all the more
vexatious, that we are threatened with a lack of water."

"But we'll find some," said Joe. "It is not to be thought of that we shouldn't
discover some river, some stream, or pond, in all this vast extent of country."

"IT hope so."

"Now don't you think that it's Joe's cargo of stone that is keeping us back?"

Kennedy asked this question only to tease Joe; and he did so the more
willingly because he had, for a moment, shared the poor lad's hallucinations; but,
not finding any thing in them, he had fallen back into the attitude of a strong-
minded looker-on, and turned the affair off with a laugh.

Joe cast a mournful glance at him; but the doctor made no reply. He was
thinking, not without secret terror, probably, of the vast solitudes of Sahara--for
there whole weeks sometimes pass without the caravans meeting with a single


spring of water. Occupied with these thoughts, he scrutinized every depression
of the soil with the closest attention.

These anxieties, and the incidents recently occurring, had not been without
their effect upon the spirits of our three travellers. They conversed less, and were
more wrapt in their own thoughts.

Joe, clever lad as he was, seemed no longer the same person since his gaze
had plunged into that ocean of gold. He kept entirely silent, and gazed
incessantly upon the stony fragments heaped up in the car--worthless to-day, but
of inestimable value to-morrow.

The appearance of this part of Africa was, moreover, quite calculated to
inspire alarm: the desert was gradually expanding around them; not another
village was to be seen--not even a collection of a few huts; and vegetation also
was disappearing. Barely a few dwarf plants could now be noticed, like those on
the wild heaths of Scotland; then came the first tract of grayish sand and flint,
with here and there a lentisk tree and brambles. In the midst of this sterility, the
rudimental carcass of the Globe appeared in ridges of sharply-jutting rock. These
symptoms of a totally dry and barren region greatly disquieted Dr. Ferguson.

It seemed as though no caravan had ever braved this desert expanse, or it
would have left visible traces of its encampments, or the whitened bones of men
and animals. But nothing of the kind was to be seen, and the aeronauts felt that,
ere long, an immensity of sand would cover the whole of this desolate region.

However, there was no going back; they must go forward; and, indeed, the
doctor asked for nothing better; he would even have welcomed a tempest to
carry him beyond this country. But, there was not a cloud in the sky. At the close
of the day, the balloon had not made thirty miles.

If there had been no lack of water! But, there remained only three gallons in
all! The doctor put aside one gallon, destined to quench the burning thirst that a
heat of ninety degrees rendered intolerable. Two gallons only then remained to
supply the cylinder. Hence, they could produce no more than four hundred and
eighty cubic feet of gas; yet the cylinder consumed about nine cubic feet per
hour. Consequently, they could not keep on longer than fifty-four hours--and all
this was a mathematical calculation!

"Fifty-four hours!" said the doctor to his companions. "Therefore, as I am
determined not to travel by night, for fear of passing some stream or pool, we
have but three days and a half of journeying during which we must find water, at
all hazards. I have thought it my duty to make you aware of the real state of the
case, as I have retained only one gallon for drinking, and we shall have to put
ourselves on the shortest allowance."

"Put us on short allowance, then, doctor," responded Kennedy, "but we must


not despair. We have three days left, you say?"

"Yes, my dear Dick!"

"Well, as grieving over the matter won't help us, in three days there will be
time enough to decide upon what is to be done; in the meanwhile, let us redouble
our vigilance!"

At their evening meal, the water was strictly measured out, and the brandy
was increased in quantity in the punch they drank. But they had to be careful
with the spirits, the latter being more likely to produce than to quench thirst.

The car rested, during the night, upon an immense plateau, in which there
was a deep hollow; its height was scarcely eight hundred feet above the level of
the sea. This circumstance gave the doctor some hope, since it recalled to his
mind the conjectures of geographers concerning the existence of a vast stretch of
water in the centre of Africa. But, if such a lake really existed, the point was to
reach it, and not a sign of change was visible in the motionless sky.

To the tranquil night and its starry magnificence succeeded the unchanging
daylight and the blazing rays of the sun; and, from the earliest dawn, the
temperature became scorching. At five o'clock in the morning, the doctor gave
the signal for departure, and, for a considerable time, the balloon remained
immovable in the leaden atmosphere.

The doctor might have escaped this intense heat by rising into a higher range,
but, in order to do so, he would have had to consume a large quantity of water, a
thing that had now become impossible. He contented himself, therefore, with
keeping the balloon at one hundred feet from the ground, and, at that elevation, a
feeble current drove it toward the western horizon.

The breakfast consisted of a little dried meat and pemmican. By noon, the
Victoria had advanced only a few miles.

"We cannot go any faster," said the doctor; "we no longer command--we
have to obey."

"Ah! doctor, here is one of those occasions when a propeller would not be a
thing to be despised."

"Undoubtedly so, Dick, provided it would not require an expenditure of
water to put it in motion, for, in that case, the situation would be precisely the
same; moreover, up to this time, nothing practical of the sort has been invented.
Balloons are still at that point where ships were before the invention of steam. It
took six thousand years to invent propellers and screws; so we have time enough
yet."

"Confounded heat!" said Joe, wiping away the perspiration that was
streaming from his forehead.

"If we had water, this heat would be of service to us, for it dilates the


hydrogen in the balloon, and diminishes the amount required in the spiral,
although it is true that, if we were not short of the useful liquid, we should not
have to economize it. Ah! that rascally savage who cost us the tank!"*

* The water-tank had been thrown overboard when the native clung to the
car.

"You don't regret, though, what you did, doctor?"

"No, Dick, since it was in our power to save that unfortunate missionary
from a horrible death. But, the hundred pounds of water that we threw overboard
would be very useful to us now; it would be thirteen or fourteen days more of
progress secured, or quite enough to carry us over this desert."

"We've made at least half the journey, haven't we?" asked Joe.

"In distance, yes; but in duration, no, should the wind leave us; and it, even
now, has a tendency to die away altogether."

"Come, sir," said Joe, again, "we must not complain; we've got along pretty
well, thus far, and whatever happens to me, I can't get desperate. We'll find
water; mind, I tell you so."

The soil, however, ran lower from mile to mile; the undulations of the gold-
bearing mountains they had left died away into the plain, like the last throes of
exhausted Nature. Scanty grass took the place of the fine trees of the east; only a
few belts of half-scorched herbage still contended against the invasion of the
sand, and the huge rocks, that had rolled down from the distant summits, crushed
in their fall, had scattered in sharp-edged pebbles which soon again became
coarse sand, and finally impalpable dust.

"Here, at last, is Africa, such as you pictured it to yourself, Joe! Was I not
right in saying, "Wait a little?’ eh?"

"Well, master, it's all natural, at least--heat and dust. It would be foolish to
look for any thing else in such a country. Do you see," he added, laughing, "I had
no confidence, for my part, in your forests and your prairies; they were out of
reason. What was the use of coming so far to find scenery just like England?
Here's the first time that I believe in Africa, and I'm not sorry to get a taste of it."

Toward evening, the doctor calculated that the balloon had not made twenty
miles during that whole burning day, and a heated gloom closed in upon it, as
soon as the sun had disappeared behind the horizon, which was traced against
the sky with all the precision of a straight line.

The next day was Thursday, the 1st of May, but the days followed each other
with desperate monotony. Each morning was like the one that had preceded it;
noon poured down the same exhaustless rays, and night condensed in its shadow
the scattered heat which the ensuing day would again bequeath to the succeeding
night. The wind, now scarcely observable, was rather a gasp than a breath, and


the morning could almost be foreseen when even that gasp would cease.

The doctor reacted against the gloominess of the situation and retained all the
coolness and self-possession of a disciplined heart. With his glass he scrutinized
every quarter of the horizon; he saw the last rising ground gradually melting to
the dead level, and the last vegetation disappearing, while, before him, stretched
the immensity of the desert.

The responsibility resting upon him pressed sorely, but he did not allow his
disquiet to appear. Those two men, Dick and Joe, friends of his, both of them, he
had induced to come with him almost by the force alone of friendship and of
duty. Had he done well in that? Was it not like attempting to tread forbidden
paths? Was he not, in this trip, trying to pass the borders of the impossible? Had
not the Almighty reserved for later ages the knowledge of this inhospitable
continent?

All these thoughts, of the kind that arise in hours of discouragement,
succeeded each other and multiplied in his mind, and, by an irresistible
association of ideas, the doctor allowed himself to be carried beyond the bounds
of logic and of reason. After having established in his own mind what he should
NOT have done, the next question was, what he should do, then. Would it be
impossible to retrace his steps? Were there not currents higher up that would
waft him to less arid regions? Well informed with regard to the countries over
which he had passed, he was utterly ignorant of those to come, and thus his
conscience speaking aloud to him, he resolved, in his turn, to speak frankly to
his two companions. He thereupon laid the whole state of the case plainly before
them; he showed them what had been done, and what there was yet to do; at the
worst, they could return, or attempt it, at least.--What did they think about it?

"T have no other opinion than that of my excellent master," said Joe; "what he
may have to suffer, I can suffer, and that better than he can, perhaps. Where he
goes, there I'll go!"

"And you, Kennedy?"

"I, doctor, I'm not the man to despair; no one was less ignorant than I of the
perils of the enterprise, but I did not want to see them, from the moment that you
determined to brave them. Under present circumstances, my opinion is, that we
should persevere--go clear to the end. Besides, to return looks to me quite as
perilous as the other course. So onward, then! you may count upon us!"

"Thanks, my gallant friends!" replied the doctor, with much real feeling, "I
expected such devotion as this; but I needed these encouraging words. Yet, once
again, thank you, from the bottom of my heart!"

And, with this, the three friends warmly grasped each other by the hand.

"Now, hear me!" said the doctor. "According to my solar observations, we


are not more than three hundred miles from the Gulf of Guinea; the desert,
therefore, cannot extend indefinitely, since the coast is inhabited, and the country
has been explored for some distance back into the interior. If needs be, we can
direct our course to that quarter, and it seems out of the question that we should
not come across some oasis, or some well, where we could replenish our stock of
water. But, what we want now, is the wind, for without it we are held here
suspended in the air at a dead calm.

"Let us wait with resignation," said the hunter.

But, each of the party, in his turn, vainly scanned the space around him
during that long wearisome day. Nothing could be seen to form the basis of a
hope. The very last inequalities of the soil disappeared with the setting sun,
whose horizontal rays stretched in long lines of fire over the flat immensity. It
was the Desert!

Our aeronauts had scarcely gone a distance of fifteen miles, having
expended, as on the preceding day, one hundred and thirty-five cubic feet of gas
to feed the cylinder, and two pints of water out of the remaining eight had been
sacrificed to the demands of intense thirst.

The night passed quietly--too quietly, indeed, but the doctor did not sleep!


CHAPTER TWENTY-FIFTH.

A Little Philosophy.--A Cloud on the Horizon.--In the Midst of a Fog.--The
Strange Balloon.--An Exact View of the Victoria.--The Palm-Trees.--Traces of a
Caravan.--The Well in the Midst of the Desert.

On the morrow, there was the same purity of sky, the same stillness of the
atmosphere. The balloon rose to an elevation of five hundred feet, but it had
scarcely changed its position to the westward in any perceptible degree.

"We are right in the open desert," said the doctor. "Look at that vast reach of
sand! What a strange spectacle! What a singular arrangement of nature! Why
should there be, in one place, such extreme luxuriance of vegetation yonder, and
here, this extreme aridity, and that in the same latitude, and under the same rays
of the sun?”

"The why concerns me but little," answered Kennedy, "the reason interests
me less than the fact. The thing is so; that's the important part of it!"

"Oh, it is well to philosophize a little, Dick; it does no harm."

"Let us philosophize, then, if you will; we have time enough before us; we
are hardly moving; the wind is afraid to blow; it sleeps."

"That will not last forever," put in Joe; "I think I see some banks of clouds in
the east."


"Joe's right!" said the doctor, after he had taken a look.

"Good!" said Kennedy; "now for our clouds, with a fine rain, and a fresh
wind to dash it into our faces!"

"Well, we'll see, Dick, we'll see!"

"But this is Friday, master, and I'm afraid of Fridays!"

"Well, I hope that this very day you'll get over those notions."

"I hope so, master, too. Whew!" he added, mopping his face, "heat's a good
thing, especially in winter, but in summer it don't do to take too much of it."

"Don't you fear the effect of the sun's heat on our balloon?" asked Kennedy,
addressing the doctor.

"No! the gutta-percha coating resists much higher temperatures than even
this. With my spiral I have subjected it inside to as much as one hundred and
fifty-eight degrees sometimes, and the covering does not appear to have
suffered."

"A cloud! a real cloud!" shouted Joe at this moment, for that piercing
eyesight of his beat all the glasses.

And, in fact, a thick bank of vapor, now quite distinct, could be seen slowly
emerging above the horizon. It appeared to be very deep, and, as it were, puffed
out. It was, in reality, a conglomeration of smaller clouds. The latter invariably
retained their original formation, and from this circumstance the doctor
concluded that there was no current of air in their collected mass.

This compact body of vapor had appeared about eight o'clock in the
morning, and, by eleven, it had already reached the height of the sun's disk. The
latter then disappeared entirely behind the murky veil, and the lower belt of
cloud, at the same moment, lifted above the line of the horizon, which was again
disclosed in a full blaze of daylight.

"It's only an isolated cloud," remarked the doctor. "It won't do to count much
upon that."

"Look, Dick, its shape is just the same as when we saw it this morning!"

"Then, doctor, there's to be neither rain nor wind, at least for us!"

"I fear so; the cloud keeps at a great height."

"Well, doctor, suppose we were to go in pursuit of this cloud, since it refuses
to burst upon us?"

"I fancy that to do so wouldn't help us much; it would be a consumption of
gas, and, consequently, of water, to little purpose; but, in our situation, we must
not leave anything untried; therefore, let us ascend!"

And with this, the doctor put on a full head of flame from the cylinder, and
the dilation of the hydrogen, occasioned by such sudden and intense heat, sent
the balloon rapidly aloft.


About fifteen hundred feet from the ground, it encountered an opaque mass
of cloud, and entered a dense fog, suspended at that elevation; but it did not meet
with the least breath of wind. This fog seemed even destitute of humidity, and
the articles brought in contact with it were scarcely dampened in the slightest
degree. The balloon, completely enveloped in the vapor, gained a little increase
of speed, perhaps, and that was all.

The doctor gloomily recognized what trifling success he had obtained from
his manoeuvre, and was relapsing into deep meditation, when he heard Joe
exclaim, in tones of most intense astonishment:

"Ah! by all that's beautiful!"

"What's the matter, Joe?"

"Doctor! Mr. Kennedy! Here's something curious!"

"What is it, then?"

"We are not alone, up here! There are rogues about! They've stolen our
invention!"

"Has he gone crazy?" asked Kennedy.

Joe stood there, perfectly motionless, the very picture of amazement.

"Can the hot sun have really affected the poor fellow's brain?" said the
doctor, turning toward him.

"Will you tell me?--"

"Look!" said Joe, pointing to a certain quarter of the sky.

"By St. James!" exclaimed Kennedy, in turn, "why, who would have believed
it? Look, look! doctor!"

"I see it!" said the doctor, very quietly.

"Another balloon! and other passengers, like ourselves!"

And, sure enough, there was another balloon about two hundred paces from
them, floating in the air with its car and its aeronauts. It was following exactly
the same route as the Victoria.

"Well," said the doctor, "nothing remains for us but to make signals; take the
flag, Kennedy, and show them our colors."

It seemed that the travellers by the other balloon had just the same idea, at
the same moment, for the same kind of flag repeated precisely the same salute
with a hand that moved in just the same manner.

"What does that mean?" asked Kennedy.

"They are apes," said Joe, "imitating us."

"It means," said the doctor, laughing, "that it is you, Dick, yourself, making
that signal to yourself; or, in other words, that we see ourselves in the second
balloon, which is no other than the Victoria."

"As to that, master, with all respect to you," said Joe, "you'll never make me


believe it."

"Climb up on the edge of the car, Joe; wave your arms, and then you'll see."

Joe obeyed, and all his gestures were instantaneously and exactly repeated.

"It is merely the effect of the MIRAGE," said the doctor, "and nothing else--
a simple optical phenomenon due to the unequal refraction of light by different
layers of the atmosphere, and that is all.

"It's wonderful," said Joe, who could not make up his mind to surrender, but
went on repeating his gesticulations.

"What a curious sight! Do you know," said Kennedy, "that it's a real pleasure
to have a view of our noble balloon in that style? She's a beauty, isn't she?-- and
how stately her movements as she sweeps along!"

"You may explain the matter as you like," continued Joe, "it's a strange thing,
anyhow!"

But ere long this picture began to fade away; the clouds rose higher, leaving
the balloon, which made no further attempt to follow them, and in about an hour
they disappeared in the open sky.

The wind, which had been scarcely perceptible, seemed still to diminish, and
the doctor in perfect desperation descended toward the ground, and all three of
the travellers, whom the incident just recorded had, for a few moments, diverted
from their anxieties, relapsed into gloomy meditation, sweltering the while
beneath the scorching heat.

About four o'clock, Joe descried some object standing out against the vast
background of sand, and soon was able to declare positively that there were two
palm-trees at no great distance.

"Palm-trees!" exclaimed Ferguson; "why, then there's a spring--a well!"

He took up his glass and satisfied himself that Joe's eyes had not been
mistaken.

"At length!" he said, over and over again, "water! water! and we are saved;
for if we do move slowly, still we move, and we shall arrive at last!"

"Good, master! but suppose we were to drink a mouthful in the mean time,
for this air is stifling?"

"Let us drink then, my boy!"

No one waited to be coaxed. A whole pint was swallowed then and there,
reducing the total remaining supply to three pints and a half.

"Ah! that does one good!" said Joe; "wasn't it fine? Barclay and Perkins
never turned out ale equal to that!"

"See the advantage of being put on short allowance!" moralized the doctor.

"It is not great, after all," retorted Kennedy; "and if I were never again to
have the pleasure of drinking water, I should agree on condition that I should


never be deprived of it."

At six o'clock the balloon was floating over the palm-trees.

They were two shrivelled, stunted, dried-up specimens of trees--two ghosts
of palms--without foliage, and more dead than alive. Ferguson examined them
with terror.

At their feet could be seen the half-worn stones of a spring, but these stones,
pulverized by the baking heat of the sun, seemed to be nothing now but
impalpable dust. There was not the slightest sign of moisture. The doctor's heart
shrank within him, and he was about to communicate his thoughts to his
companions, when their exclamations attracted his attention. As far as the eye
could reach to the eastward, extended a long line of whitened bones; pieces of
skeletons surrounded the fountain; a caravan had evidently made its way to that
point, marking its progress by its bleaching remains; the weaker had fallen one
by one upon the sand; the stronger, having at length reached this spring for
which they panted, had there found a horrible death.

Our travellers looked at each other and turned pale.

"Let us not alight!" said Kennedy, "let us fly from this hideous spectacle!
There's not a drop of water here!"

"No, Dick, as well pass the night here as elsewhere; let us have a clear
conscience in the matter. We'll dig down to the very bottom of the well. There
has been a spring here, and perhaps there's something left in it!"

The Victoria touched the ground; Joe and Kennedy put into the car a quantity
of sand equal to their weight, and leaped out. They then hastened to the well, and
penetrated to the interior by a flight of steps that was now nothing but dust. The
spring appeared to have been dry for years. They dug down into a parched and
powdery sand--the very dryest of all sand, indeed--there was not one trace of
moisture!

The doctor saw them come up to the surface of the desert, saturated with
perspiration, wom out, covered with fine dust, exhausted, discouraged and
despairing.

He then comprehended that their search had been fruitless. He had expected
as much, and he kept silent, for he felt that, from this moment forth, he must
have courage and energy enough for three.

Joe brought up with him some pieces of a leathern bottle that had grown hard
and horn-like with age, and angrily flung them away among the bleaching bones
of the caravan.

At supper, not a word was spoken by our travellers, and they even ate
without appetite. Yet they had not, up to this moment, endured the real agonies
of thirst, and were in no desponding mood, excepting for the future.


CHAPTER TWENTY-SIXTH.

One Hundred and Thirteen Degrees.--The Doctor's Reflections.--A Desperate
Search.--The Cylinder goes out.--One Hundred and Twenty-two Degrees.--
Contemplation of the Desert.--A Night Walk.--Solitude.--Debility.--Joe's
Prospects.--He gives himself One Day more.

The distance made by the balloon during the preceding day did not exceed
ten miles, and, to keep it afloat, one hundred and sixty-two cubic feet of gas had
been consumed.

On Saturday morning the doctor again gave the signal for departure.

"The cylinder can work only six hours longer; and, if in that time we shall
not have found either a well or a spring of water, God alone knows what will
become of us!"

"Not much wind this morming, master," said Joe; "but it will come up,
perhaps," he added, suddenly remarking the doctor's ill-concealed depression.

Vain hope! The atmosphere was in a dead calm--one of those calms which
hold vessels captive in tropical seas. The heat had become intolerable; and the
thermometer, in the shade under the awning, indicated one hundred and thirteen
degrees.

Joe and Kennedy, reclining at full length near each other, tried, if not in
slumber, at least in torpor, to forget their situation, for their forced inactivity
gave them periods of leisure far from pleasant. That man is to be pitied the most
who cannot wean himself from gloomy reflections by actual work, or some
practical pursuit. But here there was nothing to look after, nothing to undertake,
and they had to submit to the situation, without having it in their power to
ameliorate it.

The pangs of thirst began to be severely felt; brandy, far from appeasing this
imperious necessity, augmented it, and richly merited the name of "tiger's milk"
applied to it by the African natives. Scarcely two pints of water remained, and
that was heated. Each of the party devoured the few precious drops with his
gaze, yet neither of them dared to moisten his lips with them. Two pints of water
in the midst of the desert!

Then it was that Dr. Ferguson, buried in meditation, asked himself whether
he had acted with prudence. Would he not have done better to have kept the
water that he had decomposed in pure loss, in order to sustain him in the air? He
had gained a little distance, to be sure; but was he any nearer to his journey's
end? What difference did sixty miles to the rear make in this region, when there
was no water to be had where they were? The wind, should it rise, would blow


there as it did here, only less strongly at this point, if it came from the east. But
hope urged him onward. And yet those two gallons of water, expended in vain,
would have sufficed for nine days' halt in the desert. And what changes might
not have occurred in nine days! Perhaps, too, while retaining the water, he might
have ascended by throwing out ballast, at the cost merely of discharging some
gas, when he had again to descend. But the gas in his balloon was his blood, his
very life!

A thousand one such reflections whirled in succession through his brain; and,
resting his head between his hands, he sat there for hours without raising it.

"We must make one final effort," he said, at last, about ten o'clock in the
morning. "We must endeavor, just once more, to find an atmospheric current to
bear us away from here, and, to that end, must risk our last resources."

Therefore, while his companions slept, the doctor raised the hydrogen in the
balloon to an elevated temperature, and the huge globe, filling out by the dilation
of the gas, rose straight up in the perpendicular rays of the sun. The doctor
searched vainly for a breath of wind, from the height of one hundred feet to that
of five miles; his starting-point remained fatally right below him, and absolute
calm seemed to reign, up to the extreme limits of the breathing atmosphere.

At length the feeding-supply of water gave out; the cylinder was
extinguished for lack of gas; the Buntzen battery ceased to work, and the
balloon, shrinking together, gently descended to the sand, in the very place that
the car had hollowed out there.

It was noon; and solar observations gave nineteen degrees thirty-five minutes
east longitude, and six degrees fifty-one minutes north latitude, or nearly five
hundred miles from Lake Tchad, and more than four hundred miles from the
western coast of Africa.

On the balloon taking ground, Kennedy and Joe awoke from their stupor.

"We have halted," said the Scot.

"We had to do so," replied the doctor, gravely.

His companions understood him. The level of the soil at that point
corresponded with the level of the sea, and, consequently, the balloon remained
in perfect equilibrium, and absolutely motionless.

The weight of the three travellers was replaced with an equivalent quantity of
sand, and they got out of the car. Each was absorbed in his own thoughts; and for
many hours neither of them spoke. Joe prepared their evening meal, which
consisted of biscuit and pemmican, and was hardly tasted by either of the party.
A mouthful of scalding water from their little store completed this gloomy
repast.

During the night none of them kept awake; yet none could be precisely said


to have slept. On the morrow there remained only half a pint of water, and this
the doctor put away, all three having resolved not to touch it until the last
extremity.

It was not long, however, before Joe exclaimed:

"I'm choking, and the heat is getting worse! I'm not surprised at that,
though," he added, consulting the thermometer; "one hundred and _ forty
degrees!"

"The sand scorches me," said the hunter, "as though it had just come out of a
furnace; and not a cloud in this sky of fire. It's enough to drive one mad!"

"Let us not despair," responded the doctor. "In this latitude these intense
heats are invariably followed by storms, and the latter come with the suddenness
of lightning. Notwithstanding this disheartening clearness of the sky, great
atmospheric changes may take place in less than an hour."

"But," asked Kennedy, "is there any sign whatever of that?"

"Well," replied the doctor, "I think that there is some slight symptom of a fall
in the barometer."

"May Heaven hearken to you, Samuel! for here we are pinned to the ground,
like a bird with broken wings."

"With this difference, however, my dear Dick, that our wings are unhurt, and
I hope that we shall be able to use them again."

"Ah! wind! wind!" exclaimed Joe; "enough to carry us to a stream or a well,
and we'll be all right. We have provisions enough, and, with water, we could wait
a month without suffering; but thirst is a cruel thing!"

It was not thirst alone, but the unchanging sight of the desert, that fatigued
the mind. There was not a variation in the surface of the soil, not a hillock of
sand, not a pebble, to relieve the gaze. This unbroken level discouraged the
beholder, and gave him that kind of malady called the "desert-sickness." The
impassible monotony of the arid blue sky, and the vast yellow expanse of the
desert-sand, at length produced a sensation of terror. In this inflamed atmosphere
the heat appeared to vibrate as it does above a blazing hearth, while the mind
grew desperate in contemplating the limitless calm, and could see no reason why
the thing should ever end, since immensity is a species of eternity.

Thus, at last, our hapless travellers, deprived of water in this torrid heat,
began to feel symptoms of mental disorder. Their eyes swelled in their sockets,
and their gaze became confused.

When night came on, the doctor determined to combat this alarming
tendency by rapid walking. His idea was to pace the sandy plain for a few hours,
not in search of any thing, but simply for exercise.

"Come along!" he said to his companions; "believe me, it will do you good."


"Out of the question!" said Kennedy; "I could not walk a step."

"And I," said Joe, "would rather sleep!"

"But sleep, or even rest, would be dangerous to you, my friends; you must
react against this tendency to stupor. Come with me!"

But the doctor could do nothing with them, and, therefore, set off alone, amid
the starry clearness of the night. The first few steps he took were painful, for
they were the steps of an enfeebled man quite out of practice in walking.
However, he quickly saw that the exercise would be beneficial to him, and
pushed on several miles to the westward. Once in rapid motion, he felt his spirits
greatly cheered, when, suddenly, a vertigo came over him; he seemed to be
poised on the edge of an abyss; his knees bent under him; the vast solitude struck
terror to his heart; he found himself the minute mathematical point, the centre of
an infinite circumference, that is to say--a nothing! The balloon had disappeared
entirely in the deepening gloom. The doctor, cool, impassible, reckless explorer
that he was, felt himself at last seized with a nameless dread. He strove to retrace
his steps, but in vain. He called aloud. Not even an echo replied, and his voice
died out in the empty vastness of surrounding space, like a pebble cast into a
bottomless gulf; then, down he sank, fainting, on the sand, alone, amid the
eternal silence of the desert.

At midnight he came to, in the arms of his faithful follower, Joe. The latter,
uneasy at his master's prolonged absence, had set out after him, easily tracing
him by the clear imprint of his feet in the sand, and had found him lying in a
swoon.

"What has been the matter, sir?" was the first inquiry.

"Nothing, Joe, nothing! Only a touch of weakness, that's all. It's over now."

"Oh! it won't amount to any thing, sir, I'm sure of that; but get up on your
feet, if you can. There! lean upon me, and let us get back to the balloon."

And the doctor, leaning on Joe's arm, returned along the track by which he
had come.

"You were too bold, sir; it won't do to run such risks. You might have been
robbed," he added, laughing. "But, sir, come now, let us talk seriously."

"Speak! I am listening to you."

"We must positively make up our minds to do something. Our present
situation cannot last more than a few days longer, and if we get no wind, we are
lost."

The doctor made no reply.

"Well, then, one of us must sacrifice himself for the good of all, and it is
most natural that it should fall to me to do so."

"What have you to propose? What is your plan?"


"A very simple one! It is to take provisions enough, and to walk right on
until I come to some place, as I must do, sooner or later. In the mean time, if
Heaven sends you a good wind, you need not wait, but can start again. For my
part, if I come to a village, I'll work my way through with a few Arabic words
that you can write for me on a slip of paper, and I'll bring you help or lose my
hide. What do you think of my plan?"

"It is absolute folly, Joe, but worthy of your noble heart. The thing is
impossible. You will not leave us."

"But, sir, we must do something, and this plan can't do you any harm, for, I
say again, you need not wait; and then, after all, I may succeed."

"No, Joe, no! We will not separate. That would only be adding sorrow to
trouble. It was written that matters should be as they are; and it is very probably
written that it shall be quite otherwise by-and-by. Let us wait, then, with
resignation."

"So be it, master; but take notice of one thing: I give you a day longer, and
I'll not wait after that. To-day is Sunday; we might say Monday, as it is one
o'clock in the morning, and if we don't get off by Tuesday, I'll run the risk. I've
made up my mind to that!"

The doctor made no answer, and in a few minutes they got back to the car,
where he took his place beside Kennedy, who lay there plunged in silence so
complete that it could not be considered sleep.


CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVENTH.

Terrific Heat.--Hallucinations.--The Last Drops of Water.--Nights of
Despair.--An Attempt at Suicide.--The Simoom.--The Oasis.--The Lion and
Lioness.

The doctor's first care, on the morrow, was to consult the barometer. He
found that the mercury had scarcely undergone any perceptible depression.

"Nothing!" he murmured, "nothing!"

He got out of the car and scrutinized the weather; there was only the same
heat, the same cloudless sky, the same merciless drought.

"Must we, then, give up to despair?" he exclaimed, in agony.

Joe did not open his lips. He was buried in his own thoughts, and planning
the expedition he had proposed.

Kennedy got up, feeling very ill, and a prey to nervous agitation. He was
suffering horribly with thirst, and his swollen tongue and lips could hardly
articulate a syllable.

There still remained a few drops of water. Each of them knew this, and each


was thinking of it, and felt himself drawn toward them; but neither of the three
dared to take a step.

Those three men, friends and companions as they were, fixed their haggard
eyes upon each other with an instinct of ferocious longing, which was most
plainly revealed in the hardy Scot, whose vigorous constitution yielded the
soonest to these unnatural privations.

Throughout the day he was delirious, pacing up and down, uttering hoarse
cries, gnawing his clinched fists, and ready to open his veins and drink his own
hot blood.

"Ah!" he cried, "land of thirst! Well might you be called the land of despair!"

At length he sank down in utter prostration, and his friends heard no other
sound from him than the hissing of his breath between his parched and swollen
lips.

Toward evening, Joe had his turn of delirium. The vast expanse of sand
appeared to him an immense pond, full of clear and limpid water; and, more than
once, he dashed himself upon the scorching waste to drink long draughts, and
rose again with his mouth clogged with hot dust.

"Curses on it!" he yelled, in his madness, "it's nothing but salt water!"

Then, while Ferguson and Kennedy lay there motionless, the resistless
longing came over him to drain the last few drops of water that had been kept in
reserve. The natural instinct proved too strong. He dragged himself toward the
car, on his knees; he glared at the bottle containing the precious fluid; he gave
one wild, eager glance, seized the treasured store, and bore it to his lips.

At that instant he heard a heart-rending cry close beside him--"Water!
water!"

It was Kennedy, who had crawled up close to him, and was begging there,
upon his knees, and weeping piteously.

Joe, himself in tears, gave the poor wretch the bottle, and Kennedy drained
the last drop with savage haste.

"Thanks!" he murmured hoarsely, but Joe did not hear him, for both alike
had dropped fainting on the sand.

What took place during that fearful night neither of them knew, but, on
Tuesday morning, under those showers of heat which the sun poured down upon
them, the unfortunate men felt their limbs gradually drying up, and when Joe
attempted to rise he found it impossible.

He looked around him. In the car, the doctor, completely overwhelmed, sat
with his arms folded on his breast, gazing with idiotic fixedness upon some
imaginary point in space. Kennedy was frightful to behold. He was rolling his
head from right to left like a wild beast in a cage.


All at once, his eyes rested on the butt of his rifle, which jutted above the rim
of the car.

"Ah!" he screamed, raising himself with a superhuman effort.

Desperate, mad, he snatched at the weapon, and turned the barrel toward his
mouth.

"Kennedy!" shouted Joe, throwing himself upon his friend.

"Let go! hands off!" moaned the Scot, in a hoarse, grating voice--and then
the two struggled desperately for the rifle.

"Let go, or I'll kill you!" repeated Kennedy. But Joe clung to him only the
more fiercely, and they had been contending thus without the doctor seeing them
for many seconds, when, suddenly the rifle went off. At the sound of its
discharge, the doctor rose up erect, like a spectre, and glared around him.

But all at once his glance grew more animated; he extended his hand toward
the horizon, and in a voice no longer human shrieked:

"There! there--off there!"

There was such fearful force in the cry that Kennedy and Joe released each
other, and both looked where the doctor pointed.

The plain was agitated like the sea shaken by the fury of a tempest; billows
of sand went tossing over each other amid blinding clouds of dust; an immense
pillar was seen whirling toward them through the air from the southeast, with
terrific velocity; the sun was disappearing behind an opaque veil of cloud whose
enormous barrier extended clear to the horizon, while the grains of fine sand
went gliding together with all the supple ease of liquid particles, and the rising
dust-tide gained more and more with every second.

Ferguson's eyes gleamed with a ray of energetic hope.

"The simoom!" he exclaimed.

"The simoom!" repeated Joe, without exactly knowing what it meant.

"So much the better!" said Kennedy, with the bitterness of despair. "So much
the better--we shall die!"

"So much the better!" echoed the doctor, "for we shall live!" and, so saying,
he began rapidly to throw out the sand that encumbered the car.

At length his companions understood him, and took their places at his side.

"And now, Joe," said the doctor, "throw out some fifty pounds of your ore,
there!"

Joe no longer hesitated, although he still felt a fleeting pang of regret. The
balloon at once began to ascend.

"Tt was high time!" said the doctor.

The simoom, in fact, came rushing on like a thunderbolt, and a moment later
the balloon would have been crushed, torn to atoms, annihilated. The awful


whirlwind was almost upon it, and it was already pelted with showers of sand
driven like hail by the storm.

"Out with more ballast!" shouted the doctor.

"There!" responded Joe, tossing over a huge fragment of quartz.

With this, the Victoria rose swiftly above the range of the whirling column,
but, caught in the vast displacement of the atmosphere thereby occasioned, it
was borne along with incalculable rapidity away above this foaming sea.

The three travellers did not speak. They gazed, and hoped, and even felt
refreshed by the breath of the tempest.

About three o'clock, the whirlwind ceased; the sand, falling again upon the
desert, formed numberless little hillocks, and the sky resumed its former
tranquillity.

The balloon, which had again lost its momentum, was floating in sight of an
oasis, a sort of islet studded with green trees, thrown up upon the surface of this
sandy ocean.

"Water! we'll find water there!" said the doctor.

And, instantly, opening the upper valve, he let some hydrogen escape, and
slowly descended, taking the ground at about two hundred feet from the edge of
the oasis.

In four hours the travellers had swept over a distance of two hundred and
forty miles!

The car was at once ballasted, and Kennedy, closely followed by Joe, leaped
out.

"Take your guns with you!" said the doctor; "take your guns, and be careful!"

Dick grasped his rifle, and Joe took one of the fowling-pieces. They then
rapidly made for the trees, and disappeared under the fresh verdure, which
announced the presence of abundant springs. As they hurried on, they had not
taken notice of certain large footprints and fresh tracks of some living creature
marked here and there in the damp soil.

Suddenly, a dull roar was heard not twenty paces from them.

"The roar of a lion!" said Joe.

"Good for that!" said the excited hunter; "we'll fight him. A man feels strong
when only a fight's in question."

"But be careful, Mr. Kennedy; be careful! The lives of all depend upon the
life of one."

But Kennedy no longer heard him; he was pushing on, his eye blazing; his
rifle cocked; fearful to behold in his daring rashness. There, under a palm-tree,
stood an enormous black-maned lion, crouching for a spring on his antagonist.
Scarcely had he caught a glimpse of the hunter, when he bounded through the


air; but he had not touched the ground ere a bullet pierced his heart, and he fell
to the earth dead.

"Hurrah! hurrah!" shouted Joe, with wild exultation.

Kennedy rushed toward the well, slid down the dampened steps, and flung
himself at full length by the side of a fresh spring, in which he plunged his
parched lips. Joe followed suit, and for some minutes nothing was heard but the
sound they made with their mouths, drinking more like maddened beasts than
men.

"Take care, Mr. Kennedy," said Joe at last; "let us not overdo the thing!" and
he panted for breath.

But Kennedy, without a word, drank on. He even plunged his hands, and
then his head, into the delicious tide--he fairly revelled in its coolness.

"But the doctor?" said Joe; "our friend, Dr. Ferguson?"

That one word recalled Kennedy to himself, and, hastily filling a flask that
he had brought with him, he started on a run up the steps of the well.

But what was his amazement when he saw an opaque body of enormous
dimensions blocking up the passage! Joe, who was close upon Kennedy's heels,
recoiled with him.

"We are blocked in--entrapped!"

"Impossible! What does that mean?--"

Dick had no time to finish; a terrific roar made him only too quickly aware
what foe confronted him.

"Another lion!" exclaimed Joe.

"A lioness, rather," said Kennedy. "Ah! ferocious brute!" he added, "I'll settle
you in a moment more!" and swiftly reloaded his rifle.

In another instant he fired, but the animal had disappeared.

"Onward!" shouted Kennedy.

"No!" interposed the other, "that shot did not kill her; her body would have
rolled down the steps; she's up there, ready to spring upon the first of us who
appears, and he would be a lost man!"

"But what are we to do? We must get out of this, and the doctor is expecting
us."

"Let us decoy the animal. Take my piece, and give me your rifle."

"What is your plan?"

"You'll see."

And Joe, taking off his linen jacket, hung it on the end of the rifle, and thrust
it above the top of the steps. The lioness flung herself furiously upon it. Kennedy
was on the alert for her, and his bullet broke her shoulder. The lioness, with a
frightful howl of agony, rolled down the steps, overturning Joe in her fall. The


poor fellow imagined that he could already feel the enormous paws of the savage
beast in his flesh, when a second detonation resounded in the narrow passage,
and Dr. Ferguson appeared at the opening above with his gun in hand, and still
smoking from the discharge.

Joe leaped to his feet, clambered over the body of the dead lioness, and
handed up the flask full of sparkling water to his master.

To carry it to his lips, and to half empty it at a draught, was the work of an
instant, and the three travellers offered up thanks from the depths of their hearts
to that Providence who had so miraculously saved them.


CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHTH.

An Evening of Delight.--Joe's Culinary Performance.--A Dissertation on
Raw Meat.--The Narrative of James Bruce.--Camping out.--Joe's Dreams.--The
Barometer begins to fall.--The Barometer rises again.--Preparations for
Departure.--The Tempest.

The evening was lovely, and our three friends enjoyed it in the cool shade of
the mimosas, after a substantial repast, at which the tea and the punch were dealt
out with no niggardly hand.

Kennedy had traversed the little domain in all directions. He had ransacked
every thicket and satisfied himself that the balloon party were the only living
creatures in this terrestrial paradise; so they stretched themselves upon their
blankets and passed a peaceful night that brought them forgetfulness of their past
sufferings.

On the morrow, May 7th, the sun shone with all his splendor, but his rays
could not penetrate the dense screen of the palm-tree foliage, and as there was no
lack of provisions, the doctor resolved to remain where he was while waiting for
a favorable wind.

Joe had conveyed his portable kitchen to the oasis, and proceeded to indulge
in any number of culinary combinations, using water all the time with the most
profuse extravagance.

"What a strange succession of annoyances and enjoyments!" moralized
Kennedy. "Such abundance as this after such privations; such luxury after such
want! Ah! I nearly went mad!"

"My dear Dick," replied the doctor, "had it not been for Joe, you would not
be sitting here, to-day, discoursing on the instability of human affairs."

"Whole-hearted friend!" said Kennedy, extending his hand to Joe.

"There's no occasion for all that," responded the latter; "but you can take
your revenge some time, Mr. Kennedy, always hoping though that you may


never have occasion to do the same for me!"

"It's a poor constitution this of ours to succumb to so little," philosophized
Dr. Ferguson.

"So little water, you mean, doctor," interposed Joe; "that element must be
very necessary to life."

"Undoubtedly, and persons deprived of food hold out longer than those
deprived of water."

"I believe it. Besides, when needs must, one can eat any thing he comes
across, even his fellow-creatures, although that must be a kind of food that's
pretty hard to digest."

"The savages don't boggle much about it!" said Kennedy.

"Yes; but then they are savages, and accustomed to devouring raw meat; it's
something that I'd find very disgusting, for my part."

"It is disgusting enough," said the doctor, "that's a fact; and so much so,
indeed, that nobody believed the narratives of the earliest travellers in Africa
who brought back word that many tribes on that continent subsisted upon raw
meat, and people generally refused to credit the statement. It was under such
circumstances that a very singular adventure befell James Bruce."

"Tell it to us, doctor; we've time enough to hear it," said Joe, stretching
himself voluptuously on the cool greensward.

"By all means.--James Bruce was a Scotchman, of Stirlingshire, who,
between 1768 and 1772, traversed all Abyssinia, as far as Lake Tyana, in search
of the sources of the Nile. He afterward returned to England, but did not publish
an account of his journeys until 1790. His statements were received with
extreme incredulity, and such may be the reception accorded to our own. The
manners and customs of the Abyssinians seemed so different from those of the
English, that no one would credit the description of them. Among other details,
Bruce had put forward the assertion that the tribes of Eastern Africa fed upon
raw flesh, and this set everybody against him. He might say so as much as he
pleased; there was no one likely to go and see! One day, in a parlor at Edinburgh,
a Scotch gentleman took up the subject in his presence, as it had become the
topic of daily pleasantry, and, in reference to the eating of raw flesh, said that the
thing was neither possible nor true. Bruce made no reply, but went out and
returned a few minutes later with a raw steak, seasoned with pepper and salt, in
the African style.

Sir,’ said he to the Scotchman, 'in doubting my statements, you have grossly
affronted me; in believing the thing to be impossible, you have been egregiously
mistaken; and, in proof thereof, you will now eat this beef-steak raw, or you will
give me instant satisfaction!’ The Scotchman had a wholesome dread of the


brawny traveller, and DID eat the steak, although not without a good many wry
faces. Thereupon, with the utmost coolness, James Bruce added: ‘Even
admitting, sir, that the thing were untrue, you will, at least, no longer maintain
that it is impossible."

"Well put in!" said Joe, "and if the Scotchman found it lie heavy on his
stomach, he got no more than he deserved. If, on our return to England, they
dare to doubt what we say about our travels--"

"Well, Joe, what would you do?"

"Why, I'll make the doubters swallow the pieces of the balloon, without
either salt or pepper!"

All burst out laughing at Joe's queer notions, and thus the day slipped by in
pleasant chat. With returning strength, hope had revived, and with hope came the
courage to do and to dare. The past was obliterated in the presence of the future
with providential rapidity.

Joe would have been willing to remain forever in this enchanting asylum; it
was the realm he had pictured in his dreams; he felt himself at home; his master
had to give him his exact location, and it was with the gravest air imaginable that
he wrote down on his tablets fifteen degrees forty-three minutes east longitude,
and eight degrees thirty-two minutes north latitude.

Kennedy had but one regret, to wit, that he could not hunt in that miniature
forest, because, according to his ideas, there was a slight deficiency of ferocious
wild beasts in it.

"But, my dear Dick," said the doctor, "haven't you rather a short memory?
How about the lion and the lioness?"

"Oh, that!" he ejaculated with the contempt of a thorough-bred sportsman for
game already killed. "But the fact is, that finding them here would lead one to
suppose that we can't be far from a more fertile country."

"It don't prove much, Dick, for those animals, when goaded by hunger or
thirst, will travel long distances, and I think that, to-night, we had better keep a
more vigilant lookout, and light fires, besides."

"What, in such heat as this?" said Joe. "Well, if it's necessary, we'll have to
do it, but I do think it a real pity to burn this pretty grove that has been such a
comfort to us!"

"Oh! above all things, we must take the utmost care not to set it on fire,"
replied the doctor, "so that others in the same strait as ourselves may some day
find shelter here in the middle of the desert."

"T'll be very careful, indeed, doctor; but do you think that this oasis is
known?"

"Undoubtedly; it is a halting-place for the caravans that frequent the centre of


Africa, and a visit from one of them might be any thing but pleasant to you, Joe."
"Why, are there any more of those rascally Nyam-Nyams around here?"
"Certainly; that is the general name of all the neighboring tribes, and, under

the same climates, the same races are likely to have similar manners and

customs."

"Pah!" said Joe, "but, after all, it's natural enough. If savages had the ways of
gentlemen, where would be the difference? By George, these fine fellows
wouldn't have to be coaxed long to eat the Scotchman's raw steak, nor the
Scotchman either, into the bargain!"

With this very sensible observation, Joe began to get ready his firewood for
the night, making just as little of it as possible. Fortunately, these precautions
were superfluous; and each of the party, in his turn, dropped off into the soundest
slumber.

On the next day the weather still showed no sign of change, but kept
provokingly and obstinately fair. The balloon remained motionless, without any
oscillation to betray a breath of wind.

The doctor began to get uneasy again. If their stay in the desert were to be
prolonged like this, their provisions would give out. After nearly perishing for
want of water, they would, at last, have to starve to death!

But he took fresh courage as he saw the mercury fall considerably in the
barometer, and noticed evident signs of an early change in the atmosphere. He
therefore resolved to make all his preparations for a start, so as to avail himself
of the first opportunity. The feeding-tank and the water-tank were both
completely filled.

Then he had to reestablish the equilibrium of the balloon, and Joe was
obliged to part with another considerable portion of his precious quartz. With
restored health, his ambitious notions had come back to him, and he made more
than one wry face before obeying his master; but the latter convinced him that he
could not carry so considerable a weight with him through the air, and gave him
his choice between the water and the gold. Joe hesitated no longer, but flung out
the requisite quantity of his much-prized ore upon the sand.

"The next people who come this way," he remarked, "will be rather surprised
to find a fortune in such a place."

"And suppose some learned traveller should come across these specimens,
eh?" suggested Kennedy.

"You may be certain, Dick, that they would take him by surprise, and that he
would publish his astonishment in several folios; so that some day we shall hear
of a wonderful deposit of gold-bearing quartz in the midst of the African sands!"

"And Joe there, will be the cause of it all!"


This idea of mystifying some learned sage tickled Joe hugely, and made him
laugh.

During the rest of the day the doctor vainly kept on the watch for a change of
weather. The temperature rose, and, had it not been for the shade of the oasis,
would have been insupportable. The thermometer marked a hundred and forty-
nine degrees in the sun, and a veritable rain of fire filled the air. This was the
most intense heat that they had yet noted.

Joe arranged their bivouac for that evening, as he had done for the previous
night; and during the watches kept by the doctor and Kennedy there was no fresh
incident.

But, toward three o'clock in the morning, while Joe was on guard, the
temperature suddenly fell; the sky became overcast with clouds, and the
darkness increased.

"Turn out!" cried Joe, arousing his companions. "Turn out! Here's the wind!"

"At last!" exclaimed the doctor, eying the heavens. "But it is a storm! The
balloon! Let us hasten to the balloon!"

It was high time for them to reach it. The Victoria was bending to the force
of the hurricane, and dragging along the car, the latter grazing the sand. Had any
portion of the ballast been accidentally thrown out, the balloon would have been
swept away, and all hope of recovering it have been forever lost.

But fleet-footed Joe put forth his utmost speed, and checked the car, while
the balloon beat upon the sand, at the risk of being tom to pieces. The doctor,
followed by Kennedy, leaped in, and lit his cylinder, while his companions threw
out the superfluous ballast.

The travellers took one last look at the trees of the oasis bowing to the force
of the hurricane, and soon, catching the wind at two hundred feet above the
ground, disappeared in the gloom.


CHAPTER TWENTY-NINTH.

Signs of Vegetation.--The Fantastic Notion of a French Author.--A
Magnificent Country.--The Kingdom of Adamova.--The Explorations of Speke
and Burton connected with those of Dr. Barth.--The Atlantika Mountains.--The
River Benoue.--The City of Yola.--The Bagele.--Mount Mendif.

From the moment of their departure, the travellers moved with great velocity.
They longed to leave behind them the desert, which had so nearly been fatal to
them.

About a quarter-past nine in the morning, they caught a glimpse of some
signs of vegetation: herbage floating on that sea of sand, and announcing, as the


weeds upon the ocean did to Christopher Columbus, the nearness of the shore--
green shoots peeping up timidly between pebbles that were, in their turn, to be
the rocks of that vast expanse.

Hills, but of trifling height, were seen in wavy lines upon the horizon. Their
profile, muffled by the heavy mist, was defined but vaguely. The monotony,
however, was beginning to disappear.

The doctor hailed with joy the new country thus disclosed, and, like a
seaman on lookout at the mast-head, he was ready to shout aloud:

"Land, ho! land!"

An hour later the continent spread broadly before their gaze, still wild in
aspect, but less flat, less denuded, and with a few trees standing out against the
gray sky.

"We are in a civilized country at last!" said the hunter.

"Civilized? Well, that's one way of speaking; but there are no people to be
seen yet."

"Tt will not be long before we see them," said Ferguson, "at our present rate
of travel."

"Are we still in the negro country, doctor?"

"Yes, and on our way to the country of the Arabs."

"What! real Arabs, sir, with their camels?"

"No, not many camels; they are scarce, if not altogether unknown, in these
regions. We must go a few degrees farther north to see them."

"What a pity!"

"And why, Joe?"

"Because, if the wind fell contrary, they might be of use to us."

"How so?"

"Well, sir, it's just a notion that's got into my head: we might hitch them to
the car, and make them tow us along. What do you say to that, doctor?"

"Poor Joe! Another person had that idea in advance of you. It was used by a
very gifted French author-- M. Mery--in a romance, it is true. He has his
travellers drawn along in a balloon by a team of camels; then a lion comes up,
devours the camels, swallows the tow-rope, and hauls the balloon in their stead;
and so on through the story. You see that the whole thing is the top-flower of
fancy, but has nothing in common with our style of locomotion."

Joe, a little cut down at learning that his idea had been used already,
cudgelled his wits to imagine what animal could have devoured the lion; but he
could not guess it, and so quietly went on scanning the appearance of the
country.

A lake of medium extent stretched away before him, surrounded by an


amphitheatre of hills, which yet could not be dignified with the name of
mountains. There were winding valleys, numerous and fertile, with their tangled
thickets of the most various trees. The African oil-tree rose above the mass, with
leaves fifteen feet in length upon its stalk, the latter studded with sharp thorns;
the bombax, or silk-cotton-tree, filled the wind, as it swept by, with the fine
down of its seeds; the pungent odors of the pendanus, the "kenda" of the Arabs,
perfumed the air up to the height where the Victoria was sailing; the papaw-tree,
with its palm-shaped leaves; the sterculier, which produces the Soudan-nut; the
baobab, and the banana-tree, completed the luxuriant flora of these inter-tropical
regions.

"The country is superb!" said the doctor.

"Here are some animals," added Joe. "Men are not far away."

"Oh, what magnificent elephants!" exclaimed Kennedy. "Is there no way to
get a little shooting?"

"How could we manage to halt in a current as strong as this? No, Dick; you
must taste a little of the torture of Tantalus just now. You shall make up for it
afterward."

And, in truth, there was enough to excite the fancy of a sportsman. Dick's
heart fairly leaped in his breast as he grasped the butt of his Purdy.

The fauna of the region were as striking as its flora. The wild-ox revelled in
dense herbage that often concealed his whole body; gray, black, and yellow
elephants of the most gigantic size burst headlong, like a living hurricane,
through the forests, breaking, rending, tearing down, devastating every thing in
their path; upon the woody slopes of the hills trickled cascades and springs
flowing northward; there, too, the hippopotami bathed their huge forms,
splashing and snorting as they frolicked in the water, and lamantines, twelve feet
long, with bodies like seals, stretched themselves along the banks, turning up
toward the sun their rounded teats swollen with milk.

It was a whole menagerie of rare and curious beasts in a wondrous hot-
house, where numberless birds with plumage of a thousand hues gleamed and
fluttered in the sunshine.

By this prodigality of Nature, the doctor recognized the splendid kingdom of
Adamova.

"We are now beginning to trench upon the realm of modern discovery. I have
taken up the lost scent of preceding travellers. It is a happy chance, my friends,
for we shall be enabled to link the toils of Captains Burton and Speke with the
explorations of Dr. Barth. We have left the Englishmen behind us, and now have
caught up with the Hamburger. It will not be long, either, before we arrive at the
extreme point attained by that daring explorer."


"It seems to me that there is a vast extent of country between the two
explored routes," remarked Kennedy; "at least, if I am to judge by the distance
that we have made."

"It is easy to determine: take the map and see what is the longitude of the
southern point of Lake Ukereoue, reached by Speke."

"Tt is near the thirty-seventh degree."

"And the city of Yola, which we shall sight this evening, and to which Barth
penetrated, what is its position?"

"Tt is about in the twelfth degree of east longitude."

"Then there are twenty-five degrees, or, counting sixty miles to each, about
fifteen hundred miles in all."

"A nice little walk," said Joe, "for people who have to go on foot."

"Tt will be accomplished, however. Livingstone and Moffat are pushing on
up this line toward the interior. Nyassa, which they have discovered, is not far
from Lake Tanganayika, seen by Burton. Ere the close of the century these
regions will, undoubtedly, be explored. But," added the doctor, consulting his
compass, "I regret that the wind is carrying us so far to the westward. I wanted to
get to the north."

After twelve hours of progress, the Victoria found herself on the confines of
Nigritia. The first inhabitants of this region, the Chouas Arabs, were feeding
their wandering flocks. The immense summits of the Atlantika Mountains seen
above the horizon--mountains that no European foot had yet scaled, and whose
height is computed to be ten thousand feet! Their western slope determines the
flow of all the waters in this region of Africa toward the ocean. They are the
Mountains of the Moon to this part of the continent.

At length a real river greeted the gaze of our travellers, and, by the enormous
ant-hills seen in its vicinity, the doctor recognized the Benoue, one of the great
tributaries of the Niger, the one which the natives have called "The Fountain of
the Waters."

"This river," said the doctor to his companions, "will, one day, be the natural
channel of communication with the interior of Nigritia. Under the command of
one of our brave captains, the steamer Pleiad has already ascended as far as the
town of Yola. You see that we are not in an unknown country."

Numerous slaves were engaged in the labors of the field, cultivating sorgho,
a kind of millet which forms the chief basis of their diet; and the most stupid
expressions of astonishment ensued as the Victoria sped past like a meteor. That
evening the balloon halted about forty miles from Yola, and ahead of it, but in
the distance, rose the two sharp cones of Mount Mendif.

The doctor threw out his anchors and made fast to the top of a high tree; but


a very violent wind beat upon the balloon with such force as to throw it over on
its side, thus rendering the position of the car sometimes extremely dangerous.
Ferguson did not close his all night, and he was repeatedly on the point of
cutting the anchor-rope and scudding away before the gale. At length, however,
the storm abated, and the oscillations of the balloon ceased to be alarming.

On the morrow the wind was more moderate, but it carried our travellers
away from the city of Yola, which recently rebuilt by the Fouillans, excited
Ferguson's curiosity. However, he had to make up his mind to being borne
farther to the northward and even a little to the east.

Kennedy proposed to halt in this fine hunting-country, and Joe declared that
the need of fresh meat was beginning to be felt; but the savage customs of the
country, the attitude of the population, and some shots fired at the Victoria,
admonished the doctor to continue his journey. They were then crossing a region
that was the scene of massacres and burnings, and where warlike conflicts
between the barbarian sultans, contending for their power amid the most
atrocious carnage, never cease.

Numerous and populous villages of long low huts stretched away between
broad pasture-fields whose dense herbage was besprinkled with violet-colored
blossoms. The huts, looking like huge beehives, were sheltered behind bristling
palisades. The wild hill-sides and hollows frequently reminded the beholder of
the glens in the Highlands of Scotland, as Kennedy more than once remarked.

In spite of all he could do, the doctor bore directly to the northeast, toward
Mount Mendif, which was lost in the midst of environing clouds. The lofty
summits of these mountains separate the valley of the Niger from the basin of
Lake Tchad.

Soon afterward was seen the Bagele, with its eighteen villages clinging to its
flanks like a whole brood of children to their mother's bosom--a magnificent
spectacle for the beholder whose gaze commanded and took in the entire picture
at one view. Even the ravines were seen to be covered with fields of rice and of
arachides.

By three o'clock the Victoria was directly in front of Mount Mendif. It had
been impossible to avoid it; the only thing to be done was to cross it. The doctor,
by means of a temperature increased to one hundred and eighty degrees, gave the
balloon a fresh ascensional force of nearly sixteen hundred pounds, and it went
up to an elevation of more than eight thousand feet, the greatest height attained
during the journey. The temperature of the atmosphere was so much cooler at
that point that the aeronauts had to resort to their blankets and thick coverings.

Ferguson was in haste to descend; the covering of the balloon gave
indications of bursting, but in the meanwhile he had time to satisfy himself of


the volcanic origin of the mountain, whose extinct craters are now but deep
abysses. Immense accumulations of bird-guano gave the sides of Mount Mendif
the appearance of calcareous rocks, and there was enough of the deposit there to
manure all the lands in the United Kingdom.

At five o'clock the Victoria, sheltered from the south winds, went gently
gliding along the slopes of the mountain, and stopped in a wide clearing remote
from any habitation. The instant it touched the soil, all needful precautions were
taken to hold it there firmly; and Kennedy, fowling-piece in hand, sallied out
upon the sloping plain. Ere long, he returned with half a dozen wild ducks and a
kind of snipe, which Joe served up in his best style. The meal was heartily
relished, and the night was passed in undisturbed and refreshing slumber.


CHAPTER THIRTIETH.

Mosfeia.--The Sheik.--Denham, Clapperton, and Oudney.--Vogel.--The
Capital of Loggoum.--Toole.--Becalmed above Kernak.--The Governor and his
Court. --The Attack.--The Incendiary Pigeons.

On the next day, May 11th, the Victoria resumed her adventurous journey.
Her passengers had the same confidence in her that a good seaman has in his
ship.

In terrific hurricanes, in tropical heats, when making dangerous departures,
and descents still more dangerous, it had, at all times and in all places, come out
safely. It might almost have been said that Ferguson managed it with a wave of
the hand; and hence, without knowing in advance, where the point of arrival
would be, the doctor had no fears concerning the successful issue of his journey.
However, in this country of barbarians and fanatics, prudence obliged him to
take the strictest precautions. He therefore counselled his companions to have
their eyes wide open for every thing and at all hours.

The wind drifted a little more to the northward, and, toward nine o'clock,
they sighted the larger city of Mosfeia, built upon an eminence which was itself
enclosed between two lofty mountains. Its position was impregnable, a narrow
road running between a marsh and a thick wood being the only channel of
approach to it.

At the moment of which we write, a sheik, accompanied by a mounted
escort, and clad in a garb of brilliant colors, preceded by couriers and trumpeters,
who put aside the boughs of the trees as he rode up, was making his grand entry
into the place.

The doctor lowered the balloon in order to get a better look at this cavalcade
of natives; but, as the balloon grew larger to their eyes, they began to show


symptoms of intense affright, and at length made off in different directions as
fast as their legs and those of their horses could carry them.

The sheik alone did not budge an inch. He merely grasped his long musket,
cocked it, and proudly waited in silence. The doctor came on to within a hundred
and fifty feet of him, and then, with his roundest and fullest voice, saluted him
courteously in the Arabic tongue.

But, upon hearing these words falling, as it seemed, from the sky, the sheik
dismounted and prostrated himself in the dust of the highway, where the doctor
had to leave him, finding it impossible to divert him from his adoration.

"Unquestionably," Ferguson remarked, "those people take us for supernatural
beings. When Europeans came among them for the first time, they were
mistaken for creatures of a higher race. When this sheik comes to speak of to-
day's meeting, he will not fail to embellish the circumstance with all the
resources of an Arab imagination. You may, therefore, judge what an account
their legends will give of us some day."

"Not such a desirable thing, after all," said the Scot, "in the point of view that
affects civilization; it would be better to pass for mere men. That would give
these negro races a superior idea of European power."

"Very good, my dear Dick; but what can we do about it? You might sit all
day explaining the mechanism of a balloon to the savants of this country, and yet
they would not comprehend you, but would persist in ascribing it to supernatural
aid."

"Doctor, you spoke of the first time Europeans visited these regions. Who
were the visitors?" inquired Joe.

"My dear fellow, we are now upon the very track of Major Denham. It was at
this very city of Mosfeia that he was received by the Sultan of Mandara; he had
quitted the Bornou country; he accompanied the sheik in an expedition against
the Fellatahs; he assisted in the attack on the city, which, with its arrows alone,
bravely resisted the bullets of the Arabs, and put the sheik's troops to flight. All
this was but a pretext for murders, raids, and pillage. The major was completely
plundered and stripped, and had it not been for his horse, under whose stomach
he clung with the skill of an Indian rider, and was borne with a headlong gallop
from his barbarous pursuers, he never could have made his way back to Kouka,
the capital of Bornou."

"Who was this Major Denham?"

"A fearless Englishman, who, between 1822 and 1824, commanded an
expedition into the Bornou country, in company with Captain Clapperton and Dr.
Oudney. They set out from Tripoli in the month of March, reached Mourzouk,
the capital of Fez, and, following the route which at a later period Dr. Barth was


to pursue on his way back to Europe, they arrived, on the 16th of February,
1823, at Kouka, near Lake Tchad. Denham made several explorations in Bornou,
in Mandara, and to the eastern shores of the lake. In the mean time, on the 15th
of December, 1823, Captain Clapperton and Dr. Oudney had pushed their way
through the Soudan country as far as Sackatoo, and Oudney died of fatigue and
exhaustion in the town of Murmur."

"This part of Africa has, therefore, paid a heavy tribute of victims to the
cause of science," said Kennedy.

"Yes, this country is fatal to travellers. We are moving directly toward the
kingdom of Baghirmi, which Vogel traversed in 1856, so as to reach the Wadai
country, where he disappeared. This young man, at the age of twenty-three, had
been sent to cooperate with Dr. Barth. They met on the 1st of December, 1854,
and thereupon commenced his explorations of the country. Toward 1856, he
announced, in the last letters received from him, his intention to reconnoitre the
kingdom of Wadai, which no European had yet penetrated. It appears that he got
as far as Wara, the capital, where, according to some accounts, he was made
prisoner, and, according to others, was put to death for having attempted to
ascend a sacred mountain in the environs. But, we must not too lightly admit the
death of travellers, since that does away with the necessity of going in search of
them. For instance, how often was the death of Dr. Barth reported, to his own
great annoyance! It is, therefore, very possible that Vogel may still be held as a
prisoner by the Sultan of Wadai, in the hope of obtaining a good ransom for him.

"Baron de Neimans was about starting for the Wadai country when he died at
Cairo, in 1855; and we now know that De Heuglin has set out on Vogel's track
with the expedition sent from Leipsic, so that we shall soon be accurately
informed as to the fate of that young and interesting explorer."*

* Since the doctor's departure, letters written from El'Obeid by Mr.
Muntzinger, the newly-appointed head of the expedition, unfortunately place the
death of Vogel beyond a doubt.

Mosfeia had disappeared from the horizon long ere this, and the Mandara
country was developing to the gaze of our aeronauts its astonishing fertility, with
its forests of acacias, its locust-trees covered with red flowers, and the
herbaceous plants of its fields of cotton and indigo trees. The river Shari, which
eighty miles farther on rolled its impetuous waters into Lake Tchad, was quite
distinctly seen.

The doctor got his companions to trace its course upon the maps drawn by
Dr. Barth.

"You perceive," said he, "that the labors of this savant have been conducted
with great precision; we are moving directly toward the Loggoum region, and


perhaps toward Kernak, its capital. It was there that poor Toole died, at the age
of scarcely twenty-two. He was a young Englishman, an ensign in the 80th
regiment, who, a few weeks before, had joined Major Denham in Africa, and it
was not long ere he there met his death. Ah! this vast country might well be
called the graveyard of European travellers."

Some boats, fifty feet long, were descending the current of the Shari. The
Victoria, then one thousand feet above the soil, hardly attracted the attention of
the natives; but the wind, which until then had been blowing with a certain
degree of strength, was falling off.

"Is it possible that we are to be caught in another dead calm?" sighed the
doctor.

"Well, we've no lack of water, nor the desert to fear, anyhow, master," said
Joe.

"No; but there are races here still more to be dreaded."

"Why!" said Joe, again, "there's something like a town."

"That is Kernak. The last puffs of the breeze are wafting us to it, and, if we
choose, we can take an exact plan of the place."

"Shall we not go nearer to it?" asked Kennedy.

"Nothing easier, Dick! We are right over it. Allow me to turn the stopcock of
the cylinder, and we'll not be long in descending."

Half an hour later the balloon hung motionless about two hundred feet from
the ground.

"Here we are!" said the doctor, "nearer to Kernak than a man would be to
London, if he were perched in the cupola of St. Paul's. So we can take a survey
at our ease."

"What is that tick-tacking sound that we hear on all sides?"

Joe looked attentively, and at length discovered that the noise they heard was
produced by a number of weavers beating cloth stretched in the open air, on
large trunks of trees.

The capital of Loggoum could then be seen in its entire extent, like an
unrolled chart. It is really a city with straight rows of houses and quite wide
streets. In the midst of a large open space there was a slave-market, attended by a
great crowd of customers, for the Mandara women, who have extremely small
hands and feet, are in excellent request, and can be sold at lucrative rates.

At the sight of the Victoria, the scene so often produced occurred again. At
first there were outcries, and then followed general stupefaction; business was
abandoned; work was flung aside, and all noise ceased. The aeronauts remained
as they were, completely motionless, and lost not a detail of the populous city.
They even went down to within sixty feet of the ground.


Hereupon the Governor of Loggoum came out from his residence, displaying
his green standard, and accompanied by his musicians, who blew on hoarse
buffalo-horns, as though they would split their cheeks or any thing else,
excepting their own lungs. The crowd at once gathered around him. In the mean
while Dr. Ferguson tried to make himself heard, but in vain.

This population looked like proud and intelligent people, with their high
foreheads, their almost aquiline noses, and their curling hair; but the presence of
the Victoria troubled them greatly. Horsemen could be seen galloping in all
directions, and it soon became evident that the governor's troops were
assembling to oppose so extraordinary a foe. Joe wore himself out waving
handkerchiefs of every color and shape to them; but his exertions were all to no
purpose.

However, the sheik, surrounded by his court, proclaimed silence, and
pronounced a discourse, of which the doctor could not understand a word. It was
Arabic, mixed with Baghirmi. He could make out enough, however, by the
universal language of gestures, to be aware that he was receiving a very polite
invitation to depart. Indeed, he would have asked for nothing better, but for lack
of wind, the thing had become impossible. His noncompliance, therefore,
exasperated the governor, whose courtiers and attendants set up a furious howl to
enforce immediate obedience on the part of the aerial monster.

They were odd-looking fellows those courtiers, with their five or six shirts
swathed around their bodies! They had enormous stomachs, some of which
actually seemed to be artificial. The doctor surprised his companions by
informing them that this was the way to pay court to the sultan. The rotundity of
the stomach indicated the ambition of its possessor. These corpulent gentry
gesticulated and bawled at the top of their voices--one of them particularly
distinguishing himself above the rest--to such an extent, indeed, that he must
have been a prime minister--at least, if the disturbance he made was any criterion
of his rank. The common rabble of dusky denizens united their howlings with
the uproar of the court, repeating their gesticulations like so many monkeys, and
thereby producing a single and instantaneous movement of ten thousand arms at
one time.

To these means of intimidation, which were presently deemed insufficient,
were added others still more formidable. Soldiers, armed with bows and arrows,
were drawn up in line of battle; but by this time the balloon was expanding, and
rising quietly beyond their reach. Upon this the governor seized a musket and
aimed it at the balloon; but, Kennedy, who was watching him, shattered the
uplifted weapon in the sheik's grasp.

At this unexpected blow there was a general rout. Every mother's son of


them scampered for his dwelling with the utmost celerity, and stayed there, so
that the streets of the town were absolutely deserted for the remainder of that
day.

Night came, and not a breath of wind was stirring. The aeronauts had to
make up their minds to remain motionless at the distance of but three hundred
feet above the ground. Not a fire or light shone in the deep gloom, and around
reigned the silence of death; but the doctor only redoubled his vigilance, as this
apparent quiet might conceal some snare.

And he had reason to be watchful. About midnight, the whole city seemed to
be in a blaze. Hundreds of streaks of flame crossed each other, and shot to and
fro in the air like rockets, forming a regular network of fire.

"That's really curious!" said the doctor, somewhat puzzled to make out what
it meant.

"By all that's glorious!" shouted Kennedy, "it looks as if the fire were
ascending and coming up toward us!"

And, sure enough, with an accompaniment of musket-shots, yelling, and din
of every description, the mass of fire was, indeed, mounting toward the Victoria.
Joe got ready to throw out ballast, and Ferguson was not long at guessing the
truth. Thousands of pigeons, their tails garnished with combustibles, had been
set loose and driven toward the Victoria; and now, in their terror, they were
flying high up, zigzagging the atmosphere with lines of fire. Kennedy was
preparing to discharge all his batteries into the middle of the ascending
multitude, but what could he have done against such a numberless army? The
pigeons were already whisking around the car; they were even surrounding the
balloon, the sides of which, reflecting their illumination, looked as though
enveloped with a network of fire.

The doctor dared hesitate no longer; and, throwing out a fragment of quartz,
he kept himself beyond the reach of these dangerous assailants; and, for two
hours afterward, he could see them wandering hither and thither through the
darkness of the night, until, little by little, their light diminished, and they, one by
one, died out.

"Now we may sleep in quiet," said the doctor.

"Not badly got up for barbarians," mused friend Joe, speaking his thoughts
aloud.

"Oh, they employ these pigeons frequently, to set fire to the thatch of hostile
villages; but this time the village mounted higher than they could go."

"Why, positively, a balloon need fear no enemies!"

"Yes, indeed, it may!" objected Ferguson.

"What are they, then, doctor?"


"They are the careless people in the car! So, my friends, let us have vigilance
in all places and at all times."


CHAPTER THIRTY-FIRST.

Departure in the Night-time.--All Three.--Kennedy's Instincts.--Precautions.-
- The Course of the Shari River.--Lake Tchad.--The Water of the Lake.--The
Hippopotamus.--One Bullet thrown away.

About three o'clock in the morning, Joe, who was then on watch, at length
saw the city move away from beneath his feet. The Victoria was once again in
motion, and both the doctor and Kennedy awoke.

The former consulted his compass, and saw, with satisfaction, that the wind
was Carrying them toward the north-northeast.

"We are in luck!" said he; "every thing works in our favor: we shall discover
Lake Tchad this very day."

"Is it a broad sheet of water?" asked Kennedy.

"Somewhat, Dick. At its greatest length and breadth, it measures about one
hundred and twenty miles."

"It will spice our trip with a little variety to sail over a spacious sheet of
water."

"After all, though, I don't see that we have much to complain of on that
score. Our trip has been very much varied, indeed; and, moreover, we are getting
on under the best possible conditions."

"Unquestionably so; excepting those privations on the desert, we have
encountered no serious danger."

"It is not to be denied that our noble balloon has behaved wonderfully well.
To-day is May 12th, and we started on the 18th of April. That makes twenty-five
days of journeying. In ten days more we shall have reached our destination."

"Where is that?"

"I do not know. But what does that signify?"

"You are right again, Samuel! Let us intrust to Providence the care of guiding
us and of keeping us in good health as we are now. We don't look much as
though we had been crossing the most pestilential country in the world!"

"We had an opportunity of getting up in life, and that's what we have done!"

"Hurrah for trips in the air!" cried Joe. "Here we are at the end of twenty-five
days in good condition, well fed, and well rested. We've had too much rest in
fact, for my legs begin to feel rusty, and I wouldn't be vexed a bit to stretch them
with a run of thirty miles or so!"

"You can do that, Joe, in the streets of London, but in fine we set out three


together, like Denham, Clapperton, and Overweg; like Barth, Richardson, and
Vogel, and, more fortunate than our predecessors here, we are three in number
still. But it is most important for us not to separate. If, while one of us was on the
ground, the Victoria should have to ascend in order to escape some sudden
danger, who knows whether we should ever see each other again? Therefore it is
that I say again to Kennedy frankly that I do not like his going off alone to hunt."

"But still, Samuel, you will permit me to indulge that fancy a little. There is
no harm in renewing our stock of provisions. Besides, before our departure, you
held out to me the prospect of some superb hunting, and thus far I have done but
little in the line of the Andersons and Cummings."

"But, my dear Dick, your memory fails you, or your modesty makes you
forget your own exploits. It really seems to me that, without mentioning small
game, you have already an antelope, an elephant, and two lions on your
conscience."

"But what's all that to an African sportsman who sees all the animals in
creation strutting along under the muzzle of his rifle? There! there! look at that
troop of giraffes!"

"Those giraffes," roared Joe; "why, they're not as big as my fist."

"Because we are a thousand feet above them; but close to them you would
discover that they are three times as tall as you are!"

"And what do you say to yon herd of gazelles, and those ostriches, that run
with the speed of the wind?" resumed Kennedy.

"Those ostriches?" remonstrated Joe, again; "those are chickens, and the
greatest kind of chickens!"

"Come, doctor, can't we get down nearer to them?" pleaded Kennedy.

"We can get closer to them, Dick, but we must not land. And what good will
it do you to strike down those poor animals when they can be of no use to you?
Now, if the question were to destroy a lion, a tiger, a cat, a hyena, I could
understand it; but to deprive an antelope or a gazelle of life, to no other purpose
than the gratification of your instincts as a sportsman, seems hardly worth the
trouble. But, after all, my friend, we are going to keep at about one hundred feet
only from the soil, and, should you see any ferocious wild beast, oblige us by
sending a ball through its heart!"

The Victoria descended gradually, but still keeping at a safe height, for, in a
barbarous, yet very populous country, it was necessary to keep on the watch for
unexpected perils.

The travellers were then directly following the course of the Shari. The
charming banks of this river were hidden beneath the foliage of trees of various
dyes; lianas and climbing plants wound in and out on all sides and formed the


most curious combinations of color. Crocodiles were seen basking in the broad
blaze of the sun or plunging beneath the waters with the agility of lizards, and in
their gambols they sported about among the many green islands that intercept the
current of the stream.

It was thus, in the midst of rich and verdant landscapes that our travellers
passed over the district of Maffatay, and about nine o'clock in the morning
reached the southern shore of Lake Tchad.

There it was at last, outstretched before them, that Caspian Sea of Africa, the
existence of which was so long consigned to the realms of fable--that interior
expanse of water to which only Denham's and Barth's expeditions had been able
to force their way.

The doctor strove in vain to fix its precise configuration upon paper. It had
already changed greatly since 1847. In fact, the chart of Lake Tchad is very
difficult to trace with exactitude, for it is surrounded by muddy and almost
impassable morasses, in which Barth thought that he was doomed to perish.
From year to year these marshes, covered with reeds and papyrus fifteen feet
high, become the lake itself. Frequently, too, the villages on its shores are half
submerged, as was the case with Ngornou in 1856, and now the hippopotamus
and the alligator frisk and dive where the dwellings of Bornou once stood.

The sun shot his dazzling rays over this placid sheet of water, and toward the
north the two elements merged into one and the same horizon.

The doctor was desirous of determining the character of the water, which
was long believed to be salt. There was no danger in descending close to the
lake, and the car was soon skimming its surface like a bird at the distance of only
five feet.

Joe plunged a bottle into the lake and drew it up half filled. The water was
then tasted and found to be but little fit for drinking, with a certain carbonate-of-
soda flavor.

While the doctor was jotting down the result of this experiment, the loud
report of a gun was heard close beside him. Kennedy had not been able to resist
the temptation of firing at a huge hippopotamus. The latter, who had been
basking quietly, disappeared at the sound of the explosion, but did not seem to be
otherwise incommoded by Kennedy's conical bullet.

"You'd have done better if you had harpooned him," said Joe.

"But how?"

"With one of our anchors. It would have been a hook just big enough for
such a rousing beast as that!"

"Humph!" ejaculated Kennedy, "Joe really has an idea this time--"

"Which I beg of you not to put into execution," interposed the doctor. "The


animal would very quickly have dragged us where we could not have done much
to help ourselves, and where we have no business to be."

"Especially now since we've settled the question as to what kind of water
there is in Lake Tchad. Is that sort of fish good to eat, Dr. Ferguson?"

"That fish, as you call it, Joe, is really a mammiferous animal of the
pachydermal species. Its flesh is said to be excellent and is an article of
important trade between the tribes living along the borders of the lake."

"Then I'm sorry that Mr. Kennedy's shot didn't do more damage."

"The animal is vulnerable only in the stomach and between the thighs. Dick's
ball hasn't even marked him; but should the ground strike me as favorable, we
shall halt at the northern end of the lake, where Kennedy will find himself in the
midst of a whole menagerie, and can make up for lost time."

"Well," said Joe, "I hope then that Mr. Kennedy will hunt the hippopotamus a
little; I'd like to taste the meat of that queer-looking beast. It doesn't look exactly
natural to get away into the centre of Africa, to feed on snipe and partridge, just
as if we were in England."


CHAPTER THIRTY-SECOND.

The Capital of Bornou.--The Islands of the Biddiomahs.--The Condors.--The
Doctor's Anxieties.--His Precautions.--An Attack in Mid-air.--The Balloon
Covering torn.--The Fall.--Sublime Self-Sacrifice.--The Northern Coast of the
Lake.

Since its arrival at Lake Tchad, the balloon had struck a current that edged it
farther to the westward. A few clouds tempered the heat of the day, and, besides,
a little air could be felt over this vast expanse of water; but about one o'clock, the
Victoria, having slanted across this part of the lake, again advanced over the land
for a space of seven or eight miles.

The doctor, who was somewhat vexed at first at this turn of his course, no
longer thought of complaining when he caught sight of the city of Kouka, the
capital of Bornou. He saw it for a moment, encircled by its walls of white clay,
and a few rudely-constructed mosques rising clumsily above _ that
conglomeration of houses that look like playing-dice, which form most Arab
towns. In the court-yards of the private dwellings, and on the public squares,
grew palms and caoutchouc-trees topped with a dome of foliage more than one
hundred feet in breadth. Joe called attention to the fact that these immense
parasols were in proper accordance with the intense heat of the sun, and made
thereon some pious reflections which it were needless to repeat.

Kouka really consists of two distinct towns, separated by the "Dendal," a


large boulevard three hundred yards wide, at that hour crowded with horsemen
and foot passengers. On one side, the rich quarter stands squarely with its airy
and lofty houses, laid out in regular order; on the other, is huddled together the
poor quarter, a miserable collection of low hovels of a conical shape, in which a
poverty-stricken multitude vegetate rather than live, since Kouka is neither a
trading nor a commercial city.

Kennedy thought it looked something like Edinburgh, were that city
extended on a plain, with its two distinct boroughs.

But our travellers had scarcely the time to catch even this glimpse of it, for,
with the fickleness that characterizes the air-currents of this region, a contrary
wind suddenly swept them some forty miles over the surface of Lake Tchad.

Then then were regaled with a new spectacle. They could count the
numerous islets of the lake, inhabited by the Biddiomahs, a race of bloodthirsty
and formidable pirates, who are as greatly feared when neighbors as are the
Touaregs of Sahara.

These estimable people were in readiness to receive the Victoria bravely with
stones and arrows, but the balloon quickly passed their islands, fluttering over
them, from one to the other with butterfly motion, like a gigantic beetle.

At this moment, Joe, who was scanning the horizon, said to Kennedy:

"There, sir, as you are always thinking of good sport, yonder is just the thing
for you!"

"What is it, Joe?"

"This time, the doctor will not disapprove of your shooting."

"But what is it?"

"Don't you see that flock of big birds making for us?"

"Birds?" exclaimed the doctor, snatching his spyglass.

"I see them," replied Kennedy; "there are at least a dozen of them."

"Fourteen, exactly!" said Joe.

"Heaven grant that they may be of a kind sufficiently noxious for the doctor
to let me peg away at them!"

"I should not object, but I would much rather see those birds at a distance
from us!"

"Why, are you afraid of those fowls?"

"They are condors, and of the largest size. Should they attack us--"

"Well, if they do, we'll defend ourselves. We have a whole arsenal at our
disposal. I don't think those birds are so very formidable."

"Who can tell?" was the doctor's only remark.

Ten minutes later, the flock had come within gunshot, and were making the
air ring with their hoarse cries. They came right toward the Victoria, more


irritated than frightened by her presence.

"How they scream! What a noise!" said Joe.

"Perhaps they don't like to see anybody poaching in their country up in the
air, or daring to fly like themselves!"

"Well, now, to tell the truth, when I take a good look at them, they are an
ugly, ferocious set, and I should think them dangerous enough if they were
armed with Purdy-Moore rifles," admitted Kennedy.

"They have no need of such weapons," said Ferguson, looking very grave.

The condors flew around them in wide circles, their flight growing gradually
closer and closer to the balloon. They swept through the air in rapid, fantastic
curves, occasionally precipitating themselves headlong with the speed of a
bullet, and then breaking their line of projection by an abrupt and daring angle.

The doctor, much disquieted, resolved to ascend so as to escape this
dangerous proximity. He therefore dilated the hydrogen in his balloon, and it
rapidly rose.

But the condors mounted with him, apparently determined not to part
company.

"They seem to mean mischief!" said the hunter, cocking his rifle.

And, in fact, they were swooping nearer, and more than one came within
fifty feet of them, as if defying the fire-arms.

"By George, I'm itching to let them have it!" exclaimed Kennedy.

"No, Dick; not now! Don't exasperate them needlessly. That would only be
exciting them to attack us!"

"But I could soon settle those fellows!"

"You may think so, Dick. But you are wrong!"

"Why, we have a bullet for each of them!"

"And suppose that they were to attack the upper part of the balloon, what
would you do? How would you get at them? Just imagine yourself in the
presence of a troop of lions on the plain, or a school of sharks in the open ocean!
For travellers in the air, this situation is just as dangerous."

"Are you speaking seriously, doctor?"

"Very seriously, Dick."

"Let us wait, then!"

"Wait! Hold yourself in readiness in case of an attack, but do not fire without
my orders."

The birds then collected at a short distance, yet to near that their naked
necks, entirely bare of feathers, could be plainly seen, as they stretched them out
with the effort of their cries, while their gristly crests, garnished with a comb and
gills of deep violet, stood erect with rage. They were of the very largest size,


their bodies being more than three feet in length, and the lower surface of their
white wings glittering in the sunlight. They might well have been considered
winged sharks, so striking was their resemblance to those ferocious rangers of
the deep.

"They are following us!" said the doctor, as he saw them ascending with him,
"and, mount as we may, they can fly still higher!"

"Well, what are we to do?" asked Kennedy.

The doctor made no answer.

"Listen, Samuel!" said the sportsman. "There are fourteen of those birds; we
have seventeen shots at our disposal if we discharge all our weapons. Have we
not the means, then, to destroy them or disperse them? I will give a good account
of some of them!"

"I have no doubt of your skill, Dick; I look upon all as dead that may come
within range of your rifle, but I repeat that, if they attack the upper part of the
balloon, you could not get a sight at them. They would tear the silk covering that
sustains us, and we are three thousand feet up in the air!"

At this moment, one of the ferocious birds darted right at the balloon, with
outstretched beak and claws, ready to rend it with either or both.

"Fire! fire at once!" cried the doctor.

He had scarcely ceased, ere the huge creature, stricken dead, dropped
headlong, turning over and over in space as he fell.

Kennedy had already grasped one of the two-barrelled fowling-pieces and
Joe was taking aim with another.

Frightened by the report, the condors drew back for a moment, but they
almost instantly returned to the charge with extreme fury. Kennedy severed the
head of one from its body with his first shot, and Joe broke the wing of another.

"Only eleven left," said he.

Thereupon the birds changed their tactics, and by common consent soared
above the balloon. Kennedy glanced at Ferguson. The latter, in spite of his
imperturbability, grew pale. Then ensued a moment of terrifying silence. In the
next they heard a harsh tearing noise, as of something rending the silk, and the
car seemed to sink from beneath the feet of our three aeronauts.

"We are lost!" exclaimed Ferguson, glancing at the barometer, which was
now swiftly rising.

"Over with the ballast!" he shouted, "over with it!"

And in a few seconds the last lumps of quartz had disappeared.

"We are still falling! Empty the water-tanks! Do you hear me, Joe? We are
pitching into the lake!"

Joe obeyed. The doctor leaned over and looked out. The lake seemed to


come up toward him like a rising tide. Every object around grew rapidly in size
while they were looking at it. The car was not two hundred feet from the surface
of Lake Tchad.

"The provisions! the provisions!" cried the doctor.

And the box containing them was launched into space.

Their descent became less rapid, but the luckless aeronauts were still falling,
and into the lake.

"Throw out something--something more!" cried the doctor.

"There is nothing more to throw!" was Kennedy's despairing response.

"Yes, there is!" called Joe, and with a wave of the hand he disappeared like a
flash, over the edge of the car.

"Joe! Joe!" exclaimed the doctor, horror-stricken.

The Victoria thus relieved resumed her ascending motion, mounted a
thousand feet into the air, and the wind, burying itself in the disinflated covering,
bore them away toward the northern part of the lake.

"Lost!" exclaimed the sportsman, with a gesture of despair.

"Lost to save us!" responded Ferguson.

And these men, intrepid as they were, felt the large tears streaming down
their cheeks. They leaned over with the vain hope of seeing some trace of their
heroic companion, but they were already far away from him.

"What course shall we pursue?" asked Kennedy.

"Alight as soon as possible, Dick, and then wait."

After a sweep of some sixty miles the Victoria halted on a desert shore, on
the north of the lake. The anchors caught in a low tree and the sportsman
fastened it securely. Night came, but neither Ferguson nor Kennedy could find
one moment's sleep.


CHAPTER THIRTY-THIRD.

Conjectures.--Reestablishment of the Victoria's Equilibrium.--Dr. Ferguson's
New Calculations.--Kennedy's Hunt.--A Complete Exploration of Lake Tchad.--
Tangalia.--The Return.--Lari.

On the morrow, the 13th of May, our travellers, for the first time,
reconnoitred the part of the coast on which they had landed. It was a sort of
island of solid ground in the midst of an immense marsh. Around this fragment
of terra firma grew reeds as lofty as trees are in Europe, and stretching away out
of sight.

These impenetrable swamps gave security to the position of the balloon. It
was necessary to watch only the borders of the lake. The vast stretch of water


broadened away from the spot, especially toward the east, and nothing could be
seen on the horizon, neither mainland nor islands.

The two friends had not yet ventured to speak of their recent companion.
Kennedy first imparted his conjectures to the doctor.

"Perhaps Joe is not lost after all," he said. "He was a skilful lad, and had few
equals as a swimmer. He would find no difficulty in swimming across the Firth
of Forth at Edinburgh. We shall see him again--but how and where I know not.
Let us omit nothing on our part to give him the chance of rejoining us."

"May God grant it as you say, Dick!" replied the doctor, with much emotion.
"We shall do everything in the world to find our lost friend again. Let us, in the
first place, see where we are. But, above all things, let us rid the Victoria of this
outside covering, which is of no further use. That will relieve us of six hundred
and fifty pounds, a weight not to be despised--and the end is worth the trouble!"

The doctor and Kennedy went to work at once, but they encountered great
difficulty. They had to tear the strong silk away piece by piece, and then cut it in
narrow strips so as to extricate it from the meshes of the network. The tear made
by the beaks of the condors was found to be several feet in length.

This operation took at least four hours, but at length the inner balloon once
completely extricated did not appear to have suffered in the least degree. The
Victoria was thus diminished in size by one fifth, and this difference was
sufficiently noticeable to excite Kennedy's surprise.

"Will it be large enough?" he asked.

"Have no fears on that score, I will reestablish the equilibrium, and should
our poor Joe return we shall find a way to start off with him again on our old
route."

"At the moment of our fall, unless I am mistaken, we were not far from an
island."

"Yes, I recollect it," said the doctor, "but that island, like all the islands on
Lake Tchad, is, no doubt, inhabited by a gang of pirates and murderers. They
certainly witnessed our misfortune, and should Joe fall into their hands, what
will become of him unless protected by their superstitions?"

"Oh, he's just the lad to get safely out of the scrape, I repeat. I have great
confidence in his shrewdness and skill."

"I hope so. Now, Dick, you may go and hunt in the neighborhood, but don't
get far away whatever you do. It has become a pressing necessity for us to renew
our stock of provisions, since we had to sacrifice nearly all the old lot."

"Very good, doctor, I shall not be long absent."

Hereupon, Kennedy took a double-barrelled fowling-piece, and strode
through the long grass toward a thicket not far off, where the frequent sound of


shooting soon let the doctor know that the sportsman was making a good use of
his time.

Meanwhile Ferguson was engaged in calculating the relative weight of the
articles still left in the car, and in establishing the equipoise of the second
balloon. He found that there were still left some thirty pounds of pemmican, a
supply of tea and coffee, about a gallon and a half of brandy, and one empty
water-tank. All the dried meat had disappeared.

The doctor was aware that, by the loss of the hydrogen in the first balloon,
the ascensional force at his disposal was now reduced to about nine hundred
pounds. He therefore had to count upon this difference in order to rearrange his
equilibrium. The new balloon measured sixty-seven thousand cubic feet, and
contained thirty-three thousand four hundred and eighty feet of gas. The dilating
apparatus appeared to be in good condition, and neither the battery nor the spiral
had been injured.

The ascensional force of the new balloon was then about three thousand
pounds, and, in adding together the weight of the apparatus, of the passengers, of
the stock of water, of the car and its accessories, and putting aboard fifty gallons
of water, and one hundred pounds of fresh meat, the doctor got a total weight of
twenty-eight hundred and thirty pounds. He could then take with him one
hundred and seventy pounds of ballast, for unforeseen emergencies, and the
balloon would be in exact balance with the surrounding atmosphere.

His arrangements were completed accordingly, and he made up for Joe's
weight with a surplus of ballast. He spent the whole day in these preparations,
and the latter were finished when Kennedy returned. The hunter had been
successful, and brought back a regular cargo of geese, wild-duck, snipe, teal, and
plover. He went to work at once to draw and smoke the game. Each piece,
suspended on a small, thin skewer, was hung over a fire of green wood. When
they seemed in good order, Kennedy, who was perfectly at home in the business,
packed them away in the car.

On the morrow, the hunter was to complete his supplies.

Evening surprised our travellers in the midst of this work. Their supper
consisted of pemmican, biscuit, and tea; and fatigue, after having given them
appetite, brought them sleep. Each of them strained eyes and ears into the gloom
during his watch, sometimes fancying that they heard the voice of poor Joe; but,
alas! the voice that they so longed to hear, was far away.

"At the first streak of day, the doctor aroused Kennedy.

"I have been long and carefully considering what should be done," said he,
"to find our companion."

"Whatever your plan may be, doctor, it will suit me. Speak!"


"Above all things, it is important that Joe should hear from us in some way."

"Undoubtedly. Suppose the brave fellow should take it into his head that we
have abandoned him?"

"He! He knows us too well for that. Such a thought would never come into
his mind. But he must be informed as to where we are."

"How can that be managed?"

"We shall get into our car and be off again through the air."

"But, should the wind bear us away?"

"Happily, it will not. See, Dick! it is carrying us back to the lake; and this
circumstance, which would have been vexatious yesterday, is fortunate now. Our
efforts, then, will be limited to keeping ourselves above that vast sheet of water
throughout the day. Joe cannot fail to see us, and his eyes will be constantly on
the lookout in that direction. Perhaps he will even manage to let us know the
place of his retreat."

"If he be alone and at liberty, he certainly will."

"And if a prisoner," resumed the doctor, "it not being the practice of the
natives to confine their captives, he will see us, and comprehend the object of
our researches.”

"But, at last," put in Kennedy--"for we must anticipate every thing--should
we find no trace--if he should have left no mark to follow him by, what are we to
do?"

"We shall endeavor to regain the northern part of the lake, keeping ourselves
as much in sight as possible. There we'll wait; we'll explore the banks; we'll
search the water's edge, for Joe will assuredly try to reach the shore; and we will
not leave the country without having done every thing to find him."

"Let us set out, then!" said the hunter.

The doctor hereupon took the exact bearings of the patch of solid land they
were about to leave, and arrived at the conclusion that it lay on the north shore of
Lake Tchad, between the village of Lari and the village of Ingemini, both visited
by Major Denham. During this time Kennedy was completing his stock of fresh
meat. Although the neighboring marshes showed traces of the rhinoceros, the
lamantine (or manatee), and the hippopotamus, he had no opportunity to see a
single specimen of those animals.

At seven in the morning, but not without great difficulty --which to Joe
would have been nothing--the balloon's anchor was detached from its hold, the
gas dilated, and the new Victoria rose two hundred feet into the air. It seemed to
hesitate at first, and went spinning around, like a top; but at last a brisk current
caught it, and it advanced over the lake, and was soon borne away at a speed of
twenty miles per hour.


The doctor continued to keep at a height of from two hundred to five
hundred feet. Kennedy frequently discharged his rifle; and, when passing over
islands, the aeronauts approached them even imprudently, scrutinizing the
thickets, the bushes, the underbrush--in fine, every spot where a mass of shade or
jutting rock could have afforded a retreat to their companion. They swooped
down close to the long pirogues that navigated the lake; and the wild fishermen,
terrified at the sight of the balloon, would plunge into the water and regain their
islands with every symptom of undisguised affright.

"We can see nothing," said Kennedy, after two hours of search.

"Let us wait a little longer, Dick, and not lose heart. We cannot be far away
from the scene of our accident."

By eleven o'clock the balloon had gone ninety miles. It then fell in with a
new current, which, blowing almost at right angles to the other, drove them
eastward about sixty miles. It next floated over a very large and populous island,
which the doctor took to be Farram, on which the capital of the Biddiomahs is
situated. Ferguson expected at every moment to see Joe spring up out of some
thicket, flying for his life, and calling for help. Were he free, they could pick him
up without trouble; were he a prisoner, they could rescue him by repeating the
manoeuvre they had practised to save the missionary, and he would soon be with
his friends again; but nothing was seen, not a sound was heard. The case seemed
desperate.

About half-past two o'clock, the Victoria hove in sight of Tangalia, a village
situated on the eastern shore of Lake Tchad, where it marks the extreme point
attained by Denham at the period of his exploration.

The doctor became uneasy at this persistent setting of the wind in that
direction, for he felt that he was being thrown back to the eastward, toward the
centre of Africa, and the interminable deserts of that region.

"We must absolutely come to a halt," said he, "and even alight. For Joe's
sake, particularly, we ought to go back to the lake; but, to begin with, let us
endeavor to find an opposite current."

During more than an hour he searched at different altitudes: the balloon
always came back toward the mainland. But at length, at the height of a thousand
feet, a very violent breeze swept to the northwestward.

It was out of the question that Joe should have been detained on one of the
islands of the lake; for, in such case he would certainly have found means to
make his presence there known. Perhaps he had been dragged to the mainland.
The doctor was reasoning thus to himself, when he again came in sight of the
northern shore of Lake Tchad.

As for supposing that Joe had been drowned, that was not to be believed for


a moment. One horrible thought glanced across the minds of both Kennedy and
the doctor: caymans swarm in these waters! But neither one nor the other had the
courage to distinctly communicate this impression. However, it came up to them
so forcibly at last that the doctor said, without further preface:

"Crocodiles are found only on the shores of the islands or of the lake, and
Joe will have skill enough to avoid them. Besides, they are not very dangerous;
and the Africans bathe with impunity, and quite fearless of their attacks."

Kennedy made no reply. He preferred keeping quiet to discussing this
terrible possibility.

The doctor made out the town of Lari about five o'clock in the evening. The
inhabitants were at work gathering in their cotton-crop in front of their huts,
constructed of woven reeds, and standing in the midst of clean and neatly-kept
enclosures. This collection of about fifty habitations occupied a slight depression
of the soil, in a valley extending between two low mountains. The force of the
wind carried the doctor farther onward than he wanted to go; but it changed a
second time, and bore him back exactly to his starting-point, on the sort of
enclosed island where he had passed the preceding night. The anchor, instead of
catching the branches of the tree, took hold in the masses of reeds mixed with
the thick mud of the marshes, which offered considerable resistance.

The doctor had much difficulty in restraining the balloon; but at length the
wind died away with the setting in of nightfall; and the two friends kept watch
together in an almost desperate state of mind.


CHAPTER THIRTY-FOURTH.

The Hurricane.--A Forced Departure.--Loss of an Anchor.--Melancholy
Reflections.--The Resolution adopted.--The Sand-Storm.--The Buried Caravan.--
A Contrary yet Favorable Wind.--The Return southward.--Kennedy at his Post.

At three o'clock in the morning the wind was raging. It beat down with such
violence that the Victoria could not stay near the ground without danger. It was
thrown almost flat over upon its side, and the reeds chafed the silk so roughly
that it seemed as though they would tear it.

"We must be off, Dick," said the doctor; "we cannot remain in this situation."

"But, doctor, what of Joe?"

"I am not likely to abandon him. No, indeed! and should the hurricane carry
me a thousand miles to the northward, I will return! But here we are endangering
the safety of all."

"Must we go without him?" asked the Scot, with an accent of profound grief.

"And do you think, then," rejoined Ferguson, "that my heart does not bleed


like your own? Am I not merely obeying an imperious necessity?"

"I am entirely at your orders," replied the hunter; "let us start!"

But their departure was surrounded with unusual difficulty. The anchor,
which had caught very deeply, resisted all their efforts to disengage it; while the
balloon, drawing in the opposite direction, increased its tension. Kennedy could
not get it free. Besides, in his present position, the manoeuvre had become a very
perilous one, for the Victoria threatened to break away before he should be able
to get into the car again.

The doctor, unwilling to run such a risk, made his friend get into his place,
and resigned himself to the alternative of cutting the anchor-rope. The Victoria
made one bound of three hundred feet into the air, and took her route directly
northward.

Ferguson had no other choice than to scud before the storm. He folded his
arms, and soon became absorbed in his own melancholy reflections.

After a few moments of profound silence, he turned to Kennedy, who sat
there no less taciturn.

"We have, perhaps, been tempting Providence," said he; "it does not belong
to man to undertake such a journey!" --and a sigh of grief escaped him as he
spoke.

"It is but a few days," replied the sportsman, "since we were congratulating
ourselves upon having escaped so many dangers! All three of us were shaking
hands!"

"Poor Joe! kindly and excellent disposition! brave and candid heart! Dazzled
for a moment by his sudden discovery of wealth, he willingly sacrificed his
treasures! And now, he is far from us; and the wind is carrying us still farther
away with resistless speed!"

"Come, doctor, admitting that he may have found refuge among the lake
tribes, can he not do as the travellers who visited them before us, did;--like
Denham, like Barth? Both of those men got back to their own country."

"Ah! my dear Dick! Joe doesn't know one word of the language; he is alone,
and without resources. The travellers of whom you speak did not attempt to go
forward without sending many presents in advance of them to the chiefs, and
surrounded by an escort armed and trained for these expeditions. Yet, they could
not avoid sufferings of the worst description! What, then, can you expect the fate
of our companion to be? It is horrible to think of, and this is one of the worst
calamities that it has ever been my lot to endure!"

"But, we'll come back again, doctor!"

"Come back, Dick? Yes, if we have to abandon the balloon! if we should be
forced to return to Lake Tchad on foot, and put ourselves in communication with


the Sultan of Bornou! The Arabs cannot have retained a disagreeable
remembrance of the first Europeans."

"I will follow you, doctor," replied the hunter, with emphasis. "You may
count upon me! We would rather give up the idea of prosecuting this journey
than not return. Joe forgot himself for our sake; we will sacrifice ourselves for
his!"

This resolve revived some hope in the hearts of these two men; they felt
strong in the same inspiration. Ferguson forthwith set every thing at work to get
into a contrary current, that might bring him back again to Lake Tchad; but this
was impracticable at that moment, and even to alight was out of the question on
ground completely bare of trees, and with such a hurricane blowing.

The Victoria thus passed over the country of the Tibbous, crossed the Belad
el Djerid, a desert of briers that forms the border of the Soudan, and advanced
into the desert of sand streaked with the long tracks of the many caravans that
pass and repass there. The last line of vegetation was speedily lost in the dim
southern horizon, not far from the principal oasis in this part of Africa, whose
fifty wells are shaded by magnificent trees; but it was impossible to stop. An
Arab encampment, tents of striped stuff, some camels, stretching out their viper-
like heads and necks along the sand, gave life to this solitude, but the Victoria
sped by like a shooting-star, and in this way traversed a distance of sixty miles in
three hours, without Ferguson being able to check or guide her course.

"We cannot halt, we cannot alight!" said the doctor; "not a tree, not an
inequality of the ground! Are we then to be driven clear across Sahara? Surely,
Heaven is indeed against us!"

He was uttering these words with a sort of despairing rage, when suddenly he
saw the desert sands rising aloft in the midst of a dense cloud of dust, and go
whirling through the air, impelled by opposing currents.

Amid this tornado, an entire caravan, disorganized, broken, and overthrown,
was disappearing beneath an avalanche of sand. The camels, flung pell-mell
together, were uttering dull and pitiful groans; cries and howls of despair were
heard issuing from that dusty and stifling cloud, and, from time to time, a parti-
colored garment cut the chaos of the scene with its vivid hues, and the moaning
and shrieking sounded over all, a terrible accompaniment to this spectacle of
destruction.

Ere long the sand had accumulated in compact masses; and there, where so
recently stretched a level plain as far as the eye could see, rose now a ridgy line
of hillocks, still moving from beneath--the vast tomb of an entire caravan!

The doctor and Kennedy, pallid with emotion, sat transfixed by this fearful
spectacle. They could no longer manage their balloon, which went whirling


round and round in contending currents, and refused to obey the different
dilations of the gas. Caught in these eddies of the atmosphere, it spun about with
a rapidity that made their heads reel, while the car oscillated and swung to and
fro violently at the same time. The instruments suspended under the awning
clattered together as though they would be dashed to pieces; the pipes of the
spiral bent to and fro, threatening to break at every instant; and the water-tanks
jostled and jarred with tremendous din. Although but two feet apart, our
aeronauts could not hear each other speak, but with firmly-clinched hands they
clung convulsively to the cordage, and endeavored to steady themselves against
the fury of the tempest.

Kennedy, with his hair blown wildly about his face, looked on without
speaking; but the doctor had regained all his daring in the midst of this deadly
peril, and not a sign of his emotion was betrayed in his countenance, even when,
after a last violent twirl, the Victoria stopped suddenly in the midst of a most
unlooked-for calm; the north wind had abruptly got the upper hand, and now
drove her back with equal rapidity over the route she had traversed in the
morning.

"Whither are we going now?" cried Kennedy.

"Let us leave that to Providence, my dear Dick; I was wrong in doubting it. It
knows better than we, and here we are, returning to places that we had expected
never to see again!"

The surface of the country, which had looked so flat and level when they
were coming, now seemed tossed and uneven, like the ocean-billows after a
storm; a long succession of hillocks, that had scarcely settled to their places yet,
indented the desert; the wind blew furiously, and the balloon fairly flew through
the atmosphere.

The direction taken by our aeronauts differed somewhat from that of the
morning, and thus about nine o'clock, instead of finding themselves again near
the borders of Lake Tchad, they saw the desert still stretching away before them.

Kennedy remarked the circumstance.

"It matters little," replied the doctor, "the important point is to return
southward; we shall come across the towns of Bornou, Wouddie, or Kouka, and I
should not hesitate to halt there."

"If you are satisfied, I am content," replied the Scot, "but Heaven grant that
we may not be reduced to cross the desert, as those unfortunate Arabs had to do!
What we saw was frightful!"

"It often happens, Dick; these trips across the desert are far more perilous
than those across the ocean. The desert has all the dangers of the sea, including
the risk of being swallowed up, and added thereto are unendurable fatigues and


privations."

"T think the wind shows some symptoms of moderating; the sand-dust is less
dense; the undulations of the surface are diminishing, and the sky is growing
clearer."

"So much the better! We must now reconnoitre attentively with our glasses,
and take care not to omit a single point."

"I will look out for that, doctor, and not a tree shall be seen without my
informing you of it."

And, suiting the action to the word, Kennedy took his station, spyglass in
hand, at the forward part of the car.


CHAPTER THIRTY-FIFTH.

What happened to Joe.--The Island of the Biddiomahs.--The Adoration
shown him.--The Island that sank.--The Shores of the Lake.--The Tree of the
Serpents.--The Foot-Tramp.--Terrible Suffering.--Mosquitoes and _ Ants.--
Hunger.--The Victoria seen.--She disappears.--The Swamp. --One Last
Despairing Cry.

What had become of Joe, while his master was thus vainly seeking for him?

When he had dashed headlong into the lake, his first movement on coming to
the surface was to raise his eyes and look upward. He saw the Victoria already
risen far above the water, still rapidly ascending and growing smaller and
smaller. It was soon caught in a rapid current and disappeared to the northward.
His master--both his friends were saved!

"How lucky it was," thought he, "that I had that idea to throw myself out into
the lake! Mr. Kennedy would soon have jumped at it, and he would not have
hesitated to do as I did, for nothing's more natural than for one man to give
himself up to save two others. That's mathematics!"

Satisfied on this point, Joe began to think of himself. He was in the middle of
a vast lake, surrounded by tribes unknown to him, and probably ferocious. All
the greater reason why he should get out of the scrape by depending only on
himself. And so he gave himself no farther concern about it.

Before the attack by the birds of prey, which, according to him, had behaved
like real condors, he had noticed an island on the horizon, and determining to
reach it, if possible, he put forth all his knowledge and skill in the art of
swimming, after having relieved himself of the most troublesome part of his
clothing. The idea of a stretch of five or six miles by no means disconcerted him;
and therefore, so long as he was in the open lake, he thought only of striking out
straight ahead and manfully.


In about an hour and a half the distance between him and the island had
greatly diminished.

But as he approached the land, a thought, at first fleeting and then tenacious,
arose in his mind. He knew that the shores of the lake were frequented by huge
alligators, and was well aware of the voracity of those monsters.

Now, no matter how much he was inclined to find every thing in this world
quite natural, the worthy fellow was no little disturbed by this reflection. He
feared greatly lest white flesh like his might be particularly acceptable to the
dreaded brutes, and advanced only with extreme precaution, his eyes on the alert
on both sides and all around him. At length, he was not more than one hundred
yards from a bank, covered with green trees, when a puff of air strongly
impregnated with a musky odor reached him.

"There!" said he to himself, "just what I expected. The crocodile isn't far
off!"

With this he dived swiftly, but not sufficiently so to avoid coming into
contact with an enormous body, the scaly surface of which scratched him as he
passed. He thought himself lost and swam with desperate energy. Then he rose
again to the top of the water, took breath and dived once more. Thus passed a
few minutes of unspeakable anguish, which all his philosophy could not
overcome, for he thought, all the while, that he heard behind him the sound of
those huge jaws ready to snap him up forever. In this state of mind he was
striking out under the water as noiselessly as possible when he felt himself
seized by the arm and then by the waist.

Poor Joe! he gave one last thought to his master; and began to struggle with
all the energy of despair, feeling himself the while drawn along, but not toward
the bottom of the lake, as is the habit of the crocodile when about to devour its
prey, but toward the surface.

So soon as he could get breath and look around him, he saw that he was
between two natives as black as ebony, who held him, with a firm gripe, and
uttered strange cries.

"Ha!" said Joe, "blacks instead of crocodiles! Well, I prefer it as it is; but
how in the mischief dare these fellows go in bathing in such places?"

Joe was not aware that the inhabitants of the islands of Lake Tchad, like
many other negro tribes, plunge with impunity into sheets of water infested with
crocodiles and caymans, and without troubling their heads about them. The
amphibious denizens of this lake enjoy the well-deserved reputation of being
quite inoffensive.

But had not Joe escaped one peril only to fall into another? That was a
question which he left events to decide; and, since he could not do otherwise, he


allowed himself to be conducted to the shore without manifesting any alarm.

"Evidently," thought he, "these chaps saw the Victoria skimming the waters
of the lake, like a monster of the air. They were the distant witnesses of my
tumble, and they can't fail to have some respect for a man that fell from the sky!
Let them have their own way, then."

Joe was at this stage of his meditations, when he was landed amid a yelling
crowd of both sexes, and all ages and sizes, but not of all colors. In fine, he was
surrounded by a tribe of Biddiomahs as black as jet. Nor had he to blush for the
scantiness of his costume, for he saw that he was in "undress" in the highest style
of that country.

But before he had time to form an exact idea of the situation, there was no
mistaking the agitation of which he instantly became the object, and this soon
enabled him to pluck up courage, although the adventure of Kazah did come
back rather vividly to his memory.

"I foresee that they are going to make a god of me again," thought he, "some
son of the moon most likely. Well, one trade's as good as another when a man
has no choice. The main thing is to gain time. Should the Victoria pass this way
again, I'll take advantage of my new position to treat my worshippers here to a
miracle when I go sailing up into the sky!"

While Joe's thoughts were running thus, the throng pressed around him. They
prostrated themselves before him; they howled; they felt him; they became even
annoyingly familiar; but at the same time they had the consideration to offer him
a superb banquet consisting of sour milk and rice pounded in honey. The worthy
fellow, making the best of every thing, took one of the heartiest luncheons he
ever ate in his life, and gave his new adorers an exalted idea of how the gods
tuck away their food upon grand occasions.

When evening came, the sorcerers of the island took him respectfully by the
hand, and conducted him to a sort of house surrounded with talismans; but, as he
was entering it, Joe cast an uneasy look at the heaps of human bones that lay
scattered around this sanctuary. But he had still more time to think about them
when he found himself at last shut up in the cabin.

During the evening and through a part of the night, he heard festive
chantings, the reverberations of a kind of drum, and a clatter of old iron, which
were very sweet, no doubt, to African ears. Then there were howling choruses,
accompanied by endless dances by gangs of natives who circled round and round
the sacred hut with contortions and grimaces.

Joe could catch the sound of this deafening orchestra, through the mud and
reeds of which his cabin was built; and perhaps under other circumstances he
might have been amused by these strange ceremonies; but his mind was soon


disturbed by quite different and less agreeable reflections. Even looking at the
bright side of things, he found it both stupid and sad to be left alone in the midst
of this savage country and among these wild tribes. Few travellers who had
penetrated to these regions had ever again seen their native land. Moreover,
could he trust to the worship of which he saw himself the object? He had good
reason to believe in the vanity of human greatness; and he asked himself
whether, in this country, adoration did not sometimes go to the length of eating
the object adored!

But, notwithstanding this rather perplexing prospect, after some hours of
meditation, fatigue got the better of his gloomy thoughts, and Joe fell into a
profound slumber, which would have lasted no doubt until sunrise, had not a
very unexpected sensation of dampness awakened the sleeper. Ere long this
dampness became water, and that water gained so rapidly that it had soon
mounted to Joe's waist.

"What can this be?" said he; "a flood! a water-spout! or a new torture
invented by these blacks? Faith, though, I'm not going to wait here till it's up to
my neck!"

And, so saying, he burst through the frail wall with a jog of his powerful
shoulder, and found himself--where? --in the open lake! Island there was none. It
had sunk during the night. In its place, the watery immensity of Lake Tchad!

"A poor country for the land-owners!" said Joe, once more vigorously
resorting to his skill in the art of natation.

One of those phenomena, which are by no means unusual on Lake Tchad,
had liberated our brave Joe. More than one island, that previously seemed to
have the solidity of rock, has been submerged in this way; and the people living
along the shores of the mainland have had to pick up the unfortunate survivors of
these terrible catastrophes.

Joe knew nothing about this peculiarity of the region, but he was none the
less ready to profit by it. He caught sight of a boat drifting about, without
occupants, and was soon aboard of it. He found it to be but the trunk of a tree
rudely hollowed out; but there were a couple of paddles in it, and Joe, availing
himself of a rapid current, allowed his craft to float along.

"But let us see where we are," he said. "The polar-star there, that does its
work honorably in pointing out the direction due north to everybody else, will,
most likely, do me that service."

He discovered, with satisfaction, that the current was taking him toward the
northern shore of the lake, and he allowed himself to glide with it. About two
o'clock in the morning he disembarked upon a promontory covered with prickly
reeds, that proved very provoking and inconvenient even to a philosopher like


him; but a tree grew there expressly to offer him a bed among its branches, and
Joe climbed up into it for greater security, and there, without sleeping much,
however, awaited the dawn of day.

When morning had come with that suddenness which is peculiar to the
equatorial regions, Joe cast a glance at the tree which had sheltered him during
the last few hours, and beheld a sight that chilled the marrow in his bones. The
branches of the tree were literally covered with snakes and chameleons! The
foliage actually was hidden beneath their coils, so that the beholder might have
fancied that he saw before him a new kind of tree that bore reptiles for its leaves
and fruit. And all this horrible living mass writhed and twisted in the first rays of
the morming sun! Joe experienced a keen sensation or terror mingled with
disgust, as he looked at it, and he leaped precipitately from the tree amid the
hissings of these new and unwelcome bedfellows.

"Now, there's something that I would never have believed!" said he.

He was not aware that Dr. Vogel's last letters had made known this singular
feature of the shores of Lake Tchad, where reptiles are more numerous than in
any other part of the world. But after what he had just seen, Joe determined to be
more circumspect for the future; and, taking his bearings by the sun, he set off
afoot toward the northeast, avoiding with the utmost care cabins, huts, hovels,
and dens of every description, that might serve in any manner as a shelter for
human beings.

How often his gaze was turned upward to the sky! He hoped to catch a
glimpse, each time, of the Victoria; and, although he looked vainly during all
that long, fatiguing day of sore foot-travel, his confident reliance on his master
remained undiminished. Great energy of character was needed to enable him
thus to sustain the situation with philosophy. Hunger conspired with fatigue to
crush him, for a man's system is not greatly restored and fortified by a diet of
roots, the pith of plants, such as the Mele, or the fruit of the doum palm-tree; and
yet, according to his own calculations, Joe was enabled to push on about twenty
miles to the westward.

His body bore in scores of places the marks of the thorns with which the
lake-reeds, the acacias, the mimosas, and other wild shrubbery through which he
had to force his way, are thickly studded; and his torn and bleeding feet rendered
walking both painful and difficult. But at length he managed to react against all
these sufferings; and when evening came again, he resolved to pass the night on
the shores of Lake Tchad.

There he had to endure the bites of myriads of insects --gnats, mosquitoes,
ants half an inch long, literally covered the ground; and, in less than two hours,
Joe had not a rag remaining of the garments that had covered him, the insects


having devoured them! It was a terrible night, that did not yield our exhausted
traveller an hour of sleep. During all this time the wild-boars and native
buffaloes, reenforced by the ajoub--a very dangerous species of lamantine --
carried on their ferocious revels in the bushes and under the waters of the lake,
filling the night with a hideous concert. Joe dared scarcely breathe. Even his
courage and coolness had hard work to bear up against so terrible a situation.

At length, day came again, and Joe sprang to his feet precipitately; but judge
of the loathing he felt when he saw what species of creature had shared his
couch--a toad!--but a toad five inches in length, a monstrous, repulsive specimen
of vermin that sat there staring at him with huge round eyes. Joe felt his stomach
revolt at the sight, and, regaining a little strength from the intensity of his
repugnance, he rushed at the top of his speed and plunged into the lake. This
sudden bath somewhat allayed the pangs of the itching that tortured his whole
body; and, chewing a few leaves, he set forth resolutely, again feeling an
obstinate resolution in the act, for which he could hardly account even to his
own mind. He no longer seemed to have entire control of his own acts, and,
nevertheless, he felt within him a strength superior to despair.

However, he began now to suffer terribly from hunger. His stomach, less
resigned than he was, rebelled, and he was obliged to fasten a tendril of wild-
vine tightly about his waist. Fortunately, he could quench his thirst at any
moment, and, in recalling the sufferings he had undergone in the desert, he
experienced comparative relief in his exemption from that other distressing
want.

"What can have become of the Victoria?" he wondered. "The wind blows
from the north, and she should be carried back by it toward the lake. No doubt
the doctor has gone to work to right her balance, but yesterday would have given
him time enough for that, so that may be to-day--but I must act just as if I was
never to see him again. After all, if I only get to one of the large towns on the
lake, I'll find myself no worse off than the travellers my master used to talk
about. Why shouldn't I work my way out of the scrape as well as they did? Some
of them got back home again. Come, then! the deuce! Cheer up, my boy!"

Thus talking to himself and walking on rapidly, Joe came right upon a horde
of natives in the very depths of the forest, but he halted in time and was not seen
by them. The negroes were busy poisoning arrows with the juice of the
euphorbium--a piece of work deemed a great affair among these savage tribes,
and carried on with a sort of ceremonial solemnity.

Joe, entirely motionless and even holding his breath, was keeping himself
concealed in a thicket, when, happening to raise his eyes, he saw through an
opening in the foliage the welcome apparition of the balloon--the Victoria


herself--moving toward the lake, at a height of only about one hundred feet
above him. But he could not make himself heard; he dared not, could not make
his friends even see him!

Tears came to his eyes, not of grief but of thankfulness; his master was then
seeking him; his master had not left him to perish! He would have to wait for the
departure of the blacks; then he could quit his hiding-place and run toward the
borders of Lake Tchad!

But by this time the Victoria was disappearing in the distant sky. Joe still
determined to wait for her; she would come back again, undoubtedly. She did,
indeed, return, but farther to the eastward. Joe ran, gesticulated, shouted--but all
in vain! A strong breeze was sweeping the balloon away with a speed that
deprived him of all hope.

For the first time, energy and confidence abandoned the heart of the
unfortunate man. He saw that he was lost. He thought his master gone beyond all
prospect of return. He dared no longer think; he would no longer reflect!

Like a crazy man, his feet bleeding, his body cut and torn, he walked on
during all that day and a part of the next night. He even dragged himself along,
sometimes on his knees, sometimes with his hands. He saw the moment nigh
when all his strength would fail, and nothing would be left to him but to sink
upon the ground and die.

Thus working his way along, he at length found himself close to a marsh, or
what he knew would soon become a marsh, for night had set in some hours
before, and he fell by a sudden misstep into a thick, clinging mire. In spite of all
his efforts, in spite of his desperate struggles, he felt himself sinking gradually in
the swampy ooze, and in a few minutes he was buried to his waist.

"Here, then, at last, is death!" he thought, in agony, "and what a death!"

He now began to struggle again, like a madman; but his efforts only served
to bury him deeper in the tomb that the poor doomed lad was hollowing for
himself; not a log of wood or a branch to buoy him up; not a reed to which he
might cling! He felt that all was over! His eyes convulsively closed!

"Master! master!--Help!" were his last words; but his voice, despairing,
unaided, half stifled already by the rising mire, died away feebly on the night.


CHAPTER THIRTY-SIXTH.

A Throng of People on the Horizon.--A Troop of Arabs.--The Pursuit. --It is
He.--Fall from Horseback.--The Strangled Arab.--A Ball from Kennedy.--Adroit
Manoeuvres.--Caught up flying.--Joe saved at last.

From the moment when Kennedy resumed his post of observation in the


front of the car, he had not ceased to watch the horizon with his utmost attention.

After the lapse of some time he turned toward the doctor and said:

"If I am not greatly mistaken I can see, off yonder in the distance, a throng of
men or animals moving. It is impossible to make them out yet, but I observe that
they are in violent motion, for they are raising a great cloud of dust."

"May it not be another contrary breeze?" said the doctor, "another whirlwind
coming to drive us back northward again?" and while speaking he stood up to
examine the horizon.

"T think not, Samuel; it is a troop of gazelles or of wild oxen."

"Perhaps so, Dick; but yon throng is some nine or ten miles from us at least,
and on my part, even with the glass, I can make nothing of it!"

"At all events I shall not lose sight of it. There is something remarkable
about it that excites my curiosity. Sometimes it looks like a body of cavalry
manoeuvring. Ah! I was not mistaken. It is, indeed, a squadron of horsemen.
Look--look there!"

The doctor eyed the group with great attention, and, after a moment's pause,
remarked:

"I believe that you are right. It is a detachment of Arabs or Tibbous, and they
are galloping in the same direction with us, as though in flight, but we are going
faster than they, and we are rapidly gaining on them. In half an hour we shall be
near enough to see them and know what they are."

Kennedy had again lifted his glass and was attentively scrutinizing them.
Meanwhile the crowd of horsemen was becoming more distinctly visible, and a
few were seen to detach themselves from the main body.

"It is some hunting manoeuvre, evidently," said Kennedy. "Those fellows
seem to be in pursuit of something. I would like to know what they are about."

"Patience, Dick! In a little while we shall overtake them, if they continue on
the same route. We are going at the rate of twenty miles per hour, and no horse
can keep up with that."

Kennedy again raised his glass, and a few minutes later he exclaimed:

"They are Arabs, galloping at the top of their speed; I can make them out
distinctly. They are about fifty in number. I can see their bournouses puffed out
by the wind. It is some cavalry exercise that they are going through. Their chief
is a hundred paces ahead of them and they are rushing after him at headlong
speed."

"Whoever they may be, Dick, they are not to be feared, and then, if
necessary, we can go higher."

"Wait, doctor--wait a little!"

"It's curious," said Kennedy again, after a brief pause, "but there's something


going on that I can't exactly explain. By the efforts they make, and the
irregularity of their line, I should fancy that those Arabs are pursuing some one,
instead of following."

"Are you certain of that, Dick?"

"Oh! yes, it's clear enough now. I am right! It is a pursuit--a hunt--but a man-
hunt! That is not their chief riding ahead of them, but a fugitive."

"A fugitive!" exclaimed the doctor, growing more and more interested.

"Yes!"

"Don't lose sight of him, and let us wait!"

Three or four miles more were quickly gained upon these horsemen, who
nevertheless were dashing onward with incredible speed.

"Doctor! doctor!" shouted Kennedy in an agitated voice.

"What is the matter, Dick?"

"Is it an illusion? Can it be possible?"

"What do you mean?"

"Wait!" and so saying, the Scot wiped the sights of his spyglass carefully,
and looked through it again intently.

"Well?" questioned the doctor.

"Tt is he, doctor!"

"He!" exclaimed Ferguson with emotion.

"Tt is he! no other!" and it was needless to pronounce the name.

"Yes! it is he! on horseback, and only a hundred paces in advance of his
enemies! He is pursued!"

"It is Joe--Joe himself!" cried the doctor, turning pale.

"He cannot see us in his flight!"

"He will see us, though!" said the doctor, lowering the flame of his blow-
pipe.

"But how?"

"In five minutes we shall be within fifty feet of the ground, and in fifteen we
shall be right over him!"

"We must let him know it by firing a gun!"

"No! he can't turn back to come this way. He's headed off!"

"What shall we do, then?"

"We must wait."

"Wait?--and these Arabs!"

"We shall overtake them. We'll pass them. We are not more than two miles
from them, and provided that Joe's horse holds out!"

"Great God!" exclaimed Kennedy, suddenly.

"What is the matter?"


Kennedy had uttered a cry of despair as he saw Joe fling himself to the
ground. His horse, evidently exhausted, had just fallen headlong.

"He sees us!" cried the doctor, "and he motions to us, as he gets upon his
feet!"

"But the Arabs will overtake him! What is he waiting for? Ah! the brave lad!
Huzza!" shouted the sportsman, who could no longer restrain his feelings.

Joe, who had immediately sprung up after his fall, just as one of the swiftest
horsemen rushed upon him, bounded like a panther, avoided his assailant by
leaping to one side, jumped up behind him on the crupper, seized the Arab by the
throat, and, strangling him with his sinewy hands and fingers of steel, flung him
on the sand, and continued his headlong flight.

A tremendous howl was heard from the Arabs, but, completely engrossed by
the pursuit, they had not taken notice of the balloon, which was now but five
hundred paces behind them, and only about thirty feet from the ground. On their
part, they were not twenty lengths of their horses from the fugitive.

One of them was very perceptibly gaining on Joe, and was about to pierce
him with his lance, when Kennedy, with fixed eye and steady hand, stopped him
short with a ball, that hurled him to the earth.

Joe did not even turn his head at the report. Some of the horsemen reined in
their barbs, and fell on their faces in the dust as they caught sight of the Victoria;
the rest continued their pursuit.

"But what is Joe about?" said Kennedy; "he don't stop!"

"He's doing better than that, Dick! I understand him! He's keeping on in the
same direction as the balloon. He relies upon our intelligence. Ah! the noble
fellow! We'll carry him off in the very teeth of those Arab rascals! We are not
more than two hundred paces from him!"

"What are we to do?" asked Kennedy.

"Lay aside your rifle,Dick."

And the Scot obeyed the request at once.

"Do you think that you can hold one hundred and fifty pounds of ballast in
your arms?"

"Ay, more than that!"

"No! That will be enough!"

And the doctor proceeded to pile up bags of sand in Kennedy's arms.

"Hold yourself in readiness in the back part of the car, and be prepared to
throw out that ballast at a single effort. But, for your life, don't do so until I give
the word!"

"Be easy on that point."

"Otherwise, we should miss Joe, and he would be lost."


"Count upon me!"

The Victoria at that moment almost commanded the troop of horsemen who
were still desperately urging their steeds at Joe's heels. The doctor, standing in
the front of the car, held the ladder clear, ready to throw it at any moment.
Meanwhile, Joe had still maintained the distance between himself and _ his
pursuers--say about fifty feet. The Victoria was now ahead of the party.

"Attention!" exclaimed the doctor to Kennedy.

"T'm ready!"

"Joe, look out for yourself!" shouted the doctor in his sonorous, ringing
voice, as he flung out the ladder, the lowest ratlines of which tossed up the dust
of the road.

As the doctor shouted, Joe had tumed his head, but without checking his
horse. The ladder dropped close to him, and at the instant he grasped it the
doctor again shouted to Kennedy:

"Throw ballast!"

"It's done!"

And the Victoria, lightened by a weight greater than Joe's, shot up one
hundred and fifty feet into the air.

Joe clung with all his strength to the ladder during the wide oscillations that
it had to describe, and then making an indescribable gesture to the Arabs, and
climbing with the agility of a monkey, he sprang up to his companions, who
received him with open arms.

The Arabs uttered a scream of astonishment and rage. The fugitive had been
snatched from them on the wing, and the Victoria was rapidly speeding far
beyond their reach.

"Master! Kennedy!" ejaculated Joe, and overwhelmed, at last, with fatigue
and emotion, the poor fellow fainted away, while Kennedy, almost beside
himself, kept exclaiming:

"Saved--saved!"

"Saved indeed!" murmured the doctor, who had recovered all his phlegmatic
coolness.

Joe was almost naked. His bleeding arms, his body covered with cuts and
bruises, told what his sufferings had been. The doctor quietly dressed his
wounds, and laid him comfortably under the awning.

Joe soon returned to consciousness, and asked for a glass of brandy, which
the doctor did not see fit to refuse, as the faithful fellow had to be indulged.

After he had swallowed the stimulant, Joe grasped the hands of his two
friends and announced that he was ready to relate what had happened to him.

But they would not allow him to talk at that time, and he sank back into a


profound sleep, of which he seemed to have the greatest possible need.

The Victoria was then taking an oblique line to the westward. Driven by a
tempestuous wind, it again approached the borders of the thorny desert, which
the travellers descried over the tops of palm-trees, bent and broken by the storm;
and, after having made a run of two hundred miles since rescuing Joe, it passed
the tenth degree of east longitude about nightfall.


CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVENTH.

The Western Route.--Joe wakes up.--His Obstinacy.--End of Joe's Narrative.-
-Tagelei.--Kennedy's Anxieties.--The Route to the North.--A Night near
Aghades.

During the night the wind lulled as though reposing after the boisterousness
of the day, and the Victoria remained quietly at the top of the tall sycamore. The
doctor and Kennedy kept watch by turns, and Joe availed himself of the chance
to sleep most sturdily for twenty-four hours at a stretch.

"That's the remedy he needs," said Dr. Ferguson. "Nature will take charge of
his care."

With the dawn the wind sprang up again in quite strong, and moreover
capricious gusts. It shifted abruptly from south to north, but finally the Victoria
was Carried away by it toward the west.

The doctor, map in hand, recognized the kingdom of Damerghou, an
undulating region of great fertility, in which the huts that compose the villages
are constructed of long reeds interwoven with branches of the asclepia. The
grain-mills were seen raised in the cultivated fields, upon small scaffoldings or
platforms, to keep them out of the reach of the mice and the huge ants of that
country.

They soon passed the town of Zinder, recognized by its spacious place of
execution, in the centre of which stands the "tree of death." At its foot the
executioner stands waiting, and whoever passes beneath its shadow is
immediately hung!

Upon consulting his compass, Kennedy could not refrain from saying:

"Look! we are again moving northward."

"No matter; if it only takes us to Timbuctoo, we shall not complain. Never
was a finer voyage accomplished under better circumstances!"

"Nor in better health," said Joe, at that instant thrusting his jolly countenance
from between the curtains of the awning.

"There he is! there's our gallant friend--our preserver!" exclaimed Kennedy,
cordially.--"How goes it, Joe?"

"Oh! why, naturally enough, Mr. Kennedy, very naturally! I never felt better
in my life! Nothing sets a man up like a little pleasure-trip with a bath in Lake
Tchad to start on--eh, doctor?"

"Brave fellow!" said Ferguson, pressing Joe's hand, "what terrible anxiety
you caused us!"

"Humph! and you, sir? Do you think that I felt easy in my mind about you,
gentlemen? You gave me a fine fright, let me tell you!"


"We shall never agree in the world, Joe, if you take things in that style."

"IT see that his tumble hasn't changed him a bit," added Kennedy.

"Your devotion and self-forgetfulness were sublime, my brave lad, and they
saved us, for the Victoria was falling into the lake, and, once there, nobody could
have extricated her."

"But, if my devotion, as you are pleased to call my summerset, saved you,
did it not save me too, for here we are, all three of us, in first-rate health?
Consequently we have nothing to squabble about in the whole affair."

"Oh! we can never come to a settlement with that youth," said the sportsman.

"The best way to settle it," replied Joe, "is to say nothing more about the
matter. What's done is done. Good or bad, we can't take it back."

"You obstinate fellow!" said the doctor, laughing; "you can't refuse, though,
to tell us your adventures, at all events."

"Not if you think it worth while. But, in the first place, I'm going to cook this
fat goose to a turn, for I see that Mr. Kennedy has not wasted his time."

"All right, Joe!"

"Well, let us see then how this African game will sit on a European
stomach!"

The goose was soon roasted by the flame of the blow-pipe, and not long
afterward was comfortably stowed away. Joe took his own good share, like a
man who had eaten nothing for several days. After the tea and the punch, he
acquainted his friends with his recent adventures. He spoke with some emotion,
even while looking at things with his usual philosophy. The doctor could not
refrain from frequently pressing his hand when he saw his worthy servant more
considerate of his master's safety than of his own, and, in relation to the sinking
of the island of the Biddiomahs, he explained to him the frequency of this
phenomenon upon Lake Tchad.

At length Joe, continuing his recital, arrived at the point where, sinking in the
swamp, he had uttered a last cry of despair.

"I thought I was gone," said he, "and as you came right into my mind, I made
a hard fight for it. How, I couldn't tell you--but I'd made up my mind that I
wouldn't go under without knowing why. Just then, I saw--two or three feet from
me--what do you think? the end of a rope that had been fresh cut; so I took leave
to make another jerk, and, by hook or by crook, I got to the rope. When I pulled,
it didn't give; so I pulled again and hauled away and there I was on dry ground!
At the end of the rope, I found an anchor! Ah, master, I've a right to call that the
anchor of safety, anyhow, if you have no objection. I knew it again! It was the
anchor of the Victoria! You had grounded there! So I followed the direction of
the rope and that gave me your direction, and, after trying hard a few times


more, I got out of the swamp. I had got my strength back with my spunk, and I
walked on part of the night away from the lake, until I got to the edge of a very
big wood. There I saw a fenced-in place, where some horses were grazing,
without thinking of any harm. Now, there are times when everybody knows how
to ride a horse, are there not, doctor? So I didn't spend much time thinking about
it, but jumped right on the back of one of those innocent animals and away we
went galloping north as fast as our legs could carry us. I needn't tell you about
the towns that I didn't see nor the villages that I took good care to go around. No!
I crossed the ploughed fields; I leaped the hedges; I scrambled over the fences; I
dug my heels into my nag; I thrashed him; I fairly lifted the poor fellow off his
feet! At last I got to the end of the tilled land. Good! There was the desert. "That
suits me!' said I, 'for I can see better ahead of me and farther too.' I was hoping
all the time to see the balloon tacking about and waiting for me. But not a bit of
it; and so, in about three hours, I go plump, like a fool, into a camp of Arabs!
Whew! what a hunt that was! You see, Mr. Kennedy, a hunter don't know what a
real hunt is until he's been hunted himself! Still I advise him not to try it if he can
keep out of it! My horse was so tired, he was ready to drop off his legs; they
were close on me; I threw myself to the ground; then I jumped up again behind
an Arab! I didn't mean the fellow any harm, and I hope he has no grudge against
me for choking him, but I saw you--and you know the rest. The Victoria came on
at my heels, and you caught me up flying, as a circus-rider does a ring. Wasn't I
right in counting on you? Now, doctor, you see how simple all that was! Nothing
more natural in the world! I'm ready to begin over again, if it would be of any
service to you. And besides, master, as I said a while ago, it's not worth
mentioning."

"My noble, gallant Joe!" said the doctor, with great feeling. "Heart of gold!
we were not astray in trusting to your intelligence and skill."

"Poh! doctor, one has only just to follow things along as they happen, and he
can always work his way out of a scrape! The safest plan, you see, is to take
matters as they come."

While Joe was telling his experience, the balloon had rapidly passed over a
long reach of country, and Kennedy soon pointed out on the horizon a collection
of structures that looked like a town. The doctor glanced at his map and
recognized the place as the large village of Tagelei, in the Damerghou country.

"Here," said he, "we come upon Dr. Barth's route. It was at this place that he
parted from his companions, Richardson and Overweg; the first was to follow
the Zinder route, and the second that of Maradi; and you may remember that, of
these three travellers, Barth was the only one who ever returned to Europe."

"Then," said Kennedy, following out on the map the direction of the Victoria,


"we are going due north."

"Due north, Dick."

"And don't that give you a little uneasiness?"

"Why should it?"

"Because that line leads to Tripoli, and over the Great Desert."

"Oh, we shall not go so far as that, my friend--at least, I hope not."

"But where do you expect to halt?"

"Come, Dick, don't you feel some curiosity to see Timbuctoo?"

"Timbuctoo?"

"Certainly," said Joe; "nobody nowadays can think of making the trip to
Africa without going to see Timbuctoo."

"You will be only the fifth or sixth European who has ever set eyes on that
mysterious city."

"Ho, then, for Timbuctoo!"

"Well, then, let us try to get as far as between the seventeenth and eighteenth
degrees of north latitude, and there we will seek a favorable wind to carry us
westward."

"Good!" said the hunter. "But have we still far to go to the northward?"

"One hundred and fifty miles at least."

"In that case," said Kennedy, "I'll turn in and sleep a bit."

"Sleep, sir; sleep!" urged Joe. "And you, doctor, do the same yourself: you
must have need of rest, for I made you keep watch a little out of time."

The sportsman stretched himself under the awning; but Ferguson, who was
not easily conquered by fatigue, remained at his post.

In about three hours the Victoria was crossing with extreme rapidity an
expanse of stony country, with ranges of lofty, naked mountains of granitic
formation at the base. A few isolated peaks attained the height of even four
thousand feet. Giraffes, antelopes, and ostriches were seen running and bounding
with marvellous agility in the midst of forests of acacias, mimosas, souahs, and
date-trees. After the barrenness of the desert, vegetation was now resuming its
empire. This was the country of the Kailouas, who veil their faces with a
bandage of cotton, like their dangerous neighbors, the Touaregs.

At ten o'clock in the evening, after a splendid trip of two hundred and fifty
miles, the Victoria halted over an important town. The moonlight revealed
glimpses of one district half in ruins; and some pinnacles of mosques and
minarets shot up here and there, glistening in the silvery rays. The doctor took a
stellar observation, and discovered that he was in the latitude of Aghades.

This city, once the seat of an immense trade, was already falling into ruin
when Dr. Barth visited it.


The Victoria, not being seen in the obscurity of night, descended about two
miles above Aghades, in a field of millet. The night was calm, and began to
break into dawn about three o'clock A.M.; while a light wind coaxed the balloon
westward, and even a little toward the south.

Dr. Ferguson hastened to avail himself of such good fortune, and rapidly
ascending resumed his aerial journey amid a long wake of golden morning
sunshine.


CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHTH.

A Rapid Passage.--Prudent Resolves.--Caravans in Sight.--Incessant Rains.--
Goa.--The Niger.--Golberry, Geoffroy, and Gray.--Mungo Park.--Laing.-- Rene
Caillie.--Clapperton.--John and Richard Lander.

The 17th of May passed tranquilly, without any remarkable incident; the
desert gained upon them once more; a moderate wind bore the Victoria toward
the southwest, and she never swerved to the right or to the left, but her shadow
traced a perfectly straight line on the sand.

Before starting, the doctor had prudently renewed his stock of water, having
feared that he should not be able to touch ground in these regions, infested as
they are by the Aouelim-Minian Touaregs. The plateau, at an elevation of
eighteen hundred feet above the level of the sea, sloped down toward the south.
Our travellers, having crossed the Aghades route at Murzouk--a route often
pressed by the feet of camels--arrived that evening, in the sixteenth degree of
north latitude, and four degrees fifty-five minutes east longitude, after having
passed over one hundred and eighty miles of a long and monotonous day's
journey.

During the day Joe dressed the last pieces of game, which had been only
hastily prepared, and he served up for supper a mess of snipe, that were greatly
relished. The wind continuing good, the doctor resolved to keep on during the
night, the moon, still nearly at the full, illumining it with her radiance. The
Victoria ascended to a height of five hundred feet, and, during her nocturnal trip
of about sixty miles, the gentle slumbers of an infant would not have been
disturbed by her motion.

On Sunday morning, the direction of the wind again changed, and it bore to
the northwestward. A few crows were seen sweeping through the air, and, off on
the horizon, a flock of vultures which, fortunately, however, kept at a distance.

The sight of these birds led Joe to compliment his master on the idea of
having two balloons.

"Where would we be," said he, "with only one balloon? The second balloon


is like the life-boat to a ship; in case of wreck we could always take to it and
escape."

"You are right, friend Joe," said the doctor, "only that my life-boat gives me
some uneasiness. It is not so good as the main craft."

"What do you mean by that, doctor?" asked Kennedy.

"I mean to say that the new Victoria is not so good as the old one. Whether it
be that the stuff it is made of is too much worn, or that the heat of the spiral has
melted the gutta-percha, I can observe a certain loss of gas. It don't amount to
much thus far, but still it is noticeable. We have a tendency to sink, and, in order
to keep our elevation, I am compelled to give greater dilation to the hydrogen."

"The deuce!" exclaimed Kennedy with concern; "I see no remedy for that."

"There is none, Dick, and that is why we must hasten our progress, and even
avoid night halts."

"Are we still far from the coast?" asked Joe.

"Which coast, my boy? How are we to know whither chance will carry us?
All that I can say is, that Timbuctoo is still about four hundred miles to the
westward.

"And how long will it take us to get there?"

"Should the wind not carry us too far out of the way, I hope to reach that city
by Tuesday evening."

"Then," remarked Joe, pointing to a long file of animals and men winding
across the open desert, "we shall arrive there sooner than that caravan."

Ferguson and Kennedy leaned over and saw an immense cavalcade. There
were at least one hundred and fifty camels of the kind that, for twelve mutkals of
gold, or about twenty-five dollars, go from Timbuctoo to Tafilet with a load of
five hundred pounds upon their backs. Each animal had dangling to its tail a bag
to receive its excrement, the only fuel on which the caravans can depend when
crossing the desert.

These Touareg camels are of the very best race. They can go from three to
seven days without drinking, and for two without eating. Their speed surpasses
that of the horse, and they obey with intelligence the voice of the khabir, or
guide of the caravan. They are known in the country under the name of mehari.

Such were the details given by the doctor while his companions continued to
gaze upon that multitude of men, women, and children, advancing on foot and
with difficulty over a waste of sand half in motion, and scarcely kept in its place
by scanty nettles, withered grass, and stunted bushes that grew upon it. The wind
obliterated the marks of their feet almost instantly.

Joe inquired how the Arabs managed to guide themselves across the desert,
and come to the few wells scattered far between throughout this vast solitude.


"The Arabs," replied Dr. Ferguson, "are endowed by nature with a wonderful
instinct in finding their way. Where a European would be at a loss, they never
hesitate for a moment. An insignificant fragment of rock, a pebble, a tuft of
grass, a different shade of color in the sand, suffice to guide them with accuracy.
During the night they go by the polar star. They never travel more than two miles
per hour, and always rest during the noonday heat. You may judge from that how
long it takes them to cross Sahara, a desert more than nine hundred miles in
breadth."

But the Victoria had already disappeared from the astonished gaze of the
Arabs, who must have envied her rapidity. That evening she passed two degrees
twenty minutes east longitude, and during the night left another degree behind
her.

On Monday the weather changed completely. Rain began to fall with
extreme violence, and not only had the balloon to resist the power of this deluge,
but also the increase of weight which it caused by wetting the whole machine,
car and all. This continuous shower accounted for the swamps and marshes that
formed the sole surface of the country. Vegetation reappeared, however, along
with the mimosas, the baobabs, and the tamarind-trees.

Such was the Sonray country, with its villages topped with roofs turned over
like Armenian caps. There were few mountains, and only such hills as were
enough to form the ravines and pools where the pintadoes and snipes went
sailing and diving through. Here and there, an impetuous torrent cut the roads,
and had to be crossed by the natives on long vines stretched from tree to tree.
The forests gave place to jungles, which alligators, hippopotami, and the
rhinoceros, made their haunts.

"Tt will not be long before we see the Niger,” said the doctor. "The face of the
country always changes in the vicinity of large rivers. These moving highways,
as they are sometimes correctly called, have first brought vegetation with them,
as they will at last bring civilization. Thus, in its course of twenty-five hundred
miles, the Niger has scattered along its banks the most important cities of
Africa."

"By-the-way," put in Joe, "that reminds me of what was said by an admirer
of the goodness of Providence, who praised the foresight with which it had
generally caused rivers to flow close to large cities!"

At noon the Victoria was passing over a petty town, a mere assemblage of
miserable huts, which once was Goa, a great capital.

"It was there," said the doctor, "that Barth crossed the Niger, on his return
from Timbuctoo. This is the river so famous in antiquity, the rival of the Nile, to
which pagan superstition ascribed a celestial origin. Like the Nile, it has engaged


the attention of geographers in all ages; and like it, also, its exploration has cost
the lives of many victims; yes, even more of them than perished on account of
the other."

The Niger flowed broadly between its banks, and its waters rolled southward
with some violence of current; but our travellers, borne swiftly by as they were,
could scarcely catch a glimpse of its curious outline.

"I wanted to talk to you about this river," said Dr. Ferguson, "and it is already
far from us. Under the names of Dhiouleba, Mayo, Egghirreou, Quorra, and
other titles besides, it traverses an immense extent of country, and almost
competes in length with the Nile. These appellations signify simply 'the River,'
according to the dialects of the countries through which it passes."

"Did Dr. Barth follow this route?" asked Kennedy.

"No, Dick: in quitting Lake Tchad, he passed through the different towns of
Bornou, and intersected the Niger at Say, four degrees below Goa; then he
penetrated to the bosom of those unexplored countries which the Niger embraces
in its elbow; and, after eight months of fresh fatigues, he arrived at Timbuctoo;
all of which we may do in about three days with as swift a wind as this."

"Have the sources of the Niger been discovered?" asked Joe.

"Long since," replied the doctor. "The exploration of the Niger and its
tributaries was the object of several expeditions, the principal of which I shall
mention: Between 1749 and 1758, Adamson made a reconnoissance of the river,
and visited Gorea; from 1785 to 1788, Golberry and Geoffroy travelled across
the deserts of Senegambia, and ascended as far as the country of the Moors, who
assassinated Saugnier, Brisson, Adam, Riley, Cochelet, and so many other
unfortunate men. Then came the illustrious Mungo Park, the friend of Sir Walter
Scott, and, like him, a Scotchman by birth. Sent out in 1795 by the African
Society of London, he got as far as Bambarra, saw the Niger, travelled five
hundred miles with a slave-merchant, reconnoitred the Gambia River, and
returned to England in 1797. He again set out, on the 30th of January, 1805, with
his brother-in-law Anderson, Scott, the designer, and a gang of workmen; he
reached Gorea, there added a detachment of thirty-five soldiers to his party, and
saw the Niger again on the 19th of August. But, by that time, in consequence of
fatigue, privations, ill-usage, the inclemencies of the weather, and the
unhealthiness of the country, only eleven persons remained alive of the forty
Europeans in the party. On the 16th of November, the last letters from Mungo
Park reached his wife; and, a year later a trader from that country gave
information that, having got as far as Boussa, on the Niger, on the 23d of
December, the unfortunate traveller's boat was upset by the cataracts in that part
of the river, and he was murdered by the natives."


"And his dreadful fate did not check the efforts of others to explore that
river?"

"On the contrary, Dick. Since then, there were two objects in view: namely,
to recover the lost man's papers, as well as to pursue the exploration. In 1816, an
expedition was organized, in which Major Grey took part. It arrived in Senegal,
penetrated to the Fonta-Jallon, visited the Foullah and Mandingo populations,
and returned to England without further results. In 1822, Major Laing explored
all the western part of Africa near to the British possessions; and he it was who
got so far as the sources of the Niger; and, according to his documents, the
spring in which that immense river takes its rise is not two feet broad.

"Easy to jump over," said Joe.

"How's that? Easy you think, eh?" retorted the doctor. "If we are to believe
tradition, whoever attempts to pass that spring, by leaping over it, is immediately
swallowed up; and whoever tries to draw water from it, feels himself repulsed by
an invisible hand."

"I suppose a man has a right not to believe a word of that!" persisted Joe.

"Oh, by all means!--Five years later, it was Major Laing's destiny to force his
way across the desert of Sahara, penetrate to Timbuctoo, and perish a few miles
above it, by strangling, at the hands of the Ouelad-shiman, who wanted to
compel him to turn Mussulman."

"Still another victim!" said the sportsman.

"It was then that a brave young man, with his own feeble resources,
undertook and accomplished the most astonishing of modern journeys--I mean
the Frenchman Rene Caillie, who, after sundry attempts in 1819 and 1824, set
out again on the 19th of April, 1827, from Rio Nunez. On the 3d of August he
arrived at Time, so thoroughly exhausted and ill that he could not resume his
journey until six months later, in January, 1828. He then joined a caravan, and,
protected by his Oriental dress, reached the Niger on the 10th of March,
penetrated to the city of Jenne, embarked on the river, and descended it, as far as
Timbuctoo, where he arrived on the 30th of April. In 1760, another Frenchman,
Imbert by name, and, in 1810, an Englishman, Robert Adams, had seen this
curious place; but Rene Caillie was to be the first European who could bring
back any authentic data concerning it. On the 4th of May he quitted this 'Queen
of the desert;’ on the 9th, he surveyed the very spot where Major Laing had been
murdered; on the 19th, he arrived at El-Arouan, and left that commercial town to
brave a thousand dangers in crossing the vast solitudes comprised between the
Soudan and the northern regions of Africa. At length he entered Tangiers, and on
the 28th of September sailed for Toulon. In nineteen months, notwithstanding
one hundred and eighty days' sickness, he had traversed Africa from west to


north. Ah! had Callie been born in England, he would have been honored as the
most intrepid traveller of modern times, as was the case with Mungo Park. But in
France he was not appreciated according to his worth."

"He was a sturdy fellow!" said Kennedy, "but what became of him?"

"He died at the age of thirty-nine, from the consequences of his long
fatigues. They thought they had done enough in decreeing him the prize of the
Geographical Society in 1828; the highest honors would have been paid to him
in England.

"While he was accomplishing this remarkable journey, an Englishman had
conceived a similar enterprise and was trying to push it through with equal
courage, if not with equal good fortune. This was Captain Clapperton, the
companion of Denham. In 1829 he reentered Africa by the western coast of the
Gulf of Benin; he then followed in the track of Mungo Park and of Laing,
recovered at Boussa the documents relative to the death of the former, and
arrived on the 20th of August at Sackatoo, where he was seized and held as a
prisoner, until he expired in the arms of his faithful attendant Richard Lander."

"And what became of this Lander?" asked Joe, deeply interested.

"He succeeded in regaining the coast and returned to London, bringing with
him the captain's papers, and an exact narrative of his own journey. He then
offered his services to the government to complete the reconnoissance of the
Niger. He took with him his brother John, the second child of a poor couple in
Cornwall, and, together, these men, between 1829 and 1831, redescended the
river from Boussa to its mouth, describing it village by village, mile by mile."

"So both the brothers escaped the common fate?" queried Kennedy.

"Yes, on this expedition, at least; but in 1833 Richard undertook a third trip
to the Niger, and perished by a bullet, near the mouth of the river. You see, then,
my friends, that the country over which we are now passing has witnessed some
noble instances of self-sacrifice which, unfortunately, have only too often had
death for their reward."


CHAPTER THIRTY-NINTH.

The Country in the Elbow of the Niger.--A Fantastic View of the Hombori
Mountains.--Kabra.--Timbuctoo.--The Chart of Dr. Barth. --A Decaying City.--
Whither Heaven wills.

During this dull Monday, Dr. Ferguson diverted his thoughts by giving his
companions a thousand details concerning the country they were crossing. The
surface, which was quite flat, offered no impediment to their progress. The
doctor's sole anxiety arose from the obstinate northeast wind which continued to


blow furiously, and bore them away from the latitude of Timbuctoo.

The Niger, after running northward as far as that city, sweeps around, like an
immense water-jet from some fountain, and falls into the Atlantic in a broad
sheaf. In the elbow thus formed the country is of varied character, sometimes
luxuriantly fertile, and sometimes extremely bare; fields of maize succeeded by
wide spaces covered with broom-corn and uncultivated plains. All kinds of
aquatic birds--pelicans, wild-duck, kingfishers, and the rest--were seen in
numerous flocks hovering about the borders of the pools and torrents.

From time to time there appeared an encampment of Touaregs, the men
sheltered under their leather tents, while their women were busied with the
domestic toil outside, milking their camels and smoking their huge-bowled
pipes.

By eight o'clock in the evening the Victoria had advanced more than two
hundred miles to the westward, and our aeronauts became the spectators of a
magnificent scene.

A mass of moonbeams forcing their way through an opening in the clouds,
and gliding between the long lines of falling rain, descended in a golden shower
on the ridges of the Hombori Mountains. Nothing could be more weird than the
appearance of these seemingly basaltic summits; they stood out in fantastic
profile against the sombre sky, and the beholder might have fancied them to be
the legendary ruins of some vast city of the middle ages, such as the icebergs of
the polar seas sometimes mimic them in nights of gloom.

"An admirable landscape for the 'Mysteries of Udolpho'!" exclaimed the
doctor. "Ann Radcliffe could not have depicted yon mountains in a more
appalling aspect."

"Faith!" said Joe, "I wouldn't like to be strolling alone in the evening through
this country of ghosts. Do you see now, master, if it wasn't so heavy, I'd like to
carry that whole landscape home to Scotland! It would do for the borders of
Loch Lomond, and tourists would rush there in crowds."

"Our balloon is hardly large enough to admit of that little experiment--but I
think our direction is changing. Bravo!--the elves and fairies of the place are
quite obliging. See, they've sent us a nice little southeast breeze, that will put us
on the right track again."

In fact, the Victoria was resuming a more northerly route, and on the
morning of the 20th she was passing over an inextricable network of channels,
torrents, and streams, in fine, the whole complicated tangle of the Niger's
tributaries. Many of these channels, covered with a thick growth of herbage,
resembled luxuriant meadow-lands. There the doctor recognized the route
followed by the explorer Barth when he launched upon the river to descend to


Timbuctoo. Eight hundred fathoms broad at this point, the Niger flowed between
banks richly grown with cruciferous plants and tamarind-trees. Herds of agile
gazelles were seen skipping about, their curling horns mingling with the tall
herbage, within which the alligator, half concealed, lay silently in wait for them
with watchful eyes.

Long files of camels and asses laden with merchandise from Jenne were
winding in under the noble trees. Ere long, an amphitheatre of low-built houses
was discovered at a turn of the river, their roofs and terraces heaped up with hay
and straw gathered from the neighboring districts.

"There's Kabra!" exclaimed the doctor, joyously; "there is the harbor of
Timbuctoo, and the city is not five miles from here!"

"Then, sir, you are satisfied?" half queried Joe.

"Delighted, my boy!"

"Very good; then every thing's for the best!"

In fact, about two o'clock, the Queen of the Desert, mysterious Timbuctoo,
which once, like Athens and Rome, had her schools of learned men, and her
professorships of philosophy, stretched away before the gaze of our travellers.

Ferguson followed the most minute details upon the chart traced by Barth
himself, and was enabled to recognize its perfect accuracy.

The city forms an immense triangle marked out upon a vast plain of white
sand, its acute angle directed toward the north and piercing a comer of the
desert. In the environs there was almost nothing, hardly even a few grasses, with
some dwarf mimosas and stunted bushes.

As for the appearance of Timbuctoo, the reader has but to imagine a
collection of billiard-balls and thimbles--such is the bird's-eye view! The streets,
which are quite narrow, are lined with houses only one story in height, built of
bricks dried in the sun, and huts of straw and reeds, the former square, the latter
conical. Upon the terraces were seen some of the male inhabitants, carelessly
lounging at full length in flowing apparel of bright colors, and lance or musket in
hand; but no women were visible at that hour of the day.

"Yet they are said to be handsome," remarked the doctor. "You see the three
towers of the three mosques that are the only ones left standing of a great
number-- the city has indeed fallen from its ancient splendor! At the top of the
triangle rises the Mosque of Sankore, with its ranges of galleries resting on
arcades of sufficiently pure design. Farther on, and near to the Sane-Gungu
quarter, is the Mosque of Sidi-Yahia and some two-story houses. But do not look
for either palaces or monuments: the sheik is a mere son of traffic, and his royal
palace is a counting-house."

"It seems to me that I can see half-ruined ramparts," said Kennedy.


"They were destroyed by the Fouillanes in 1826; the city was one-third larger
then, for Timbuctoo, an object generally coveted by all the tribes, since the
eleventh century, has belonged in succession to the Touaregs, the Sonrayans, the
Morocco men, and the Fouillanes; and this great centre of civilization, where a
sage like Ahmed-Baba owned, in the sixteenth century, a library of sixteen
hundred manuscripts, is now nothing but a mere half-way house for the trade of
Central Africa."

The city, indeed, seemed abandoned to supreme neglect; it betrayed that
indifference which seems epidemic to cities that are passing away. Huge heaps
of rubbish encumbered the suburbs, and, with the hill on which the market-place
stood, formed the only inequalities of the ground.

When the Victoria passed, there was some slight show of movement; drums
were beaten; but the last learned man still lingering in the place had hardly time
to notice the new phenomenon, for our travellers, driven onward by the wind of
the desert, resumed the winding course of the river, and, ere long, Timbuctoo
was nothing more than one of the fleeting reminiscences of their journey.

"And now," said the doctor, "Heaven may waft us whither it pleases!"

"Provided only that we go westward," added Kennedy.

"Bah!" said Joe; "I wouldn't be afraid if it was to go back to Zanzibar by the
same road, or to cross the ocean to America."

"We would first have to be able to do that, Joe!"

"And what's wanting, doctor?"

"Gas, my boy; the ascending force of the balloon is evidently growing
weaker, and we shall need all our management to make it carry us to the sea-
coast. I shall even have to throw over some ballast. We are too heavy."

"That's what comes of doing nothing, doctor; when a man lies stretched out
all day long in his hammock, he gets fat and heavy. It's a lazybones trip, this of
ours, master, and when we get back every body will find us big and stout."

"Just like Joe," said Kennedy; "just the ideas for him: but wait a bit! Can you
tell what we may have to go through yet? We are still far from the end of our
trip. Where do you expect to strike the African coast, doctor?"

"I should find it hard to answer you, Kennedy. We are at the mercy of very
variable winds; but I should think myself fortunate were we to strike it between
Sierra Leone and Portendick. There is a stretch of country in that quarter where
we should meet with friends."

"And it would be a pleasure to press their hands; but, are we going in the
desirable direction?"

"Not any too well, Dick; not any too well! Look at the needle of the
compass; we are bearing southward, and ascending the Niger toward its


sources."

"A fine chance to discover them," said Joe, "if they were not known already.
Now, couldn't we just find others for it, on a pinch?"

"Not exactly, Joe; but don't be alarmed: I hardly expect to go so far as that."

At nightfall the doctor threw out the last bags of sand. The Victoria rose
higher, and the blow-pipe, although working at full blast, could scarcely keep her
up. At that time she was sixty miles to the southward of Timbuctoo, and in the
morning the aeronauts awoke over the banks of the Niger, not far from Lake
Debo.


CHAPTER FORTIETH.

Dr. Ferguson's Anxieties.--Persistent Movement southward.--A Cloud of
Grasshoppers.--A View of Jenne.--A View of Sego.--Change of the Wind.--Joe's
Regrets.

The flow of the river was, at that point, divided by large islands into narrow
branches, with a very rapid current. Upon one among them stood some
shepherds’ huts, but it had become impossible to take an exact observation of
them, because the speed of the balloon was constantly increasing. Unfortunately,
it turned still more toward the south, and in a few moments crossed Lake Debo.

Dr. Ferguson, forcing the dilation of his aerial craft to the utmost, sought for
other currents of air at different heights, but in vain; and he soon gave up the
attempt, which was only augmenting the waste of gas by pressing it against the
well-worn tissue of the balloon.

He made no remark, but he began to feel very anxious. This persistence of
the wind to head him off toward the southern part of Africa was defeating his
calculations, and he no longer knew upon whom or upon what to depend. Should
he not reach the English or French territories, what was to become of him in the
midst of the barbarous tribes that infest the coasts of Guinea? How should he
there get to a ship to take him back to England? And the actual direction of the
wind was driving him along to the kingdom of Dahomey, among the most
savage races, and into the power of a ruler who was in the habit of sacrificing
thousands of human victims at his public orgies. There he would be lost!

On the other hand, the balloon was visibly wearing out, and the doctor felt it
failing him. However, as the weather was clearing up a little, he hoped that the
cessation of the rain would bring about a change in the atmospheric currents.

It was therefore a disagreeable reminder of the actual situation when Joe said
aloud:

"There! the rain's going to pour down harder than ever; and this time it will


be the deluge itself, if we're to judge by yon cloud that's coming up!"

"What! another cloud?" asked Ferguson.

"Yes, and a famous one," replied Kennedy.

"T never saw the like of it," added Joe.

"I breathe freely again!" said the doctor, laying down his spy-glass. "That's
not a cloud!"

"Not a cloud?" queried Joe, with surprise.

"No; it is a Swarm."

"Eh?"

"A swarm of grasshoppers!"

"That? Grasshoppers!"

"Myriads of grasshoppers, that are going to sweep over this country like a
water-spout; and woe to it! for, should these insects alight, it will be laid waste."

"That would be a sight worth beholding!"

"Wait a little, Joe. In ten minutes that cloud will have arrived where we are,
and you can then judge by the aid of your own eyes."

The doctor was right. The cloud, thick, opaque, and several miles in extent,
came on with a deafening noise, casting its immense shadow over the fields. It
was composed of numberless legions of that species of grasshopper called
crickets. About a hundred paces from the balloon, they settled down upon a tract
full of foliage and verdure. Fifteen minutes later, the mass resumed its flight, and
our travellers could, even at a distance, see the trees and the bushes entirely
stripped, and the fields as bare as though they had been swept with the scythe.
One would have thought that a sudden winter had just descended upon the earth
and struck the region with the most complete sterility.

"Well, Joe, what do you think of that?"

"Well, doctor, it's very curious, but quite natural. What one grasshopper does
on a small scale, thousands do on a grand scale."

"It's a terrible shower," said the hunter; "more so than hail itself in the
devastation it causes."

"It is impossible to prevent it," replied Ferguson. "Sometimes the inhabitants
have had the idea to burn the forests, and even the standing crops, in order to
arrest the progress of these insects; but the first ranks plunging into the flames
would extinguish them beneath their mass, and the rest of the swarm would then
pass irresistibly onward. Fortunately, in these regions, there is some sort of
compensation for their ravages, since the natives gather these insects in great
numbers and greedily eat them."

"They are the prawns of the air," said Joe, who added that he was sorry that
he had never had the chance to taste them--just for information's sake!


The country became more marshy toward evening; the forests dwindled to
isolated clumps of trees; and on the borders of the river could be seen plantations
of tobacco, and swampy meadow-lands fat with forage. At last the city of Jenne,
on a large island, came in sight, with the two towers of its clay-built mosque, and
the putrid odor of the millions of swallows' nests accumulated in its walls. The
tops of some baobabs, mimosas, and date-trees peeped up between the houses;
and, even at night, the activity of the place seemed very great. Jenne is, in fact,
quite a commercial city: it supplies all the wants of Timbuctoo. Its boats on the
river, and its caravans along the shaded roads, bear thither the various products
of its industry.

"Were it not that to do so would prolong our journey," said the doctor, "I
should like to alight at this place. There must be more than one Arab there who
has travelled in England and France, and to whom our style of locomotion is not
altogether new. But it would not be prudent."

"Let us put off the visit until our next trip," said Joe, laughing.

"Besides, my friends, unless I am mistaken, the wind has a slight tendency to
veer a little more to the eastward, and we must not lose such an opportunity."

The doctor threw overboard some articles that were no longer of use--some
empty bottles, and a case that had contained preserved-meat--and thereby
managed to keep the balloon in a belt of the atmosphere more favorable to his
plans. At four o'clock in the morning the first rays of the sun lighted up Sego, the
capital of Bambarra, which could be recognized at once by the four towns that
compose it, by its Saracenic mosques, and by the incessant going and coming of
the flat-bottomed boats that convey its inhabitants from one quarter to the other.
But the travellers were not more seen than they saw. They sped rapidly and
directly to the northwest, and the doctor's anxiety gradually subsided.

"Two more days in this direction, and at this rate of speed, and we'll reach
the Senegal River."

"And we'll be in a friendly country?” asked the hunter.

"Not altogether; but, if the worst came to the worst, and the balloon were to
fail us, we might make our way to the French settlements. But, let it hold out
only for a few hundred miles, and we shall arrive without fatigue, alarm, or
danger, at the western coast."

"And the thing will be over!" added Joe. "Heigh-ho! so much the worse. If it
wasn't for the pleasure of telling about it, I would never want to set foot on the
ground again! Do you think anybody will believe our story, doctor?"

"Who can tell, Joe? One thing, however, will be undeniable: a thousand
witnesses Saw us Start on one side of the African Continent, and a thousand more
will see us arrive on the other."


"And, in that case, it seems to me that it would be hard to say that we had not
crossed it," added Kennedy.

"Ah, doctor!" said Joe again, with a deep sigh, "I'll think more than once of
my lumps of solid gold-ore! There was something that would have given
WEIGHT to our narrative! At a grain of gold per head, I could have got together
a nice crowd to listen to me, and even to admire me!"


CHAPTER FORTY-FIRST.

The Approaches to Senegal.--The Balloon sinks lower and lower.--They
keep throwing out, throwing out.--The Marabout Al-Hadji.--Messrs. Pascal,
Vincent, and Lambert.--A Rival of Mohammed.--The Difficult Mountains.--
Kennedy's Weapons.--One of Joe's Manoeuvres.--A Halt over a Forest.

On the 27th of May, at nine o'clock in the morning, the country presented an
entirely different aspect. The slopes, extending far away, changed to hills that
gave evidence of mountains soon to follow. They would have to cross the chain
which separates the basin of the Niger from the basin of the Senegal, and
determines the course of the water-shed, whether to the Gulf of Guinea on the
one hand, or to the bay of Cape Verde on the other.

As far as Senegal, this part of Africa is marked down as dangerous. Dr.
Ferguson knew it through the recitals of his predecessors. They had suffered a
thousand privations and been exposed to a thousand dangers in the midst of
these barbarous negro tribes. It was this fatal climate that had devoured most of
the companions of Mungo Park. Ferguson, therefore, was more than ever
decided not to set foot in this inhospitable region.

But he had not enjoyed one moment of repose. The Victoria was descending
very perceptibly, so much so that he had to throw overboard a number more of
useless articles, especially when there was a mountain-top to pass. Things went
on thus for more than one hundred and twenty miles; they were worn out with
ascending and falling again; the balloon, like another rock of Sisyphus, kept
continually sinking back toward the ground. The rotundity of the covering,
which was now but little inflated, was collapsing already. It assumed an
elongated shape, and the wind hollowed large cavities in the silken surface.

Kennedy could not help observing this.

"Is there a crack or a tear in the balloon?" he asked.

"No, but the gutta percha has evidently softened or melted in the heat, and
the hydrogen is escaping through the silk."

"How can we prevent that?"

"It is impossible. Let us lighten her. That is the only help. So let us throw out


every thing we can spare.”

"But what shall it be?" said the hunter, looking at the car, which was already
quite bare.

"Well, let us get rid of the awning, for its weight is quite considerable."

Joe, who was interested in this order, climbed up on the circle which kept
together the cordage of the network, and from that place easily managed to
detach the heavy curtains of the awning and throw them overboard.

"There's something that will gladden the hearts of a whole tribe of blacks,"
said he; "there's enough to dress a thousand of them, for they're not very
extravagant with cloth."

The balloon had risen a little, but it soon became evident that it was again
approaching the ground.

"Let us alight," suggested Kennedy, "and see what can be done with the
covering of the balloon."

"I tell you, again, Dick, that we have no means of repairing it."

"Then what shall we do?"

"We'll have to sacrifice every thing not absolutely indispensable; I am
anxious, at all hazards, to avoid a detention in these regions. The forests over the
tops of which we are skimming are any thing but safe."

"What! are there lions in them, or hyenas?" asked Joe, with an expression of
sovereign contempt.

"Worse than that, my boy! There are men, and some of the most cruel, too, in
all Africa."

"How is that known?"

"By the statements of travellers who have been here before us. Then the
French settlers, who occupy the colony of Senegal, necessarily have relations
with the surrounding tribes. Under the administration of Colonel Faidherbe,
reconnoissances have been pushed far up into the country. Officers such as
Messrs. Pascal, Vincent, and Lambert, have brought back precious documents
from their expeditions. They have explored these countries formed by the elbow
of the Senegal in places where war and pillage have left nothing but ruins."

"What, then, took place?"

"T will tell you. In 1854 a Marabout of the Senegalese Fouta, Al-Hadji by
name, declaring himself to be inspired like Mohammed, stirred up all the tribes
to war against the infidels--that is to say, against the Europeans. He carried
destruction and desolation over the regions between the Senegal River and its
tributary, the Fateme. Three hordes of fanatics led on by him scoured the
country, sparing neither a village nor a hut in their pillaging, massacring career.
He advanced in person on the town of Sego, which was a long time threatened.


In 1857 he worked up farther to the northward, and invested the fortification of
Medina, built by the French on the bank of the river. This stronghold was
defended by Paul Holl, who, for several months, without provisions or
ammunition, held out until Colonel Faidherbe came to his relief. Al-Hadji and
his bands then repassed the Senegal, and reappeared in the Kaarta, continuing
their rapine and murder.--Well, here below us is the very country in which he has
found refuge with his hordes of banditti; and I assure you that it would not be a
good thing to fall into his hands."

"We shall not," said Joe, "even if we have to throw overboard our clothes to
save the Victoria."

"We are not far from the river," said the doctor, "but I foresee that our
balloon will not be able to carry us beyond it."

"Let us reach its banks, at all events," said the Scot, "and that will be so
much gained."

"That is what we are trying to do," rejoined Ferguson, "only that one thing
makes me feel anxious."

"What is that?"

"We shall have mountains to pass, and that will be difficult to do, since I
cannot augment the ascensional force of the balloon, even with the greatest
possible heat that I can produce."

"Well, wait a bit," said Kennedy, "and we shall see!"

"The poor Victoria!" sighed Joe; "I had got fond of her as the sailor does of
his ship, and I'll not give her up so easily. She may not be what she was at the
start-- granted; but we shouldn't say a word against her. She has done us good
service, and it would break my heart to desert her."

"Be at your ease, Joe; if we leave her, it will be in spite of ourselves. She'll
serve us until she's completely worn out, and I ask of her only twenty-four hours
more!"

"Ah, she's getting used up! She grows thinner and thinner," said Joe,
dolefully, while he eyed her. "Poor balloon!"

"Unless I am deceived," said Kennedy, "there on the horizon are the
mountains of which you were speaking, doctor."

"Yes, there they are, indeed!" exclaimed the doctor, after having examined
them through his spy-glass, "and they look very high. We shall have some
trouble in crossing them."

"Can we not avoid them?"

"I am afraid not, Dick. See what an immense space they occupy--nearly one-
half of the horizon!"

"They even seem to shut us in," added Joe. "They are gaining on both our


right and our left."

"We must then pass over them."

These obstacles, which threatened such imminent peril, seemed to approach
with extreme rapidity, or, to speak more accurately, the wind, which was very
fresh, was hurrying the balloon toward the sharp peaks. So rise it must, or be
dashed to pieces.

"Let us empty our tank of water," said the doctor, "and keep only enough for
one day."

"There it goes," shouted Joe.

"Does the balloon rise at all?" asked Kennedy.

"A little--some fifty feet," replied the doctor, who kept his eyes fixed on the
barometer. "But that is not enough."

In truth the lofty peaks were starting up so swiftly before the travellers that
they seemed to be rushing down upon them. The balloon was far from rising
above them. She lacked an elevation of more than five hundred feet more.

The stock of water for the cylinder was also thrown overboard and only a
few pints were retained, but still all this was not enough.

"We must pass them though!" urged the doctor.

"Let us throw out the tanks--we have emptied them." said Kennedy.

"Over with them!"

"There they go!" panted Joe. "But it's hard to see ourselves dropping off this
way by piecemeal."

"Now, for your part, Joe, make no attempt to sacrifice yourself as you did the
other day! Whatever happens, swear to me that you will not leave us!"

"Have no fears, my master, we shall not be separated."

The Victoria had ascended some hundred and twenty feet, but the crest of the
mountain still towered above it. It was an almost perpendicular ridge that ended
in a regular wall rising abruptly in a straight line. It still rose more than two
hundred feet over the aeronauts.

"In ten minutes," said the doctor to himself, "our car will be dashed against
those rocks unless we succeed in passing them!"

"Well, doctor?" queried Joe.

"Keep nothing but our pemmican, and throw out all the heavy meat."

Thereupon the balloon was again lightened by some fifty pounds, and it rose
very perceptibly, but that was of little consequence, unless it got above the line
of the mountain-tops. The situation was terrifying. The Victoria was rushing on
with great rapidity. They could feel that she would be dashed to pieces--that the
shock would be fearful.

The doctor glanced around him in the car. It was nearly empty.


"If needs be, Dick, hold yourself in readiness to throw over your fire-arms!"

"Sacrifice my fire-arms?" repeated the sportsman, with intense feeling.

"My friend, I ask it; it will be absolutely necessary!"

"Samuel! Doctor!"

"Your guns, and your stock of powder and ball might cost us our lives."

"We are close to it!" cried Joe.

Sixty feet! The mountain still overtopped the balloon by sixty feet.

Joe took the blankets and other coverings and tossed them out; then, without
a word to Kennedy, he threw over several bags of bullets and lead.

The balloon went up still higher; it surmounted the dangerous ridge, and the
rays of the sun shone upon its uppermost extremity; but the car was still below
the level of certain broken masses of rock, against which it would inevitably be
dashed.

"Kennedy! Kennedy! throw out your fire-arms, or we are lost!" shouted the
doctor.

"Wait, sir; wait one moment!" they heard Joe exclaim, and, looking around,
they saw Joe disappear over the edge of the balloon.

"Joe! Joe!" cried Kennedy.

"Wretched man!" was the doctor's agonized expression.

The flat top of the mountain may have had about twenty feet in breadth at
this point, and, on the other side, the slope presented a less declivity. The car just
touched the level of this plane, which happened to be quite even, and it glided
over a soil composed of sharp pebbles that grated as it passed.

"We're over it! we're over it! we're clear!" cried out an exulting voice that
made Ferguson's heart leap to his throat.

The daring fellow was there, grasping the lower rim of the car, and running
afoot over the top of the mountain, thus lightening the balloon of his whole
weight. He had to hold on with all his strength, too, for it was likely to escape his
grasp at any Moment.

When he had reached the opposite declivity, and the abyss was before him,
Joe, by a vigorous effort, hoisted himself from the ground, and, clambering up
by the cordage, rejoined his friends.

"That was all!" he coolly ejaculated.

"My brave Joe! my friend!" said the doctor, with deep emotion.

"Oh! what I did," laughed the other, "was not for you; it was to save Mr.
Kennedy's rifle. I owed him that good turn for the affair with the Arab! I like to
pay my debts, and now we are even," added he, handing to the sportsman his
favorite weapon. "I'd feel very badly to see you deprived of it."

Kennedy heartily shook the brave fellow's hand, without being able to utter a


word.

The Victoria had nothing to do now but to descend. That was easy enough,
so that she was soon at a height of only two hundred feet from the ground, and
was then in equilibrium. The surface seemed very much broken as though by a
convulsion of nature. It presented numerous inequalities, which would have been
very difficult to avoid during the night with a balloon that could no longer be
controlled. Evening was coming on rapidly, and, notwithstanding his
repugnance, the doctor had to make up his mind to halt until morning.

"We'll now look for a favorable stopping-place," said he.

"Ah!" replied Kennedy, "you have made up your mind, then, at last?"

"Yes, I have for a long time been thinking over a plan which we'll try to put
into execution; it is only six o'clock in the evening, and we shall have time
enough. Throw out your anchors, Joe!"

Joe immediately obeyed, and the two anchors dangled below the balloon.

"I see large forests ahead of us," said the doctor; "we are going to sweep
along their tops, and we shall grapple to some tree, for nothing would make me
think of passing the night below, on the ground."

"But can we not descend?" asked Kennedy.

"To what purpose? I repeat that it would be dangerous for us to separate, and,
besides, I claim your help for a difficult piece of work."

The Victoria, which was skimming along the tops of immense forests, soon
came to a sharp halt. Her anchors had caught, and, the wind falling as dusk came
on, she remained motionlessly suspended above a vast field of verdure, formed
by the tops of a forest of sycamores.


CHAPTER FORTY-SECOND.

A Struggle of Generosity.--The Last Sacrifice.--The Dilating Apparatus. --
Joe's Adroitness.--Midnight.--The Doctor's Watch.--Kennedy's Watch. --The
Latter falls asleep at his Post.--The Fire.--The Howlings of the Natives.--Out of
Range.

Doctor Ferguson's first care was to take his bearings by stellar observation,
and he discovered that he was scarcely twenty-five miles from Senegal.

"All that we can manage to do, my friends," said he, after having pointed his
map, "is to cross the river; but, as there is neither bridge nor boat, we must, at all
hazards, cross it with the balloon, and, in order to do that, we must still lighten


W


up.
"But I don't exactly see how we can do that?" replied Kennedy, anxious
about his fire-arms, "unless one of us makes up his mind to sacrifice himself for


the rest,--that is, to stay behind, and, in my turn, I claim that honor."

"You, indeed!" remonstrated Joe; "ain't I used to--"

"The question now is, not to throw ourselves out of the car, but simply to
reach the coast of Africa on foot. I am a first-rate walker, a good sportsman, and-


W


"T'll never consent to it!" insisted Joe.

"Your generous rivalry is useless, my brave friends," said Ferguson; "I trust
that we shall not come to any such extremity: besides, if we did, instead of
separating, we should keep together, so as to make our way across the country in
company."

"That's the talk," said Joe; "a little tramp won't do us any harm."

"But before we try that," resumed the doctor, "we must employ a last means
of lightening the balloon."

"What will that be? I should like to see it," said Kennedy, incredulously.

"We must get rid of the cylinder-chests, the spiral, and the Buntzen battery.
Nine hundred pounds make a rather heavy load to carry through the air."

"But then, Samuel, how will you dilate your gas?"

"T shall not do so at all. We'll have to get along without it."

"But--"

"Listen, my friends: I have calculated very exactly the amount of ascensional
force left to us, and it is sufficient to carry us every one with the few objects that
remain. We shall make in all a weight of hardly five hundred pounds, including
the two anchors which I desire to keep."

"Dear doctor, you know more about the matter than we do; you are the sole
judge of the situation. Tell us what we ought to do, and we will do it."

"I am at your orders, master," added Joe.

"I repeat, my friends, that however serious the decision may appear, we must
sacrifice our apparatus."

"Let it go, then!" said Kennedy, promptly.

"To work!" said Joe.

It was no easy job. The apparatus had to be taken down piece by piece. First,
they took out the mixing reservoir, then the one belonging to the cylinder, and
lastly the tank in which the decomposition of the water was effected. The united
strength of all three travellers was required to detach these reservoirs from the
bottom of the car in which they had been so firmly secured; but Kennedy was so
strong, Joe so adroit, and the doctor so ingenious, that they finally succeeded.
The different pieces were thrown out, one after the other, and they disappeared
below, making huge gaps in the foliage of the sycamores.

"The black fellows will be mightily astonished," said Joe, "at finding things


like those in the woods; they'll make idols of them!"

The next thing to be looked after was the displacement of the pipes that were
fastened in the balloon and connected with the spiral. Joe succeeded in cutting
the caoutchouc jointings above the car, but when he came to the pipes he found it
more difficult to disengage them, because they were held by their upper
extremity and fastened by wires to the very circlet of the valve.

Then it was that Joe showed wonderful adroitness. In his naked feet, so as
not to scratch the covering, he succeeded by the aid of the network, and in spite
of the oscillations of the balloon, in climbing to the upper extremity, and after a
thousand difficulties, in holding on with one hand to that slippery surface, while
he detached the outside screws that secured the pipes in their place. These were
then easily taken out, and drawn away by the lower end, which was hermetically
sealed by means of a strong ligature.

The Victoria, relieved of this considerable weight, rose upright in the air and
tugged strongly at the anchor-rope.

About midnight this work ended without accident, but at the cost of most
severe exertion, and the trio partook of a luncheon of pemmican and cold punch,
as the doctor had no more fire to place at Joe's disposal.

Besides, the latter and Kennedy were dropping off their feet with fatigue.

"Lie down, my friends, and get some rest," said the doctor. "I'll take the first
watch; at two o'clock I'll waken Kennedy; at four, Kennedy will waken Joe, and
at six we'll start; and may Heaven have us in its keeping for this last day of the
trip!"

Without waiting to be coaxed, the doctor's two companions stretched
themselves at the bottom of the car and dropped into profound slumber on the
instant.

The night was calm. A few clouds broke against the last quarter of the moon,
whose uncertain rays scarcely pierced the darkness. Ferguson, resting his elbows
on the rim of the car, gazed attentively around him. He watched with close
attention the dark screen of foliage that spread beneath him, hiding the ground
from his view. The least noise aroused his suspicions, and he questioned even
the slightest rustling of the leaves.

He was in that mood which solitude makes more keenly felt, and during
which vague terrors mount to the brain. At the close of such a journey, after
having surmounted so many obstacles, and at the moment of touching the goal,
one's fears are more vivid, one's emotions keener. The point of arrival seems to
fly farther from our gaze.

Moreover, the present situation had nothing very consolatory about it. They
were in the midst of a barbarous country, and dependent upon a vehicle that


might fail them at any moment. The doctor no longer counted implicitly on his
balloon; the time had gone by when he manoevred it boldly because he felt sure
of it.

Under the influence of these impressions, the doctor, from time to time,
thought that he heard vague sounds in the vast forests around him; he even
fancied that he saw a swift gleam of fire shining between the trees. He looked
sharply and turned his night-glass toward the spot; but there was nothing to be
seen, and the profoundest silence appeared to return.

He had, no doubt, been under the dominion of a mere hallucination. He
continued to listen, but without hearing the slightest noise. When his watch had
expired, he woke Kennedy, and, enjoining upon him to observe the extremest
vigilance, took his place beside Joe, and fell sound asleep.

Kennedy, while still rubbing his eyes, which he could scarcely keep open,
calmly lit his pipe. He then ensconced himself in a corner, and began to smoke
vigorously by way of keeping awake.

The most absolute silence reigned around him; a light wind shook the tree-
tops and gently rocked the car, inviting the hunter to taste the sleep that stole
over him in spite of himself. He strove hard to resist it, and repeatedly opened
his eyes to plunge into the outer darkness one of those looks that see nothing; but
at last, yielding to fatigue, he sank back and slumbered.

How long he had been buried in this stupor he knew not, but he was
suddenly aroused from it by a strange, unexpected crackling sound.

He rubbed his eyes and sprang to his feet. An intense glare half-blinded him
and heated his cheek--the forest was in flames!

"Fire! fire!" he shouted, scarcely comprehending what had happened.

His two companions started up in alarm.

"What's the matter?" was the doctor's immediate exclamation.

"Fire!" said Joe. "But who could--"

At this moment loud yells were heard under the foliage, which was now
illuminated as brightly as the day.

"Ah! the savages!" cried Joe again; "they have set fire to the forest so as to
be the more certain of burning us up."

"The Talabas! Al-Hadji's marabouts, no doubt," said the doctor.

A circle of fire hemmed the Victoria in; the crackling of the dry wood
mingled with the hissing and sputtering of the green branches; the clambering
vines, the foliage, all the living part of this vegetation, writhed in the destructive
element. The eye took in nothing but one vast ocean of flame; the large trees
stood forth in black relief in this huge furnace, their branches covered with
glowing coals, while the whole blazing mass, the entire conflagration, was


reflected on the clouds, and the travellers could fancy themselves enveloped in a
hollow globe of fire.

"Let us escape to the ground!" shouted Kennedy, "it is our only chance of
safety!"

But Ferguson checked him with a firm grasp, and, dashing at the anchor-
rope, severed it with one well-directed blow of his hatchet. Meanwhile, the
flames, leaping up at the balloon, already quivered on its illuminated sides; but
the Victoria, released from her fastenings, spun upward a thousand feet into the
air.

Frightful yells resounded through the forest, along with the report of fire-
arms, while the balloon, caught in a current of air that rose with the dawn of day,
was borne to the westward.

It was now four o'clock in the morning.


CHAPTER FORTY-THIRD.

The Talabas.--The Pursuit.--A Devastated Country.--The Wind begins to
fall.--The Victoria sinks.--The last of the Provisions.--The Leaps of the Balloon.-
-A Defence with Fire-arms.--The Wind freshens.--The Senegal River.--The
Cataracts of Gouina.--The Hot Air.--The Passage of the River.

"Had we not taken the precaution to lighten the balloon yesterday evening,
we should have been lost beyond redemption," said the doctor, after a long
silence.

"See what's gained by doing things at the right time!" replied Joe. "One gets
out of scrapes then, and nothing is more natural."

"We are not out of danger yet," said the doctor.

"What do you still apprehend?" queried Kennedy. "The balloon can't descend
without your permission, and even were it to do so--"

"Were it to do so, Dick? Look!"

They had just passed the borders of the forest, and the three friends could see
some thirty mounted men clad in broad pantaloons and the floating bournouses.
They were armed, some with lances, and others with long muskets, and they
were following, on their quick, fiery little steeds, the direction of the balloon,
which was moving at only moderate speed.

When they caught sight of the aeronauts, they uttered savage cries, and
brandished their weapons. Anger and menace could be read upon their swarthy
faces, made more ferocious by thin but bristling beards. Meanwhile they
galloped along without difficulty over the low levels and gentle declivities that
lead down to the Senegal.


"It is, indeed, they!" said the doctor; "the cruel Talabas! the ferocious
marabouts of Al-Hadji! I would rather find myself in the middle of the forest
encircled by wild beasts than fall into the hands of these banditti."

"They haven't a very obliging look!" assented Kennedy; "and they are rough,
stalwart fellows."

"Happily those brutes can't fly," remarked Joe; "and that's something."

"See," said Ferguson, "those villages in ruins, those huts burned down--that
is their work! Where vast stretches of cultivated land were once seen, they have
brought barrenness and devastation."

"At all events, however," interposed Kennedy, "they can't overtake us; and, if
we succeed in putting the river between us and them, we are safe."

"Perfectly, Dick," replied Ferguson; "but we must not fall to the ground!"
and, as he said this, he glanced at the barometer.

"In any case, Joe," added Kennedy, "it would do us no harm to look to our
fire-arms."

"No harm in the world, Mr. Dick! We are lucky that we didn't scatter them
along the road."

"My rifle!" said the sportsman. "I hope that I shall never be separated from
it!"

And so saying, Kennedy loaded the pet piece with the greatest care, for he
had plenty of powder and ball remaining.

"At what height are we?" he asked the doctor.

"About seven hundred and fifty feet; but we no longer have the power of
seeking favorable currents, either going up or coming down. We are at the mercy
of the balloon!"

"That is vexatious!" rejoined Kennedy. "The wind is poor; but if we had
come across a hurricane like some of those we met before, these vile brigands
would have been out of sight long ago."

"The rascals follow us at their leisure," said Joe. "They're only at a short
gallop. Quite a nice little ride!"

"If we were within range," sighed the sportsman, "I should amuse myself
with dismounting a few of them."

"Exactly," said the doctor; "but then they would have you within range also,
and our balloon would offer only too plain a target to the bullets from their long
guns; and, if they were to make a hole in it, I leave you to judge what our
situation would be!"

The pursuit of the Talabas continued all morning; and by eleven o'clock the
aeronauts had made scarcely fifteen miles to the westward.

The doctor was anxiously watching for the least cloud on the horizon. He


feared, above all things, a change in the atmosphere. Should he be thrown back
toward the Niger, what would become of him? Besides, he remarked that the
balloon tended to fall considerably. Since the start, he had already lost more than
three hundred feet, and the Senegal must be about a dozen miles distant. At his
present rate of speed, he could count upon travelling only three hours longer.

At this moment his attention was attracted by fresh cries. The Talabas
appeared to be much excited, and were spurring their horses.

The doctor consulted his barometer, and at once discovered the cause of
these symptoms.

"Are we descending?" asked Kennedy.

"Yes!" replied the doctor.

"The mischief!" thought Joe

In the lapse of fifteen minutes the Victoria was only one hundred and fifty
feet above the ground; but the wind was much stronger than before.

The Talabas checked their horses, and soon a volley of musketry pealed out
on the air.

"Too far, you fools!" bawled Joe. "I think it would be well to keep those
scamps at a distance."

And, as he spoke, he aimed at one of the horsemen who was farthest to the
front, and fired. The Talaba fell headlong, and, his companions halting for a
moment, the balloon gained upon them.

"They are prudent!" said Kennedy.

"Because they think that they are certain to take us," replied the doctor; "and,
they will succeed if we descend much farther. We must, absolutely, get higher
into the air."

"What can we throw out?" asked Joe.

"All that remains of our stock of pemmican; that will be thirty pounds less
weight to carry."

"Out it goes, sir!" said Joe, obeying orders.

The car, which was now almost touching the ground, rose again, amid the
cries of the Talabas; but, half an hour later, the balloon was again falling rapidly,
because the gas was escaping through the pores of the covering.

Ere long the car was once more grazing the soil, and Al-Hadji's black riders
rushed toward it; but, as frequently happens in like cases, the balloon had
scarcely touched the surface ere it rebounded, and only came down again a mile
away.

"So we shall not escape!" said Kennedy, between his teeth.

"Throw out our reserved store of brandy, Joe," cried the doctor; "our
instruments, and every thing that has any weight, even to our last anchor,


because go they must!"

Joe flung out the barometers and thermometers, but all that amounted to
little; and the balloon, which had risen for an instant, fell again toward the
ground.

The Talabas flew toward it, and at length were not more than two hundred
Paces away.

"Throw out the two fowling-pieces!" shouted Ferguson.

"Not without discharging them, at least," responded the sportsman; and four
shots in quick succession struck the thick of the advancing group of horsemen.
Four Talabas fell, amid the frantic howls and imprecations of their comrades.

The Victoria ascended once more, and made some enormous leaps, like a
huge gum-elastic ball, bounding and rebounding through the air. A strange sight
it was to see these unfortunate men endeavoring to escape by those huge aerial
strides, and seeming, like the giant Antaeus, to receive fresh strength every time
they touched the earth. But this situation had to terminate. It was now nearly
noon; the Victoria was getting empty and exhausted, and assuming a more and
more elongated form every instant. Its outer covering was becoming flaccid, and
floated loosely in the air, and the folds of the silk rustled and grated on each
other.

"Heaven abandons us!" said Kennedy; "we have to fall!"

Joe made no answer. He kept looking intently at his master.

"No!" said the latter; "we have more than one hundred and fifty pounds yet
to throw out."

"What can it be, then?" said Kennedy, thinking that the doctor must be going
mad.

"The car!" was his reply; "we can cling to the network. There we can hang
on in the meshes until we reach the river. Quick! quick!"

And these daring men did not hesitate a moment to avail themselves of this
last desperate means of escape. They clutched the network, as the doctor
directed, and Joe, holding on by one hand, with the other cut the cords that
suspended the car; and the latter dropped to the ground just as the balloon was
sinking for the last time.

"Hurrah! hurrah!" shouted the brave fellow exultingly, as the Victoria, once
more relieved, shot up again to a height of three hundred feet.

The Talabas spurred their horses, which now came tearing on at a furious
gallop; but the balloon, falling in with a much more favorable wind, shot ahead
of them, and was rapidly carried toward a hill that stretched across the horizon to
the westward. This was a circumstance favorable to the aeronauts, because they
could rise over the hill, while Al-Hadji's horde had to diverge to the northward in


order to pass this obstacle.

The three friends still clung to the network. They had been able to fasten it
under their feet, where it had formed a sort of swinging pocket.

Suddenly, after they had crossed the hill, the doctor exclaimed: "The river!
the river! the Senegal, my friends!"

And about two miles ahead of them, there was indeed the river rolling along
its broad mass of water, while the farther bank, which was low and fertile,
offered a sure refuge, and a place favorable for a descent.

"Another quarter of an hour," said Ferguson, "and we are saved!"

But it was not to happen thus; the empty balloon descended slowly upon a
tract almost entirely bare of vegetation. It was made up of long slopes and stony
plains, a few bushes and some coarse grass, scorched by the sun.

The Victoria touched the ground several times, and rose again, but her
rebound was diminishing in height and length. At the last one, it caught by the
upper part of the network in the lofty branches of a baobab, the only tree that
stood there, solitary and alone, in the midst of the waste.

"It's all over," said Kennedy.

"And at a hundred paces only from the river!" groaned Joe.

The three hapless aeronauts descended to the ground, and the doctor drew his
companions toward the Senegal.

At this point the river sent forth a prolonged roaring; and when Ferguson
reached its bank, he recognized the falls of Gouina. But not a boat, not a living
creature was to be seen. With a breadth of two thousand feet, the Senegal
precipitates itself for a height of one hundred and fifty, with a thundering
reverberation. It ran, where they saw it, from east to west, and the line of rocks
that barred its course extended from north to south. In the midst of the falls,
rocks of strange forms started up like huge ante-diluvian animals, petrified there
amid the waters.

The impossibility of crossing this gulf was self-evident, and Kennedy could
not restrain a gesture of despair.

But Dr. Ferguson, with an energetic accent of undaunted daring, exclaimed--

"All is not over!"

"I knew it," said Joe, with that confidence in his master which nothing could
ever shake.

The sight of the dried-up grass had inspired the doctor with a bold idea. It
was the last chance of escape. He led his friends quickly back to where they had
left the covering of the balloon.

"We have at least an hour's start of those banditti," said he; "let us lose no
time, my friends; gather a quantity of this dried grass; I want a hundred pounds


of it, at least."

"For what purpose?" asked Kennedy, surprised.

"I have no more gas; well, I'll cross the river with hot air!"

"Ah, doctor," exclaimed Kennedy, "you are, indeed, a great man!"

Joe and Kennedy at once went to work, and soon had an immense pile of
dried grass heaped up near the baobab.

In the mean time, the doctor had enlarged the orifice of the balloon by
cutting it open at the lower end. He then was very careful to expel the last
remnant of hydrogen through the valve, after which he heaped up a quantity of
grass under the balloon, and set fire to it.

It takes but a little while to inflate a balloon with hot air. A head of one
hundred and eighty degrees is sufficient to diminish the weight of the air it
contains to the extent of one-half, by rarefying it. Thus, the Victoria quickly
began to assume a more rounded form. There was no lack of grass; the fire was
kept in full blast by the doctor's assiduous efforts, and the balloon grew fuller
every instant.

It was then a quarter to four o'clock.

At this moment the band of Talabas reappeared about two miles to the
northward, and the three friends could hear their cries, and the clatter of their
horses galloping at full speed.

"In twenty minutes they will be here!" said Kennedy.

"More grass! more grass, Joe! In ten minutes we shall have her full of hot
air."

"Here it is, doctor!"

The Victoria was now two-thirds inflated.

"Come, my friends, let us take hold of the network, as we did before."

"All right!" they answered together.

In about ten minutes a few jerking motions by the balloon indicated that it
was disposed to start again. The Talabas were approaching. They were hardly
five hundred paces away.

"Hold on fast!" cried Ferguson.

"Have no fear, master--have no fear!"

And the doctor, with his foot pushed another heap of grass upon the fire.

With this the balloon, now completely inflated by the increased temperature,
moved away, sweeping the branches of the baobab in her flight.

"We're off!" shouted Joe.

A volley of musketry responded to his exclamation. A bullet even ploughed
his shoulder; but Kennedy, leaning over, and discharging his rifle with one hand,
brought another of the enemy to the ground.


Cries of fury exceeding all description hailed the departure of the balloon,
which had at once ascended nearly eight hundred feet. A swift current caught
and swept it along with the most alarming oscillations, while the intrepid doctor
and his friends saw the gulf of the cataracts yawning below them.

Ten minutes later, and without having exchanged a word, they descended
gradually toward the other bank of the river.

There, astonished, speechless, terrified, stood a group of men clad in the
French uniform. Judge of their amazement when they saw the balloon rise from
the right bank of the river. They had well-nigh taken it for some celestial
phenomenon, but their officers, a lieutenant of marines and a naval ensign,
having seen mention made of Dr. Ferguson's daring expedition, in the European
papers, quickly explained the real state of the case.

The balloon, losing its inflation little by little, settled with the daring
travellers still clinging to its network; but it was doubtful whether it would reach
the land. At once some of the brave Frenchmen rushed into the water and caught
the three aeronauts in their arms just as the Victoria fell at the distance of a few
fathoms from the left bank of the Senegal.

"Dr. Ferguson!" exclaimed the lieutenant.

"The same, sir," replied the doctor, quietly, "and his two friends."

The Frenchmen escorted our travellers from the river, while the balloon,
half-empty, and borne away by a swift current, sped on, to plunge, like a huge
bubble, headlong with the waters of the Senegal, into the cataracts of Gouina.

"The poor Victoria!" was Joe's farewell remark.

The doctor could not restrain a tear, and extending his hands his two friends
wrung them silently with that deep emotion which requires no spoken words.


CHAPTER FORTY-FOURTH.

Conclusion.--The Certificate.--The French Settlements.--The Post of
Medina.--The Basilic.--Saint Louis.--The English Frigate.--The Return to
London.

The expedition upon the bank of the river had been sent by the governor of
Senegal. It consisted of two officers, Messrs. Dufraisse, lieutenant of marines,
and Rodamel, naval ensign, and with these were a sergeant and seven soldiers.
For two days they had been engaged in reconnoitring the most favorable
situation for a post at Gouina, when they became witnesses of Dr. Ferguson's
arrival.

The warm greetings and felicitations of which our travellers were the
recipients may be imagined. The Frenchmen, and they alone, having had ocular


proof of the accomplishment of the daring project, naturally became Dr.
Ferguson's witnesses. Hence the doctor at once asked them to give their official
testimony of his arrival at the cataracts of Gouina.

"You would have no objection to signing a certificate of the fact, would
you?" he inquired of Lieutenant Dufraisse.

"At your orders!" the latter instantly replied.

The Englishmen were escorted to a provisional post established on the bank
of the river, where they found the most assiduous attention, and every thing to
supply their wants. And there the following certificate was drawn up in the terms
in which it appears to-day, in the archives of the Royal Geographical Society of
London:

"We, the undersigned, do hereby declare that, on the day herein mentioned,
we witnessed the arrival of Dr. Ferguson and his two companions, Richard
Kennedy and Joseph Wilson, clinging to the cordage and network of a balloon,
and that the said balloon fell at a distance of a few paces from us into the river,
and being swept away by the current was lost in the cataracts of Gouina. In
testimony whereof, we have hereunto set our hands and seals beside those of the
persons hereinabove named, for the information of all whom it may concern.

"Done at the Cataracts of Gouina, on the 24th of May, 1862. "(Signed),
"SAMUEL FERGUSON "RICHARD KENNEDY, "JOSEPH WILSON,
"DUFRAISSE, Lieutenant of Marines, "RODAMEL, Naval Ensign, "DUFAYS,
Sergeant, "FLIPPEAU, MAYOR, } "PELISSIER, LOROIS, } Privates."
RASCAGNET, GUIL- } LON, LEBEL, }

Here ended the astonishing journey of Dr. Ferguson and his brave
companions, as vouched for by undeniable testimony; and they found
themselves among friends in the midst of most hospitable tribes, whose relations
with the French settlements are frequent and amicable.

They had arrived at Senegal on Saturday, the 24th of May, and on the 27th of
the same month they reached the post of Medina, situated a little farther to the
north, but on the river.

There the French officers received them with open arms, and lavished upon
them all the resources of their hospitality. Thus aided, the doctor and his friends
were enabled to embark almost immediately on the small steamer called the
Basilic, which ran down to the mouth of the river.

Two weeks later, on the 10th of June, they arrived at Saint Louis, where the
governor gave them a magnificent reception, and they recovered completely
from their excitement and fatigue.

Besides, Joe said to every one who chose to listen:

That was a stupid trip of ours, after all, and I wouldn't advise any body who


is greedy for excitement to undertake it. It gets very tiresome at the last, and if it
hadn't been for the adventures on Lake Tchad and at the Senegal River, I do
believe that we'd have died of yawning."

An English frigate was just about to sail, and the three travellers procured
passage on board of her. On the 25th of June they arrived at Portsmouth, and on
the next day at London.

We will not describe the reception they got from the Royal Geographical
Society, nor the intense curiosity and consideration of which they became the
objects. Kennedy set off, at once, for Edinburgh, with his famous rifle, for he
was in haste to relieve the anxiety of his faithful old housekeeper.

The doctor and his devoted Joe remained the same men that we have known
them, excepting that one change took place at their own suggestion.

They ceased to be master and servant, in order to become bosom friends.

The journals of all Europe were untiring in their praises of the bold
explorers, and the Daily Telegraph struck off an edition of three hundred and
seventy-seven thousand copies on the day when it published a sketch of the trip.

Doctor Ferguson, at a public meeting of the Royal Geographical Society,
gave a recital of his journey through the air, and obtained for himself and his
companions the golden medal set apart to reward the most remarkable exploring
expedition of the year 1862.


The first result of Dr. Ferguson's expedition was to establish, in the most
precise manner, the facts and geographical surveys reported by Messrs. Barth,
Burton, Speke, and others. Thanks to the still more recent expeditions of Messrs.
Speke and Grant, De Heuglin and Muntzinger, who have been ascending to the
sources of the Nile, and penetrating to the centre of Africa, we shall be enabled
ere long to verify, in turn, the discoveries of Dr. Ferguson in that vast region
comprised between the fourteenth and thirty-third degrees of east longitude.


GODFREY MORGAN


A CALIFORNIAN MYSTERY


BY


JULES VERNE


CHAPTER I.

IN WHICH THE READER HAS THE OPPORTUNITY OF BUYING AN
ISLAND IN THE PACIFIC OCEAN.

"An island to sell, for cash, to the highest bidder!" said Dean Felporg, the
auctioneer, standing behind his rostrum in the room where the conditions of the
singular sale were being noisily discussed.

"Island for sale! island for sale!" repeated in shrill tones again and again
Gingrass, the crier, who was threading his way in and out of the excited crowd
closely packed inside the largest saloon in the auction mart at No. 10,
Sacramento Street.

The crowd consisted not only of a goodly number of Americans from the
States of Utah, Oregon, and California, but also of a few Frenchmen, who form
quite a sixth of the population.

Mexicans were there enveloped in their sarapes; Chinamen in their large-
sleeved tunics, pointed shoes, and conical hats; one or two Kanucks from the
coast; and even a sprinkling of Black Feet, Grosventres, or Flatheads, from the
banks of the Trinity river.

The scene is in San Francisco, the capital of California, but not at the period
when the placer-mining fever was raging--from 1849 to 1852. San Francisco was
no longer what it had been then, a caravanserai, a terminus, an inn, where for a
night there slept the busy men who were hastening to the gold-fields west of the
Sierra Nevada. At the end of some twenty years the old unknown Yerba-Buena
had given place to a town unique of its kind, peopled by 100,000 inhabitants,
built under the shelter of a couple of hills, away from the shore, but stretching
off to the farthest heights in the background--a city in short which has dethroned
Lima, Santiago, Valparaiso, and every other rival, and which the Americans have
made the queen of the Pacific, the "glory of the western coast!"

It was the 15th of May, and the weather was still cold. In California, subject
as it is to the direct action of the polar currents, the first weeks of this month are
somewhat similar to the last weeks of March in Central Europe. But the cold was
hardly noticeable in the thick of the auction crowd. The bell with its incessant
clangour had brought together an enormous throng, and quite a summer
temperature caused the drops of perspiration to glisten on the foreheads of the
spectators which the cold outside would have soon solidified.

Do not imagine that all these folks had come to the auction-room with the


intention of buying. I might say that all of them had but come to see. Who was
going to be mad enough, even if he were rich enough, to purchase an isle of the
Pacific, which the government had in some eccentric moment decided to sell?
Would the reserve price ever be reached? Could anybody be found to work up
the bidding? If not, it would scarcely be the fault of the public crier, who tried
his best to tempt buyers by his shoutings and gestures, and the flowery
metaphors of his harangue. People laughed at him, but they did not seem much
influenced by him.

"An island! an isle to sell!" repeated Gingrass.

"But not to buy!" answered an Irishman, whose pocket did not hold enough
to pay for a single pebble.

"An island which at the valuation will not fetch six dollars an acre!" said the
auctioneer.

"And which won't pay an eighth per cent.!" replied a big farmer, who was
well acquainted with agricultural speculations.

"An isle which measures quite sixty-four miles round and has an area of two
hundred and twenty-five thousand acres!"

"Is it solid on its foundation?" asked a Mexican, an old customer at the
liquor-bars, whose personal solidity seemed rather doubtful at the moment.

"An isle with forests still virgin!" repeated the crier, "with prairies, hills,
watercourses--"

"Warranted?" asked a Frenchman, who seemed rather inclined to nibble.

"Yes! warranted!" added Felporg, much too old at his trade to be moved by
the chaff of the public.

"For two years?"

"To the end of the world!"

"Beyond that?"

"A freehold island!" repeated the crier, "an island without a single noxious
animal, no wild beasts, no reptiles!--"

"No birds?" added a wag.

"No insects?" inquired another.

"An island for the highest bidder!" said Dean Felporg, beginning again.
"Come, gentlemen, come! Have a little courage in your pockets! Who wants an
island in perfect state of repair, never been used, an island in the Pacific, that
ocean of oceans? The valuation is a mere nothing! It is put at eleven hundred
thousand dollars, is there any one will bid? Who speaks first? You, sir?--you,
over there nodding your head like a porcelain mandarin? Here is an island! a
really good island! Who says an island?"

"Pass it round!" said a voice as if they were dealing with a picture or a vase.


And the room shouted with laughter, but not a half-dollar was bid.

However, if the lot could not be passed round, the map of the island was at
the public disposal. The whereabouts of the portion of the globe under
consideration could be accurately ascertained. There was neither surprise nor
disappointment to be feared in that respect. Situation, orientation, outline,
altitudes, levels, hydrography, climatology, lines of communication, all these
were easily to be verified in advance. People were not buying a pig in a poke,
and most undoubtedly there could be no mistake as to the nature of the goods on
sale. Moreover, the innumerable journals of the United States, especially those of
California, with their dailies, bi-weeklies, weeklies, bi-monthlies, monthlies,
their reviews, magazines, bulletins, &c., had been for several months directing
constant attention to the island whose sale by auction had been authorized by
Act of Congress.

The island was Spencer Island, which lies in the west-south-west of the Bay
of San Francisco, about 460 miles from the Californian coast, in 32° 15' north
latitude, and 145° 18' west longitude, reckoning from Greenwich. It would be
impossible to imagine a more isolated position, quite out of the way of all
maritime or commercial traffic, although Spencer Island was relatively, not very
far off, and situated practically in American waters. But thereabouts the regular
currents diverging to the north and south have formed a kind of lake of calms,
which is sometimes known as the "Whirlpool of Fleurieu."

It is in the centre of this enormous eddy, which has hardly an appreciable
movement, that Spencer Island is situated. And so it is sighted by very few ships.
The main routes of the Pacific, which join the new to the old continent, and lead
away to China or Japan, run in a more southerly direction. Sailing-vessels would
meet with endless calms in the Whirlpool of Fleurieu; and steamers, which
always take the shortest road, would gain no advantage by crossing it. Hence
ships of neither class know anything of Spencer Island, which rises above the
waters like the isolated summit of one of the submarine mountains of the Pacific.
Truly, for a man wishing to flee from the noise of the world, seeking quiet in
solitude, what could be better than this island, lost within a few hundred miles of
the coast? For a voluntary Robinson Crusoe, it would be the very ideal of its
kind! Only of course he must pay for it.

And now, why did the United States desire to part with the island? Was it for
some whim? No! A great nation cannot act on caprice in any matter, however
simple. The truth was this: situated as it was, Spencer Island had for a long time
been known as a Station perfectly useless. There could be no practical result
from settling there. In a military point of view it was of no importance, for it
only commanded an absolutely deserted portion of the Pacific. In a commercial


point of view there was a similar want of importance, for the products would not
pay the freight either inwards or outwards. For a criminal colony it was too far
from the coast. And to occupy it in any way, would be a very expensive
undertaking. So it had remained deserted from time immemorial, and Congress,
composed of "eminently practical" men, had resolved to put it up for sale--on
one condition only, and that was, that its purchaser should be a free American
citizen. There was no intention of giving away the island for nothing, and so the
reserve price had been fixed at $1,100,000. This amount for a financial society
dealing with such matters was a mere bagatelle, if the transaction could offer any
advantages; but as we need hardly repeat, it offered none, and competent men
attached no more value to this detached portion of the United States, than to one
of the islands lost beneath the glaciers of the Pole.

In one sense, however, the amount was considerable. A man must be rich to
pay for this hobby, for in any case it would not return him a halfpenny per cent.
He would even have to be immensely rich for the transaction was to be a "cash"
one, and even in the United States it is as yet rare to find citizens with
$1,100,000 in their pockets, who would care to throw them into the water
without hope of return.

And Congress had decided not to sell the island under the price. Eleven
hundred thousand dollars, not a cent less, or Spencer Island would remain the
property of the Union.

It was hardly likely that any one would be mad enough to buy it on the
terms.

Besides, it was expressly reserved that the proprietor, if one offered, should
not become king of Spencer Island, but president of a republic. He would gain
no right to have subjects, but only fellow-citizens, who could elect him for a
fixed time, and would be free from re-electing him indefinitely. Under any
circumstances he was forbidden to play at monarchy. The Union could never
tolerate the foundation of a kingdom, no matter how small, in American waters.

This reservation was enough to keep off many an ambitious millionaire,
many an aged nabob, who might like to compete with the kings of the Sandwich,
the Marquesas, and the other archipelagoes of the Pacific.

In short, for one reason or other, nobody presented himself. Time was getting
on, the crier was out of breath in his efforts to secure a buyer, the auctioneer
orated without obtaining a single specimen of those nods which his estimable
fraternity are so quick to discover; and the reserve price was not even mentioned.

However, if the hammer was not wearied with oscillating above the rostrum,
the crowd was not wearied with waiting around it. The joking continued to
increase, and the chaff never ceased for a moment. One individual offered two


dollars for the island, costs included. Another said that a man ought to be paid
that for taking it.

And all the time the crier was heard with,--

"An island to sell! an island for sale!"

And there was no one to buy it.

"Will you guarantee that there are flats there?" said Stumpy, the grocer of
Merchant Street, alluding to the deposits so famous in alluvial gold-mining.

"No," answered the auctioneer, "but it is not impossible that there are, and
the State abandons all its rights over the gold lands."

"Haven't you got a volcano?" asked Oakhurst, the bar-keeper of Montgomery
Street.

"No volcanoes," replied Dean Felporg, "if there were, we could not sell at
this price!"

An immense shout of laughter followed.

"An island to sell! an island for sale!" yelled Gingrass, whose lungs tired
themselves out to no purpose.

"Only a dollar! only a half-dollar! only a cent above the reserve!" said the
auctioneer for the last time, "and I will knock it down! Once! Twice!"

Perfect silence.

"If nobody bids we must put the lot back! Once! Twice!

"Twelve hundred thousand dollars!"

The four words rang through the room like four shots from a revolver.

The crowd, suddenly speechless, turned towards the bold man who had dared
to bid.

It was William W. Kolderup, of San Francisco.


CHAPTER II.

HOW WILLIAM W. KOLDERUP, OF SAN FRANCISCO, WAS AT
LOGGERHEADS WITH J. R. TASKINAR, OF STOCKTON.

A man extraordinarily rich, who counted dollars by the million as other men
do by the thousand; such was William W. Kolderup.

People said he was richer than the Duke of Westminster, whose income is
some $4,000,000 a year, and who can spend his $10,000 a day, or seven dollars
every minute; richer than Senator Jones, of Nevada, who has $35,000,000 in the
funds; richer than Mr. Mackay himself, whose annual $13,750,000 give him
$1560 per hour, or half-a-dollar to spend every second of his life.

I do not mention such minor millionaires as the Rothschilds, the Vanderbilts,
the Dukes of Northumberland, or the Stewarts, nor the directors of the powerful


bank of California, and other opulent personages of the old and new worlds
whom William W. Kolderup would have been able to comfortably pension. He
could, without inconvenience, have given away a million just as you and I might
give away a Shilling.

It was in developing the early placer-mining enterprises in California that our
worthy speculator had laid the solid foundations of his incalculable fortune. He
was the principal associate of Captain Sutter, the Swiss, in the localities, where,
in 1848, the first traces were discovered. Since then, luck and shrewdness
combined had helped him on, and he had interested himself in all the great
enterprises of both worlds. He threw himself boldly into commercial and
industrial speculations. His inexhaustible funds were the life of hundreds of
factories, his ships were on every sea. His wealth increased not in arithmetical
but in geometrical progression. People spoke of him as one of those few
"milliardaires" who never know how much they are worth. In reality he knew
almost to a dollar, but he never boasted of it.

At this very moment when we introduce him to our readers with all the
consideration such a many-sided man merits, William W. Kolderup had 2000
branch offices scattered over the globe, 80,000 employés in America, Europe,
and Australia, 300,000 correspondents, a fleet of 500 ships which continually
ploughed the ocean for his profit, and he was spending not less than a million a
year in bill-stamps and postages. In short, he was the honour and glory of
opulent Frisco--the nickname familiarly given by the Americans to the
Californian capital.

A bid from William W. Kolderup could not but be a serious one. And when
the crowd in the auction room had recognized who it was that by $100,000 had
capped the reserve price of Spencer Island, there was an irresistible sensation,
the chaffing ceased instantly, jokes gave place to interjections of admiration, and
cheers resounded through the saloon. Then a deep silence succeeded to the
hubbub, eyes grew bigger, and ears opened wider. For our part had we been there
we would have had to hold our breath that we might lose nothing of the exciting
scene which would follow should any one dare to bid against William W.
Kolderup.

But was it probable? Was it even possible?

No! And at the outset it was only necessary to look at William W. Kolderup
to feel convinced that he could never yield on a question where his financial
gallantry was at stake.

He was a big, powerful man, with huge head, large shoulders, well-built
limbs, firmly knit, and tough as iron. His quiet but resolute look was not
willingly cast downwards, his grey hair, brushed up in front, was as abundant as


if he were still young. The straight lines of his nose formed a geometrically-
drawn right-angled triangle. No moustache; his beard cut in Yankee fashion
bedecked his chin, and the two upper points met at the opening of the lips and
ran up to the temples in pepper-and-salt whiskers; teeth of snowy whiteness were
symmetrically placed on the borders of a clean-cut mouth. The head of one of
those true kings of men who rise in the tempest and face the storm. No hurricane
could bend that head, so solid was the neck which supported it. In these battles
of the bidders each of its nods meant an additional hundred thousand dollars.

There was no one to dispute with him.

"Twelve hundred thousand dollars--twelve hundred thousand!" said the
auctioneer, with that peculiar accent which men of his vocation find most
effective.

"Going at twelve hundred thousand dollars!" repeated Gingrass the crier.

"You could safely bid more than that," said Oakhurst, the bar-keeper;
"William Kolderup will never give in."

"He knows no one will chance it," answered the grocer from Merchant
Street.

Repeated cries of "Hush!" told the two worthy tradesmen to be quiet. All
wished to hear. All hearts palpitated. Dare any one raise his voice in answer to
the voice of William W. Kolderup? He, magnificent to look upon, never moved.
There he remained as calm as if the matter had no interest for him. But--and this
those near to him noticed--his eyes were like revolvers loaded with dollars,
ready to fire.

"Nobody speaks?" asked Dean Felporg.

Nobody spoke.

"Once! Twice!"

"Once! Twice!" repeated Gingrass, quite accustomed to this little dialogue
with his chief.

"Going!"

"Going!"

"For twelve--hundred--thousand--dollars--Spencer--Island--com--plete!"

"For twelve--hundred--thousand--dollars!"

"That is so? No mistake?"

"No withdrawal?"

"For twelve hundred thousand dollars, Spencer Island!"

The waistcoats rose and fell convulsively. Could it be possible that at the last
second a higher bid would come? Felporg with his right hand stretched on the
table was shaking his ivory hammer--one rap, two raps, and the deed would be
done.


The public could not have been more absorbed in the face of a summary
application of the law of Justice Lynch!

The hammer slowly fell, almost touched the table, rose again, hovered an
instant like a sword which pauses ere the drawer cleaves the victim in twain;
then it flashed swiftly downwards.

But before the sharp rap could be given, a voice was heard giving utterance
to these four words,--

"Thirteen--hundred--thousand--dollars!"

There was a preliminary "Ah!" of general stupefaction, then a second "Ah!"
of not less general satisfaction. Another bidder had presented himself! There was
going to be a fight after all!

But who was the reckless individual who had dared to come to dollar strokes
with William W. Kolderup of San Francisco?

It was J. R. Taskinar, of Stockton.

J. R. Taskinar was rich, but he was more than proportionately fat. He
weighed 490 lbs. If he had only run second in the last fat-man show at Chicago,
it was because he had not been allowed time to finish his dinner, and had lost
about a dozen pounds.

This colossus, who had had to have special chairs made for his portly person
to rest upon, lived at Stockton, on the San Joachim. Stockton is one of the most
important cities in California, one of the depot centres for the mines of the south,
the rival of Sacramento the centre for the mines of the north. There the ships
embark the largest quantity of Californian corn.

Not only had the development of the mines and speculations in wheat
furnished J. R. Taskinar with the occasion of gaining an enormous fortune, but
petroleum, like another Pactolus, had run through his treasury. Besides, he was a
great gambler, a lucky gambler, and he had found "poker" most prodigal of its
favours to him.

But if he was a Croesus, he was also a rascal; and no one would have
addressed him as "honourable," although the title in those parts is so much in
vogue. After all, he was a good war-horse, and perhaps more was put on his back
than was justly his due. One thing was certain, and that was that on many an
occasion he had not hesitated to use his "Derringer"--the Californian revolver.

Now J. R. Taskinar particularly detested William W. Kolderup. He envied
him for his wealth, his position, and his reputation. He despised him as a fat man
despises a lean one. It was not the first time that the merchant of Stockton had
endeavoured to do the merchant of San Francisco out of some business or other,
good or bad, simply owing to a feeling of rivalry. William W. Kolderup
thoroughly knew his man, and on all occasions treated him with scorn enough to


drive him to distraction.

The last success which J. R. Taskinar could not forgive his opponent was that
gained in the struggle over the state elections. Notwithstanding his efforts, his
threats, and his libels, not to mention the millions of dollars squandered by his
electoral courtiers, it was William W. Kolderup who sat in his seat in the
Legislative Council of Sacramento.

J. R. Taskinar had learnt--how, I cannot tell--that it was the intention of
William W. Kolderup to acquire possession of Spencer Island. This island
seemed doubtless as useless to him as it did to his rival. No matter. Here was
another chance for fighting, and perhaps for conquering. J. R. Taskinar would
not allow it to escape him.

And that is why J. R. Taskinar had come to the auction room among the
curious crowd who could not be aware of his designs, why at all points he had
prepared his batteries, why before opening fire, he had waited till his opponent
had covered the reserve, and why when William W. Kolderup had made his bid
of--

"Twelve hundred thousand dollars!"

J. R. Taskinar at the moment when William W. Kolderup thought he had
definitely secured the island, woke up with the words shouted in stentorian
tones,--

"Thirteen hundred thousand dollars!"

Everybody as we have seen turned to look at him.

"Fat Taskinar!"

The name passed from mouth to mouth. Yes. Fat Taskinar! He was known
well enough! His corpulence had been the theme of many an article in the
journals of the Union.

I am not quite sure which mathematician it was who had demonstrated by
transcendental calculations, that so great was his mass that it actually influenced
that of our satellite and in an appreciable manner disturbed the elements of the
lunar orbit.

But it was not J. R. Taskinar's physical composition which interested the
spectators in the room. It was something far different which excited them; it was
that he had entered into direct public rivalry with William W. Kolderup. It was a
fight of heroes, dollar versus dollar, which had opened, and I do not know which
of the two coffers would turn out to be best lined. Enormously rich were both
these mortal enemies! After the first sensation, which was rapidly suppressed,
renewed silence fell on the assembly. You could have heard a spider weaving his
web.

It was the voice of Dean Felporg which broke the spell.


"For thirteen hundred thousand dollars, Spencer Island!" declaimed he,
drawing himself up so as to better command the circle of bidders.

William W. Kolderup had turned towards J. R. Taskinar. The bystanders
moved back, so as to allow the adversaries to behold each other. The man of
Stockton and the man of San Francisco were face to face, mutually staring, at
their ease. Truth compels me to state that they made the most of the opportunity.
Never would one of them consent to lower his eyes before those of his rival.

"Fourteen hundred thousand dollars," said William W. Kolderup.

"Fifteen hundred thousand!" retorted J. R. Taskinar.

"Sixteen hundred thousand!"

"Seventeen hundred thousand!"

Have you ever heard the story of the two mechanics of Glasgow, who tried
which should raise the other highest up the factory chimney at the risk of a
catastrophe? The only difference was that here the chimney was of ingots of
gold.

Each time after the capping bid of J. R. Taskinar, William W. Kolderup took
a few moments to reflect before he bid again. On the contrary Taskinar burst out
like a bomb, and did not seem to require a second to think.

"Seventeen hundred thousand dollars!" repeated the auctioneer. "Now,
gentlemen, that is a mere nothing! It is giving it away!"

And one can well believe that, carried away by the jargon of his profession,
he was about to add,--

"The frame alone is worth more than that!" When--

"Seventeen hundred thousand dollars!" howled Gingrass, the crier.

"Eighteen hundred thousand!" replied William W. Kolderup.

"Nineteen hundred thousand!" retorted J. R. Taskinar.

"Two millions!" quoth William W. Kolderup, and so quickly that this time he
evidently had not taken the trouble to think. His face was a little pale when these
last words escaped his lips, but his whole attitude was that of a man who did not
intend to give in.

J. R. Taskinar was simply on fire. His enormous face was like one of those
gigantic railway bull's-eyes which, screened by the red, signal the stoppage of
the train. But it was highly probable that his rival would disregard the block, and
decline to shut off steam.

This J. R. Taskinar felt. The blood mounted to his brows, and seemed
apoplectically congested there. He wriggled his fat fingers, covered with
diamonds of great price, along the huge gold chain attached to his chronometer.
He glared at his adversary, and then shutting his eyes so as to open them with a
more spiteful expression a moment afterwards.


"Two million, four hundred thousand dollars!" he remarked, hoping by this
tremendous leap to completely rout his rival.

"Two million, seven hundred thousand!" replied William W. Kolderup in a
peculiarly calm voice.

"Two million, nine hundred thousand!"

"Three millions!"

Yes! William W. Kolderup, of San Francisco, said three millions of dollars!

Applause rang through the room, hushed, however, at the voice of the
auctioneer, who repeated the bid, and whose oscillating hammer threatened to
fall in spite of himself by the involuntary movement of his muscles. It seemed as
though Dean Felporg, surfeited with the surprises of public auction sales, would
be unable to contain himself any longer.

All glances were turned on J. R. Taskinar. That voluminous personage was
sensible of this, but still more was he sensible of the weight of these three
millions of dollars, which seemed to crush him. He would have spoken,
doubtless to bid higher--but he could not. He would have liked to nod his head--
he could do so no more.

After a long pause, however, his voice was heard; feeble it is true, but
sufficiently audible.

"Three millions, five hundred thousand!"

"Four millions," was the answer of William W. Kolderup.

It was the last blow of the bludgeon. J. R. Taskinar succumbed. The hammer
gave a hard rap on the marble table and--

Spencer Island fell for four millions of dollars to William W. Kolderup, of
San Francisco.

"T will be avenged!" muttered J. R. Taskinar, and throwing a glance of hatred
at his conqueror, he returned to the Occidental Hotel.

But "hip, hip, hurrah," three times thrice, smote the ears of William W.
Kolderup, then cheers followed him to Montgomery Street, and such was the
delirious enthusiasm of the Americans that they even forgot to favour him with
the customary bars of "Yankee Doodle."


CHAPTER III.

THE CONVERSATION OF PHINA HOLLANEY AND GODFREY
MORGAN, WITH A PIANO ACCOMPANIMENT.

William W. Kolderup had returned to his mansion in Montgomery Street.
This thoroughfare is the Regent Street, the Broadway, the Boulevard des Italiens
of San Francisco. Throughout its length, the great artery which crosses the city


parallel with its quays is astir with life and movement; trams there are
innumerable; carriages with horses, carriages with mules; men bent on business,
hurrying to and fro over its stone pavements, past shops thronged with
customers; men bent on pleasure, crowding the doors of the "bars," where at all
hours are dispensed the Californian's drinks.

There is no need for us to describe the mansion of a Frisco nabob. With so
many millions, there was proportionate luxury. More comfort than taste. Less of
the artistic than the practical. One cannot have everything.

So the reader must be contented to know that there was a magnificent
reception-room, and in this reception-room a piano, whose chords were
permeating the mansion's warm atmosphere when the opulent Kolderup walked
in.

"Good!" he said. "She and he are there! A word to my cashier, and then we
can have a little chat."

And he stepped towards his office to arrange the little matter of Spencer
Island, and then dismiss it from his mind. He had only to realize a few
certificates in his portfolio and the acquisition was settled for. Half-a-dozen lines
to his broker--no more. Then William W. Kolderup devoted himself to another
"combination" which was much more to his taste.

Yes! she and he were in the drawing-room--she, in front of the piano; he, half
reclining on the sofa, listening vaguely to the pearly arpeggios which escaped
from the fingers of the charmer.

"Are you listening?" she said.

"Of course."

"Yes! but do you understand it?"

"Do I understand it, Phina! Never have you played those 'Auld Robin Gray'
variations more superbly."

"But it is not 'Auld Robin Gray,' Godfrey: it is 'Happy Moments.

"Oh! ah! yes! I remember!" answered Godfrey, in a tone of indifference
which it was difficult to mistake. The lady raised her two hands, held them
suspended for an instant above the keys as if they were about to grasp another
chord, and then with a half-turn on her music-stool she remained for a moment
looking at the too tranquil Godfrey, whose eyes did their best to avoid hers.

Phina Hollaney was the goddaughter of William W. Kolderup. An orphan, he
had educated her, and given her the right to consider herself his daughter, and to
love him as her father. She wanted for nothing. She was young, "handsome in
her way" as people say, but undoubtedly fascinating, a blonde of sixteen with the
ideas of a woman much older, as one could read in the crystal of her blue-black
eyes. Of course, we must compare her to a lily, for all beauties are compared to


WY


lilies in the best American society. She was then a lily, but a lily grafted into an
eglantine. She certainly had plenty of spirit, but she had also plenty of practical
common-sense, a somewhat selfish demeanour, and but little sympathy with the
illusions and dreams so characteristic of her sex and age.

Her dreams were when she was asleep, not when she was awake. She was
not asleep now, and had no intention of being so.

"Godfrey?" she continued.

"Phina?" answered the young man.

"Where are you now?"

"Near you--in this room--"

"Not near me, Godfrey! Not in this room! But far far away, over the seas, is
it not so?"

And mechanically Phina's hand sought the key-board and rippled along a
series of sinking sevenths, which spoke of a plaintive sadness, unintelligible
perhaps to the nephew of William W. Kolderup.

For such was this young man, such was the relationship he bore towards the
master of the house. The son of a sister of this buyer of islands, fatherless and
motherless for a good many years, Godfrey Morgan, like Phina, had been
brought up in the house of his uncle, in whom the fever of business had still left
a place for the idea of marrying these two to each other.

Godfrey was in his twenty-third year. His education now finished, had left
him with absolutely nothing to do. He had graduated at the University, but had
found it of little use. For him life opened out but paths of ease; go where he
would, to the right or the left, whichever way he went, fortune would not fail
him.

Godfrey was of good presence, gentlemanly, elegant--never tying his cravat
in a ring, nor starring his fingers, his wrists or his shirt-front with those jewelled
gimcracks so dear to his fellow-citizens.

I shall surprise no one in saying that Godfrey Morgan was going to marry
Phina Hollaney. Was he likely to do otherwise? All the proprieties were in favour
of it. Besides, William W. Kolderup desired the marriage. The two people whom
he loved most in this world were sure of a fortune from him, without taking into
consideration whether Phina cared for Godfrey, or Godfrey cared for Phina. It
would also simplify the bookkeeping of the commercial house. Ever since their
births an account had been opened for the boy, another for the girl. It would then
be only necessary to rule these off and transfer the balances to a joint account for
the young couple. The worthy merchant hoped that this would soon be done, and
the balances struck without error or omission.

But it is precisely that there had been an omission and perhaps an error that


we are about to show.

An error, because at the outset Godfrey felt that he was not yet old enough
for the serious undertaking of marriage; an omission, because he had not been
consulted on the subject.

In fact, when he had finished his studies Godfrey had displayed a quite
premature indifference to the world, in which he wanted for nothing, in which he
had no wish remaining ungratified, and nothing whatever to do. The thought of
travelling round the world was always present to him. Of the old and new
continents he knew but one spot--San Francisco, where he was born, and which
he had never left except in a dream. What harm was there in a young man
making the tour of the globe twice or thrice--especially if he were an American?
Would it do him any good? Would he learn anything in the different adventures
he would meet with in a voyage of any length? If he were not already satiated
with a life of adventure, how could he be answered? Finally, how many millions
of leagues of observation and instruction were indispensable for the completion
of the young man's education?

Things had reached this pass; for a year or more Godfrey had been immersed
in books of voyages of recent date, and had passionately devoured them. He had
discovered the Celestial Empire with Marco Polo, America with Columbus, the
Pacific with Cook, the South Pole with Dumont d'Urville. He had conceived the
idea of going where these illustrious travellers had been without him. In truth, he
would not have considered an exploring expedition of several years to cost him
too dear at the price of a few attacks of Malay pirates, several ocean collisions,
and a shipwreck or two on a desert island where he could live the life of a
Selkirk or a Robinson Crusoe! A Crusoe! To become a Crusoe! What young
imagination has not dreamt of this in reading as Godfrey had often, too often
done, the adventures of the imaginary heroes of Daniel de Foe and De Wyss?

Yes! The nephew of William W. Kolderup was in this state when his uncle
was thinking of binding him in the chains of marriage. To travel in this way with
Phina, then become Mrs. Morgan, would be clearly impossible! He must go
alone or leave it alone. Besides, once his fancy had passed away, would not she
be better disposed to sign the settlements? Was it for the good of his wife that he
had not been to China or Japan, not even to Europe? Decidedly not.

And hence it was that Godfrey was now absent in the presence of Phina,
indifferent when she spoke to him, deaf when she played the airs which used to
please him; and Phina, like a thoughtful, serious girl, soon noticed this.

To say that she did not feel a little annoyance mingled with some chagrin, is
to do her a gratuitous injustice. But accustomed to look things in the face, she
had reasoned thus,--


"If we must part, it had better be before marriage than afterwards!"

And thus it was that she had spoken to Godfrey in these significant words.

"No! You are not near me at this moment--you are beyond the seas!"

Godfrey had risen. He had walked a few steps without noticing Phina, and
unconsciously his index finger touched one of the keys of the piano. A loud C#
of the octave below the staff, a note dismal enough, answered for him.

Phina had understood him, and without more discussion was about to bring
matters to a crisis, when the door of the room opened.

William W. Kolderup appeared, seemingly a little preoccupied as usual. Here
was the merchant who had just finished one negotiation and was about to begin
another.

"Well," said he, "there is nothing more now than for us to fix the date."

"The date?" answered Godfrey, with a start. "What date, if you please,
uncle?"

"The date of your wedding!" said William W. Kolderup. "Not the date of
mine, I suppose!"

"Perhaps that is more urgent?" said Phina.

"Hey?--what?" exclaimed the uncle--"what does that matter? We are only
talking of current affairs, are we not?"

"Godfather Will," answered the lady. "It is not of a wedding that we are
going to fix the date to-day, but of a departure."

"A departure!"

"Yes, the departure of Godfrey," continued Phina, "of Godfrey who, before
he gets married, wants to see a little of the world!"

"You want to go away--you?" said William W. Kolderup, stepping towards
the young man and raising his arms as if he were afraid that this "rascal of a
nephew" would escape him.

"Yes; I do, uncle," said Godfrey gallantly.

"And for how long?"

"For eighteen months, or two years, or more, if--"

Ni fest!

"If you will let me, and Phina will wait for me."

"Wait for you! An intended who intends until he gets away!" exclaimed
William W. Kolderup.

"You must let Godfrey go," pleaded Phina; "I have thought it carefully over. I
am young, but really Godfrey is younger. Travel will age him, and I do not think
it will change his taste! He wishes to travel, let him travel! The need of repose
will come to him afterwards, and he will find me when he returns."

"What!" exclaimed William W. Kolderup, "you consent to give your bird his


liberty?"

"Yes, for the two years he asks."

"And you will wait for him?"

"Uncle Will, if I could not wait for him I could not love him!" and so saying
Phina returned to the piano, and whether she willed it or no, her fingers softly
played a portion of the then fashionable "Départ du Fiancé," which was very
appropriate under the circumstances. But Phina, without perceiving it perhaps,
was playing in "A minor," whereas it was written in "A major," and all the
sentiment of the melody was transformed, and its plaintiveness chimed in well
with her hidden feelings.

But Godfrey stood embarrassed, and said not a word. His uncle took him by
the head and turning it to the light looked fixedly at him for a moment or two. In
this way he questioned him without having to speak, and Godfrey was able to
reply without having occasion to utter a syllable.

And the lamentations of the "Départ du Fiancé" continued their sorrowful
theme, and then William W. Kolderup, having made the turn of the room,
returned to Godfrey, who stood like a criminal before the judge. Then raising his
voice,--

"You are serious," he asked.

"Quite serious!" interrupted Phina, while Godfrey contented himself with
making a sign of affirmation.

"You want to try travelling before you marry Phina! Well! You shall try it,
my nephew!"

He made two or three steps and stopping with crossed arms before Godfrey,
asked,--

"Where do you want to go to?"

"Everywhere."

"And when do you want to start?"

"When you please, Uncle Will."

"All right," replied William W. Kolderup, fixing a curious look on his
nephew.

Then he muttered between his teeth,--

"The sooner the better."

At these last words came a sudden interruption from Phina. The little finger
of her left hand touched a G#, and the fourth had, instead of falling on the key-
note, rested on the "sensible," like Ralph in the "Huguenots," when he leaves at
the end of his duet with Valentine.

Perhaps Phina's heart was nearly full, she had made up her mind to say
nothing.


It was then that William W. Kolderup, without noticing Godfrey, approached
the piano.

"Phina," said he gravely, "you should never remain on the 'sensible

And with the tip of his large finger he dropped vertically on to one of the
keys and an "A natural" resounded through the room.


wy
!


CHAPTER IV.

IN WHICH T. ARTELETT, OTHERWISE TARTLET, IS DULY
INTRODUCED TO THE READER.

If T. Artelett had been a Parisian, his compatriots would not have failed to
nickname him Tartlet, but as he had already received this title we do not hesitate
to describe him by it. If Tartlet was not a Frenchman he ought to have been one.

In his "Itinéraire de Paris a Jérusalem," Chateaubriand tells of a little man
"powdered and frizzed in the old-fashioned style, with a coat of apple green, a
waistcoat of drouget, shirt-frill and cuffs of muslin, who scraped a violin and
made the Iroquois dance 'Madeleine Friquet.”

The Californians are not Iroquois, far from it; but Tartlet was none the less
professor of dancing and deportment in the capital of their state. If they did not
pay him for his lessons, as they had his predecessor in beaver-skins and bear-
hams, they did so in dollars. If in speaking of his pupils he did not talk of the
"bucks and their squaws," it was because his pupils were highly civilized, and
because in his opinion he had contributed considerably to their civilization.

Tartlet was a bachelor, and aged about forty-five at the time we introduce
him to our readers. But for a dozen years or so his marriage with a lady of
somewhat mature age had been expected to take place.

Under present circumstances it is perhaps advisable to give "two or three
lines" concerning his age, appearance, and position in life. He would have
responded to such a request we imagine as follows, and thus we can dispense
with drawing his portrait from a moral and physical point of view.

"He was born on the 17th July, 1835, at a quarter-past three in the morning.

"His height is five feet, two inches, three lines.

"His girth is exactly two feet, three inches.

"His weight, increased by some six pounds during the last year, is one
hundred and fifty one pounds, two ounces.

"He has an oblong head.

"His hair, very thin above the forehead, is grey chestnut, his forehead is high,
his face oval, his complexion fresh coloured.

"His eyes--sight excellent--a greyish brown, eyelashes and eyebrows clear


chestnut, eyes themselves somewhat sunk in their orbits beneath the arches of
the brows.

"His nose is of medium size, and has a slight indentation towards the end of
the left nostril.

"His cheeks and temples are flat and hairless.

"His ears are large and flat.

"His mouth, of middling size, is absolutely free from bad teeth.

"His lips, thin and slightly pinched, are covered with a heavy moustache and
imperial, his chin is round and also shaded with a many-tinted beard.

"A small mole ornaments his plump neck--in the nape.

"Finally, when he is in the bath it can be seen that his skin is white and
smooth.

"His life is calm and regular. Without being robust, thanks to his great
temperance, he has kept his health uninjured since his birth. His lungs are rather
irritable, and hence he has not contracted the bad habit of smoking. He drinks
neither spirits, coffee, liqueurs, nor neat wine. In a word, all that could
prejudicially affect his nervous system is vigorously excluded from his table.
Light beer, and weak wine and water are the only beverages he can take without
danger. It is on account of his carefulness that he has never had to consult a
doctor since his life began.

"His gesture is prompt, his walk quick, his character frank and open. His
thoughtfulness for others is extreme, and it is on account of this that in the fear
of making his wife unhappy, he has never entered into matrimony."

Such would have been the report furnished by Tartlet, but desirable as he
might be to a lady of a certain age, the projected union had hitherto failed. The
professor remained a bachelor, and continued to give lessons in dancing and
deportment.

It was in this capacity that he entered the mansion of William W. Kolderup.
As time rolled on his pupils gradually abandoned him, and he ended by
becoming one wheel more in the machinery of the wealthy establishment.

After all, he was a brave man, in spite of his eccentricities. Everybody liked
him. He liked Godfrey, he liked Phina, and they liked him. He had only one
ambition in the world, and that was to teach them all the secrets of his art, to
make them in fact, as far as deportment was concerned, two highly accomplished
individuals.

Now, what would you think? It was he, this Professor Tartlet, whom William
W. Kolderup had chosen as his nephew's companion during the projected
voyage. Yes! He had reason to believe that Tartlet had not a little contributed to
imbue Godfrey with this roaming mania, so as to perfect himself by a tour round


the world. William W. Kolderup had resolved that they should go together. On
the morrow, the 16th of April, he sent for the professor to his office.

The request of the nabob was an order for Tartlet. The professor left his
room, with his pocket violin--generally known as a kit--so as to be ready for all
emergencies. He mounted the great staircase of the mansion with his feet
academically placed as was fitting for a dancing-master; knocked at the door of
the room, entered--his body half inclined, his elbows rounded, his mouth on the
grin--and waited in the third position, after having crossed his feet one before the
other, at half their length, his ankles touching and his toes turned out. Any one
but Professor Tartlet placed in this sort of unstable equilibrium would have
tottered on his base, but the professor preserved an absolute perpendicularity.

"Mr. Tartlet," said William W. Kolderup, "I have sent for you to tell you
some news which I imagine will rather surprise you."

"As you think best!" answered the professor.

"My nephew's marriage is put off for a year or eighteen months, and
Godfrey, at his own request, is going to visit the different countries of the old
and new world."

"Sir," answered Tartlet, "my pupil, Godfrey, will do honour to the country of
his birth, and--"

"And, to the professor of deportment who has initiated him into etiquette,"
interrupted the merchant, in a tone of which the guileless Tartlet failed to
perceive the irony.

And, in fact, thinking it the correct thing to execute an "assemblée,” he first
moved one foot and then the other, by a sort of semi-circular side slide, and then
with a light and graceful bend of the knee, he bowed to William W. Kolderup.

"I thought," continued the latter, "that you might feel a little regret at
separating from your pupil?"

"The regret will be extreme,” answered Tartlet, "but should it be necessary--"

"It is not necessary," answered William W. Kolderup, knitting his bushy
eyebrows.

"Ah!" replied Tartlet.

Slightly troubled, he made a graceful movement to the rear, so as to pass
from the third to the fourth position; but he left the breadth of a foot between his
feet, without perhaps being conscious of what he was doing.

"Yes!" added the merchant in a peremptory tone, which admitted not of the
ghost of a reply; "I have thought it would really be cruel to separate a professor
and a pupil so well made to understand each other!"

"Assuredly!--the journey?" answered Tartlet, who did not seem to want to
understand.


"Yes! Assuredly!" replied William W. Kolderup; "not only will his travels
bring out the talents of my nephew, but the talents of the professor to whom he
owes so correct a bearing.”

Never had the thought occurred to this great baby that one day he would
leave San Francisco, California, America, to roam the seas. Such an idea had
never entered the brain of a man more absorbed in choregraphy than geography,
and who was still ignorant of the suburbs of the capital beyond ten miles radius.
And now this was offered to him. He was to understand that nolens volens he
was to expatriate himself, he himself was to experience with all their costs and
inconveniences the very adventures he had recommended to his pupil! Here,
decidedly, was something to trouble a brain much more solid than his, and the
unfortunate Tartlet for the first time in his life felt an involuntary yielding in the
muscles of his limbs, suppled as they were by thirty-five years' exercise.

"Perhaps," said he, trying to recall to his lips the stereotyped smile of the
dancer which had left him for an instant,--"perhaps--am I not--"

"You will go!" answered William W. Kolderup like a a man with whom
discussion was useless.

To refuse was impossible. Tartlet did not even think of such a thing. What
was he in the house? A thing, a parcel, a package to be sent to every corner of
the world. But the projected expedition troubled him not a little.

"And when am I to start?" demanded he, trying to get back into an
academical position.

"In a month."

"And on what raging ocean has Mr. Kolderup decided that his vessel should
bear his nephew and me?"

"The Pacific, at first."

"And on what point of the terrestrial globe shall I first set foot?"

"On the soil of New Zealand," answered William W. Kolderup; "I have
remarked that the New Zealanders always stick their elbows out! Now you can
teach them to turn them in!"

And thus was Professor Tartlet selected as the travelling-companion of
Godfrey Morgan.

A nod from the merchant gave him to understand that the audience had
terminated. He retired, considerably agitated, and the performance of the special
graces which he usually displayed in this difficult act left a good deal to be
desired. In fact, for the first time in his life, Professor Tartlet, forgetting in his
preoccupation the most elementary principles of his art, went out with his toes
turned in!


CHAPTER V.

IN WHICH THEY PREPARE TO GO, AND AT THE END OF WHICH
THEY GO FOR GOOD.

Before the long voyage together through life, which men call marriage,
Godfrey then was to make the tour of the world--a journey sometimes even more
dangerous. But he reckoned on returning improved in every respect; he left a lad,
he would return a man. He would have seen, noted, compared. His curiosity
would be satisfied. There would only remain for him to settle down quietly, and
live happily at home with his wife, whom no temptation would take him from.
Was he wrong or right? Was he to learn a valuable lesson? The future will show.

In short, Godfrey was enchanted.

Phina, anxious without appearing to be so, was resigned to this
apprenticeship.

Professor Tartlet, generally so firm on his limbs, had lost all his dancing
equilibrium. He had lost all his usual self-possession, and tried in vain to recover
it; he even tottered on the carpet of his room as if he were already on the floor of
a cabin, rolling and pitching on the ocean.

As for William W. Kolderup, since he had arrived at a decision, he had
become very uncommunicative, especially to his nephew. The closed lips, and
eyes half hidden beneath their lids, showed that there was some fixed idea in the
head where generally floated the highest commercial speculations.

"Ah! you want to travel," muttered he every now and then; "travel instead of
marrying and staying at home! Well, you shall travel."

Preparations were immediately begun.

In the first place, the itinerary had to be projected, discussed, and settled.

Was Godfrey to go south, or east, or west? That had to be decided in the first
place.

If he went southwards, the Panama, California and British Columbia
Company, or the Southampton and Rio Janeiro Company would have to take
him to Europe.

If he went eastwards, the Union Pacific Railway would take him in a few
days to New York, and thence the Cunard, Inman, White Star, Hamburg-
American, or French-Transatlantic Companies would land him on the shores of
the old world.

If he went westwards, the Golden Age Steam Transoceanic would render it
easy for him to reach Melbourne, and thence he could get to the Isthmus of Suez
by the boats of the Peninsular and Oriental Company.

The means of transport were abundant, and thanks to their mathematical


agreement the round of the world was but a simple pleasure tour.

But it was not thus that the nephew and heir of the nabob of Frisco was to
travel.

No! William W. Kolderup possessed for the requirements of his business
quite a fleet of steam and sailing-vessels. He had decided that one of these ships
should be "put at the disposal" of Godfrey Morgan, as if he were a prince of the
blood, travelling for his pleasure--at the expense of his father's subjects.

By his orders the Dream, a substantial steamer of 600 tons and 200 horse-
power, was got ready. It was to be commanded by Captain Turcott, a tough old
salt, who had already sailed in every latitude in every sea. A thorough sailor, this
friend of tornadoes, cyclones, and typhoons, had already spent of his fifty years
of life, forty at sea. To bring to in a hurricane was quite child's play to this
mariner, who was never disconcerted, except by land-sickness when he was in
port. His incessantly unsteady existence on a vessel's deck had endowed him
with the habit of constantly balancing himself to the right or the left, or behind or
in front, as though he had the rolling and pitching variety of St. Vitus's dance.

A mate, an engineer, four stokers, a dozen seamen, eighteen men in all,
formed the crew of the Dream. And if the ship was contented to get quietly
through eight miles an hour, she possessed a great many excellent nautical
qualities. If she was not swift enough to race the waves when the sea was high,
the waves could not race over her, and that was an advantage which quite
compensated for the mediocrity of her speed, particularly when there was no
hurry. The Dream was brigantine rigged, and in a favourable wind, with her 400
square yards of canvas, her steaming rate could be considerably increased.

It should be borne in mind all through that the voyage of the Dream was
carefully planned, and would be punctually performed. William W. Kolderup
was too practical a man not to put to some purpose a journey of 15,000 or 16,000
leagues across all the oceans of the globe. His ship was to go without cargo,
undoubtedly, but it was easy to get her down to her right trim by means of water
ballast, and even to sink her to her deck, if it proved necessary.

The Dream was instructed to communicate with the different branch
establishments of the wealthy merchant. She was to go from one market to
another.

Captain Turcott, never fear, would not find it difficult to pay the expenses of
the voyage! Godfrey Morgan's whim would not cost the avuncular purse a single
dollar! That is the way they do business in the best commercial houses!

All this was decided at long, very secret interviews between William W.
Kolderup and Captain Turcott. But it appeared that the regulation of this matter,
simple as it seemed, could not be managed alone, for the captain paid numerous


visits to the merchant's office. When he came away, it would be noticed that his
face bore a curious expression, that his hair stood on end as if he had been
ruffling it up with fevered hands, and that all his body rolled and pitched more
than usual. High words were constantly heard, proving that the interviews were
stormy. Captain Turcott, with his plain speaking, knew how to withstand
William W. Kolderup, who loved and esteemed him enough to permit him to
contradict him.

And now all was arranged. Who had given in? William W. Kolderup or
Turcott? I dare not say, for I do not even know the subject of their discussion.
However, I rather think it must have been the captain.

Anyhow, after eight days of interviewing, the merchant and the captain were
in accord, but Turcott did not cease to grumble between his teeth.

"May five hundred thousand Davy Joneses drag me to the bottom if ever I
had a job like this before!"

However, the Dream fitted out rapidly, and her captain neglected nothing
which would enable him to put to sea in the first fortnight in June. She had been
into dock, and the hull had been gone over with composition, whose brilliant red
contrasted vividly with the black of her upper works.

A great number of vessels of all kinds and nationalities came into the port of
San Francisco. In a good many years the old quays of the town, built straight
along the shore, would have been insufficient for the embarkation and
disembarkation of their cargoes, if engineers had not devised subsidiary
wharves. Piles of red deal were driven into the water, and many square miles of
planks were laid on them and formed huge platforms. A good deal of the bay
was thus taken up, but the bay is enormous. There were also regular landing-
stages, with numberless cranes and crabs, at which steamers from both oceans,
steamboats from the Californian rivers, clippers from all countries, and coasters
from the American seaboard were ranged in proper order, so as not to interfere
one with the other.

It was at one of these artificial quays, at the extremity of Mission Wharf
Street, that the Dream had been securely moored after she had come out of dock.

Nothing was neglected, and the steamer would start under the most
favourable conditions. Provisioning, outfit, all were minutely studied. The
rigging was perfect, the boilers had been tested and the screw was an excellent
one. A steam launch was even carried, to facilitate communication with the
shore, and this would probably be of great service during the voyage.

Everything was ready on the 10th of June. They had only to put to sea. The
men shipped by Captain Turcott to work the sails or drive the engine were a
picked crew, and it would have been difficult to find a better one. Quite a stock


of live animals, agouties, sheep, goats, poultry, &c., were stowed between decks,
the material wants of the travellers were likewise provided for by numerous
cases of preserved meats of the best brands.

The route the Dream was to follow had doubtless been the subject of the
long conferences which William W. Kolderup had had with his captain. All
knew that they were first bound for Auckland, in New Zealand, unless want of
coal necessitated by the persistence of contrary winds obliged them to refill
perhaps at one of the islands of the Pacific or some Chinese port.

All this detail mattered little to Godfrey once he was on the sea, and still less
to Tartlet, whose troubled spirit exaggerated from day to day the dangers of
navigation. There was only one formality to be gone through--the formality of
being photographed.

An engaged man could not decently start on a long voyage round the world
without taking with him the image of her he loved, and in return leaving his own
image behind him.

Godfrey in tourist costume accordingly handed himself over to Messrs
Stephenson and Co., photographers of Montgomery Street, and Phina, in her
walking-dress, confided in like manner to the sun the task of fixing her charming
but somewhat sorrowing features on the plate of those able operators.

It is also the custom to travel together, and so Phina's portrait had its allotted
place in Godfrey's cabin, and Godfrey's portrait its special position in Phina's
room. As for Tartlet, who had no betrothed and who was not thinking of having
one at present, he thought it better to confide his image to sensitised paper. But
although great was the talent of the photographers they failed to present him
with a satisfactory proof. The negative was a confused fog in which it was
impossible to recognize the celebrated professor of dancing and deportment.

This was because the patient could not keep himself still, in spite of all that
was Said about the invariable rule in studios devoted to operations of this nature.

They tried other means, even the instantaneous process. Impossible. Tartlet
pitched and rolled in anticipation as violently as the captain of the Dream.

The idea of obtaining a picture of the features of this remarkable man had
thus to be abandoned. Irreparable would be the misfortune if--but far from us be
the thought!--if in imagining he was leaving the new world for the old world
Tartlet had left the new world for the other world from which nobody returns.

On the 9th of June all was ready. The Dream was complete. Her papers, bills
of lading, charter-party, assurance policy, were all in order, and two days before
the ship-broker had sent on the last signatures.

On that day a grand farewell breakfast was given at the mansion in
Montgomery Street. They drank to the happy voyage of Godfrey and his safe


return.

Godfrey was rather agitated, and he did not strive to hide it. Phina showed
herself much the most composed. As for Tartlet he drowned his apprehensions in
several glasses of champagne, whose influence was perceptible up to the
moment of departure. He even forgot his kit, which was brought to him as they
were casting off the last hawsers of the Dream.

The last adieux were said on board, the last handshakings took place on the
poop, then the engine gave two or three turns of the screw and the steamer was
under way.

"Good-bye, Phina!"

"Good-bye, Godfrey!"

"May Heaven protect you!" said the uncle.

"And above all may it bring us back!" murmured Professor Tartlet.

"And never forget, Godfrey," added William W. Kolderup, "the device which
the Dream bears on her stern, 'Confide, recte agens.""

"Never, Uncle Will! Good-bye, Phina!"

"Good-bye, Godfrey!"

The steamer moved off, handkerchiefs were shaken as long as she remained
in sight from the quay, and even after. Soon the bay of San Francisco, the largest
in the world, was crossed, the Dream passed the narrow throat of the Golden
Gate and then her prow cleft the waters of the Pacific Ocean. It was as though
the Gates of Gold had closed upon her.


CHAPTER VI.

IN WHICH THE READER MAKES THE ACQUAINTANCE OF A NEW
PERSONAGE.

The voyage had begun. There had not been much difficulty so far, it must be
admitted.

Professor Tartlet, with incontestable logic, often repeated,--

"Any voyage can begin! But where and how it finishes is the important
point."

The cabin occupied by Godfrey was below the poop of the Dream and
opened on to the dining-saloon. Our young traveller was lodged there as
comfortably as possible. He had given Phina's photograph the best place on the
best lighted panel of his room. A cot to sleep on, a lavatory for toilet purposes,
some chests of drawers for his clothes and his linen, a table to work at, an
armchair to sit upon, what could a young man in his twenty-second year want
more? Under such circumstances he might have gone twenty-two times round


the world! Was he not at the age of that practical philosophy which consists in
good health and good humour? Ah! young people, travel if you can, and if you
cannot--travel all the same!

Tartlet was not in a good humour. His cabin, near that of his pupil, seemed to
him too narrow, his bed too hard, the six square yards which he occupied quite
insufficient for his steps and strides. Would not the traveller in him absorb the
professor of dancing and deportment? No! It was in the blood, and when Tartlet
reached the hour of his last sleep his feet would be found placed in a horizontal
line with the heels one against the other, in the first position.

Meals were taken in common. Godfrey and Tartlet sat opposite to each other,
the captain and mate occupying each end of the rolling table. This alarming
appellation, the "rolling table," is enough to warn us that the professor's place
would too often be vacant.

At the start, in the lovely month of June, there was a beautiful breeze from
the northeast, and Captain Turcott was able to set his canvas so as to increase his
speed. The Dream thus balanced hardly rolled at all, and as the waves followed
her, her pitching was but slight. This mode of progressing was not such as to
affect the looks of the passengers and give them pinched noses, hollow eyes,
livid foreheads, or colourless cheeks. It was supportable. They steered southwest
over a splendid sea, hardly lifting in the least, and the American coast soon
disappeared below the horizon.

For two days nothing occurred worthy of mention. The Dream made good
progress. The commencement of the voyage promised well--so that Captain
Turcott seemed occasionally to feel an anxiety which he tried in vain to hide.
Each day as the sun crossed the meridian he carefully took his observations. But
it could be noticed that immediately afterwards he retired with the mate into his
cabin, and then they remained in secret conclave as if they were discussing some
grave eventuality. This performance passed probably unnoticed by Godfrey, who
understood nothing about the details of navigation, but the boatswain and the
crew seemed somewhat astonished at it, particularly as for two or three times
during the first week, when there was not the least necessity for the manoeuvre,
the course of the Dream at night was completely altered, and resumed again in
the morning. In a sailing-ship this might be intelligible; but in a steamer, which
could keep on the great circle line and only use canvas when the wind was
favourable, it was somewhat extraordinary.

During the morning of the 12th of June a very unexpected incident occurred
on board.

Captain Turcott, the mate, and Godfrey, were sitting down to breakfast when
an unusual noise was heard on deck. Almost immediately afterwards the


boatswain opened the door and appeared on the threshold.

"Captain!" he said.

"What's up?" asked Turcott, sailor as he was, always on the alert.

"Here's a--Chinee!" said the boatswain.

"A Chinese!"

"Yes! a genuine Chinese we have just found by chance at the bottom of the
hold!"

"At the bottom of the hold!" exclaimed Turcott. "Well, by all the--
somethings--of Sacramento, just send him to the bottom of the sea!"

"All right!" answered the boatswain.

And that excellent man with all the contempt of a Californian for a son of the
Celestial Empire, taking the order as quite a natural one, would have had not the
slightest compunction in executing it.

However, Captain Turcott rose from his chair, and followed by Godfrey and
the mate, left the saloon and walked towards the forecastle of the Dream.

There stood a Chinaman, tightly handcuffed, and held by two or three sailors,
who were by no means sparing of their nudges and knocks. He was a man of
from five-and-thirty to forty, with intelligent features, well built, of lithe figure,
but a little emaciated, owing to his sojourn for sixteen hours at the bottom of a
badly ventilated hold.

Captain Turcott made a sign to his men to leave the unhappy intruder alone.

"Who are you?" he asked.

"A son of the sun."

"And what is your name?"

"Seng Vou," answered the Chinese, whose name in the Celestial language
signifies "he who does not live."

"And what are you doing on board here?"

"I am out for a sail!" coolly answered Seng Vou, "but am doing you as little
harm as I can."

"Really! as little harm!--and you stowed yourself away in the hold when we
started?"

"Just so, captain."

"So that we might take you for nothing from America to China, on the other
side of the Pacific?"

"If you will have it so."

"And if I don't wish to have it so, you yellow-skinned nigger. If I will have it
that you have to swim to China."

"T will try," said the Chinaman with a smile, "but I shall probably sink on the
road!"


"Well, John," exclaimed Captain Turcott, "I am going to show you how to
save your passage-money."

And Captain Turcott, much more angry than circumstances necessitated, was
perhaps about to put his threat into execution, when Godfrey intervened.

"Captain," he said, "one more Chinee on board the Dream is one Chinee less
in California, where there are too many."

"A great deal too many!" answered Captain Turcott.

"Yes, too many. Well, if this poor beggar wishes to relieve San Francisco of
his presence, he ought to be pitied! Bah! we can throw him on shore at Shanghai,
and there needn't be any fuss about it!"

In saying that there were too many Chinese in California Godfrey held the
same language as every true Californian. The emigration of the sons of the
Celestial Empire--there are 300,000,000 in China as against 30,000,000 of
Americans in the United States--has become dangerous to the provinces of the
Far West; and the legislators of these States of California, Lower California,
Oregon, Nevada, Utah, and even Congress itself, are much concerned at this new
epidemic of invasion, to which the Yankees have given the name of the "yellow-
plague."

At this period there were more than 50,000 Chinese, in the State of
California alone. These people, very industrious at gold-washing, very patient,
living on a pinch of rice, a mouthful of tea, and a whiff of opium, did an
immense deal to bring down the price of manual labour, to the detriment of the
native workmen. They had to submit to special laws, contrary to the American
constitution--laws which regulated their immigration, and withheld from them
the right of naturalization, owing to the fear that they would end by obtaining a
majority in the Congress. Generally ill-treated, much as Indians or negroes, so as
to justify the title of "pests" which was applied to them, they herded together in a
sort of ghetto, where they carefully kept up the manners and customs of the
Celestial Empire.

In the Californian capital, it is in the Sacramento Street district, decked with
their banners and lanterns, that this foreign race has taken up its abode. There
they can be met in thousands, trotting along in their wide-sleeved blouses,
conical hats, and turned-up shoes. Here, for the most part, they live as grocers,
gardeners, or laundresses--unless they are working as cooks or belong to one of
those dramatic troupes which perform Chinese pieces in the French theatre at
San Francisco.

And--there is no reason why we should conceal the fact--Seng Vou happened
to form part of one of these troupes, in which he filled the role of "comic lead,"
if such a description can apply to any Chinese artiste. As a matter of fact they are


so serious, even in their fun, that the Californian romancer, Bret Harte, has told
us that he never saw a genuine Chinaman laugh, and has even confessed that he
is unable to say whether one of the national pieces he witnessed was a tragedy or
a farce.

In short, Seng Vou was a comedian. The season had ended, crowned with
success--perhaps out of proportion to the gold pieces he had amassed--he wished
to return to his country otherwise than as a corpse, for Chinamen always like to
get buried at home and there are special steamers who carry dead Celestials and
nothing else. At all risks, therefore, he had secretly slipped on board the Dream.

Loaded with provisions, did he hope to get through, incognito, a passage of
several weeks, and then to land on the coast of China without being seen?

It is just possible. At any rate, the case was hardly one for a death penalty.

So Godfrey had good reason to interfere in favour of the intruder, and
Captain Turcott, who pretended to be angrier than he really was, gave up the idea
of sending Seng Vou overboard to battle with the waves of the Pacific.

Seng Vou, however, did not return to his hiding-place in the hold, though he
was rather an incubus on board. Phlegmatic, methodic, and by no means
communicative, he carefully avoided the seamen, who had always some prank to
play off on him, and he kept to his own provisions. He was thin enough in all
conscience, and his additional weight but imperceptibly added to the cost of
navigating the Dream. If Seng Vou got a free passage it was obvious that his
carriage did not cost William W. Kolderup very much.

His presence on board put into Captain Turcott's head an idea which his mate
probably was the only one to understand thoroughly.

"He will bother us a bit--this confounded Chinee!--after all, so much the
worse for him."

"What ever made him stow himself away on board the Dream?" answered
the mate.

"To get to Shanghai!" replied Captain Turcott. "Bless John and all John's
sons too!"


CHAPTER VII.

IN WHICH IT WILL BE SEEN THAT WILLIAM W. KOLDERUP WAS
PROBABLY RIGHT IN INSURING HIS SHIP.

During the following days, the 13th, 14th, and 15th of June, the barometer
slowly fell, without an attempt to rise in the slightest degree, and the weather
became variable, hovering between rain and wind or storm. The breeze
strengthened considerably, and changed to south-westerly. It was a head-wind


for the Dream, and the waves had now increased enormously, and lifted her
forward. The sails were all furled, and she had to depend on her screw alone;
under half steam, however, so as to avoid excessive labouring.

Godfrey bore the trial of the ship's motion without even losing his good-
humour for a moment. Evidently he was fond of the sea.

But Tartlet was not fond of the sea, and it served him out.

It was pitiful to see the unfortunate professor of deportment deporting
himself no longer, the professor of dancing dancing contrary to every rule of his
art. Remain in his cabin, with the seas shaking the ship from stem to stern, he
could not.

"Air! air!" he gasped.

And so he never left the deck. A roll sent him rolling from one side to the
other, a pitch sent him pitching from one end to the other. He clung to the rails,
he clutched the ropes, he assumed every attitude that is absolutely condemned by
the principles of the modern choregraphic art. Ah! why could he not raise
himself into the air by some balloon-like movement, and escape the
eccentricities of that moving plane? A dancer of his ancestors had said that he
only consented to set foot to the ground so as not to humiliate his companions,
but Tartlet would willingly never have come down at all on the deck, whose
perpetual agitation threatened to hurl him into the abyss.

What an idea it was for the rich William W. Kolderup to send him here.

"Is this bad weather likely to last?" asked he of Captain Turcott twenty times
a day.

"Dunno! barometer is not very promising!" was the invariable answer of the
captain, knitting his brows.

"Shall we soon get there?"

"Soon, Mr. Tartlet? Hum! soon!"

"And they call this the Pacific Ocean!" repeated the unfortunate man,
between a couple of shocks and oscillations.

It should be stated that, not only did Professor Tartlet suffer from sea-
sickness, but also that fear had seized him as he watched the great seething
waves breaking into foam level with the bulwarks of the Dream, and heard the
valves, lifted by the violent beats, letting the steam off through the waste-pipes,
as he felt the steamer tossing like a cork on the mountains of water.

"No," said he with a lifeless look at his pupil, "it is not impossible for us to
capsize."

"Take it quietly, Tartlet," replied Godfrey. "A ship was made to float! There
are reasons for all this."

"T tell you there are none."


And, thinking thus, the professor had put on his life-belt. He wore it night
and day, tightly buckled round his waist. He would not have taken it off for
untold gold. Every time the sea gave him a moment's respite he would replenish
it with another puff. In fact, he never blew it out enough to please him.

We must make some indulgence for the terrors of Tartlet. To those
unaccustomed to the sea, its rolling is of a nature to cause some alarm, and we
know that this passenger-in-spite-of-himself had not even till then risked his
safety on the peaceable waters of the Bay of San Francisco; so that we can
forgive his being ill on board a ship in a stiffish breeze, and his feeling terrified
at the playfulness of the waves.

The weather became worse and worse, and threatened the Dream with a gale,
which, had she been near the shore, would have been announced to her by the
semaphores.

During the day the ship was dreadfully knocked about, though running at
half steam so as not to damage her engines. Her screw was continually
immerging and emerging in the violent oscillations of her liquid bed. Hence,
powerful strokes from its wings in the deeper water, or fearful tremors as it rose
and ran wild, causing heavy thunderings beneath the stern, and furious
gallopings of the pistons which the engineer could master but with difficulty.

One observation Godfrey made, of which at first he could not discover the
cause. This was, that during the night the shocks experienced by the steamer
were infinitely less violent than during the day. Was he then to conclude that the
wind then fell, and that a calm set in after sundown?

This was so remarkable that, on the night between the 21st and 22nd of June,
he endeavoured to find out some explanation of it. The day had been particularly
stormy, the wind had freshened, and it did not appear at all likely that the sea
would fall at night, lashed so capriciously as it had been for so many hours.

Towards midnight then Godfrey dressed, and, wrapping himself up warmly,
went on deck.

The men on watch were forward, Captain Turcott was on the bridge.

The force of the wind had certainly not diminished. The shock of the waves,
which should have dashed on the bows of the Dream, was, however, very much
less violent. But in raising his eyes towards the top of the funnel, with its black
canopy of smoke, Godfrey saw that the smoke, instead of floating from the bow
aft, was, on the contrary, floating from aft forwards, and following the same
direction as the ship.

"Has the wind changed?" he said to himself.

And extremely glad at the circumstance he mounted the bridge. Stepping up
to Turcott,--


"Captain!" he said.

The latter, enveloped in his oilskins, had not heard him approach, and at first
could not conceal a movement of annoyance in seeing him close to him.

"You, Mr. Godfrey, you--on the bridge?"

"Yes, I, captain. I came to ask--"

"What?" answered Captain Turcott sharply.

"If the wind has not changed?"

"No, Mr. Godfrey, no. And, unfortunately, I think it will turn to a storm!"

"But we now have the wind behind us!"

"Wind behind us--yes--wind behind us!" replied the captain, visibly
disconcerted at the observation. "But it is not my fault."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that in order not to endanger the vessel's safety I have had to put her
about and run before the storm."

"That will cause us a most lamentable delay!" said Godfrey.

"Very much so," answered Captain Turcott, "but when day breaks, if the sea
falls a little, I shall resume our westerly route. I should recommend you, Mr.
Godfrey, to get back to your cabin. Take my advice, try and sleep while we are
running before the wind. You will be less knocked about."

Godfrey made a sign of affirmation; turning a last anxious glance at the low
clouds which were chasing each other with extreme swiftness, he left the bridge,
returned to his cabin, and soon resumed his interrupted slumbers. The next
morning, the 22nd of June, as Captain Turcott had said, the wind having sensibly
abated, the Dream was headed in proper direction.

This navigation towards the west during the day, towards the east during the
night, lasted for forty-eight hours more; but the barometer showed some
tendency to rise, its oscillations became less frequent; it was to be presumed that
the bad weather would end in northerly winds. And so in fact it happened.

On the 25th of June, about eight o'clock in the moming, when Godfrey
stepped on deck, a charming breeze from the northeast had swept away the
clouds, the sun's rays were shining through the rigging and tipping its projecting
points with touches of fire. The sea, deep green in colour, glittered along a large
section of its surface beneath the direct influence of its beams. The wind blew
only in feeble gusts which laced the wave-crests with delicate foam. The lower
Sails were set.

Properly speaking, they were not regular waves on which the sea rose and
fell, but only lengthened undulations which gently rocked the steamer.

Undulations or waves, it is true, it was all one to Professor Tartlet, as unwell
when it was "too mild," as when it was "too rough." There he was, half


crouching on the deck, with his mouth open like a carp fainted out of water.

The mate on the poop, his telescope at his eye, was looking towards the
northeast.

Godfrey approached him.

"Well, sir," said he gaily, "to-day is a little better than yesterday."

"Yes, Mr. Godfrey," replied the mate, "we are now in smooth water."

"And the Dream is on the right road!"

"Not yet."

"Not yet? and why?"

"Because we have evidently drifted north-eastwards during this last spell,
and we must find out our position exactly."

"But there is a good sun and a horizon perfectly clear."

"At noon in taking its height we shall get a good observation, and then the
captain will give us our course."

"Where is the captain?” asked Godfrey.

"He has gone off."

"Gone off?"

"Yes! our look-outs saw from the whiteness of the sea that there were some
breakers away to the east; breakers which are not shown on the chart. So the
steam launch was got out, and with the boatswain and three men, Captain
Turcott has gone off to explore."

"How long ago?"

"About an hour and a half!"

"Ah!" said Godfrey, "I am sorry he did not tell me. I should like to have gone
too."

"You were asleep, Mr. Godfrey," replied the mate, "and the captain did not
like to wake you."

"Tam sorry; but tell me, which way did the launch go?"

"Over there," answered the mate, "over the starboard bow, north-eastwards."

"And can you see it with the telescope?"

"No, she is too far off."

"But will she be long before she comes back?"

"She won't be long, for the captain is going to take the sights himself, and to
do that he must be back before noon."

At this Godfrey went and sat on the forecastle, having sent some one for his
glasses. He was anxious to watch the return of the launch. Captain Turcott's
reconnaissance did not cause him any surprise. It was natural that the Dream
should not be run into danger on a part of the sea where breakers had been
reported.


Two hours passed. It was not until half-past ten that a light line of smoke
began to rise on the horizon.

It was evidently the steam launch which, having finished the reconnaissance,
was making for the ship.

It amused Godfrey to follow her in the field of his glasses. He saw her little
by little reveal herself in clearer outline, he saw her grow on the surface of the
sea, and then give definite shape to her smoke wreath, as it mingled with a few
curls of steam on the clear depth of the horizon.

She was an excellent little vessel, of immense speed, and as she came along
at full steam, she was soon visible to the naked eye. Towards eleven o'clock, the
wash from her bow as she tore through the waves was perfectly distinct, and
behind her the long furrow of foam gradually growing wider and fainter like the
tail of a comet.

At a quarter-past eleven, Captain Turcott hailed and boarded the Dream.

"Well, captain, what news?" asked Godfrey, shaking his hand.

"Ah! Good morning, Mr. Godfrey!"

"And the breakers?"

"Only show!" answered Captain Turcott. "We saw nothing suspicious, our
men must have been deceived, but I am rather surprised at that, all the same."

"We are going ahead then?" said Godfrey.

"Yes, we are going on now, but I must first take an observation."

"Shall we get the launch on board?" asked the mate.

"No," answered the captain, "we may want it again. Leave it in tow!"

The captain's orders were executed, and the launch, still under steam,
dropped round to the stern of the Dream.

Three-quarters of an hour afterwards, Captain Turcott, with his sextant in his
hand, took the sun's altitude, and having made his observation, he gave the
course. That done, having given a last look at the horizon, he called the mate,
and taking him into his cabin, the two remained there in a long consultation.

The day was a very fine one. The sails had been furled, and the Dream
steamed rapidly without their help. The wind was very slight, and with the speed
given by the screw there would not have been enough to fill them.

Godfrey was thoroughly happy. This sailing over a beautiful sea, under a
beautiful sky, could anything be more cheering, could anything give more
impulse to thought, more satisfaction to the mind? And it is scarcely to be
wondered at that Professor Tartlet also began to recover himself a little. The state
of the sea did not inspire him with immediate inquietude, and his physical being
showed a little reaction. He tried to eat, but without taste or appetite. Godfrey
would have had him take off the life-belt which encircled his waist, but this he


absolutely refused to do. Was there not a chance of this conglomeration of wood
and iron, which men call a vessel, gaping asunder at any moment.

The evening came, a thick mist spread over the sky, without descending to
the level of the sea. The night was to be much darker than would have been
thought from the magnificent daytime.

There was no rock to fear in these parts, for Captain Turcott had just fixed
his exact position on the charts; but collisions are always possible, and they are
much more frequent on foggy nights.

The lamps were carefully put into place as soon as the sun set. The white one
was run up the mast, and the green light to the right and the red one to the left
gleamed in the shrouds. If the Dream was run down, at the least it would not be
her fault--that was one consolation. To founder even when one is in order is to
founder nevertheless, and if any one on board made this observation it was of
course Professor Tartlet. However, the worthy man, always on the roll and the
pitch, had regained his cabin, Godfrey his; the one with the assurance, the other
in the hope that he would pass a good night, for the Dream scarcely moved on
the crest of the lengthened waves.

Captain Turcott, having handed over the watch to the mate, also came under
the poop to take a few hours' rest. All was in order. The steamer could go ahead
in perfect safety, although it did not seem as though the thick fog would lift.

In about twenty minutes Godfrey was asleep, and the sleepless Tartlet, who
had gone to bed with his clothes on as usual, only betrayed himself by distant
sighs. All at once--at about one in the morning--Godfrey was awakened by a
dreadful clamour.

He jumped out of bed, slipped on his clothes, his trousers, his waistcoat and
his sea-boots.

Almost immediately a fearful cry was heard on deck, "We are sinking! we
are sinking!"

In an instant Godfrey was out of his cabin and in the saloon. There he
cannoned against an inert mass which he did not recognize. It was Professor
Tartlet.

The whole crew were on deck, hurrying about at the orders of the mate and
captain.

"A collision?" asked Godfrey.

"I don't know, I don't know--this beastly fog--" answered the mate; "but we
are sinking!"

"Sinking?" exclaimed Godfrey.

And in fact the Dream, which had doubtless struck on a rock was sensibly
foundering. The water was creeping up to the level of the deck. The engine fires


were probably already out below.

"To the sea! to the sea, Mr. Morgan!" exclaimed the captain. "There is not a
moment to lose! You can see the ship settling down! It will draw you down in
the eddy!"

"And Tartlet?"

"T'll look after him!--We are only half a cable from the shore!"

"But you?"

"My duty compels me to remain here to the last, and I remain!" said the
captain. "But get off! get off!"

Godfrey still hesitated to cast himself into the waves, but the water was
already up to the level of the deck.

Captain Turcott knowing that Godfrey swam like a fish, seized him by the
shoulders, and did him the service of throwing him overboard.

It was time! Had it not been for the darkness, there would doubtless have
been seen a deep raging vortex in the place once occupied by the Dream.

But Godfrey, in a few strokes in the calm water, was able to get swiftly clear
of the whirlpool, which would have dragged him down like the maelstrom.


All this was the work of a minute.

A few minutes afterwards, amid shouts of despair, the lights on board went
out one after the other.

Doubt existed no more; the Dream had sunk head downwards!

As for Godfrey he had been able to reach a large lofty rock away from the
surf. There, shouting vainly in the darkness, hearing no voice in reply to his own,
not knowing if he should find himself on an isolated rock or at the extremity of a
line of reefs, and perhaps the sole survivor of the catastrophe, he waited for the
dawn.


CHAPTER VIII.

WHICH LEADS GODFREY TO BITTER REFLECTIONS ON THE
MANIA FOR TRAVELLING.

Three long hours had still to pass before the sun reappeared above the
horizon. These were such hours that they might rather be called centuries.

The trial was a rough one to begin with, but, we repeat, Godfrey had not
come out for a simple promenade. He himself put it very well when he said he
had left behind him quite a lifetime of happiness and repose, which he would
never find again in his search for adventures. He tried his utmost therefore to rise
to the situation.

He was, temporarily, under shelter. The sea after all could not drive him off
the rock which lay anchored alone amid the spray of the surf. Was there any fear
of the incoming tide soon reaching him? No, for on reflection he concluded that
the wreck had taken place at the highest tide of the new moon.

But was the rock isolated? Did it command a line of breakers scattered on
this portion of the sea? What was this coast which Captain Turcott had thought
he saw in the darkness? To which continent did it belong? It was only too certain
that the Dream had been driven out of her route during the storm of the
preceding days. The position of the ship could not have been exactly fixed. How
could there be a doubt of this when the captain had two hours before affirmed
that his charts bore no indication of breakers in these parts! He had even done
better and had gone himself to reconnoitre these imaginary reefs which his look-
outs had reported they had seen in the east.

It nevertheless had been only too true, and Captain Turcott's reconnaissance
would have certainly prevented the catastrophe if it had only been pushed far
enough. But what was the good of returning to the past?

The important question in face of what had happened--a question of life or
death--was for Godfrey to know if he was near to some land. In what part of the


Pacific there would be time later on to determine. Before everything he must
think as soon as the day came of how to leave the rock, which in its biggest part
could not measure more that twenty yards square. But people do not leave one
place except to go to another. And if this other did not exist, if the captain had
been deceived in the fog, if around the breakers there stretched a boundless sea,
if at the extreme point of view the sky and the water seemed to meet all round
the horizon?

The thoughts of the young man were thus concentrated on this point. All his
powers of vision did he employ to discover through the black night if any
confused mass, any heap of rocks or cliffs, would reveal the neighbourhood of
land to the eastward of the reef.

Godfrey saw nothing. Not a smell of earth reached his nose, not a sensation
of light reached his eyes, not a sound reached his ears. Not a bird traversed the
darkness. It seemed that around him there was nothing but a vast desert of water.

Godfrey did not hide from himself that the chances were a thousand to one
that he was lost. He no longer thought of making the tour of the world, but of
facing death, and calmly and bravely his thoughts rose to that Providence which
can do all things for the feeblest of its creatures, though the creatures can do
nothing of themselves. And so Godfrey had to wait for the day to resign himself
to his fate, if safety was impossible; and, on the contrary, to try everything, if
there was any chance of life.

Calmed by the very gravity of his reflections, Godfrey had seated himself on
the rock. He had stripped off some of his clothes which had been saturated by
the sea-water, his woollen waistcoat and his heavy boots, so as to be ready to
jump into the sea if necessary.

However, was it possible that no one had survived the wreck? What! not one
of the men of the Dream carried to shore? Had they all been sucked in by the
terrible whirlpool which the ship had drawn round herself as she sank? The last
to whom Godfrey had spoken was Captain Turcott, resolved not to quit his ship
while one of his sailors was still there! It was the captain himself who had hurled
him into the sea at the moment the Dream was disappearing.

But the others, the unfortunate Tartlet, and the unhappy Chinese, surprised
without doubt, and swallowed up, the one in the poop, the other in the depths of
the hold, what had become of them? Of all those on board the Dream, was he the
only one saved? And had the steam launch remained at the stern of the steamer?
Could not a few passengers or sailors have saved themselves therein, and found
time to flee from the wreck? But was it not rather to be feared that the launch
had been dragged down by the ship under several fathoms of water?

Godfrey then said to himself, that if in this dark night he could not see, he


could at least make himself heard. There was nothing to prevent his shouting and
hailing in the deep silence. Perhaps the voice of one of his companions would
respond to his.

Over and over again then did he call, giving forth a prolonged shout which
should have been heard for a considerable distance round. Not a cry answered to
his.

He began again, many times, turning successively to every point of the
horizon.

Absolute silence.

"Alone! alone!" he murmured.

Not only had no cry answered to his, but no echo had sent him back the
sound of his own voice. Had he been near a cliff, not far from a group of rocks,
such as generally border the shore, it was certain that his shouts, repelled by the
obstacles, would have returned to him. Either eastwards of the reef, therefore,
stretched a lowlying shore ill-adapted for the production of an echo, or there was
no land in his vicinity, the bed of breakers on which he had found refuge was
isolated.

Three hours were passed in these anxieties. Godfrey, quite chilled, walked
about the top of the rock, trying to battle with the cold. At last a few pale beams
of light tinged the clouds in the zenith. It was the reflection of the first colouring
of the horizon.

Godfrey tured to this side--the only one towards which there could be land--
to see if any cliff outlined itself in the shadow. With its early rays the rising sun
might disclose its features more distinctly.

But nothing appeared through the misty dawn. A light fog was rising over the
sea, which did not even admit of his discovering the extent of the breakers.

[Illustration: Nothing appeared through the mist. page 82]

He had, therefore, to satisfy himself with illusions. If Godfrey were really
cast on an isolated rock in the Pacific, it was death to him after a brief delay,
death by hunger, by thirst, or if necessary, death at the bottom of the sea as a last
resource!

However, he kept constantly looking, and it seemed as though the intensity
of his gaze increased enormously, for all his will was concentrated therein.

At length the morning mist began to fade away. Godfrey saw the rocks which
formed the reef successively defined in relief on the sea, like a troop of marine
monsters. It was a long and irregular assemblage of dark boulders, strangely
worn, of all sizes and forms, whose direction was almost west and east. The
enormous block on the top of which Godfrey found himself emerged from the
sea on the western edge of the bank scarcely thirty fathoms from the spot where


the Dream had gone down. The sea hereabouts appeared to be very deep, for of
the steamer nothing was to be seen, not even the ends of her masts. Perhaps by
some under-current she had been drawn away from the reefs.

A glance was enough for Godfrey to take in this state of affairs. There was
no safety on that side. All his attention was directed towards the other side of the
breakers, which the lifting fog was gradually disclosing. The sea, now that the
tide had retired, allowed the rocks to stand out very distinctly. They could be
seen to lengthen as there humid bases widened. Here were vast intervals of
water, there a few shallow pools. If they joined on to any coast, it would not be
difficult to reach it.

Up to the present, however, there was no sign of any shore. Nothing yet
indicated the proximity of dry land, even in this direction.

The fog continued to lift, and the field of view persistently watched by
Godfrey continued to grow. Its wreaths had now rolled off for about half a mile
or so. Already a few sandy flats appeared among the rocks, carpeted with their
slimy sea-weed.

Did not this sand indicate more or less the presence of a beach, and if the
beach existed, could there be a doubt but what it belonged to the coast of a more
important land? At length a long profile of low hills, buttressed with huge
granitic rocks, became clearly outlined and seemed to shut in the horizon on the
east. The sun had drunk up all the morning vapours, and his disc broke forth in
all its glory.

"Land! land!" exclaimed Godfrey.

And he stretched his hands towards the shore-line, as he knelt on the reef and
offered his thanks to Heaven.

It was really land. The breakers only formed a projecting ridge, something
like the southern cape of a bay, which curved round for about two miles or more.
The bottom of the curve seemed to be a level beach, bordered by trifling hills,
contoured here and there with lines of vegetation, but of no great size.

From the place which Godfrey occupied, his view was able to grasp the
whole of this side.

Bordered north and south by two unequal promontories, it stretched away
for, at the most, five or six miles. It was possible, however, that it formed part of
a large district. Whatever it was, it offered at the least temporary safety. Godfrey,
at the sight, could not conceive a doubt but that he had not been thrown on to a
solitary reef, and that this morsel of ground would satisfy his earliest wants.

"To land! to land!" he said to himself.

But before he left the reef, he gave a look round for the last time. His eyes
again interrogated the sea away up to the horizon. Would some raft appear on the


surface of the waves, some fragment of the Dream, some survivor, perhaps?

Nothing. The launch even was not there, and had probably been dragged into
the common abyss.

Then the idea occurred to Godfrey that among the breakers some of his
companions might have found a refuge, and were, like him, waiting for the day
to try and reach the shore.

There was nobody, neither on the rocks, nor on the beach! The reef was as
deserted as the ocean!

But in default of survivors, had not the sea thrown up some of the corpses?
Could not Godfrey find among the rocks, along to the utmost boundary of the
surf, the inanimate bodies of some of his companions?

No! Nothing along the whole length of the breakers, which the last ripples of
the ebb had now left bare.

Godfrey was alone! He could only count on himself to battle with the
dangers of every sort which environed him!

Before this reality, however, Godfrey, let it be said to his credit, did not quail.
But as before everything it was best for him to ascertain the nature of the ground
from which he was separated by so short a distance, he left the summit of the
rock and began to approach the shore.

When the interval which separated the rocks was too great to be cleared at a
bound, he got down into the water, and sometimes walking and sometimes
swimming he easily gained the one next in order. When there was but a yard or
two between, he jumped from one rock to the other. His progress over these
slimy stones, carpeted with glistening sea-weeds, was not easy, and it was long.
Nearly a quarter of a mile had thus to be traversed.

But Godfrey was active and handy, and at length he set foot on the land
where there probably awaited him, if not early death, at least a miserable life
worse than death. Hunger, thirst, cold, and nakedness, and perils of all kinds;
without a weapon of defence, without a gun to shoot with, without a change of
clothes--such the extremities to which he was reduced.

How imprudent he had been! He had been desirous of knowing if he was
capable of making his way in the world under difficult circumstances! He had
put himself to the proof! He had envied the lot of a Crusoe! Well, he would see if
the lot were an enviable one!

And then there returned to his mind the thought of his happy existence, that
easy life in San Francisco, in the midst of a rich and loving family, which he had
abandoned to throw himself into adventures. He thought of his Uncle Will, of his
betrothed Phina, of his friends who would doubtless never see him again.

As he called up these remembrances his heart swelled, and in spite of his


resolution a tear rose to his eyes.

And again, if he was not alone, if some other survivor of the shipwreck had
managed, like him, to reach the shore, and even in default of the captain or the
mate, this proved to be Professor Tartlet, how little he could depend on that
frivolous being, and how slightly improved the chances of the future appeared!
At this point, however, he still had hope. If he had found no trace among the
breakers, would he meet with any on the beach?

Who else but he had already touched the shore, seeking a companion who
was seeking him?

Godfrey took another long look from north to south. He did not notice a
single human being. Evidently this portion of the earth was uninhabited. In any
case there was no sign, not a trace of smoke in the air, not a vestige.

"Let us get on!" said Godfrey to himself.

And he walked along the beach towards the north, before venturing to climb
the sand dunes, which would allow him to reconnoitre the country over a larger
extent.

The silence was absolute. The sand had received no other footmark. A few
sea-birds, gulls or guillemots, were skimming along the edge of the rocks, the
only living things in the solitude.

Godfrey continued his walk for a quarter of an hour. At last he was about to
turn on to the talus of the most elevated of the dunes, dotted with rushes and
brushwood, when he suddenly stopped.

A shapeless object, extraordinarily distended, something like the corpse of a
sea monster, thrown there, doubtless, by the late storm, was lying about thirty
paces off on the edge of the reef.

Godfrey hastened to run towards it.

The nearer he approached the more rapidly did his heart beat. In truth, in this
stranded animal he seemed to recognize a human form.

Godfrey was not ten paces away from it, when he stopped as if rooted to the
soil, and exclaimed,--

"Tartlet!"

It was the professor of dancing and deportment.

Godfrey rushed towards his companion, who perhaps still breathed.

A moment afterwards he saw that it was the life-belt which produced this
extraordinary distension, and gave the aspect of a monster of the sea to the
unfortunate professor.

But although Tartlet was motionless, was he dead? Perhaps this natatory
clothing had kept him above water, while the surf had borne him to shore?

Godfrey set to work. He knelt down by Tartlet; he unloosed the life-belt and


rubbed him vigorously. He noticed at last a light breath on the half-opened lips!
He put his hand on his heart! The heart still beat.

Godfrey spoke to him.

Tartlet shook his head, then he gave utterance to a hoarse exclamation,
followed by incoherent words.

Godfrey shook him violently.

Tartlet then opened his eyes, passed his left hand over his brow, lifted his
right hand and assured himself that his precious kit and bow, which he tightly
held, had not abandoned him.

"Tartlet! My dear Tartlet!" shouted Godfrey, lightly raising his head.

The head with his mass of tumbled hair gave an affirmative nod.

"Tt is I! I! Godfrey!"

"Godfrey?" asked the professor.

And then he turned over, and rose on to his knees, and looked about, and
smiled, and rose to his feet! He had discovered that at last he was on a solid
base! He had gathered that he was no longer on the ship's deck, exposed to all
the uncertainties of its pitches and its rolls! The sea had ceased to carry him! He
stood on firm ground!

And then Professor Tartlet recovered the aplomb which he had lost since his
departure; his feet placed themselves naturally, with their toes turned out, in the
regulation position; his left hand seized his kit, his right hand grasped his bow.

Then, while the strings, vigorously attacked, gave forth a humid sound of
melancholy sonorousness, these words escaped his smiling lips,--

"In place, miss!"

The good man was thinking of Phina.


CHAPTER IX.

IN WHICH IT IS SHOWN THAT CRUSOES DO NOT HAVE
EVERYTHING AS THEY WISH.

That done, the professor and his pupil rushed into one another's arms.

"My dear Godfrey!" exclaimed Tartlet.

"My good Tartlet!" replied Godfrey.

"At last we are arrived in port!" observed the professor in the tone of a man
who had had enough of navigation and its accidents.

He called it arriving in port!

Godfrey had no desire to contradict him.

"Take off your life-belt," he said. "It suffocates you and hampers your
movements."


"Do you think I can do so without inconvenience?" asked Tartlet.

"Without any inconvenience," answered Godfrey. "Now put up your fiddle,
and let us take a look round."

"Come on," replied the professor; "but if you don't mind, Godfrey, let us go
to the first restaurant we see. I am dying of hunger, and a dozen sandwiches
washed down with a glass or two of wine will soon set me on my legs again."

"Yes! to the first restaurant!" answered Godfrey, nodding his head; "and even
to the last, if the first does not suit us."

"And," continued Tartlet, "we can ask some fellow as we go along the road
to the telegraph office so as to send a message off to your Uncle Kolderup. That
excellent man will hardly refuse to send on some necessary cash for us to get
back to Montgomery Street, for I have not got a cent with me!"

"Agreed, to the first telegraph office," answered Godfrey, "or if there isn't
one in this country, to the first post office. Come on, Tartlet."

The professor took off his swimming apparatus, and passed it over his
shoulder like a hunting-horn, and then both stepped out for the edge of the dunes
which bordered the shore.

What more particularly interested Godfrey, whom the encounter with Tartlet
had imbued with some hope, was to see if they too were the only survivors of the
Dream.

A quarter of an hour after the explorers had left the edge of the reef they had
climbed a dune about sixty or eighty feet high, and stood on its crest. Thence
they looked on a large extent of coast, and examined the horizon in the east,
which till then had been hidden by the hills on the shore.

Two or three miles away in that direction a second line of hills formed the
background, and beyond them nothing was seen of the horizon.

Towards the north the coast trended off to a point, but it could not be seen if
there was a corresponding cape behind. On the south a creek ran some distance
into the shore, and on this side it looked as though the ocean closed the view.
Whence this land in the Pacific was probably a peninsula, and the isthmus which
joined it to the continent would have to be sought for towards the north or north-
east.

The country, however, far from being barren, was hidden beneath an
agreeable mantle of verdure; long prairies, amid which meandered many limpid
streams, and high and thick forests, whose trees rose above one another to the
very background of hills. It was a charming landscape.

But of houses forming town, village, or hamlet, not one was in sight! Of
buildings grouped and arranged as a farm of any sort, not a sign! Of smoke in
the sky, betraying some dwelling hidden among the trees, not a trace. Not a


steeple above the branches, not a windmill on an isolated hill. Not even in
default of houses a cabin, a hut, an ajoupa, or a wigwam? No! nothing. If human
beings inhabited this unknown land, they must live like troglodytes, below, and
not above the ground. Not a road was visible, not a footpath, not even a track. It
seemed that the foot of man had never trod either a rock of the beach or a blade
of the grass on the prairies.

"I don't see the town," remarked Tartlet, who, however, remained on tiptoe.

"That is perhaps because it is not in this part of the province!" answered
Godfrey.

"But a village?"

"There's nothing here."

"Where are we then?"

"I know nothing about it."

"What! You don't know! But Godfrey, we had better make haste and find
"Who is to tell us?"

"What will become of us then?" exclaimed Tartlet, rounding his arms and
lifting them to the sky.

"Become a couple of Crusoes!"

At this answer the professor gave a bound such as no clown had ever
equalled.

Crusoes! They! A Crusoe! He! Descendants of that Selkirk who had lived for
long years on the island of Juan Fernandez! Imitators of the imaginary heroes of
Daniel Defoe and De Wyss whose adventures they had so often read!
Abandoned, far from their relatives, their friends; separated from their fellow-
men by thousands of miles, destined to defend their lives perhaps against wild
beasts, perhaps against savages who would land there, wretches without
resources, suffering from hunger, suffering from thirst, without weapons, without
tools, almost without clothes, left to themselves. No, it was impossible!

"Don't say such things, Godfrey," exclaimed Tartlet. "No! Don't joke about
such things! The mere supposition will kill me! You are laughing at me, are you
not?"

"Yes, my gallant Tartlet," answered Godfrey. "Reassure yourself. But in the
first place, let us think about matters that are pressing."

In fact, they had to try and find some cavern, a grotto or hole, in which to
pass the night, and then to collect some edible mollusks so as to satisfy the
cravings of their stomachs.

Godfrey and Tartlet then commenced to descend the talus of the dunes in the
direction of the reef. Godfrey showed himself very ardent in his researches, and


out.


Tartlet considerably stupefied by his shipwreck experiences. The first looked
before him, behind him, and all around him; the second hardly saw ten paces in
front of him.

"If there are no inhabitants on this land, are there any animals?" asked
Godfrey.

He meant to say domestic animals, such as furred and feathered game, not
wild animals which abound in tropical regions, and with which they were not
likely to have to do.

Several flocks of birds were visible on the shore, bitterns, curlews, bernicle
geese, and teal, which hovered and chirped and filled the air with their
flutterings and cries, doubtless protesting against the invasion of their domain.

Godfrey was justified in concluding that where there were birds there were
nests, and where there were nests there were eggs. The birds congregated here in
such numbers, because rocks provided them with thousands of cavities for their
dwelling-places. In the distance a few herons and some flocks of snipe indicated
the neighbourhood of a marsh.

Birds then were not wanting, the only difficulty was to get at them without
fire-arms. The best thing to do now was to make use of them in the egg state,
and consume them under that elementary but nourishing form.

But if the dinner was there, how were they to cook it? How were they to set
about lighting a fire? An important question, the solution of which was
postponed.

Godfrey and Tartlet returned straight towards the reef, over which some sea-
birds were circling. An agreeable surprise there awaited them.

Among the indigenous fowl which ran along the sand of the beach and
pecked about among the sea-weed and under the tufts of aquatic plants, was it a
dozen hens and two or three cocks of the American breed that they beheld? No!
There was no mistake, for at their approach did not a resounding cock-a-doodle-
do-oo-oo rend the air like the sound of a trumpet?

And farther off, what were those quadrupeds which were gliding in and out
of the rocks, and making their way towards the first slopes of the hills, or
grubbing beneath some of the green shrubs? Godfrey could not be mistaken.
There were a dozen agouties, five or six sheep, and as many goats, who were
quietly browsing on the first vegetation on the very edge of the prairie.

"Look there, Tartlet!" he exclaimed.

And the professor looked, but saw nothing, so much was he absorbed with
the thought of this unexpected situation.

A thought flashed across the mind of Godfrey, and it was correct: it was that
these hens, agouties, goats, and sheep had belonged to the Dream. At the


moment she went down, the fowls had easily been able to reach the reef and then
the beach. As for the quadrupeds, they could easily have swum ashore.

"And so," remarked Godfrey, "what none of our unfortunate companions
have been able to do, these simple animals, guided by their instinct, have done!
And of all those on board the Dream, none have been saved but a few beasts!"

"Including ourselves!" answered Tartlet naively.

As far as he was concerned, he had come ashore unconsciously, very much
like one of the animals. It mattered little. It was a very fortunate thing for the two
shipwrecked men that a certain number of these animals had reached the shore.
They would collect them, fold them, and with the special fecundity of their
species, if their stay on this land was a lengthy one, it would be easy to have
quite a flock of quadrupeds, and a yard full of poultry.

But on this occasion, Godfrey wished to keep to such alimentary resources as
the coast could furnish, either in eggs or shell-fish. Professor Tartlet and he set to
work to forage among the interstices of the stones, and beneath the carpet of sea-
weeds, and not without success. They soon collected quite a notable quantity of
mussels and periwinkles, which they could eat raw. A few dozen eggs of the
bernicle geese were also found among the higher rocks which shut in the bay on
the north. They had enough to satisfy a good many; and, hunger pressing,
Godfrey and Tartlet hardly thought of making difficulties about their first repast.

"And the fire?" said the professor.

"Yes! The fire!" said Godfrey.

It was the most serious of questions, and it led to an inventory being made of
the contents of their pockets. Those of the professor were empty or nearly so.
They contained a few spare strings for his kit, and a piece of rosin for his bow.
How would you get a light from that, I should like to know? Godfrey was hardly
better provided. However, it was with extreme satisfaction that he discovered in
his pocket an excellent knife, whose leather case had kept it from the sea-water.
This knife, with blade, gimlet, hook, and saw, was a valuable instrument under
the circumstances. But besides this tool, Godfrey and his companion had only
their two hands; and as the hands of the professor had never been used except in
playing his fiddle, and making his gestures, Godfrey concluded that he would
have to trust to his own.

He thought, however, of utilizing those of Tartlet for procuring a fire by
means of rubbing two sticks of wood rapidly together. A few eggs cooked in the
embers would be greatly appreciated at their second meal at noon.

While Godfrey then was occupied in robbing the nests in spite of the
proprietors, who tried to defend their progeny in the shell, the professor went off
to collect some pieces of wood which had been dried by the sun at the foot of the


dunes. These were taken behind a rock sheltered from the wind from the sea.
Tartlet then chose two very dry pieces, with the intention of gradually obtaining
sufficient heat by rubbing them vigorously and continuously together. What
simple Polynesian savages commonly did, why should not the professor, so
much their superior in his own opinion, be able to do?

Behold him then, rubbing and rubbing, in a way to dislocate the muscles of
his arm and shoulder. He worked himself into quite a rage, poor man! But
whether it was that the wood was not right, or its dryness was not sufficient, or
the professor held it wrongly, or had not got the peculiar turn of hand necessary
for operations of this kind, if he did not get much heat out of the wood, he
succeeded in getting a good deal out of himself. In short, it was his own forehead
alone which smoked under the vapours of his own perspiration.

When Godfrey returned with his collection of eggs, he found Tartlet in a
rage, in a state to which his choregraphic exercises had never doubtless
provoked him.

"Doesn't it do?" he asked.

"No, Godfrey, it does not do," replied the professor. "And I begin to think
that these inventions of the savages are only imaginations to deceive the world."

"No," answered Godfrey. "But in that, as in all things, you must know how to
do it."

"These eggs, then?"

"There is another way. If you attach one of these eggs to the end of a string
and whirl it round rapidly, and suddenly arrest the movement of rotation, the
movement may perhaps transform itself into heat, and then--"

"And then the egg will be cooked?"

"Yes, if the rotation has been swift enough and the stoppage sudden enough.
But how do you produce the stoppage without breaking the egg? Now, there is a
simpler way, dear Tartlet. Behold!"

And carefully taking one of the eggs of the bernicle goose, he broke the shell
at its end, and adroitly swallowed the inside without any further formalities.

Tartlet could not make up his mind to imitate him, and contented himself
with the shell-fish.

It now remained to look for a grotto or some shelter in which to pass the
night.

"It is an unheard-of thing," observed the professor, "that Crusoes cannot at
the least find a cavern, which, later on, they can make their home!"

"Let us look," said Godfrey.

It was unheard of. We must avow, however, that on this occasion the
tradition was broken. In vain did they search along the rocky shore on the


southern part of the bay. Not a cavern, not a grotto, not a hole was there that
would serve as a shelter. They had to give up the idea. Godfrey resolved to
reconnoitre up to the first trees in the background beyond the sandy coast.

Tartlet and he then remounted the first line of sandhills and crossed the
verdant prairies which they had seen a few hours before.

A very odd circumstance, and a very fortunate one at the time, that the other
survivors of the wreck voluntarily followed them. Evidently, cocks and hens, and
sheep, goats and agouties, driven by instinct, had resolved to go with them.
Doubtless they felt too lonely on the beach, which did not yield sufficient food.

Three-quarters of an hour later Godfrey and Tartlet--they had scarcely
spoken during the exploration--arrived at the outskirt of the trees. Not a trace
was there of habitation or inhabitant. Complete solitude. It might even be
doubted if this part of the country had ever been trodden by human feet.

In this place were a few handsome trees, in isolated groups, and others more
crowded about a quarter of a mile in the rear formed a veritable forest of
different species.

Godfrey looked out for some old trunk, hollowed by age, which could offer a
shelter among its branches, but his researches were in vain, although he
continued them till night was falling.

Hunger made itself sharply felt, and the two contented themselves with
mussels, of which they had thoughtfully brought an ample supply from the
beach. Then, quite tired out, they lay down at the foot of a tree, and trusting to
Providence, slept through the night.


CHAPTER X.

IN WHICH GODFREY DOES WHAT ANY OTHER SHIPWRECKED
MAN WOULD HAVE DONE UNDER THE CIRCUMSTANCES.

The night passed without incident. The two men, quite knocked up with
excitement and fatigue, had slept as peacefully as if they had been in the most
comfortable room in the mansion in Montgomery Street.

On the morrow, the 27th of June, at the first rays of the rising sun, the crow
of the cock awakened them.

Godfrey immediately recognized where he was, but Tartlet had to rub his
eyes and stretch his arms for some time before he did so.

"Is breakfast this morning to resemble dinner yesterday?" was his first
observation.

"IT am afraid so," answered Godfrey. "But I hope we shall dine better this
evening.”


The professor could not restrain a significant grimace. Where were the tea
and sandwiches which had hitherto been brought to him when he awoke? How
could he wait till breakfast-time, the bell for which would perhaps never sound,
without this preparatory repast?

But it was necessary to make a start. Godfrey felt the responsibility which
rested on him, on him alone, for he could in no way depend on his companion.
In that empty box which served the professor for a cranium there could be born
no practical idea; Godfrey would have to think, contrive, and decide for both.

His first thought was for Phina, his betrothed, whom he had so stupidly
refused to make his wife; his second for his Uncle Will, whom he had so
imprudently left, and then turning to Tartlet,--

"To vary our ordinary," he said, "here are some shell-fish and half a dozen
eggs."

"And nothing to cook them with!"

"Nothing!" said Godfrey. "But if the food itself was missing, what would you
say then, Tartlet?"

"I should say that nothing was not enough,” said Tartlet drily.

Nevertheless, they had to be content with this repast.

The very natural idea occurred to Godfrey to push forward the
reconnaissance commenced the previous evening. Above all it was necessary to
know as soon as possible in what part of the Pacific Ocean the Dream had been
lost, so as to discover some inhabited place on the shore, where they could either
arrange the way of returning home or await the passing of some ship.

Godfrey observed that if he could cross the second line of hills, whose
picturesque outline was visible beyond the first, that he might perhaps be able to
do this. He reckoned that they could get there in an hour or two, and it was to
this urgent exploration that he resolved to devote the first hours of the day. He
looked round him. The cocks and hens were beginning to peck about among the
high vegetation. Agouties, goats, sheep, went and came on the skirt of the forest.

Godfrey did not care to drag all this flock of poultry and quadrupeds about
with him. But to keep them more safely in this place, it would be necessary to
leave Tartlet in charge of them.

Tartlet agreed to remain alone, and for several hours to act as shepherd of the
flock.

He made but one observation,--

"If you lose yourself, Godfrey?"

"Have no fear of that," answered the young man, "I have only this forest to
cross, and as you will not leave its edge I am certain to find you again."

"Don't forget the telegram to your Uncle Will, and ask him for a good many


hundred dollars."

"The telegram--or the letter! It is all one!" answered Godfrey, who so long as
he had not fixed on the position of this land was content to leave Tartlet to his
illusions.

Then having shaken hands with the professor, he plunged beneath the trees,
whose thick branches scarcely allowed the sun's rays to penetrate. It was their
direction, however, which was to guide our young explorer towards the high hill
whose curtain hid from his view the whole of the eastern horizon.

Footpath there was none. The ground, however, was not free from all
imprint. Godfrey in certain places remarked the tracks of animals. On two or
three occasions he even believed he saw some rapid ruminants moving off, either
elans, deer, or wapiti, but he recognized no trace of ferocious animals such as
tigers or jaguars, whose absence, however, was no cause for regret.

The first floor of the forest, that is to say all that portion of the trees
comprised between the first fork and the branches, afforded an asylum to a great
number of birds--wild pigeons by the hundred beneath the trees, ospreys, grouse,
aracaris with beaks like a lobster's claw, and higher, hovering above the glades,
two or three of those lammergeiers whose eye resembles a cockade. But none of
the birds were of such special kinds that he could therefrom make out the
latitude of this continent.

So it was with the trees of this forest. Almost the same species as those in
that part of the United States which comprises Lower California, the Bay of
Monterey, and New Mexico.

Arbutus-trees, large-flowered cornels, maples, birches, oaks, four or five
varieties of magnolias and sea-pines, such as are met with in South Carolina,
then in the centre of vast clearances, olive-trees, chestnuts, and small shrubs.
Tufts of tamarinds, myrtles, and mastic-trees, such as are produced in the
temperate zone. Generally, there was enough space between the trees to allow
him to pass without being obliged to call on fire or the axe. The sea breeze
circulated freely amid the higher branches, and here and there great patches of
light shone on the ground.

And so Godfrey went along striking an oblique line beneath these large trees.
To take any precautions never occurred to him. The desire to reach the heights
which bordered the forest on the east entirely absorbed him. He sought among
the foliage for the direction of the solar rays so as to march straight on his goal.
He did not even see the guide-birds, so named because they fly before the steps
of the traveller, stopping, returning, and darting on ahead as if they were
showing the way. Nothing could distract him.

His state of mind was intelligible. Before an hour had elapsed his fate would


be settled! Before an hour he would know if it were possible to reach some
inhabited portion of the continent.

Already Godfrey, reasoning on what had been the route followed and the
way made by the Dream during a navigation of seventeen days, had concluded
that it could only be on the Japanese or Chinese coast that the ship had gone
down.

Besides the position of the sun, always in the south, rendered it quite certain
that the Dream had not crossed the line.

Two hours after he had started Godfrey reckoned the distance he had
travelled at about five miles, considering several circuits which he had had to
make owing to the density of the forest. The second group of hills could not be
far away.

Already the trees were getting farther apart from each other, forming isolated
groups, and the rays of light penetrated more easily through the lofty branches.
The ground began slightly to slope, and then abruptly to rise.

Although he was somewhat fatigued, Godfrey had enough will not to slacken
his pace. He would doubtless have run had it not been for the steepness of the
earlier ascents.

He had soon got high enough to overlook the general mass of the verdant
dome which stretched away behind him, and whence several heads of trees here
and there emerged.

But Godfrey did not dream of looking back. His eyes never quitted the line
of the denuded ridge, which showed itself about 400 or 500 feet before and
above him. That was the barrier which all the time hid him from the eastern
horizon.

A tiny cone, obliquely truncated, overlooked this rugged line and joined on
with its gentle slope to the sinuous crest of the hills.

"There! there!" said Godfrey, "that is the point I must reach! The top of that
cone! And from there what shall I see?--A town?--A village?--A desert?"

Highly excited, Godfrey mounted the hill, keeping his elbows at his chest to
restrain the beating of his heart. His panting tired him, but he had not the
patience to stop so as to recover himself. Were he to have fallen half fainting on
the summit of the cone which shot up about 100 feet above his head, he would
not have lost a minute in hastening towards it.

A few minutes more and he would be there. The ascent seemed to him steep
enough on his side, an angle perhaps of thirty or thirty-five degrees. He helped
himself up with hands and feet; he seized on the tufts of slender herbs on the
hill-side, and on a few meagre shrubs, mastics and myrtles, which stretched
away up to the top.


A last effort was made! His head rose above the platform of the cone, and
then, lying on his stomach, his eyes gazed at the eastern horizon.

It was the sea which formed it. Twenty miles off it united with the line of the
sky!

He turned round.

Still sea--west of him, south of him, north of him! The immense ocean
surrounding him on all sides!

"An island!"

[Illustration: "An Island!" page 111]

As he uttered the word Godfrey felt his heart shrink. The thought had not
occurred to him that he was on an island. And yet such was the case! The
terrestrial chain which should have attached him to the continent was abruptly
broken. He felt as though he had been a sleeping man in a drifted boat, who
awoke with neither oar nor sail to help him back to shore.

But Godfrey was soon himself again. His part was taken, to accept the
situation. If the chances of safety did not come from without, it was for him to
contrive them.

He set to work at first then as exactly as possible to ascertain the disposition
of this island which his view embraced over its whole length. He estimated that
it ought to measure about sixty miles round, being, as far as he could see, about
twenty miles long from south to north, and twelve miles wide from east to west.

Its central part was screened by the green depths of forest which extended up
to the ridge dominated by the cone, whose slope died away on the shore.

All the rest was prairie, with clumps of trees, or beach with rocks, whose
outer ring was capriciously tapered off in the form of capes and promontories. A
few creeks cut out the coast, but could only afford refuge for two or three
fishing-boats.

The bay at the bottom of which the Dream lay shipwrecked was the only one
of any size, and that extended over some seven or eight miles. An open
roadstead, no vessel would have found it a safe shelter, at least unless the wind
was blowing from the east.

But what was this island? To what geographical group did it belong? Did it
form part of an archipelago, or was it alone in this portion of the Pacific?

In any case, no other island, large or small, high or low, appeared within the
range of vision.

Godfrey rose and gazed round the horizon. Nothing was to be seen along the
circular line where sea and sky ran into each other. If, then, there existed to
windward or to leeward any island or coast of a continent, it could only be at a
considerable distance.


Godfrey called up all his geographical reminiscences, in order to discover
what island of the Pacific this could be. In reasoning it out he came to this
conclusion.

The Dream for seventeen days had steered very nearly south-west. Now with
a speed of from 150 to 180 miles every four-and-twenty hours, she ought to have
covered nearly fifty degrees. Now it was obvious that she had not crossed the
equator.

The situation of the island, or of the group to which it belonged, would
therefore have to be looked for in that part of the ocean comprised between the
160th and 170th degrees of west longitude.

In this portion of the Pacific it seemed to Godfrey that the map showed no
other archipelago than that of the Sandwich Islands, but outside this archipelago
were there not any isolated islands whose names escaped him and which were
dotted here and there over the sea up to the coast of the Celestial Empire?

It was not of much consequence. There existed no means of his going in
search of another spot on the ocean which might prove more hospitable.

"Well," said Godfrey to himself, "if I don't know the name of this island, I'll
call it Phina Island, in memory of her I ought never to have left to run about the
world, and perhaps the name will bring us some luck."

Godfrey then occupied himself in trying to ascertain if the island was
inhabited in the part which he had not yet been able to visit.

From the top of the cone he saw nothing which betrayed the presence of
aborigines, neither habitations on the prairie nor houses on the skirt of the trees,
not even a fisherman's hut on the shore.

But if the island was deserted, the sea which surrounded it was none the less
so, for not a ship showed itself within the limits of what, from the height of the
cone, was a considerable circuit.

Godfrey having finished his exploration had now only to get down to the
foot of the hill and retake the road through the forest so as to rejoin Tartlet. But
before he did so his eyes were attracted by a sort of cluster of trees of huge
stature, which rose on the boundary of the prairie towards the north. It was a
gigantic group, it exceeded by a head all those which Godfrey had previously
seen.

"Perhaps," he said, "it would be better to take up our quarters over there,
more especially as if I am not mistaken I can see a stream which should rise in
the central chain and flow across the prairie."

This was to be looked into on the morrow.

Towards the south the aspect of the island was slightly different. Forests and
prairies rapidly gave place to the yellow carpet of the beach, and in places the


shore was bounded with picturesque rocks.

But what was Godfrey's surprise, when he thought he saw a light smoke,
which rose in the air beyond this rocky barrier.

"Are there any of our companions?" he exclaimed. "But no, it is not possible!
Why should they have got so far from the bay since yesterday, and round so
many miles of reef? Is it a village of fishermen, or the encampment of some
indigenous tribe?"

Godfrey watched it with the closest attention. Was this gentle vapour which
the breeze softly blew towards the west a smoke? Could he be mistaken?
Anyhow it quickly vanished, a few minutes afterwards nothing could be seen of
it.

It was a false hope.

Godfrey took a last look in its direction, and then seeing nothing, glided
down the slope, and again plunged beneath the trees.

An hour later he had traversed the forest and found himself on its skirt.

There Tartlet awaited him with his two-footed and four-footed flock. And
how was the obstinate professor occupying himself? In the same way. A bit of
wood was in his right hand another piece in his left, and he still continued his
efforts to set them alight. He rubbed and rubbed with a constancy worthy of a
better fate.

"Well," he shouted as he perceived Godfrey some distance off--"and the
telegraph office?"

"It is not open!" answered Godfrey, who dared not yet tell him anything of
the situation.

"And the post?"

"Tt is shut! But let us have something to eat!--I am dying with hunger! We
can talk presently."

And this morning Godfrey and his companion had again to content
themselves with a too meagre repast of raw eggs and shell-fish.

"Wholesome diet!" repeated Godfrey to Tartlet, who was hardly of that
opinion and picked his food with considerable care.


CHAPTER XI.

IN WHICH THE QUESTION OF LODGING IS SOLVED AS WELL AS IT
COULD BE.

The day was already far advanced. Godfrey resolved to defer till the morrow
the task of proceeding to a new abode. But to the pressing questions which the
professor propounded on the results of his exploration he ended by replying that


it was an island, Phina Island, on which they both had been cast, and that they
must think of the means of living before dreaming of the means of departing.

"An island!" exclaimed Tartlet.

"Yes! It is an island!"

"Which the sea surrounds?"

"Naturally."

"But what is it?"

"I have told you, Phina Island, and you understand why I gave it that name."

"No, I do not understand!" answered Tartlet, making a grimace; "and I don't
see the resemblance! Miss Phina is surrounded by land, not water!"

After this melancholy reflection, he prepared to pass the night with as little
discomfort as possible. Godfrey went off to the reef to get a new stock of eggs
and mollusks, with which he had to be contented, and then, tired out, he came
back to the tree and soon fell asleep, while Tartlet, whose philosophy would not
allow him to accept such a state of affairs, gave himself over to the bitterest
meditations. On the morrow, the 28th of June, they were both afoot before the
cock had interrupted their slumbers.

To begin with, a hasty breakfast, the same as the day before. Only water from
a little brook was advantageously replaced by a little milk given by one of the
goats.

Ah! worthy Tartlet! Where were the "mint julep," the "port wine sangaree,"
the "sherry cobbler," the "sherry cocktail," which he hardly drank, but which
were served him at all hours in the bars and taverns of San Francisco? How he
envied the poultry, the agouties, and the sheep, who cheerfully quenched their
thirst without the addition of such saccharine or alcoholic mixtures to their water
from the stream! To these animals no fire was necessary to cook their food; roots
and herbs and seeds sufficed, and their breakfast was always served to the
minute on their tablecloth of green.

"Let us make a start," said Godfrey.

And behold the two on their way, followed by a procession of domestic
animals, who refused to be left behind. Godfrey's idea was to explore, in the
north of the island, that portion of the coast on which he had noticed the group of
gigantic trees in his view from the cone. But to get there he resolved to keep
along the shore. The surf might perhaps have cast up some fragment of the
wreck. Perhaps they might find on the beach some of their companions in the
Dream to which they could give Christian burial. As for finding any one of them
living, it was hardly to be hoped for, after a lapse of six-and-thirty hours.

The first line of hills was surmounted, and Godfrey and his companion
reached the beginning of the reef, which looked as deserted as it had when they


had left it. There they renewed their stock of eggs and mollusks, in case they
should fail to find even such meagre resources away to the north. Then,
following the fringe of sea-weed left by the last tide, they again ascended the
dunes, and took a good look round.

Nothing! always nothing!

We must certainly say that if misfortune had made Crusoes of these survivors
of the Dream, it had shown itself much more rigorous towards them than
towards their predecessors, who always had some portion of the vessel left to
them, and who, after bringing away crowds of objects of necessity had been able
to utilize the timbers of the wreck. Victuals for a considerable period, clothes,
tools, weapons, had always been left them with which to satisfy the elementary
exigencies of existence. But here there was nothing of all this! In the middle of
that dark night the ship had disappeared in the depths of the sea, without leaving
on the reefs the slightest traces of its wreck! It had not been possible to save a
thing from her--not even a lucifer-match--and to tell the truth, the want of that
match was the most serious of all wants.

I know well, good people comfortably installed in your easy-chairs before a
comfortable hearth at which is blazing brightly a fire of wood or coals, that you
will be apt to say,--

"But nothing was more easy than for them to get a fire! There are a thousand
ways of doing that! Two pebbles! A little dry moss! A little burnt rag,"--and how
do you burn the rag? "The blade of a knife would do for a steel, or two bits of
wood rubbed briskly together in Polynesian fashion!"

Well, try it!

It was about this that Godfrey was thinking as he walked, and this it was that
occupied his thoughts more than anything else. Perhaps he too, poking his coke
fire and reading his travellers' tales, had thought the same as you good people!
But now he had to put matters to the test, and he saw with considerable
disquietude the want of a fire, that indispensable element which nothing could
replace.

He kept on ahead, then, lost in thought, followed by Tartlet, who by his
shouts and gestures, kept together the flock of sheep, agouties, goats, and
poultry.

Suddenly his look was attracted by the bright colours of a cluster of small
apples which hung from the branches of certain shrubs, growing in hundreds at
the foot of the dunes. He immediately recognized them as "manzanillas," which
serve as food to the Indians in certain parts of California.

"At last," he exclaimed, "there is something which will be a change from our
eggs and mussels."


"What? Do you eat those things?" said Tartlet with his customary grimace.

"You shall soon see!" answered Godfrey.

And he set to work to gather the manzanillas, and eat them greedily.

They were only wild apples, but even their acidity did not prevent them from
being agreeable. The professor made little delay in imitating his companion, and
did not show himself particularly discontented at the work. Godfrey thought, and
with reason, that from these fruits there could be made a fermented liquor which
would be preferable to the water.

The march was resumed. Soon the end of the sand dunes died away in a
prairie traversed by a small stream. This was the one Godfrey had seen from the
top of the cone. The large trees appeared further on, and after a journey of about
nine miles the two explorers, tired enough by their four hours' walk, reached
them a few minutes after noon.

The site was well worth the trouble of looking at, of visiting, and, doubtless,
occupying.

On the edge of a vast prairie, dotted with manzanilla bushes and other
shrubs, there rose a score of gigantic trees which could have even borne
comparison with the same species in the forests of California. They were
arranged in a semi-circle. The carpet of verdure, which stretched at their feet,
after bordering the stream for some hundreds of feet, gave place to a long beach,
covered with rocks, and shingle, and sea-weed, which ran out into the water in a
narrowing point to the north.

These "big trees," as they are commonly called in Western America, belong
to the genus Sequoia, and are conifers of the fir family. If you ask the English for
their distinguishing name, you will be told "Wellingtonias," if you ask the
Americans they will reply "Washingtonias." But whether they recall the memory
of the phlegmatic victor of Waterloo, or of the illustrious founder of the
American Republic, they are the hugest products known of the Californian and
Nevadan floras. In certain districts in these states there are entire forests of these
trees, such as the groups at Mariposa and Calaveras, some of the trees of which
measure from sixty to eighty feet in circumference, and some 300 feet in height.
One of them, at the entrance of the Yosemite Valley, is quite 100 feet round.
When living--for it is now prostrate--its first branches could have overtopped
Strasburg Cathedral, or, in other words, were above eighty feet from the ground.

Besides this tree there are "The Mother of the Forest," "The Beauty of the
Forest," "The Hut of the Pioneer," "The Two Sentinels," "General Grant," "Miss
Emma," "Miss Mary," "Brigham Young and his Wife," "The Three Graces,"
"The Bear," &c., &c.; all of them veritable vegetable phenomena. One of the
trees has been sawn across at its base, and on it there has been built a ball-room,


in which a quadrille of eight or ten couples can be danced with ease.

But the giant of giants, in a forest which is the property of the state, about
fifteen miles from Murphy, is "The Father of the Forest," an old sequoia, 4000
years old, which rises 452 feet from the ground, higher than the cross of St.
Peter's, at Rome, higher than the great pyramid of Ghizeh, higher than the iron
bell-turret which now caps one of the towers of Rouen Cathedral, and which
ought to be looked upon as the highest monument in the world.

It was a group of some twenty of these colossi that nature had planted on this
point of the island, at the epoch, probably, when Solomon was building that
temple at Jerusalem which has never risen from its ruins. The largest was,
perhaps, 300 feet high, the smallest nearly 200.

Some of them, hollowed out by age, had enormous arches through their
bases, beneath which a troop of horsemen could have ridden with ease.

Godfrey was struck with admiration in the presence of these natural
phenomena, as they are not generally found at altitudes of less than from 5000 to
6000 feet above the level of the sea. He even thought that the view alone was
worth the journey. Nothing he had seen was comparable to these columns of
clear brown, which outlined themselves almost without sensible diminution of
their diameters to their lowest fork. The cylindrical trunks rising from 80 to 100
feet above the earth, ramified into such thick branches that they themselves
looked like tree-stems of huge dimensions bearing quite a forest in the air.

One of these specimens of Sequoia gigantea--one of the biggest in the group-
-more particularly attracted Godfrey's attention.

Gazing at its base it displayed an opening of from four to five feet in width,
and ten feet high, which gave entrance to its interior. The giant's heart had
disappeared, the alburnum had been dissipated into soft whitish dust; but if the
tree did not depend so much on its powerful roots as on its solid bark, it could
still keep its position for centuries.

"In default of a cavern or a grotto," said Godfrey, "here is a ready-made
dwelling. A wooden house, a tower, such as there is in no inhabited land. Here
we can be sheltered and shut in. Come along, Tartlet! come!"

And the young man, catching hold of his companion, dragged him inside the
sequoia.

The base was covered with a bed of vegetable dust, and in diameter could
not be less than twenty feet.

As for the height to which its vault extended, the gloom prevented even an
estimate. For not a ray of light found its way through the bark wall. Neither cleft
nor fault was there through which the wind or rain could come. Our two Crusoes
would therein find themselves in a position to brave with impunity the


inclemency of the weather. No cave could be firmer, or drier, or compacter. In
truth it would have been difficult to have anywhere found a better.

"Eh, Tartlet, what do you think of our natural house?" asked Godfrey.

"Yes, but the chimney?" answered Tartlet.

"Before we talk about the chimney," replied Godfrey, "let us wait till we have
got the fire!"

This was only logical.

Godfrey went to reconnoitre the neighbourhood. As we have said, the prairie
extended to this enormous mass of sequoias which formed its edge. The small
stream meandering through the grassy carpet gave a healthy freshness to its
borders, and thereon grew shrubs of different kinds; myrtles, mastic bushes, and
among others a quantity of manzanillas, which gave promise of a large crop of
their wild apples.

Farther off, on ground that grew gradually higher, were scattered several
clumps of trees, made up of oaks and beeches, sycamores and nettle-trees, but
trees of great stature as they were, they seemed but simple underwood by the
side of the "mammoths," whose huge shadows the sun was throwing even into
the sea. Across the prairie lay minor lines of bushes, and vegetable clumps and
verdant thickets, which Godfrey resolved to investigate on the following day.

If the site pleased him, it did not displease the domestic animals. Agouties,
goats, and sheep had soon taken possession of this domain, which offered them
roots to nibble at, and grass to browse on far beyond their needs. As for the
fowls they were greedily pecking away at the seeds and worms in the banks of
the rivulet. Animal life was already manifesting itself in such goings and
comings, such flights and gambols, such bleatings and gruntings and cluckings
as had doubtless never been heard of in these parts before.

Then Godfrey returned to the clump of sequoias, and made a more attentive
examination of the tree in which he had chosen to take up his abode. It appeared
to him that it would be difficult, if not impossible, to climb into the first
branches, at least by the exterior; for the trunk presented no protuberances.
Inside it the ascent might be easier, if the tree were hollow up to the fork.

In case of danger it would be advisable to seek refuge among the thick
boughs borne by the enormous trunk. But this matter could be looked into later
on.

When he had finished his inquiries the sun was low on horizon, and it
seemed best to put off till to-morrow the preparations for their definitely taking
up their abode.

But, after a meal with dessert composed of wild apples, what could they do
better than pass the night on a bed of the vegetable dust which covered the


ground inside the sequoia?

And this, under the keeping of Providence, was what was done, but not until
after Godfrey, in remembrance of his uncle, William W. Kolderup, had given to
the giant the name of "Will Tree," just as its prototypes in the forests of
California and the neighbouring states bear the names of the great citizens of the
American Republic.


CHAPTER XII.

WHICH ENDS WITH A THUNDER-BOLT.

It must be acknowledged that Godfrey was in a fair way to become a new
man in this completely novel position to one so frivolous, so light-minded, and
so thoughtless. He had hitherto only had to allow himself to live. Never had care
for the morrow disquieted his rest. In the opulent mansion in Montgomery
Street, where he slept his ten hours without a break, not the fall of a rose leaf had
ever troubled his slumbers.

It was so no longer. On this unknown land he found himself thoroughly shut
off from the rest of the world, left entirely to his own resources, obliged to face
the necessities of life under conditions in which a man even much more practical
might have been in great difficulty. Doubtless when it was found that the Dream
did not return, a search for him would be made. But what were these two? Less
than a needle in a hayrick or a sand-grain on the sea-bottom! The incalculable
fortune of Uncle Kolderup could not do everything.

When Godfrey had found his fairly acceptable shelter, his sleep in it was by
no means undisturbed. His brain travelled as it had never done before. Ideas of
all kinds were associated together: those of the past which he bitterly regretted,
those of the present of which he sought the realization, those of the future which
disquieted him more than all!

But in these rough trials, the reason and, in consequence, the reasoning
which naturally flows from it, were little by little freed from the limbo in which
they had hitherto slept. Godfrey was resolved to strive against his ill-luck, and to
do all he could to get out of his difficulties. If he escaped, the lesson would
certainly not be lost on him for the future.

At daybreak he was astir, with the intention of proceeding to a more
complete installation. The question of food, above all that of fire, which was
connected with it, occupied the first place; then there were tools or arms to
make, clothes to procure, unless they were anxious of soon appearing attired in
Polynesian costume.

Tartlet still slumbered. You could not see him in the shadow, but you could


hear him. That poor man, spared from the wreck, remained as frivolous at forty-
five as his pupil had formerly been. He was a gain in no sense. He even might be
considered an incubus, for he had to be cared for in all ways. But he was a
companion!

He was worth more in that than the most intelligent dog, although he was
probably of less use! He was a creature able to talk--although only at random; to
converse--if the matter were never serious; to complain--and this he did most
frequently! As it was, Godfrey was able to hear a human voice. That was worth
more than the parrot's in Robinson Crusoe! Even with a Tartlet he would not be
alone, and nothing was so disheartening as the thought of absolute solitude.

"Crusoe before Friday, Crusoe after Friday; what a difference!" thought he.

However, on this morning, that of June 29th, Godfrey was not sorry to be
alone, so as to put into execution his project of exploring the group of sequoias.
Perhaps he would be fortunate enough to discover some fruit, some edible root,
which he could bring back--to the extreme satisfaction of the professor. And so
he left Tartlet to his dreams, and set out.

A light fog still shrouded the shore and the sea, but already it had
commenced to lift in the north and east under the influence of the solar rays,
which little by little were condensing it. The day promised to be fine. Godfrey,
after having cut himself a substantial walking-stick, went for two miles along
that part of the beach which he did not know, and whose return formed the
outstretched point of Phina Island.

There he made a first meal of shell-fish, mussels, clams, and especially some
capital little oysters which he found in great abundance.

"If it comes to the worst," he said to himself, "we need never die of hunger!
Here are thousands of dozens of oysters to satisfy the calls of the most imperious
stomach! If Tartlet complains, it is because he does not like mollusks! Well, he
will have to like them!"

Decidedly, if the oyster did not absolutely replace bread and meat, it
furnished an aliment in no whit less nutritive and in a condition capable of being
absorbed in large quantities. But as this mollusk is of very easy digestion, it is
somewhat dangerous in its use, to say nothing of its abuse.

This breakfast ended, Godfrey again seized his stick, and struck off obliquely
towards the south-east, so as to walk up the right bank of the stream. In this
direction, he would cross the prairie up to the groups of trees observed the night
before beyond the long lines of shrubs and underwood, which he wished to
carefully examine.

Godfrey then advanced in this direction for about two miles. He followed the
bank of the stream, carpeted with short herbage and smooth as velvet. Flocks of


aquatic birds noisily flew round this being, who, new to them, had come to
trouble their domain. Fish of many kinds were seen darting about in the limpid
waters of the brook, here abouts some four or five yards wide.

It was evident that there would be no difficulty in catching these fish, but
how to cook them? Always this insoluble question!

Fortunately, when Godfrey reached the first line of shrubs he recognized two
sorts of fruits or roots. One sort had to pass through the fiery trial before being
eaten, the other was edible in its natural state. Of these two vegetables the
American Indians make constant use.

The first was a shrub of the kind called "camas," which thrives even in lands
unfit for culture. With these onion-like roots, should it not be found preferable to
treat them as potatoes, there is made a sort of flour very rich and glutinous. But
either way, they have to be subjected to a certain cooking, or drying.

The other bush produces a species of bulb of oblong form, bearing the
indigenous name of "yamph," and if it possesses less nutritive principles than the
camas, it is much the better for one thing,--it can be eaten raw.

Godfrey, highly pleased at his discovery, at once satisfied his hunger on a
few of these excellent roots, and not forgetting Tartlet's breakfast, collected a
large bundle, and throwing it over his shoulder, retook the road to Will Tree.

That he was well received on his arrival with the crop of yamphs need not be
insisted on. The professor greedily regaled himself, and his pupil had to caution
him to be moderate.

"Ah!" he said. "We have got some roots to-day. Who knows whether we shall
have any to-morrow?"

"Without any doubt," replied Godfrey, "to-morrow and the day after, and
always. There is only the trouble of going and fetching them."

"Well, Godfrey, and the camas?"

"Of the camas we will make flour and bread when we have got a fire."

"Fire!" exclaimed the professor, shaking his head. "Fire! And how shall we
make it?"

"I don't know yet, but somehow or other we will get at it."

"May Heaven hear you, my dear Godfrey! And when I think that there are so
many fellows in this world who have only got to rub a bit of wood on the sole of
their boot to get it, it annoys me! No! Never would I have believed that ill-luck
would have reduced me to this state! You need not take three steps down
Montgomery Street, before you will meet with a gentleman, cigar in mouth, who
thinks it a pleasure to give you a light, and here--"

"Here we are not in San Francisco, Tartlet, nor in Montgomery Street, and I
think it would be wiser for us not to reckon on the kindness of those we meet!"


"But, why is cooking necessary for bread and meat? Why did not nature
make us so that we might live upon nothing?"

"That will come, perhaps!" answered Godfrey with a good-humoured smile.

"Do you think so?"

"T think that our scientists are probably working out the subject."

"Is it possible! And how do they start on their research as to this new mode
of alimentation?"

"On this line of reasoning," answered Godfrey, "as the functions of digestion
and respiration are connected, the endeavour is to substitute one for the other.
Hence the day when chemistry has made the aliments necessary for the food of
man capable of assimilation by respiration, the problem will be solved. There is
nothing wanted beyond rendering the air nutritious. You will breathe your dinner
instead of eating it, that is all!"

"Ah! Is it not a pity that this precious discovery is not yet made!" exclaimed
the professor. "How cheerfully would I breathe half a dozen sandwiches and a
silverside of beef, just to give me an appetite!"

And Tartlet plunged into a semi-sensuous reverie, in which he beheld
succulent atmospheric dinners, and at them unconsciously opened his mouth and
breathed his lungs full, oblivious that he had scarcely the wherewithal to feed
upon in the ordinary way.

Godfrey roused him from his meditation, and brought him back to the
present. He was anxious to proceed to a more complete installation in the interior
of Will Tree.

The first thing to do was to clean up their future dwelling-place. It was at the
outset necessary to bring out several bushels of that vegetable dust which
covered the ground and in which they sank almost up to their knees. Two hours'
work hardly sufficed to complete this troublesome task, but at length the
chamber was clear of the pulverulent bed, which rose in clouds at the slightest
movement.

The ground was hard and firm, as if floored with joists, the large roots of the
sequoia ramifying over its surface. It was uneven but solid. Two corners were
selected for the beds and of these several bundles of herbage, thoroughly dried in
the sun, were to form the materials. As for other furniture, benches, stools, or
tables, it was not impossible to make the most indispensable things, for Godfrey
had a capital knife, with its saw and gimlet. The companions would have to keep
inside during rough weather, and they could eat and work there. Daylight did not
fail them, for it streamed through the opening. Later on, if it became necessary to
close this aperture for greater safety, Godfrey could try and pierce one or two
embrasures in the bark of the sequoia to serve as windows.


As for discovering to what height the opening ran up into the trunk, Godfrey
could not do so without a light. All that he could do was to find out with the aid
of a pole ten or twelve feet long, held above his head, that he could not touch the
top.

The question, however, was not an urgent one. It would be solved eventually.

The day passed in these labours, which were not ended at sunset. Godfrey
and Tartlet, tired as they were, found their novel bed-clothes formed of the dried
herbage, of which they had an ample supply, most excellent; but they had to
drive away the poultry who would willingly have roosted in the interior of Will
Tree. Then occurred to Godfrey the idea of constructing a poultry-house in some
other sequoia, as, to keep them out of the common room, he was building up a
hurdle of brushwood. Fortunately neither the sheep nor the agouties, nor the
goats experienced the like temptation. These animals remained quietly outside,
and had no fancy to get through the insufficient barrier.

The following days were employed in different jobs, in fitting up the house
or bringing in food; eggs and shell-fish were collected, yamph roots and
manzanilla apples were brought in, and oysters, for which each morning they
went to the bank or the shore. All this took time, and the hours passed away
quickly.

The "dinner things" consisted now of large bivalve shells, which served for
dishes or plates. It is true that for the kind of food to which the hosts of Will Tree
were reduced, others were not needed.

There was also the washing of the linen in the clear water of the stream,
which occupied the leisure of Tartlet. It was to him that this task fell; but he only
had to see to the two shirts, two handkerchiefs, and two pairs of socks, which
composed the entire wardrobe of both.

While this operation was in progress, Godfrey and Tartlet had to wear only
waistcoat and trousers, but in the blazing sun of that latitude the clothes quickly
dried. And so matters went on without either rain or wind till July 3rd. Already
they had begun to be fairly comfortable in their new home, considering the
condition in which they had been cast on the island.

However, it was advisable not to neglect the chances of safety which might
come from without. Each day Godfrey examined the whole sector of sea which
extended from the east to the north-west beyond the promontory.

This part of the Pacific was always deserted. Not a vessel, not a fishing-boat,
not a ribbon of smoke detaching itself from the horizon, proclaimed the passage
of a steamer. It seemed that Phina Island was situated out of the way of all the
itineraries of commerce. All they could do was to wait, trusting in the Almighty
who never abandons the weak.


Meanwhile, when their immediate necessities allowed them leisure, Godfrey,
incited by Tartlet, returned to that important and vexed question of the fire.

He tried at first to replace amadou, which he so unfortunately lacked, by
another and analogous material. It was possible that some of the varieties of
mushrooms which grew in the crevices of the old trees, after having been
subjected to prolonged drying, might be transformed into a combustible
substance.

Many of these mushrooms were collected and exposed to the direct action of
the sun, until they were reduced to powder. Then with the back of his knife,
Godfrey endeavoured to strike some sparks off with a flint, so that they might
fall on this substance. It was useless. The spongy stuff would not catch fire.
Godfrey then tried to use that fine vegetable dust, dried during so many
centuries, which he had found in the interior of Will Tree. The result was equally
discouraging.

In desperation he then, by means of his knife and flint, strove to secure the
ignition of a sort of sponge which grew under the rocks. He fared no better. The
particle of steel, lighted by the impact of the silex, fell on to the substance, but
went out immediately. Godfrey and Tartlet were in despair. To do without fire
was impossible. Of their fruits and mollusks they were getting tired, and their
stomachs began to revolt at such food. They eyed, the professor especially, the
sheep, agouties, and fowls which went and came round Will Tree. The pangs of
hunger seized them as they gazed. With their eyes they ate the living meat!

No! It could not go on like this!

But an unexpected circumstance, a providential one if you will, came to their
aid.

In the night of the 3rd of July the weather, which had been on the change for
a day or so, grew stormy, after an oppressive heat which the sea-breeze had been
powerless to temper.

Godfrey and Tartlet at about one o'clock in the morning were awakened by
heavy claps of thunder, and most vivid flashes of lightning. It did not rain as yet,
but it soon promised to do so, and then regular cataracts would be precipitated
from the cloudy zone, owing to the rapid condensation of the vapour.

Godfrey got up and went out so as to observe the state of the sky.

There seemed quite a conflagration above the domes of the giant trees and
the foliage appeared on fire against the sky, like the fine network of a Chinese
shadow.

Suddenly, in the midst of the general uproar, a vivid flash illuminated the
atmosphere. The thunder-clap followed immediately, and Will Tree was
permeated from top to bottom with the electric force.


Godfrey, staggered by the return shock, stood in the midst of a rain of fire
which showered around him. The lightning had ignited the dry branches above
him. They were incandescent particles of carbon which crackled at his feet.

Godfrey with a shout awoke his companion.

"Fire! Fire!"

"Fire!" answered Tartlet. "Blessed be Heaven which sends it to us!"

Instantly they possessed themselves of the flaming twigs, of which some still
bummed, while others had been consumed in the flames. Hurriedly, at the same
time, did they heap together a quantity of dead wood such as was never wanting
at the foot of the sequoia, whose trunk had not been touched by the lightning.

Then they returned into their gloomy habitation as the rain, pouring down in
sheets, extinguished the fire which threatened to devour the upper branches of
Will Tree.


CHAPTER XIII.

IN WHICH GODFREY AGAIN SEES A SLIGHT SMOKE OVER
ANOTHER PART OF THE ISLAND.

That was a storm which came just when it was wanted! Godfrey and Tartlet
had not, like Prometheus, to venture into space to bring down the celestial fire!
"It was," said Tartlet, "as if the sky had been obliging enough to send it down to
them on a lightning flash."

With them now remained the task of keeping it!

"No! we must not let it go out!" Godfrey had said.

"Not until the wood fails us to feed it!" had responded Tartlet, whose
satisfaction showed itself in little cries of joy.

"Yes! but who will keep it in?"

"I! I will! I will watch it day and night, if necessary," replied Tartlet,
brandishing a flaming bough.

And he did so till the sun rose.

Dry wood, as we have said, abounded beneath the sequoias. Until the dawn
Godfrey and the professor, after heaping up a considerable stock, did not spare to
feed the fire. By the foot of one of the large trees in a narrow space between the
roots the flames leapt up, crackling clearly and joyously. Tartlet exhausted his
lungs blowing away at it, although his doing so was perfectly useless. In this
performance he assumed the most characteristic attitudes in following the
greyish smoke whose wreaths were lost in the foliage above.

But it was not that they might admire it that they had so longingly asked for
this indispensable fire, not to warm themselves at it. It was destined for a much


more interesting use. There was to be an end of their miserable meals of raw
mollusks and yamph roots, whose nutritive elements boiling water and simple
cooking in the ashes had never developed. It was in this way that Godfrey and
Tartlet employed it during the morning.

"We could eat a fowl or two!" exclaimed Tartlet, whose jaws moved in
anticipation. "Not to mention an agouti ham, a leg of mutton, a quarter of goat,
some of the game on the prairie, without counting two or three freshwater fish
and a sea fish or so."

"Not so fast," answered Godfrey, whom the declaration of this modest bill of
fare had put in good humour. "We need not risk indigestion to satisfy a fast! We
must look after our reserves, Tartlet! Take a couple of fowls--one apiece--and if
we want bread, I hope that our camsa roots can be so prepared as to replace it
with advantage!" This cost the lives of two innocent hens, who, plucked, trussed,
and dressed by the professor, were stuck on a stick, and soon roasted before the
crackling flames.

Meanwhile, Godfrey was getting the camas roots in a state to figure
creditably at the first genuine breakfast on Phina Island. To render them edible it
was only necessary to follow the Indian method, which the Californians were
well acquainted with.

This was what Godfrey did.

A few flat stones selected from the beach were thrown in the fire so as to get
intensely hot. Tartlet seemed to think it a great shame to use such a good fire "to
cook stones with," but as it did not hinder the preparation of his fowls in any
way he had no other complaint to make.

While the stones were getting warm Godfrey selected a piece of ground
about a yard square from which he tore up the grass; then with his hands armed
with large scallop shells he dug the soil to the depth of about ten inches. That
done he laid at the bottom of the cavity a fire of dry wood, which he so arranged
as to communicate to the earth heaped up at its bottom some considerable heat.

When all the wood had been consumed and the cinders taken away, the
camas roots, previously cleaned and scraped, were strewn in the hole, a thin
layer of sods thrown over them and the glowing stones placed on the top, so as
to serve as the basis of a new fire which was lighted on their surface.

In fact, it was a kind of oven which had been prepared; and in a very short
time--about half an hour or so--the operation was at an end.

Beneath the double layer of stones and sods lay the roots cooked by this
violent heating. On crushing them there was obtainable a flour well fitted for
making into bread, but, even eaten as they were, they proved much like potatoes
of highly nutritive quality.


It was thus that this time the roots were served and we leave our readers to
imagine what a breakfast our two friends made on the chickens which they
devoured to the very bones, and on the excellent camas roots, of which they had
no need to be sparing. The field was not far off where they grew in abundance.
They could be picked up in hundreds by simply stooping down for them.

The repast over, Godfrey set to work to prepare some of the flour, which
keeps for any length of time, and which could be transformed into bread for their
daily wants.

The day was passed in different occupations. The fire was kept up with great
care. Particularly was the fuel heaped on for the night; and Tartlet, nevertheless,
arose on many occasions to sweep the ashes together and provoke a more active
combustion. Having done this, he would go to bed again, to get up as soon as the
fire burnt low, and thus he occupied himself till the day broke. The night passed
without incident, the cracklings of the fire and the crow of the cock awoke
Godfrey and his companion, who had ended his performances by falling off to
sleep.

At first Godfrey was surprised at feeling a current of air coming down from
above in the interior of Will Tree. He was thus led to think that the sequoia was
hollow up to the junction of the lower branches where there was an opening
which they would have to stop up if they wished to be snug and sheltered.

"But it is very singular!" said Godfrey to himself.

"How was it that during the preceding nights I did not feel this current of air?
Could it have been the lightning?"

And to get an answer to this question, the idea occurred to him to examine
the trunk of the sequoia from the out side.

When he had done so, he understood what had happened during the storm.

The track of the lightning was visible on the tree, which had had a long strip
of its bark torn off from the fork down to the roots.

Had the electric spark found its way into the interior of the sequoia in place
of keeping to the outside, Godfrey and his companion would have been struck.
Most decidedly they had had a narrow escape.

"It is not a good thing to take refuge under trees during a storm," said
Godfrey. "That is all very well for people who can do otherwise. But what way
have we to avoid the danger who live inside the tree? We must see!"

Then examining the sequoia from the point where the long lightning trace
began--"It is evident," said he, "that where the flash struck the tree has been
cracked. But since the air penetrates by this orifice the tree must be hollow along
its whole length and only lives in its bark? Now that is what I ought to see
about!"


And Godfrey went to look for a resinous piece of wood that might do for a
torch.

A bundle of pine twigs furnished him with the torch he needed, as from them
exuded a resin which, once inflamed, gave forth a brilliant light.

Godfrey then entered the cavity which served him for his house. To darkness
immediately succeeded light, and it was easy to see the state of the interior of
Will Tree. A sort of vault of irregular formation stretched across in a ceiling
some fifteen feet above the ground. Lifting his torch Godfrey distinctly saw that
into this there opened a narrow passage whose further development was lost in
the shadow. The tree was evidently hollow throughout its length; but perhaps
some portion of the alburnum still remained intact. In that case, by the help of
the protuberances it would be possible if not easy to get up to the fork.

Godfrey, who was thinking of the future, resolved to know without delay if
this were so.

He had two ends in view; one, to securely close the opening by which the
rain and wind found admission, and so render Will Tree almost habitable; the
other, to see if in case of danger, or an attack from animals or savages, the upper
branches of the tree would not afford a convenient refuge.

He could but try. If he encountered any insurmountable obstacle in the
narrow passage, Godfrey could be got down again.

After firmly sticking his torch between two of the roots below, behold him
then commencing to raise himself on to the first interior knots of the bark. He
was lithe, strong, and accustomed to gymnastics like all young Americans. It
was only sport to him. Soon he had reached in this uneven tube a part much
narrower, in which, with the aid of his back and knees, he could work his way
upwards like a chimney-sweep. All he feared was that the hole would not
continue large enough for him to get up.

However, he kept on, and each time he reached a projection he would stop
and take breath.

Three minutes after leaving the ground, Godfrey had mounted about sixty
feet, and consequently could only have about twenty feet further to go.

In fact, he already felt the air blowing more strongly on his face. He inhaled
it greedily, for the atmosphere inside the sequoia was not, strictly speaking,
particularly fresh.

After resting for a minute, and shaking off the fine dust which he had rubbed
on to him off the wall, Godfrey started again up the long tunnel, which gradually
narrowed.

But at this moment his attention was attracted by a peculiar noise, which
appeared to him somewhat suspicious. There was a sound as of scratching, up


the tree. Almost immediately a sort of hissing was heard.

Godfrey stopped.

"What is that?" he asked. "Some animal taken refuge in the sequoia? Was it a
snake? No! We have not yet seen one on the island! Perhaps it is a bird that
wants to get out!"

Godfrey was not mistaken; and as he continued to mount, a cawing, followed
by a rapid flapping of wings, showed him that it was some bird ensconced in the
tree whose sleep he was doubtless disturbing.

Many a "frrr-frrr!" which he gave out with the whole power of his lungs,
soon determined the intruder to clear off.

It proved to be a kind of jackdaw, of huge stature, which scuttled out of the
opening, and disappeared into the summit of Will Tree.

A few seconds afterwards, Godfrey's head appeared through the same
opening, and he soon found himself quite at his ease, installed on a fork of the
tree where the lower branches gave off, at about eighty feet from the ground.

There, as has been said, the enormous stem of the sequoia supported quite a
forest. The capricious network of its upper boughs presented the aspect of a
wood crowded with trees, which no gap rendered passable.

However, Godfrey managed, not without difficulty, to get along from one
branch to another, so as to gain little by little the upper story of this vegetable
phenomenon.

A number of birds with many a cry flew off at his approach, and hastened to
take refuge in the neighbouring members of the group, above which Will Tree
towered by more than a head.

Godfrey continued to climb as well as he could, and did not stop until the
ends of the higher branches began to bend beneath his weight.

A huge horizon of water surrounded Phina Island, which lay unrolled like a
relief-map at his feet. Greedily his eyes examined that portion of the sea. It was
still deserted. He had to conclude once more, that the island lay away from the
trade routes of the Pacific.

Godfrey uttered a heavy sigh; then his look fell on the narrow domain on
which fate had condemned him to live, doubtless for long, perhaps for ever.

But what was his surprise when he saw, this time away to the north, a smoke
similar to that which he had already thought he had seen in the south. He
watched it with the keenest attention.

[Illustration: There was the column of smoke. page 152]

A very light vapour, calm and pure, greyish blue at its tip, rose straight in the
air.

"No! I am not mistaken!" exclaimed Godfrey. "There is a smoke, and


therefore a fire which produces it! And that fire could not have been lighted
except by--By whom?"

Godfrey then with extreme precision took the bearings of the spot in
question.

The smoke was rising in the north-east of the island, amid the high rocks
which bordered the beach. There was no mistake about that. It was less than five
miles from Will Tree. Striking straight to the north-east across the prairie, and
then following the shore, he could not fail to find the rocks above which the
vapour rose.

With beating heart Godfrey made his way down the scaffolding of branches
until he reached the fork. There he stopped an instant to clear off the moss and
leaves which clung to him, and that done he slid down the opening, which he
enlarged as much as possible, and rapidly gained the ground. A word to Tartlet
not to be uneasy at his absence, and Godfrey hastened off in the north-easterly
direction so as to reach the shore.

It was a two hours' walk across the verdant prairie, through clumps of
scattered trees, or hedges of spiny shrubs, and then along the beach. At length
the last chain of rocks was reached.

But the smoke which Godfrey had seen from the top of the tree he searched
for in vain when he had reached the ground. As he had taken the bearings of the
spot with great care, he came towards it without any mistake.

There Godfrey began his search. He carefully explored every nook and
corner of this part of the shore. He called. No one answered to his shout. No
human being appeared on the beach. Not a rock gave him a trace of a newly
lighted fire--nor of a fire now extinct, which could have been fed by sea herbs
and dry alge thrown up by the tide.

"But it is impossible that I should have been mistaken!" repeated Godfrey to
himself. "I am sure it was smoke that I saw! And besides!--"

As Godfrey could not admit that he had been the dupe of a delusion, he
began to think that there must exist some well of heated water, or kind of
intermittent geyser, which he could not exactly find, but which had given forth
the vapour.

There was nothing to show that in the island there were not many of such
natural wells, and the apparition of the column of smoke could be easily
explained by so simple a geological phenomenon.

Godfrey left the shore and returned towards Will Tree, observing the country
as he went along a little more carefully than he had done as he came. A few
ruminants showed themselves, amongst others some wapiti, but they dashed past
with such speed that it was impossible to get near them.


In about four hours Godfrey got back. Just before he reached the tree he
heard the shrill "twang! squeak!" of the kit, and soon found himself face to face
with Professor Tartlet, who, in the attitude of a vestal, was watching the sacred
fire confided to his keeping.


CHAPTER XIV.

WHEREIN GODFREY FINDS SOME WRECKAGE, TO WHICH HE
AND HIS COMPANION GIVE A HEARTY WELCOME.

To put up with what you cannot avoid is a philosophical principle, that may
not perhaps lead you to the accomplishment of great deeds, but is assuredly
eminently practical. On this principle Godfrey had resolved to act for the future.
If he had to live in this island, the wisest thing for him to do was to live there as
comfortably as possible until an opportunity offered for him to leave it.

And so, without delay, he set to work to get the interior of Will Tree into
some order. Cleanliness was of the first importance. The beds of dried grass
were frequently renewed. The plates and dishes were only scallop shells, it is
true, but no American kitchen could show cleaner ones. It should be said to his
praise that Professor Tartlet was a capital washer. With the help of his knife
Godfrey, by flattening out a large piece of bark, and sticking four uprights into
the ground, had contrived a table in the middle of the room. Some large stumps
served for stools. The comrades were no longer reduced to eating on their knees,
when the weather prevented their dining in the open air.

There was still the question of clothing, which was of great interest to them,
and they did the best they could. In that climate, and under that latitude, there
was no reason why they should not go about half naked; but, at length, trousers,
waistcoat, and linen shirt were all worn out. How could they replace them? Were
the sheep and the goats to provide them with skins for clothing, after furnishing
them with flesh for food? It looked like it. Meanwhile, Godfrey had the few
garments he possessed frequently washed. It was on Tartlet, transformed into a
laundress, that this task fell, and he acquitted himself of it to the general
satisfaction.

Godfrey busied himself specially in providing food, and in arranging matters
generally. He was, in fact, the caterer. Collecting the edible roots and the
manzanilla fruit occupied him some hours every day; and so did fishing with
plaited rushes, sometimes in the waters of the stream, and sometimes in the
hollows of the rocks on the beach when the tide had gone out. The means were
primitive, no doubt, but from time to time a fine crustacean or a succulent fish
figured on the table of Will Tree, to say nothing of the mollusks, which were


easily caught by hand.

But we must confess that the pot--of all the pieces in the battery of the cook
undoubtedly the most essential--the simple iron pot, was wanting. Its absence
could not but be deeply felt. Godfrey knew not how to replace the vulgar pipkin,
whose use is universal. No hash, no stew, no boiled meat, no fish, nothing but
roasts and grills. No soup appeared at the beginning of a meal. Constantly and
bitterly did Tartlet complain--but how to satisfy the poor man?

Godfrey was busied with other cares. In visiting the different trees of the
group he had found a second sequoia of great height, of which the lower part,
hollowed out by the weather, was very rugged and uneven.

Here he devised his poultry-house, and in it the fowls took up their abode.
The hens soon became accustomed to their home, and settled themselves to set
on eggs placed in the dried grass, and chickens began to multiply. Every evening
the broods were driven in and shut up, so as to keep them from birds of prey,
who, aloft in the branches, watched their easy victims, and would, if they could,
have ended by destroying them.

As for the agoutis, the sheep, and the goats, it would have been useless then
to have looked out a stable or a shelter for them. When the bad weather came,
there would be time enough to see to that. Meanwhile they prospered on the
luxuriant pasturage of the prairie, with its abundance of sainfoin and edible
roots, of which the porcine representatives showed genuine appreciation. A few
kids had been dropped since the arrival in the island, and as much milk as
possible was left to the goats with which to nourish their little ones.

From all this it resulted that the surroundings of Will Tree were quite lively.
The well-fed domestic animals came during the warm hours of the day to find
there a refuge from the heat of the sun. No fear was there of their wandering
abroad, or of their falling a prey to wild beasts, of which Phina Island seemed to
contain not a single specimen.

And so things went on, with a present fairly comfortable perhaps, but a
future very disquieting, when an unexpected incident occurred which bettered
the position considerably.

It was on the 29th of July.

Godfrey was strolling in the morning along that part of the shore which
formed the beach of the large bight to which he had given the name of Dream
Bay. He was exploring it to see if it was as rich in shell-fish as the coast on the
north. Perhaps he still hoped that he might yet come across some of the wreck,
of which it seemed to him so strange that the tide had as yet brought in not a
single fragment.

On this occasion he had advanced to the northern point which terminated in a


sandy spit, when his attention was attracted by a rock of curious shape, rising
near the last group of alge and sea-weeds.

A strange presentiment made him hasten his steps. What was his surprise,
and his joy, when he saw that what he had taken for a rock was a box, half buried
in the sand.

Was it one of the packages of the Dream? Had it been here ever since the
wreck? Was it not rather all that remained of another and more recent
catastrophe? It was difficult to say. In any case no matter whence it came or what
it held, the box was a valuable prize.

Godfrey examined it outwardly. There was no trace of an address not even a
name, not even one of those huge initials cut out of thin sheet metal which
Omament the boxes of the Americans. Perhaps he would find inside it some
paper which would indicate the origin, or nationality, or name of the proprietor?
Any how it was apparently hermetically sealed, and there was hope that its
contents had not been spoiled by their sojourn in the sea-water. It was a very
strong wooden box, covered with thick leather, with copper corner plates at the
angles, and large straps all over it.

Impatient as he was to view the contents of the box, Godfrey did not think of
damaging it, but of opening it after destroying the lock; as to transporting it from
the bottom of Dream Bay to Will Tree, its weight forbade it, and he never gave
that a thought.

"Well," said Godfrey to himself, "we must empty it where it is, and make as
many journeys as may be necessary to take away all that is inside."

It was about four miles from the end of the promontory to the group of
sequoias. It would therefore take some time to do this, and occasion considerable
fatigue. Time did not press, however. As for the fatigue, it was hardly worth
thinking about.

What did the box contain? Before returning to Will Tree, Godfrey had a try
at opening it.

He began by unbuckling the straps, and once they were off he very carefully
lifted the leather shield which protected the lock. But how was he to force it?

It was a difficult job. Godfrey had no lever with which to bring his strength
to bear. He had to guard against the risk of breaking his knife, and so he looked
about for a heavy stone with which he could start the staple.

The beach was strewn with lumps of hard silex in every form which could do
for a hammer.

Godfrey picked out one as thick as his wrist, and with it he gave a
tremendous whack on the plate of copper.

To his extreme surprise the bolt shot through the staple immediately gave


way.

Either the staple was broken by the blow, or the lock was not tured.

Godfrey's heart beat high as he stooped to lift up the box lid.

It rose unchecked, and in truth had Godfrey had to get it to pieces he would
not have done so without trouble. The trunk was a regular strong-box. The
interior was lined with sheet zinc, so that the sea-water had failed to penetrate.
The objects it contained, however delicate they might be, would be found in a
perfect state of preservation.

And what objects! As he took them out Godfrey could not restrain
exclamations of joy! Most assuredly the box must have belonged to some highly
practical traveller, who had reckoned on getting into a country where he would
have to trust to his own resources.

In the first place there was linen--shirts, tablecloths, sheets, counterpanes;
then clothes--woollen jerseys, woollen socks, cotton socks, cloth trousers,
velveteen trousers, knitted waistcoats, waistcoats of good heavy stuffs; then two
pairs of strong boots, and hunting-shoes and felt hats.

Then came a few kitchen and toilet utensils; and an iron pot--the famous pot
which was wanted so badly--a kettle, a coffee-pot, a tea-pot, some spoons, some
forks, some knives, a looking-glass, and brushes of all kinds, and, what was by
no means to be despised, three cans, containing about fifteen pints of brandy and
tafia, and several pounds of tea and coffee.

Then, in the third place, came some tools--an auger, a gimlet, a handsaw, an
assortment of nails and brads, a spade, a shovel, a pickaxe, a hatchet, an adze,
&c., &c.

In the fourth place, there were some weapons, two hunting-knives in their
leather sheaths, a carbine and two muskets, three six-shooter revolvers, a dozen
pounds of powder, many thousand caps, and an important stock of lead and
bullets, all the arms seeming to be of English make. There was also a small
medicine-chest, a telescope, a compass, and a chronometer. There were also a
few English books, several quires of blank paper, pencils, pens, and ink, an
almanac, a Bible with a New York imprint, and a "Complete Cook's Manual."

Verily this is an inventory of what under the circumstances was an
inestimable prize.

Godfrey could not contain himself for joy. Had he expressly ordered the
trousseau for the use of shipwrecked folks in difficulties, he could not have made
it more complete.

Abundant thanks were due for it to Providence. And Providence had the
thanks, and from an overflowing heart.

Godfrey indulged himself in the pleasure of spreading out all his treasure on


the beach. Every object was looked over, but not a scrap of paper was there in
the box to indicate to whom it belonged, or the ship on which it had been
embarked.

Around, the sea showed no signs of a recent wreck.

Nothing was there on the rocks, nothing on the sands. The box must have
been brought in by the flood, after being afloat for perhaps many days. In fact,
its size in proportion to its weight had assured for it sufficient buoyancy.

The two inhabitants of Phina Island would for some time be kept provided in
a large measure with the material wants of life,--tools, arms, instruments,
utensils, clothes--due to the luckiest of chances.

Godfrey did not dream of taking all the things to Will Tree at once. Their
transport would necessitate several journeys but he would have to make haste for
fear of bad weather.

Godfrey then put back most of the things in the box. A gun, a revolver, a
certain quantity of powder and lead, a hunting-knife, the telescope, and the iron
pot, he took as his first load.

The box was carefully closed and strapped up, and with a rapid step Godfrey
strode back along the shore.

Ah! What a reception he had from Tartlet, an hour later! And the delight of
the Professor when his pupil ran over the list of their new riches! The pot--that
pot above everything--threw him into transports of joy, culminating in a series of
"hornpipes" and "cellar-flaps,". wound up by a triumphant  "six-eight
breakdown."

It was only noon as yet. Godfrey wished after the meal to get back at once to
Dream Bay. He would never rest until the whole was in safety at Will Tree.

Tartlet made no objection, and declared himself ready to start. It was no
longer necessary to watch the fire. With the powder they could always get a
light. But the Professor was desirous that during their absence the soup which he
was thinking about might be kept gently on the simmer. The wonderful pot was
soon filled with water from the stream, a whole quarter of a goat was thrown in,
accompanied by a dozen yamph roots, to take the place of vegetables, and then a
pinch or two of salt found in the crevices of the rocks gave seasoning to the
mixture.

"Tt must skim itself," exclaimed Tartlet, who seemed highly satisfied at his
performance.

And off they started for Dream Bay by the shortest road. The box had not
been disturbed. Godfrey opened it with care. Amid a storm of admiring
exclamations from Tartlet, he began to pick out the things.

In this first journey Godfrey and his companion, transformed into beasts of


burden, carried away to Will Tree the arms, the ammunition, and a part of the
wearing apparel.

Then they rested from their fatigue beside the table, on which there smoked
the stewed agouti, which they pronounced most excellent. As for the meat, to
listen to the Professor it would have been difficult even to imagine anything
more exquisite! Oh! the marvellous effect of privation!

On the 30th, the next day, Godfrey and Tartlet set forth at dawn, and in three
other journeys succeeded in emptying and carrying away all that the box
contained. Before the evening, tools, weapons, instruments, utensils, were all
brought, arranged, and stowed away in Will Tree.

On the 1st of August, the box itself, dragged along the beach not without
difficulty, found a place in the tree, and was transformed into a linen-closet.

Tartlet, with the fickleness of his mind, now looked upon the future through
none but rosy glasses. We can hardly feel astonished then that on this day, with
his kit in his hand, he went out to find his pupil, and said to him in all
seriousness, as if he were in the drawing-room of Kolderup's mansion,--

"Well, Godfrey, my boy, don't you think it is time to resume our dancing
lessons?"


CHAPTER XV.

IN WHICH THERE HAPPENS WHAT HAPPENS AT LEAST ONCE IN
THE LIFE OF EVERY CRUSOE, REAL OR IMAGINARY.

And now the future looked less gloomy. But if Tartlet saw in the possession
of the instruments, the tools, and the weapons only the means of making their
life of isolation a little more agreeable, Godfrey was already thinking of how to
escape from Phina Island. Could he not now construct a vessel strong enough to
enable them to reach if not some neighbouring land, at least some ship passing
within sight of the island?

Meanwhile the weeks which followed were principally spent in carrying out
not these ideas, but those of Tartlet. The wardrobe at Will Tree was now
replenished, but it was decided to use it with all the discretion which the
uncertainty of the future required. Never to wear any of the clothes unless
necessity compelled him to do so, was the rule to which the professor was forced
to submit.

"What is the good of that?" grumbled he. "It is a great deal too stingy, my
dear Godfrey! Are we savages, that we should go about half naked?"

"I beg your pardon, Tartlet," replied Godfrey; "we are savages, and nothing
else."


"As you please; but you will see that we shall leave the island before we
have worn the clothes!"

"I know nothing about it, Tartlet, and it is better to have than to want."

"But on Sunday now, surely on Sunday, we might dress up a little?"

"Very well, on Sundays then, and perhaps on public holidays," answered
Godfrey, who did not wish to anger his frivolous companion; "but as to day is
Monday we shall have to wait a whole week before we come out in our best."

We need hardly mention that from the moment he arrived on the island
Godfrey had not omitted to mark each day as it passed. By the aid of the
calendar he found in the box he was able to verify that the day was really
Monday.

Each performed his daily task according to his ability. It was no longer
necessary for them to keep watch by day and night over a fire which they had
now the means of relighting.

Tartlet therefore abandoned, not without regret, a task which suited him so
well. Henceforwards he took charge of the provisioning with yamph and camas
roots--of that in short which formed the daily bread of the establishment, so that
the professor went every day and collected them, up to the lines of shrubs with
which the prairie was bordered behind Will Tree. It was one or two miles to
walk, but he accustomed himself to it. Between whiles he occupied his time in
collecting oysters or other mollusks, of which they consumed a great quantity.

Godfrey reserved for himself the care of the domestic animals and the
poultry. The butchering trade was hardly to his taste, but he soon overcame his
repugnance. Thanks to him, boiled meats appeared frequently on the table,
followed by an occasional joint of roast meat to afford a sufficiently varied bill
of fare. Game abounded in the woods of Phina Island, and Godfrey proposed to
begin his shooting when other more pressing cares allowed him time. He thought
of making good use of the guns, powder, and bullets in his arsenal, but he in the
first place wished to complete his preparations. His tools enabled him to make
several benches inside and outside Will Tree. The stools were cut out roughly
with the axe, the table made a little less roughly became more worthy of the
dishes and dinner things with which Professor Tartlet adorned it. The beds were
arranged in wooden boxes and their litter of dry grass assumed a more inviting
aspect. If mattresses and palliasses were still wanting, counterpanes at least were
not. The various cooking utensils stood no longer on the ground, but had their
places on planks fixed along the walls. Stores, linen, and clothes were carefully
put away in cavities hollowed out in the bark of the sequoia. From strong pegs
were suspended the arms and instruments, forming quite a trophy on the walls.

Godfrey was also desirous of putting a door to the house, so that the other


living creatures--the domestic animals--should not come during the night and
trouble their sleep. As he could not cut out boards with his only saw, the
handsaw, he used large and thick pieces of bark, which he got off very easily.
With these he made a door sufficiently massive to close the opening into Will
Tree, at the same time he made two little windows, one opposite to the other, so
as to let light and air into the room. Shutters allowed him to close them at night,
but from the morning to the evening it was no longer necessary to take refuge in
flaring resinous torches which filled the dwelling with smoke. What Godfrey
would think of to yield them light during the long nights of winter he had as yet
no idea. He might take to making candles with the mutton fat, or he might be
contented with resinous torches more carefully prepared. We shall see.

Another of his anxieties was how to construct a chimney in Will Tree. While
the fine weather lasted, the fire outside among the roots of the sequoia sufficed
for all the wants of the kitchen, but when the bad weather came and the rain fell
in torrents, and they would have to battle with the cold, whose extreme rigour
during a certain time they reasonably feared, they would have to have a fire
inside their house, and the smoke from it must have some vent. This important
question therefore had to be settled.

One very useful work which Godfrey undertook was to put both banks of the
river in communication with each other on the skirt of the sequoia-trees.

He managed, after some difficulty, to drive a few stakes into the river-bed,
and on them he fixed a staging of planks, which served for a bridge. They could
thus get away to the northern shore without crossing the ford, which led them a
couple of miles out of their road.

But if Godfrey took all these precautions so as to make existence a little
more possible on this lone isle of the Pacific, in case he and his companion were
destined to live on it for some time, or perhaps live on it for ever, he had no
intention of neglecting in any way the chances of rescue.

Phina Island was not on the routes taken by the ships--that was only too
evident. It offered no port of call, nor means of revictualling. There was nothing
to encourage ships to take notice of it. At the same time it was not impossible
that a war-ship or a merchant-vessel might come in sight. It was advisable
therefore to find some way of attracting attention, and showing that the island
was inhabited.

With this object Godfrey erected a flagstaff at the end of the cape which ran
out to the north, and for a flag he sacrificed a piece of one of the cloths found in
the trunk. As he thought that the white colour would only be visible in a strong
light, he tried to stain his flag with the berries of a sort of shrub which grew at
the foot of the dunes. He obtained a very vivid red, which he could not make


indelible owing to his having no mordant, but he could easily re-dye the cloth
when the wind or rain had faded it.

These varied employments occupied him up to the 15th of August. For many
weeks the sky had been constantly clear, with the exception of two or three
storms of extreme violence which had brought down a large quantity of water, to
be greedily drunk in by the soil.

About this time Godfrey began his shooting expeditions. But if he was
skilful enough in the use of the gun, he could not reckon on Tartlet, who had yet
to fire his first shot.

Many days of the week did Godfrey devote to the pursuit of fur and feather,
which, without being abundant, were yet plentiful enough for the requirements
of Will Tree.

A few partridges, some of the red-legged variety, and a few snipes, came as a
welcome variation of the bill of fare. Two or three antelopes fell to the prowess
of the young stalker; and although he had had nothing to do with their capture,
the professor gave them a no less welcome than he did when they appeared as
haunches and cutlets.

But while he was out shooting, Godfrey did not forget to take a more
complete survey of the island. He penetrated the depths of the dense forests
which occupied the central districts. He ascended the river to its source. He
again mounted the summit of the cone, and redescended by the talus on the
eastern shore, which he had not, up to then, visited.

"After all these explorations," repeated Godfrey to himself, "there can be no
doubt that Phina Island has no dangerous animals, neither wild beasts, snakes,
nor saurians! I have not caught sight of one! Assuredly if there had been any, the
report of the gun would have woke them up! It is fortunate, indeed. If it were to
become necessary to fortify Will Tree against their attacks, I do not know how
we should get on!"

Then passing on to quite a natural deduction--

"It must also be concluded," continued he, "that the island is not inhabited at
all. Either natives or people shipwrecked here would have appeared before now
at the sound of the gun! There is, however, that inexplicable smoke which I
twice thought I saw."

The fact is, that Godfrey had never been able to trace any fire. As for the hot
water springs to which he attributed the origin of the vapour he had noticed,
Phina Island being in no way volcanic did not appear to contain any, and he had
to content himself with thinking that he had twice been the victim of an illusion.

Besides, this apparition of the smoke or the vapour was not repeated. When
Godfrey the second time ascended the central cone, as also when he again


climbed up into Will Tree, he saw nothing to attract his attention. He ended by
forgetting the circumstance altogether.

Many weeks passed in different occupations about the tree, and many
shooting excursions were undertaken. With every day their mode of life
improved.

Every Sunday, as had been agreed, Tartlet donned his best clothes. On that
day he did nothing but walk about under the big trees, and indulge in an
occasional tune on the kit. Many were the glissades he performed, giving lessons
to himself, as his pupil had positively refused to continue his course.

"What is the good of it?" was Godfrey's answer to the entreaties of the
professor. "Can you imagine Robinson Crusoe taking lessons in dancing and
deportment?"

"And why not?" asked Tartlet seriously. "Why should Robinson Crusoe
dispense with deportment? Not for the good of others, but of himself, he should
acquire refined manners."

To which Godfrey made no reply. And as he never came for his lesson, the
professor became professor "emeritus."

The 13th of September was noted for one of the greatest and cruellest
deceptions to which, on a desert island, the unfortunate survivors of a shipwreck
could be subjected.

Godfrey had never again seen that inexplicable and undiscoverable smoke on
the island; but on this day, about three o'clock in the afternoon, his attention was
attracted by a long line of vapour, about the origin of which he could not be
deceived.

He had gone for a walk to the end of Flag Point--the name which he had
given to the cape on which he had erected his flagstaff. While he was looking
through his glass he saw above the horizon a smoke driven by the west wind
towards the island.

Godfrey's heart beat high.

"A ship!" he exclaimed.

But would this ship, this steamer, pass in sight of Phina Island? And if it
passed, would it come near enough for the signal thereon to be seen on board?

Or would not rather the semi-visible smoke disappear with the vessel
towards the north-west or south-west of the horizon?

For two hours Godfrey was a prey to alternating emotions more easy to
indicate than to describe.

The smoke got bigger and bigger. It increased when the steamer re-stoked
her fires, and diminished almost to vanishing-point as the fuel was consumed.
Continually did the vessel visibly approach. About four o'clock her hull had


come up on the line between the sky and the sea.

She was a large steamer, bearing north-east. Godfrey easily made that out. If
that direction was maintained, she would inevitably approach Phina Island.

Godfrey had at first thought of running back to Will Tree to inform Tartlet.
What was the use of doing so? The sight of one man making signals could do as
much good as that of two. He remained there, his glass at his eye, losing not a
single movement of the ship.

The steamer kept on her course towards the coast, her bow steered straight
for the cape. By five o'clock the horizon-line was already above her hull, and her
rig was visible. Godfrey could even recognize the colours at her gaff.

She carried the United States’ ensign.

"But if I can see their flag, cannot they see mine? The wind keeps it out, so
that they could easily see my flag with their glasses. Shall I make signals, by
raising it and lowering it a few times, so as to show that I want to enter into
communication with them? Yes! I have not an instant to lose."

It was a good idea. Godfrey ran to the end of Flag Point, and began to haul
his flag up and down, as if he were saluting. Then he left it half-mast high, so as
to show, in the way usual with seafaring people, that he required help and
succour.

The steamer still approached to within three miles of the shore, but her flag
remained immovable at the peak, and replied not to that on Flag Point. Godfrey
felt his heart sink. He would not be noticed! It was half-past six, and the sun was
about to set!

The steamer was now about two miles from the cape, which she was rapidly
nearing. At this moment the sun disappeared below the horizon. With the first
shadows of night, all hope of being seen had to be given up.

Godfrey again, with no more success, began to raise and lower his flag.
There was no reply.

He then fired his gun two or three times, but the distance was still great, and
the wind did not set in that direction! No report would be heard on board!

The night gradually came on; soon the steamer's hull grew invisible.
Doubtless in another hour she would have passed Phina Island.

Godfrey, not knowing what to do, thought of setting fire to a group of
resinous trees which grew at the back of Flag Point. He lighted a heap of dry
leaves with some gunpowder, and then set light to the group of pines, which
flared up like an enormous torch.

But no fire on the ship answered to the one on the land, and Godfrey returned
sadly to Will Tree, feeling perhaps more desolate than he had ever felt till then.


CHAPTER XVI.

IN WHICH SOMETHING HAPPENS WHICH CANNOT FAIL TO
SURPRISE THE READER.

To Godfrey the blow was serious. Would this unexpected chance which had
just escaped him ever offer again? Could he hope so? No! The indifference of
the steamer as she passed in sight of the island, without even taking a look at it,
was obviously shared in by all the vessels venturing in this deserted portion of
the Pacific. Why should they put into port more than she had done? The island
did not possess a single harbour.

Godfrey passed a sorrowful night. Every now and then jumping up as if he
heard a cannon out at sea, he would ask himself if the steamer had not caught
sight of the huge fire which still burnt on the coast, and if she were not
endeavouring to answer the signal by a gun-shot?

Godfrey listened. It was only an illusion of his over-excited brain. When the
day came, he had come to look upon the apparition of the ship as but a dream,
which had commenced about three o'clock on the previous afternoon.

But no! He was only too certain that a ship had been in sight of Phina Island,
maybe within two miles of it, and certainly she had not put in.

Of this deception Godfrey said not a word to Tartlet. What was the good of
talking about it? Besides, his frivolous mind could not see more than twenty-four
hours ahead. He was no longer thinking of the chances of escaping from the
island which might offer. He no longer imagined that the future had great things
in store for them. San Francisco was fading out of his recollection. He had no
sweetheart waiting for him, no Uncle Will to return to. If at this end of the world
he could only commence a course of lessons on dancing, his happiness would be
complete--were it only with one pupil.

If the professor dreamt not of immediate danger, such as to compromise his
safety in this island--bare, as it was, of wild beasts and savages--he was wrong.
This very day his optimism was to be put to a rude test.

About four o'clock in the afternoon Tartlet had gone, according to his
custom, to collect some oysters and mussels, on that part of the shore behind
Flag Point, when Godfrey saw him coming back as fast as his legs could carry
him to Will Tree. His hair stood on end round his temples. He looked like a man
in flight, who dared not turn his head to the right or to the left.

"What is the matter?" shouted Godfrey, not without alarm, running to meet
his companion.

"There! there!" answered Tartlet, pointing with his finger towards the narrow
strip of sea visible to the north between the trees.


"But what is it?” asked Godfrey, whose first movement was to run to the
edge of the sequoias.

"A canoe!"

[Illustration: "A Canoe!" page 181]

"A canoe?"

"Yes! Savages! Quite a fleet of savages! Cannibals, perhaps!"

Godfrey looked in the direction pointed out.

It was not a fleet, as the distracted Tartlet had said; but he was only mistaken
about the quantity.

In fact, there was a small vessel gliding through the water, now very calm,
about half-a-mile from the coast, so as to double Flag Point.

"And why should they be cannibals?" asked Godfrey, turning towards the
professor.

"Because in Crusoe Islands," answered Tartlet, "there are always cannibals,
who arrive sooner or later."

"Is it not a boat from some merchant-ship?"

"From a ship?"

"Yes. From a steamer which passed here yesterday afternoon, in sight of our
island?"

"And you said nothing to me about it!" exclaimed Tartlet, lifting his hands to
the sky.

"What good should I have done?" asked Godfrey. "Besides, I thought that the
vessel had disappeared! But that boat might belong to her! Let us go and see!"

Godfrey ran rapidly back to Will Tree, and, seizing his glass, returned to the
edge of the trees.

He then examined with extreme attention the little vessel, which would ere
then have perceived the flag on Flag Point as it fluttered in the breeze.

The glass fell from his hands.

"Savages! Yes! They are really savages!" he exclaimed.

Tartlet felt his knees knock together, and a tremor of fright ran through his
body.

It was a vessel manned by savages which Godfrey saw approaching the
island. Built like a Polynesian canoe, she carried a large sail of woven bamboo;
an outrigger on the weather side kept her from capsizing as she heeled down to
the wind.

Godfrey easily distinguished the build of the vessel. She was a proa, and this
would indicate that Phina Island was not far from Malaysia. But they were not
Malays on board; they were half-naked blacks, and there were about a dozen of
them.


The danger of being found was thus great. Godfrey regretted that he had
hoisted the flag, which had not been seen by the ship, but would be by these
black fellows. To take it down now would be too late.

It was, in truth, very unfortunate. The savages had probably come to the
island thinking it was uninhabited, as indeed it had been before the wreck of the
Dream. But there was the flag, indicating the presence of human beings on the
coast! How were they to escape them if they landed?

Godfrey knew not what to do. Anyhow his immediate care must be to watch
if they set foot on the island. He could think of other things afterwards.

With his glass at his eye he followed the proa; he saw it turn the point of the
promontory, then run along the shore and then approach the mouth of the small
stream, which, two miles up, flowed past Will Tree.

If the savages intended to paddle up the river, they would soon reach the
group of sequoias--and nothing could hinder them. Godfrey and Tartlet ran
rapidly back to their dwelling. They first of all set about guarding them selves
against surprise, and giving themselves time to prepare their defence.

At least that is what Godfrey thought of. The ideas of the professor took
quite a different turn.

"Ah!" he exclaimed. "It is destiny! This is as it was written? We could not
escape it! You cannot be a Crusoe without a canoe coming to your island,
without cannibals appearing one day or another! Here we have been for only
three months, and there they are already! Assuredly, neither Defoe, nor De Wyss
exaggerated matters! You can make yourself a Crusoe, if you like!"

Worthy Tartlet, folks do not make themselves Crusoes, they become Crusoes,
and you are not sure that you are wise in comparing your position with that of
the heroes of the two English and Swiss romances!

The precautions taken by Godfrey as soon as he returned to Will Tree were
as follows. The fire burning among the roots of the sequoia was extinguished,
and the embers scattered broadcast, so as to leave no trace; cocks, hens, and
chickens were already in their house for the night, and the entrance was hidden
with shrubs and twigs as much as possible; the other animals, the goats, agoutis,
and sheep, were driven on to the prairie, but it was unlucky that there was no
stable to shut them up in; all the instruments and tools were taken into the tree.
Nothing was left outside that could indicate the presence or the passage of
human beings.

Then the door was closely shut, after Godfrey and Tartlet had gone in. The
door made of the sequoia bark was indistinguishable from the bark of the trunk,
and might perhaps escape the eyes of the savages, who would not look at it very
closely. It was the same with the two windows, in which the lower boards were


shut. Then all light was extinguished in the dwelling, and our friends remained
in total darkness. How long that night was! Godfrey and Tartlet heard the
slightest sounds outside. The creaking of a dry branch, even a puff of wind,
made them start. They thought they heard some one walking under the trees. It
seemed that they were prowling round Will Tree. Then Godfrey climbed up to
one of the windows, opened one of the boards, and anxiously peered into the
gloom.

Nothing!

However, Godfrey at last heard footsteps on the ground. His ear could not
deceive him this time. He still looked, but could only see one of the goats come
for shelter beneath the trees.

Had any of the savages happened to discover the house hidden in the
enormous sequoia, Godfrey had made up his mind what to do: he would drag up
Tartlet with him by the chimney inside, and take refuge in the higher branches,
where he would be better able to resist. With guns and revolvers in his
possession, and ammunition in abundance, he would there have some chance
against a dozen savages devoid of fire-arms.

If in the event of their being armed with bows and arrows they attacked from
below, it was not likely that they would have the best of it against fire-arms
aimed from above. If on the other hand they forced the door of the dwelling and
tried to reach the branches from the inside, they would find it very difficult to get
there, owing to the narrow opening, which the besieged could easily defend.

Godfrey said nothing about this to Tartlet. The poor man had been almost out
of his mind with fright since he had seen the proa. The thought that he might be
obliged to take refuge in the upper part of a tree, as if in an eagle's nest, would
not have soothed him in the least. If it became necessary, Godfrey decided to
drag him up before he had time to think about it.

The night passed amid these alternations of fear and hope. No attack
occurred. The savages had not yet come to the sequoia group. Perhaps they
would wait for the day before venturing to cross the island.

"That is probably what they will do," said Godfrey, "since our flag shows
that it is inhabited! But there are only a dozen of them, and they will have to be
cautious! How are they to know that they have only to deal with a couple of
shipwrecked men? No! They will risk nothing except by daylight--at least, if
they are going to stop."

"Supposing they go away when the daylight comes?" answered Tartlet.

"Go away? Why should they have come to Phina Island for one night?"

"I do not know," replied the professor, who in his terror could only explain
the arrival of the blacks by supposing that they had come to feed on human flesh.


"Anyhow," continued Godfrey; "to-morrow morning, if they have not come
to Will Tree, we will go out and reconnoitre."

"We?"

"Yes! we! Nothing would be more imprudent than for us to separate! Who
knows whether we may not have to run to the forest in the centre of the island
and hide there for some days--until the departure of the proa! No! We will keep
together, Tartlet!"

"Hush!" said the professor in a low voice; "I think I hear something outside."

Godfrey climbed up again to the window, and got down again almost
immediately.

"No!" he said. "Nothing suspicious! It is only our cattle coming back to the
wood."

"Hunted perhaps!" exclaimed Tartlet.

"They seem very quiet then," replied Godfrey; "I fancy they have only come
in search of shelter against the morning dew."

"Ah!" murmured Tartlet in so piteous a tone that Godfrey could hardly help
laughing, "these things could not happen at your uncle's place in Montgomery
Street!"

"Day will soon break," said Godfrey, after a pause. "In an hour's time, if the
savages have not appeared, we will leave Will Tree and reconnoitre towards the
north of the island. You are able to carry a gun, Tartlet?"

"Carry? Yes!"

"And to fire it in a stated direction?"

"I do not know! I have never tried such a thing, and you may be sure,
Godfrey, that my bullet will not go--"

"Who knows if the report alone might not frighten the savages?"

An hour later, it was light enough to see beyond the sequoias.

Godfrey then cautiously reopened the shutters.

From that looking to the south he saw nothing extraordinary. The domestic
animals wandered peacefully under the trees, and did not appear in the least
alarmed. The survey completed, Godfrey carefully shut this window. Through
the opening to the north there was a view up to the shore. Two miles off even the
end of Flag Point could be seen; but the mouth of the river at the place where the
savages had landed the evening before was not visible. Godfrey at first looked
around without using his glass, so as to examine the environs of Will Tree on
this side of Phina Island.

All was quite peaceful.

Godfrey then taking his glass swept round the coast to the promontory at
Flag Point. Perhaps, as Tartlet had said, though it was difficult to find the reason,


the savages had embarked, after a night spent on shore, without attempting to see
if the island were inhabited.


CHAPTER XVII.

IN WHICH PROFESSOR TARTLET'S GUN REALLY DOES MARVELS.

But Godfrey suddenly uttered an exclamation which made the professor
jump. There could be no doubt that the savages knew the island was inhabited,
for the flag hitherto hoisted at the extremity of the cape had been carried away
by them and no longer floated on the mast at Flag Point. The moment had then
come to put the project into execution, to reconnoitre if the savages were still in
the island, and to see what they were doing.

"Let us go," said he to his companion.

"Go! But--" answered Tartlet.

"Would you rather stay here?"

"With you, Godfrey--yes!"

"No--alone!"

"Alone! Never!"

"Come along then!"

Tartlet, thoroughly understanding that Godfrey would not alter his decision,
resolved to accompany him. He had not courage enough to stay behind at Will
Tree.

Before starting, Godfrey assured himself that the fire-arms were ready for
action. The two guns were loaded, and one passed into the hands of the
professor, who seemed as much embarrassed with it as might have been a savage
of Pomotou. He also hung one of the hunting-knives to his belt, to which he had
already attached his cartridge-pouch. The thought had occurred to him to also
take his fiddle, imagining perhaps that they would be sensible to the charm of its
squeaking, of which all the talent of a virtuoso could not conceal the harshness.

Godfrey had some trouble in getting him to abandon this idea, which was as
ridiculous as it was impracticable.

It was now six o'clock in the moming. The summits of the sequoias were
glowing in the first rays of the sun.

Godfrey opened the door; he stepped outside; he scanned the group of trees.

Complete solitude.

The animals had returned to the prairie. There they were, tranquilly
browsing, about a quarter of a mile away. Nothing about them denoted the least
uneasiness.

Godfrey made a sign to Tartlet to join him. The professor, as clumsy as could


be in his fighting harness, followed--not without some hesitation.

Then Godfrey shut the door, and saw that it was well hidden in the bark of
the sequoia. Then, having thrown at the foot of the tree a bundle of twigs, which
he weighted with a few large stones, he set out towards the river, whose banks he
intended to descend, if necessary, to its mouth. Tartlet followed him not without
giving before each of his steps an uneasy stare completely round him up to the
very limits of the horizon; but the fear of being left alone impelled him to
advance.

Arrived at the edge of the group of trees, Godfrey stopped.

Taking his glasses from their case, he scanned with extreme attention all that
part of the coast between the Flag Point promontory and the north-east angle of
the island.

Not a living being showed itself, not a single smoke wreath was rising in the
air.

The end of the cape was equally deserted, but they would there doubtless
find numberless footprints freshly made. As for the mast, Godfrey had not been
deceived. If the staff still rose above the last rock on the cape, it was bereft of its
flag. Evidently the savages after coming to the place had gone off with the red
cloth which had excited their covetousness, and had regained their boat at the
mouth of the river.

Godfrey then turned off so as to examine the western shore.

It was nothing but a vast desert from Flag Point right away beyond the curve
of Dream Bay.

No boat of any kind appeared on the surface of the sea. If the savages had
taken to their proa, it only could be concluded that they were hugging the coast
sheltered by the rocks, and so closely that they could not be seen.

However, Godfrey could not and would not remain in doubt. He was
determined to ascertain, yes or no, if the proa had definitely left the island.

To do this it was necessary to visit the spot where the savages had landed the
night before, that is to say, the narrow creek at the mouth of the river.

This he immediately attempted.

The borders of the small watercourse were shaded by occasional clumps of
trees encircled by shrubs, for a distance of about two miles. Beyond that for
some five or six hundred yards down to the sea the river ran between naked
banks. This state of affairs enabled him to approach close to the landing-place
without being perceived. It might be, however, that the savages had ascended the
stream, and to be prepared for this eventuality the advance had to be made with
extreme caution.

Godfrey, however thought, not without reason, that, at this early hour the


savages, fatigued by their long voyage, would not have quitted their anchorage.
Perhaps they were still sleeping either in their canoe or on land; in which case it
would be seen if they could not be surprised.

This idea was acted upon at once. It was important that they should get on
quickly. In such circumstances the advantage is generally gained at the outset.
The fire-arms were again examined, the revolvers were carefully looked at, and
then Godfrey and Tartlet commenced the descent of the left bank of the river in
Indian file. All around was quiet. Flocks of birds flew from one bank to the
other, pursuing each other among the higher branches without showing any
uneasiness.

Godfrey went first, but it can easily be believed that his companion found the
attempt to cover step rather tiring. Moving from one tree to another they
advanced towards the shore without risk of discovery. Here the clumps of bushes
hid them from the opposite bank, there even their heads disappeared amid the
luxurious vegetation. But no matter where they were, an arrow from a bow or a
stone from a sling might at any moment reach them. And so they had to be
constantly on their guard.

However, in spite of the recommendations which were addressed to him,
Tartlet, tripping against an occasional stump, had two or three falls which might
have complicated matters. Godfrey was beginning to regret having brought such
a clumsy assistant. Indeed, the poor man could not be much help to him.
Doubtless he would have been worth more left behind at Will Tree; or, if he
would not consent to that, hidden away in some nook in the forest. But it was too
late. An hour after he had left the sequoia group, Godfrey and his companion had
come a mile--only a mile--for the path was not easy beneath the high vegetation
and between the luxuriant shrubs. Neither one nor the other of our friends had
seen anything suspicious.

Hereabouts the trees thinned out for about a hundred yards or less, the river
ran between naked banks, the country round was barer.

Godfrey stopped. He carefully observed the prairie to the right and left of the
stream.

Still there was nothing to disquiet him, nothing to indicate the approach of
savages. It is true that as they could not but believe the island inhabited, they
would not advance without precaution, in fact they would be as careful in
ascending the little river as Godfrey was in descending it. It was to be supposed
therefore that if they were prowling about the neighbourhood, they would also
profit by the shelter of the trees or the high bushes of mastics and myrtles which
formed such an excellent screen.

It was a curious though very natural circumstance that, the farther they


advanced, Tartlet, perceiving no enemy, little by little lost his terror, and began to
speak with scorn of "those cannibal laughing-stocks." Godfrey, on the contrary,
became more anxious, and it was with greater precaution than ever that he
crossed the open space and regained the shadow of the trees. Another hour led
them to the place where the banks, beginning to feel the effects of the sea's
vicinity, were only bordered with stunted shrubs, or sparse grasses.

Under these circumstances it was difficult to keep hidden or rather
impossible to proceed without crawling along the ground.

This is what Godfrey did, and also what he advised Tartlet to do.

"There are not any savages! There are not any cannibals! They have all
gone!" said the professor.

"There are!" answered Godfrey quickly, in a low voice, "They ought to be
here! Down Tartlet, get down! Be ready to fire, but don't do so till I tell you."

Godfrey had said these words in such a tone of authority that the professor,
feeling his limbs give way under him, had no difficulty in at once assuming the
required position.

And he did well!

In fact, it was not without reason that Godfrey had spoken as he had.

From the spot which they then occupied, they could see neither the shore,
nor the place where the river entered the sea. A small spur of hills shut out the
view about a hundred yards ahead, but above this near horizon a dense smoke
was rising straight in the air.

Godfrey, stretched at full length in the grass, with his finger on the trigger of
his musket, kept looking towards the coast.

"This smoke," he said, "is it not of the same kind that I have already seen
twice before? Should I conclude that savages have previously landed on the
north and south of the island, and that the smoke came from fires lighted by
them? But no! That is not possible, for I found no cinders, nor traces of a
fireplace, nor embers! Ah! this time I'll know the reason of it."

And by a clever reptilian movement, which Tartlet imitated as well as he
could, he managed, without showing his head above the grass, to reach the bend
of the river.

Thence he could command, at his ease, every part of the bank through which
the river ran.

An exclamation could not but escape him! His hand touched the professor's
shoulder to prevent any movement of his! Useless to go further! Godfrey saw
what he had come to see!

A large fire of wood was lighted on the beach, among the lower rocks, and
from it a canopy of smoke rose slowly to the sky. Around the fire, feeding it with


fresh armfuls of wood, of which they had made a heap, went and came the
savages who had landed the evening before. Their canoe was moored to a large
stone, and, lifted by the rising tide, oscillated on the ripples of the shore.

Godfrey could distinguish all that was passing on the sands without using his
glasses. He was not more than two hundred yards from the fire, and he could
even hear it crackling. He immediately perceived that he need fear no surprise
from the rear, for all the blacks he had counted in the proa were in the group.

Ten out of the twelve were occupied in looking after the fire and sticking
stakes in the ground with the evident intention of rigging up a spit in the
Polynesian manner. An eleventh, who appeared to be the chief, was walking
along the beach, and constantly turning his glances towards the interior of the
island, as if he were afraid of an attack.

Godfrey recognized as a piece of finery on his shoulders the red stuff of his
flag.

The twelfth savage was stretched on the ground, tied tightly to a post.

Godfrey recognized at once the fate in store for the wretched man. The spit
was for him! The fire was to roast him at! Tartlet had not been mistaken, when,
the previous evening, he had spoken of these folks as cannibals!

It must be admitted that neither was he mistaken in saying that the
adventures of Crusoes, real or imaginary, were all copied one from the other!

Most certainly Godfrey and he did then find themselves in the same position
as the hero of Daniel Defoe when the savages landed on his island. They were to
assist, without doubt, at the same scene of cannibalism.

Godfrey decided to act as this hero did! He would not permit the massacre of
the prisoner for which the stomachs of the cannibals were waiting! He was well
armed. His two muskets--four shots--his two revolvers--a dozen shots--could
easily settle these eleven rascals, whom the mere report of one of the fire-arms
might perhaps be sufficient to scatter. Having taken his decision he coolly waited
for the moment to interfere like a thunder-clap.

He had not long to wait!

Twenty minutes had barely elapsed, when the chief approached the fire. Then
by a gesture he pointed out the prisoner to the savages who were expecting his
orders.

Godfrey rose. Tartlet, without knowing why, followed the example. He did
not even comprehend where his companion was going, for he had said nothing to
him of his plans.

Godfrey imagined, evidently, that at sight of him the savages would make
some movement, perhaps to rush to their boat, perhaps to rush at him.

They did nothing. It did not even seem as though they saw him; but at this
moment the chief made a significant gesture. Three of his companions went
towards the prisoner, unloosed him, and forced him near the fire.
