He was still a young man, who, feeling that his last hour had come, resisted
with all his might.

Assuredly, if he could, he would sell his life dearly. He began by throwing
off the savages who held him, but he was soon knocked down, and the thief,
seizing a sort of stone axe, jumped forward to beat in his head.

Godfrey uttered a cry, followed by a report. A bullet whistled through the air,
and it seemed as though the chief were mortally wounded, for he fell on the
ground.

At the report, the savages, surprised as though they had never heard the
sound of fire-arms, stopped. At the sight of Godfrey those who held the prisoner
instantly released him.

Immediately the poor fellow arose, and ran towards the place where he
perceived his unexpected liberator.

At this moment a second report was heard.

It was Tartlet, who, without looking--for the excellent man kept his eyes
shut--had just fired, and the stock of the musket on his right shoulder delivered
the hardest knock which had ever been received by the professor of dancing and
deportment.

But--what a chance it was!--a second savage fell close to his chief.

The rout at once began. Perhaps the savages thought they had to do with a
numerous troop of natives whom they could not resist. Perhaps they were simply
terrified at the sight of the two white men who seemed to keep the lightning in
their pockets. There they were, seizing the two who were wounded, carrying
them off, rushing to the proa, driving it by their paddles out of the little creek,
hoisting their sail, steering before the wind, making for the Flag Point
promontory, and doubling it in hot haste.

Godfrey had no thought of pursuing them. What was the good of killing
them? They had saved the victim. They had put them to flight, that was the
important point. This had been done in such a way that the cannibals would
never dare to return to Phina Island.

All was then for the best. They had only to rejoice in their victory, in which
Tartlet did not hesitate to claim the greatest share.

Meanwhile the prisoner had come to his rescuer. For an instant he stopped,
with the fear inspired in him by superior beings, but almost immediately he
resumed his course. When he arrived before the two whites, he bowed to the
ground; then catching hold of Godfrey's foot, he placed it on his head in sign of
servitude.


One would almost have thought that this Polynesian savage had also read
Robinson Crusoe!


CHAPTER XVIII.

WHICH TREATS OF THE MORAL AND PHYSICAL EDUCATION OF A
SIMPLE NATIVE OF THE PACIFIC.

Godfrey at once raised the poor fellow, who lay prostrate before him. He
looked in his face.

He was a man of thirty-five or more, wearing only a rag round his loins. In
his features, as in the shape of his head, there could be recognized the type of the
African negro. It was not possible to confound him with the debased wretches of
the Polynesian islands, who, with their depressed crania and elongated arms,
approach so strangely to the monkey.

Now, as he was a negro from Soudan or Abyssinia who had fallen into the
hands of the natives of an archipelago of the Pacific, it might be that he could
speak English or one or two words of the European languages which Godfrey
understood. But it was soon apparent that the unhappy man only used an idiom
that was absolutely incomprehensible--probably the language of the aborigines
among whom he had doubtless arrived when very young. In fact, Godfrey had
immediately interrogated him in English, and had obtained no reply. He then
made him understand by signs, not without difficulty, that he would like to know
his name.

After many fruitless essays, the negro, who had a very intelligent and even
honest face, replied to the demand which was made of him in a single word,--

"Carefinotu."

"Carefinotu!" exclaimed Tartlet. "Do you hear the name? I propose that we
call him 'Wednesday,' for to-day is Wednesday, and that is what they always do
in these Crusoe islands! Is he to be allowed to call himself Carefinotu?"

"If that is his name," said Godfrey; "why should he not keep it?"

And at the moment he felt a hand placed on his chest, while all the black's
physiognomy seemed to ask him what his name was.

"Godfrey!" answered he.

The black endeavoured to say the word, but although Godfrey repeated it
several times, he could not succeed in pronouncing it in an intelligible fashion.
Then he turned towards the professor, as if to know his name.

"Tartlet," was the reply of that individual in a most amiable tone.

"Tartlet!" repeated Carefinotu.

And it seemed as though this assemblage of syllables was more agreeable to


his vocal chords, for he pronounced it distinctly.

The professor appeared to be extremely flattered. In truth he had reason to
be.

Then Godfrey, wishing to put the intelligence of the black to some profit,
tried to make him understand that he wished to know the name of the island. He
pointed with his hand to the woods and prairies and hills, and then the shore
which bound them, and then the horizon of the sea, and he interrogated him with
a look.

Carefinotu did not at first understand what was meant, and imitating the
gesture of Godfrey he also turned and ran his eyes over the space.

"Arneka," said he at length.

"Arneka?" replied Godfrey, striking the soil with his foot so as to accentuate
his demand.

"Arneka!" repeated the negro.

This told Godfrey nothing, neither the geographical name borne by the
island, nor its position in the Pacific. He could not remember such a name; it was
probably a native one, little known to geographers.

However, Carefinotu did not cease from looking at the two white men, not
without some stupor, going from one to the other as if he wished to fix in his
mind the differences which characterized them. The smile on his mouth
disclosed abundant teeth of magnificent whiteness which Tartlet did not examine
without a certain reserve.

"If those teeth," he said, "have never eaten human flesh may my fiddle burst
up in my hand."

"Anyhow, Tartlet,"” answered Godfrey; "our new companion no longer looks
like the poor beggar they were going to cook and feed on! That is the main
point!"

What particularly attracted the attention of Carefinotu were the weapons
carried by Godfrey and Tartlet--as much the musket in the hand as the revolver
in the belt.

Godfrey easily understood this sentiment of curiosity. It was evident that the
savage had never seen a fire-arm. He said to himself that this was one of those
iron tubes which had launched the thunder-bolt that had delivered him? There
could be no doubt of it.

Godfrey, wishing to give him, not without reason, a high idea of the power of
the whites, loaded his gun, and then, showing to Carefinotu a red-legged
partridge that was flying across the prairie about a hundred yards away, he
shouldered it quickly, and fired. The bird fell.

At the report the black gave a prodigious leap, which Tartlet could not but


admire from a choregraphic point of view. Then repressing his fear, and seeing
the bird with broken wing running through the grass, he started off and swift as a
greyhound ran towards it, and with many a caper, half of joy, half of
stupefaction, brought it back to his master.

Tartlet then thought of displaying to Carefinotu that the Great Spirit had also
favoured him with the power of the lightning; and perceiving a kingfisher
tranquilly seated on an old stump near the river was bringing the stock up to his
cheek, when Godfrey stopped him with,--

"No! Don't fire, Tartlet!"

"Why not?"

"Suppose that by some mishap you were not to hit the bird, think how we
would fall in the estimation of the nigger!"

"And why should I not hit him?" replied Tartlet with some acerbity. "Did I
not, during the battle, at more than a hundred paces, the very first time I handled
a gun, hit one of the cannibals full in the chest?"

"You touched him evidently," said Godfrey; "for he fell. But take my advice,
Tartlet, and in the common interest do not tempt fortune twice!"

The professor, slightly annoyed, allowed himself to be convinced; he threw
the gun on to his shoulder with a swagger, and both our heroes, followed by
Carefinotu, returned to Will Tree.

There the new guest of Phina Island met with quite a surprise in the
habitation so happily contrived in the lower part of the sequoia. First he had to
be shown, by using them while he looked on, the use of the tools, instruments,
and utensils. It was obvious that Carefinotu belonged to, or had lived amongst
savages in the lowest rank of the human scale, for fire itself seemed to be
unknown to him. He could not understand why the pot did not take fire when
they put it on the blazing wood; he would have hurried away from it, to the great
displeasure of Tartlet, who was watching the different phases of the cooking of
the soup. At a mirror, which was held out to him, he betrayed consummate
astonishment; he turned round, and turned it round to see if he himself were not
behind it.

"The fellow is hardly a monkey!" exclaimed the professor with a disdainful
grimace.

"No, Tartlet," answered Godfrey; "he is more than a monkey, for his looks
behind the mirror show good reasoning power."

"Well, I will admit that he is not a monkey," said Tartlet, shaking his head as
if only half convinced; "but we shall see if such a being can be of any good to
us."

"I am sure he will be!" replied Godfrey.


In any case Carefinotu showed himself quite at home with the food placed
before him. He first tore it apart, and then tasted it; and then I believe that the
whole breakfast of which they partook the--agouti soup, the partridge killed by
Godfrey, and the shoulder of mutton with camas and yamph roots--would hardly
have sufficed to calm the hunger which devoured him.

"The poor fellow has got a good appetite!" said Godfrey.

"Yes," responded Tartlet; "and we shall have to keep a watch on his cannibal
instinct.”

"Well, Tartlet! We shall make him get over the taste of human flesh if he ever
had it!"

"IT would not swear that," replied the professor. "It appears that once they
have acquired this taste--"

While they were talking, Carefinotu was listening with extreme attention.
His eyes sparkled with intelligence. One could see that he understood what was
being said in his presence. He then spoke with extreme volubility, but it was only
a succession of onomatopoeias devoid of sense, of harsh interjections with a and
ou predominant, as in the majority of Polynesian idioms.

Whatever the negro was, he was a new companion; he might become a
devoted servant, which the most unexpected chance had sent to the hosts of Will
Tree.

He was powerful, adroit, active; no work came amiss to him. He showed a
real aptitude to imitate what he saw being done. It was in this way that Godfrey
proceeded with his education. The care of the domestic animals, the collection of
the roots and fruits, the cutting up of the sheep or agouties, which were to serve
for food for the day, the fabrication of a sort of cider they extracted from the wild
manzanilla apples,--he acquitted himself well in all these tasks, after having seen
them done.

Whatever Tartlet thought, Godfrey felt no distrust in the savage, and never
seemed to regret having come across him. What disquieted him was the possible
return of the cannibals who now knew the situation of Phina Island.

From the first, a bed had been reserved for Carefinotu in the room at Will
Tree, but generally, unless it was raining, he preferred to sleep outside in some
hole in the tree, as though he were on guard over the house.

During the fortnight which followed his arrival on the island, Carefinotu
many times accompanied Godfrey on his shooting excursions. His surprise was
always extreme when he saw the game fall hit at such a distance; but in his
character of retriever, he showed a dash and daring which no obstacles, hedge or
bush, or stream, could stop.

Gradually, Godfrey became greatly attached to this negro. There was only


one part of his progress in which Carefinotu showed refractoriness; that was in
learning the English language. Do what he might he could not be prevailed upon
to pronounce the most ordinary words which Godfrey, and particularly Professor
Tartlet tried to teach him.

So the time passed. But if the present was fairly supportable, thanks to a
happy accident, if no immediate danger menaced them, Godfrey could not help
asking himself, if they were ever to leave this island, by what means they were
to rejoin their country! Not a day passed but he thought of Uncle Will and his
betrothed. It was not without secret apprehension that he saw the bad season
approaching, which would put between his friends and him a barrier still more
impassable.

On the 27th of September a circumstance occurred deserving of note.

If it gave more work to Godfrey and his two companions, it at least assured
them of an abundant reserve of food.

Godfrey and Carefinotu were busied in collecting the mollusks, at the
extreme end of Dream Bay, when they perceived out at sea an innumerable
quantity of small moving islets which the rising tide was bringing gently to
shore. It was a sort of floating archipelago, on the surface of which there walked,
or flew, a few of those sea-birds, with great expanse of wing, known as sea-
hawks.

What then were these masses which floated landwards, rising and falling
with the undulations of the waves?

Godfrey did not know what to think, when Carefinotu threw himself down
on his stomach, and then drawing his head back into his shoulders, folded
beneath him his arms and legs, and began to imitate the movements of an animal
crawling slowly along the ground.

Godfrey looked at him without understanding these extraordinary
gymnastics. Then suddenly--

"Turtles!" he exclaimed.

Carefinotu was right. There was quite a square mile of myriads of turtles,
swimming on the surface of the water.

About a hundred fathoms from the shore the greater part of them dived and
disappeared, and the sea-hawks, finding their footing gone, flew up into the air
in large spirals. But luckily about a hundred of the amphibians came on to the
beach.

Godfrey and the negro had quickly run down in front of these creatures, each
of which measured at the least from three to four feet in diameter. Now the only
way of preventing turtles from regaining the sea is to turn them on their backs;
and it was in this rough work that Godfrey and Carefinotu employed themselves,


not without great fatigue.

The following days were spent in collecting the booty. The flesh of the turtle,
which is excellent either fresh or preserved, could perhaps be kept for a time in
both forms. In preparation for the winter, Godfrey had the greater part salted in
such a way as to serve for the needs of each day. But for some time the table was
supplied with turtle soup, on which Tartlet was not the only one to regale
himself.

Barring this incident, the monotony of existence was in no way ruffled.
Every day the same hours were devoted to the same work. Would not the life
become still more depressing when the winter season would oblige Godfrey and
his companions to shut themselves up in Will Tree? Godfrey could not think of it
without anxiety. But what could he do?

Meanwhile, he continued the exploration of the island, and all the time not
occupied with more pressing tasks he spent in roaming about with his gun.
Generally Carefinotu accompanied him, Tartlet remaining behind at the
dwelling. Decidedly he was no hunter, although his first shot had been a master-
stroke!

Now on one of these occasions an unexpected incident happened, of a nature
to gravely compromise the future safety of the inmates of Will Tree.

Godfrey and the black had gone out hunting in the central forest, at the foot
of the hill which formed the principal ridge of Phina Island. Since the morning
they had seen nothing pass but two or three antelopes through the high
underwood, but at too great a distance for them to fire with any chance of hitting
them.

As Godfrey was not in search of game for dinner, and did not seek to destroy
for destruction's sake, he resigned himself to return empty-handed. If he
regretted doing so it was not so much for the meat of the antelope, as for the
skin, of which he intended to make good use.

It was about three o'clock in the afternoon. He and his companion after lunch
were no more fortunate than before. They were preparing to return to Will Tree
for dinner, when, just as they cleared the edge of the wood, Carefinotu made a
bound; then precipitating himself on Godfrey, he seized him by the shoulders,
and dragged him along with such vigour that resistance was impossible.

After going about twenty yards they stopped. Godfrey took breath, and,
turning towards Carefinotu, interrogated him with a look.

The black, exceedingly frightened, stretched out his hand towards an animal
which was standing motionless about fifty yards off.

It was a grizzly bear, whose paws held the trunk of a tree, and who was
swaying his big head up and down, as if he were going to rush at the two


hunters.

Immediately, without pausing to think, Godfrey loaded his gun, and fired
before Carefinotu could hinder him.

Was the enormous plantigrade hit by the bullet? Probably. Was he killed?
They could not be sure, but his paws unclasped, and he rolled at the foot of the
tree. Delay was dangerous. A struggle with so formidable an animal might have
the worst results. In the forests of California the pursuit of the grizzly is fraught
with the greatest danger, even to professional hunters of the beast.

And so the black seized Godfrey by the arms to drag him away in the
direction of Will Tree, and Godfrey, understanding that he could not be too
cautious, made no resistance.


CHAPTER XIX.

IN WHICH THE SITUATION ALREADY GRAVELY COMPROMISED
BECOMES MORE AND MORE COMPLICATED.

The presence of a formidable wild beast in Phina Island was, it must be
confessed, calculated to make our friends think the worst of the ill-fortune which
had fallen on them.

Godfrey--perhaps he was wrong--did not consider that he ought to hide from
Tartlet what had passed.

"A bear!" screamed the professor, looking round him with a bewildered glare
as if the environs of Will Tree were being assailed by a herd of wild beasts.
"Why, a bear? Up to now we had not even got a bear in our island! If there is one
there may be many, and even numbers of other ferocious beasts--jaguars,
panthers, tigers, hyeenas, lions!"

Tartlet already beheld Phina Island given over to quite a menagerie escaped
from their cages.

Godfrey answered that there was no need for him to exaggerate. He had seen
one bear, that was certain. Why one of these animals had never been seen before
in his wanderings on the island he could not explain, and it was indeed
inexplicable. But to conclude from this that wild animals of all kinds were
prowling in the woods and prairies was to go too far. Nevertheless, they would
have to be cautious and never go out unarmed.

Unhappy Tartlet! From this day there commenced for him an existence of
anxieties, emotions, alarms, and irrational terrors which gave him nostalgia for
his native land in a most acute form.

"No!" repeated he. "No! If there are animals--I have had enough of it, and I
want to get off!"


He had not the power.

Godfrey and his companions then had henceforth to be on their guard. An
attack might take place not only on the shore side or the prairie side, but even in
the group of sequoias. This is why serious measures were taken to put the
habitation in a state to repel a sudden attack. The door was strengthened, so as to
resist the clutches of a wild beast. As for the domestic animals Godfrey would
have built a stable to shut them up in at least at night, but it was not easy to do
so. He contented himself at present with making a sort of enclosure of branches
not far from Will Tree, which would keep them as in a fold. But the enclosure
was not solid enough nor high enough to hinder a bear or hyena from upsetting
it or getting over it.

Notwithstanding the remonstrances made to him, Carefinotu persisted in
watching outside during the night, and Godfrey hoped thus to receive warning of
a direct attack.

Decidedly Carefinotu endangered his life in thus constituting himself the
guardian of Will Tree; but he had understood that he could thus be of service to
his liberators, and he persisted, in spite of all Godfrey said to him, in watching as
usual over the general safety.

A week passed without any of these formidable visitors appearing in the
neighbourhood. Godfrey did not go very far from the dwelling, unless there was
a necessity for his doing so. While the sheep and goats grazed on the
neighbouring prairie, they were never allowed out of sight. Generally Carefinotu
acted as shepherd. He did not take a gun, for he did not seem to understand the
management of fire-arms, but one of the hunting-knives hung from his belt, and
he carried an axe in his right hand. Thus armed the active negro would not have
hesitated to throw himself before a tiger or any animal of the worst description.

However, as neither a bear nor any of his congeners had appeared since the
last encounter Godfrey began to gather confidence. He gradually resumed his
hunting expeditions, but without pushing far into the interior of the island.
Frequently the black accompanied him; Tartlet, safe in Will Tree, would not risk
himself in the open, not even if he had the chance of giving a dancing lesson.
Sometimes Godfrey would go alone, and then the professor had a companion to
whose instruction he obstinately devoted himself.

Yes! Tartlet had at first thought of teaching Carefinotu the most ordinary
words in the English language, but he had to give this up, as the negro seemed to
lack the necessary phonetic apparatus for that kind of pronunciation. "Then," had
Tartlet said, "if I cannot be his professor, I will be his pupil!"

And he it was who attempted to learn the idiom spoken by Carefinotu.
Godfrey had warned him that the accomplishment would be of little use. Tartlet


was not dissuaded. He tried to get Carefinotu to name the objects he pointed at
with his hand. In truth Tartlet must have got on excellently, for at the end of
fifteen days he actually knew fifteen words! He knew that Carefinotu said "birsi"
for fire, "aradore" for the sky, "mervira" for the sea, "doura" for a tree, &c. He
was as proud of this as if he had taken the first prize for Polynesian at some
examination!

It was then with a feeling of gratitude that he wished to make some
recognition of what had been done for him, and instead of torturing the negro
with English words, he resolved on teaching him deportment and the true
principles of European choregraphy.

At this Godfrey could not restrain his peals of laughter. After all it would
pass the time away, and on Sunday, when there was nothing else to do, he
willingly assisted at the course of lectures delivered by the celebrated Professor
Tartlet of San Francisco. Indeed, we ought to have seen them! The unhappy
Carefinotu perspired profusely as he went through the elementary exercises. He
was docile and willing, nevertheless; but like all his fellows, his shoulders did
not set back, nor did his chest throw out, nor did his knees or his feet point apart!
To make a Vestris or a Saint Leon of a savage of this sort!

The professor pursued his task in quite a fury. Carefinotu, tortured as he was,
showed no lack of zeal. What he suffered, even to get his feet into the first
position can be imagined! And when he passed to the second and then to the
third, it was still more agonizing.

"But look at me, you blockhead!" exclaimed Tartlet, who added example to
precept. "Put your feet out! Further out! The heel of one to the heel of the other!
Open your knees, you duffer! Put back your shoulders, you idiot! Stick up your
head! Round your elbows!"

"But you ask what is impossible!" said Godfrey.

"Nothing is impossible to an intelligent man!" was Tartlet's invariable
response.

"But his build won't allow of it."

"Well, his build must allow of it! He will have to do it sooner or later, for the
savage must at least know how to present himself properly in a drawing-room!"

"But, Tartlet, he will never have the opportunity of appearing in a drawing-
room!"

"Eh! How do you know that, Godfrey?" replied the professor, drawing
himself up. "Do you know what the future may bring forth?"

This was the last word in all discussions with Tartlet. And then the professor
taking his kit would with the bow extract from it some squeaky little air to the
delight of Carefinotu. It required but this to excite him. Oblivious of


choregraphic rules, what leaps, what contortions, what capers!

And Tartlet, in a reverie, as he saw this child of Polynesia so demean
himself, inquired if these steps, perhaps a little too characteristic, were not
natural to the human being, although outside all the principles of his art.

But we must leave the professor of dancing and deportment to his
philosophical meditations, and return to questions at once more practical and
pressing.

During his last excursions into the plain, either by himself or with
Carefinotu, Godfrey had seen no wild animal. He had even come upon no traces
of such. The river to which they would come to drink bore no footprint on its
banks. During the night there were no howlings nor suspicious noises. Besides
the domestic animals continued to give no signs of uneasiness.

"This is singular," said Godfrey several times; "but I was not mistaken!
Carefinotu certainly was not! It was really a bear that he showed me! It was
really a bear that I shot! Supposing I killed him, was he the last representative of
the plantigrades on the island?"

It was quite inexplicable! Besides, if Godfrey had killed this bear, he would
have found the body where he had shot it. Now they searched for it in vain!
Were they to believe then that the animal mortally wounded had died far off in
some den. It was possible after all, but then at this place, at the foot of this tree,
there would have been traces of blood, and there were none.

"Whatever it is," thought Godfrey, "it does not much matter; and we must
keep on our guard.”

With the first days of November it could be said that the wet season had
commenced in this unknown latitude. Cold rains fell for many hours. Later on
probably they would experience those interminable showers which do not cease
for weeks at a time, and are characteristic of the rainy period of winter in these
latitudes.

Godfrey had then to contrive a fireplace in the interior of Will Tree--an
indispensable fireplace that would serve as well to warm the dwelling during the
winter months as to cook their food in shelter from the rain and tempest.

The hearth could at any time be placed in a corner of the chamber between
big stones, some placed on the ground and others built up round them; but the
question was how to get the smoke out, for to leave it to escape by the long
chimney, which ran down the centre of the sequoia, proved impracticable.

Godfrey thought of using as a pipe some of those long stout bamboos which
grew on certain parts of the river banks. It should be said that on this occasion he
was greatly assisted by Carefinotu. The negro, not without effort, understood
what Godfrey required. He it was who accompanied him for a couple of miles


from Will Tree to select the larger bamboos, he it was who helped him build his
hearth. The stones were placed on the ground opposite to the door; the bamboos,
emptied of their pith and bored through at the knots, afforded, when joined one
to another, a tube of sufficient length, which ran out through an aperture made
for it in the sequoia bark, and would serve every purpose, provided it did not
catch fire. Godfrey soon had the satisfaction of seeing a good fire burning
without filling the interior of Will Tree with smoke.

He was quite right in hastening on these preparations, for from the 3rd to the
10th of November the rain never ceased pouring down. It would have been
impossible to keep a fire going in the open air. During these miserable days they
had to keep indoors and did got venture out except when the flocks and poultry
urgently required them to do so. Under these circumstances the reserve of camas
roots began to fail; and these were what took the place of bread, and of which
the want would be immediately felt.

Godfrey then one day, the 10th of November, informed Tartlet that as soon as
the weather began to mend a little he and Carefinotu would go out and collect
some. Tartlet, who was never in a hurry to run a couple of miles across a soaking
prairie, decided to remain at home during Godfrey's absence.

In the evening the sky began to clear of the heavy clouds which the west
wind had been accumulating since the commencement of the month, the rain
gradually ceased, the sun gave forth a few crepuscular rays. It was to be hoped
that the morming would yield a lull in the storm, of which it was advisable to
make the most.

"To-morrow," said Godfrey, "I will go out, and Carefinotu will go with me."

"Agreed!" answered Tartlet.

The evening came, and when supper was finished and the sky, cleared of
clouds, permitted a few brilliant stars to appear, the black wished to take up his
accustomed place outside, which he had had to abandon during the preceding
rainy nights. Godfrey tried to make him understand that he had better remain
indoors, that there was no necessity to keep a watch as no wild animal had been
noticed; but Carefinotu was obstinate. He therefore had to have his way.

The morning was as Godfrey had foreseen, no rain had fallen since the
previous evening, and when he stepped forth from Will Tree, the first rays of the
sun were lightly gilding the thick dome of the sequoias.

Carefinotu was at his post, where he had passed the night. He was waiting.
Immediately, well armed and provided with large sacks, the two bid farewell to
Tartlet, and started for the river, which they intended ascending along the left
bank up to the camas bushes.

An hour afterwards they arrived there without meeting with any unpleasant


adventure.

The roots were rapidly torn up and a large quantity obtained, so as to fill the
sacks. This took three hours, so that it was about eleven o'clock in the moming
when Godfrey and his companion set out on their return to Will Tree.

Walking close together, keeping a sharp look-out, for they could not talk to
each other, they had reached a bend in the small river where there were a few
large trees, grown like a natural cradle across the stream, when Godfrey
suddenly stopped.

This time it was he who showed to Carefinotu a motionless animal at the foot
of a tree whose eyes were gleaming with a singular light.

"A tiger!" he exclaimed.

He was not mistaken. It was really a tiger of large stature resting on its hind
legs with its forepaws on the trunk of a tree, and ready to spring.

In a moment Godfrey had dropped his sack of roots. The loaded gun passed
into his right hand; he cocked it, presented it, aimed it, and fired.

"Hurrah! hurrah!" he exclaimed.

This time there was no room for doubt; the tiger, struck by the bullet, had
bounded backwards. But perhaps he was not mortally wounded, perhaps
rendered still more furious by his wound he would spring on to them!

Godfrey held his gun pointed, and threatened the animal with his second
barrel.

But before Godfrey could stop him, Carefinotu had rushed at the place where
the tiger disappeared, his hunting-knife in his hand.

Godfrey shouted for him to stop, to come back! It was in vain. The black,
resolved even at the risk of his life to finish the animal which perhaps was only
wounded, did not or would not hear.

Godfrey rushed after him.

When he reached the bank, he saw Carefinotu struggling with the tiger,
holding him by the throat, and at last stabbing him to the heart with a powerful
blow.

The tiger then rolled into the river, of which the waters, swollen by the rains,
carried it away with the quickness of a torrent. The corpse, which floated only
for an instant, was swiftly borne off towards the sea.

A bear! A tiger! There could be no doubt that the island did contain
formidable beasts of prey!

Godfrey, after rejoining Carefinotu, found that in the struggle the black had
only received a few scratches. Then, deeply anxious about the future, he retook
the road to Will Tree.


CHAPTER XX.

IN WHICH TARTLET REITERATES IN EVERY KEY THAT HE WOULD
RATHER BE OFF.

When Tartlet learnt that there were not only bears in the island, but tigers
too, his lamentations again arose. Now he would never dare to go out! The wild
beasts would end by discovering the road to Will Tree! There was no longer any
safety anywhere! In his alarm the professor wanted for his protection quite a
fortification! Yes! Stone walls with scarps and counterscarps, curtains and
bastions, and ramparts, for what was the use of a shelter under a group of
sequoias? Above all things, he would at all risks, like to be off.

"So would I," answered Godfrey quietly.

In fact, the conditions under which the castaways on Phina Island had lived
up to now were no longer the same. To struggle to the end, to struggle for the
necessaries of life, they had been able, thanks to fortunate circumstances.
Against the bad season, against winter and its menaces, they knew how to act,
but to have to defend themselves against wild animals, whose attack was
possible every minute, was another thing altogether; and in fact they could not
do it.

The situation, already complicated, had become very serious, for it had
become intolerable.

"But," repeated Godfrey to himself, without cessation, "how is it that for four
months we did not see a single beast of prey in the island, and why during the
last fortnight have we had to encounter a bear and a tiger? What shall we say to
that?"

The fact might be inexplicable, but it was none the less real.

Godfrey, whose coolness and courage increased, as difficulties grew, was not
cast down. If dangerous animals menaced their little colony, it was better to put
themselves on guard against their attacks, and that without delay.

But what was to be done?

It was at the outset decided that excursions into the woods or to the sea-shore
should be rarer, and that they should never go out unless well armed, and only
when it was absolutely necessary for their wants.

"We have been lucky enough in our two encounters!" said Godfrey
frequently; "but there may come a time when we may not shoot so straight! So
there is no necessity for us to run into danger!"

At the same time they had not only to settle about the excursions, but to
protect Will Tree--not only the dwelling, but the annexes, the poultry roost, and
the fold for the animals, where the wild beasts could easily cause irreparable


disaster.

Godfrey thought then, if not of fortifying Will Tree according to the famous
plans of Tartlet, at least of connecting the four or five large sequoias which
surrounded it.

If he could devise a high and strong palisade from one tree to another, they
would be in comparative security at any rate from a surprise.

It was practicable--Godfrey concluded so after an examination of the ground-
-but it would cost a good deal of labour. To reduce this as much as possible, he
thought of erecting the palisade around a perimeter of only some three hundred
feet. We can judge from this the number of trees he had to select, cut down,
carry, and trim until the enclosure was complete.

Godfrey did not quail before his task. He imparted his projects to Tartlet,
who approved them, and promised his active co-operation; but what was more
important, he made his plans understood to Carefinotu, who was always ready to
come to his assistance.

They set to work without delay.

There was at a bend in the stream, about a mile from Will Tree, a small wood
of stone pines of medium height, whose trunks, in default of beams and planks,
without wanting to be squared, would, by being placed close together, form a
solid palisade.

It was to this wood that, at dawn on the 12th of November, Godfrey and his
two companions repaired. Though well armed they advanced with great care.

"You can have too much of this sort of thing,” murmured Tartlet, whom these
new difficulties had rendered still more discontented, "I would rather be off!"

But Godfrey did not take the trouble to reply to him.

On this occasion his tastes were not being consulted, his intelligence even
was not being appealed to. It was the assistance of his arms that the common
interest demanded. In short, he had to resign himself to his vocation of beast of
burden.

No unpleasant accident happened in the mile which separated the wood from
Will Tree. In vain they had carefully beaten the underwood, and swept the
horizon all around them. The domestic animals they had left out at pasture gave
no sign of alarm. The birds continued their frolics with no more anxiety than
usual.

Work immediately began. Godfrey, very properly did not want to begin
carrying until all the trees he wanted had been felled. They could work at them
in greater safety on the spot.

Carefinotu was of great service during this toilsome task. He had become
very clever in the use of the axe and saw. His strength even allowed him to


continue at work when Godfrey was obliged to rest for a minute or so, and when
Tartlet, with bruised hands and aching limbs, had not even strength left to lift his
fiddle.

However, although the unfortunate professor of dancing and deportment had
been transformed into a wood-cutter, Godfrey had reserved for him the least
fatiguing part, that is, the clearing off of the smaller branches. In spite of this, if
Tartlet had only been paid half a dollar a day, he would have stolen four-fifths of
his salary!

For six days, from the 12th to the 17th of November, these labours
continued. Our friends went off in the morning at dawn, they took their food
with them, and they did not return to Will Tree until evening. The sky was not
very clear. Heavy clouds frequently accumulated over it. It was harvest weather,
with alternating showers and sunshine; and during the showers the wood-cutters
would take shelter under the trees, and resume their task when the rain had
ceased.

On the 18th all the trees, topped and cleared of branches, were lying on the
ground, ready for transport to Will Tree.

During this time no wild beast had appeared in the neighbourhood of the
river. The question was, were there any more in the island, or had the bear and
the tiger been--a most improbable event--the last of their species?

Whatever it was, Godfrey had no intention of abandoning his project of the
solid palisade so as to be prepared against a surprise from savages, or bears, or
tigers. Besides, the worst was over, and there only remained to take the wood
where it was wanted.

We say "the worst was over," though the carriage promised to be somewhat
laborious. If it were not so, it was because Godfrey had had a very practical idea,
which materially lightened the task; this was to make use of the current of the
river, which the flood occasioned by the recent rains had rendered very rapid, to
transport the wood. Small rafts could be formed, and they would quietly float
down to the sequoias, where a bar, formed by the small bridge, would stop them.
From thence to Will Tree was only about fifty-five paces.

If any of them showed particular satisfaction at this mode of procedure, it
was Tartlet.

On the 18th the first rafts were formed, and they arrived at the barrier
without accident. In less than three days on the evening of the 25th, the palisade
had been all sent down to its destination.

On the morrow, the first trunks, sunk two feet in the soil, began to rise in
such a manner as to connect the principal sequoias which surrounded Will Tree.
A capping of strong flexible branches, pointed by the axe, assured the solidity of


the wall.

Godfrey saw the work progress with extreme satisfaction, and delayed not
until it was finished.

"Once the palisade is done," he said to Tartlet, "we shall be really at home."

"We shall not be really at home," replied the professor drily, "until we are in
Montgomery Street, with your Uncle Kolderup."

There was no disputing this opinion.

On the 26th of November the palisade was three parts done. It comprised
among the sequoias attached one to another that in which the poultry had
established themselves, and Godfrey's intention was to build a stable inside it.

In three or four days the fence was finished. There only remained to fit in a
solid door, which would assure the closure of Will Tree.

But on the morning of the 27th of November the work was interrupted by an
event which we had better explain with some detail, for it was one of those
unaccountable things peculiar to Phina Island.

About eight o'clock, Carefinotu had climbed up to the fork of the sequoia, so
as to more carefully close the hole by which the cold and rain penetrated, when
he uttered a singular cry.

Godfrey, who was at work at the palisade, raised his head and saw the black,
with expressive gestures, motioning to him to join him without delay.

Godfrey, thinking Carefinotu would not have disturbed him unless he had
serious reason, took his glasses with him and climbed up the interior passage,
and passing through the hole, seated himself astride of one of the main branches.

Carefinotu, pointing with his arm towards the rounded angle which Phina
Island made to the north-east, showed a column of smoke rising in the air like a
long plume.

"Again!" exclaimed Godfrey.

And putting his glasses in the direction, he assured himself that this time
there was no possible error, that it must escape from some important fire, which
he could distinctly see must be about five miles off.

Godfrey turned towards the black.

Carefinotu expressed his surprise, by his looks, his exclamations, in fact by
his whole attitude.

Assuredly he was no less astounded than Godfrey at this apparition.

Besides, in the offing, there was no ship, not a vessel native or other, nothing
which showed that a landing had recently been made on the shore.

"Ah! This time I will find out the fire which produces that smoke!"
exclaimed Godfrey.

And pointing to the north-east angle of the island, and then to the foot of the


tree, he gesticulated to Carefinotu that he wished to reach the place without
losing an instant.

Carefinotu understood him. He even gave him to understand that he
approved of the idea.

"Yes," said Godfrey to himself, "if there is a human being there, we must
know who he is and whence he comes! We must know why he hides himself! It
will be for the safety of all!"

A moment afterwards Carefinotu and he descended to the foot of Will Tree.
Then Godfrey, informing Tartlet of what had passed and what he was going to
do, proposed for him to accompany them to the north coast.

A dozen miles to traverse in one day was not a very tempting suggestion to a
man who regarded his legs as the most precious part of his body, and only
designed for noble exercises. And so he replied that he would prefer to remain at
Will Tree.

"Very well, we will go alone," answered Godfrey, "but do not expect us until
the evening."

So saying, and Carefinotu and he carrying some provisions for lunch on the
road, they set out, after taking leave of the professor, whose private opinion it
was that they would find nothing, and that all their fatigue would be useless.

Godfrey took his musket and revolver; the black the axe and the hunting-
knife which had become his favourite weapon. They crossed the plank bridge to
the right bank of the river, and then struck off across the prairie to the point on
the shore where the smoke had been seen rising amongst the rocks.

It was rather more easterly than the place which Godfrey had uselessly
visited on his second exploration.

They progressed rapidly, not without a sharp look-out that the wood was
clear and that the bushes and underwood did not hide some animal whose attack
might be formidable.

Nothing disquieting occurred.

At noon, after having had some food, without, however, stopping for an
instant, they reached the first line of rocks which bordered the beach. The
smoke, still visible, was rising about a quarter of a mile ahead. They had only to
keep straight on to reach their goal.

They hastened their steps, but took precautions so as to surprise, and not be
surprised.

Two minutes afterwards the smoke disappeared, as if the fire had been
suddenly extinguished.

But Godfrey had noted with exactness the spot whence it arose. It was at the
point of a strangely formed rock, a sort of truncated pyramid, easily


recognizable. Showing this to his companion, he kept straight on.

The quarter of a mile was soon traversed, then the last line was climbed, and
Godfrey and Carefinotu gained the beach about fifty paces from the rock.

They ran up to it. Nobody! But this time half-smouldering embers and half-
burnt wood proved clearly that the fire had been alight on the spot.

"There has been some one here!" exclaimed Godfrey. "Some one not a
moment ago! We must find out who!"

He shouted. No response! Carefinotu gave a terrible yell. No one appeared!

Behold them then hunting amongst the neighbouring rocks, searching a
cavern, a grotto, which might serve as a refuge for a shipwrecked man, an
aboriginal, a savage--

It was in vain that they ransacked the slightest recesses of the shore. There
was neither ancient nor recent camp in existence, not even the traces of the
passage of a man.

"But," repeated Godfrey, "it was not smoke from a warm spring this time! It
was from a fire of wood and grass, and that fire could not light itself."

Vain was their search. Then about two o'clock Godfrey and Carefinotu, as
weary as they were disconcerted at their fruitless endeavours, retook their road
to Will Tree.

There was nothing astonishing in Godfrey being deep in thought. It seemed
to him that the island was now under the empire of some occult power. The
reappearance of this fire, the presence of wild animals, did not all this denote
some extraordinary complication?

And was there not cause for his being confirmed in this idea when an hour
after he had regained the prairie, he heard a singular noise, a sort of hard
jingling.

Carefinotu pushed him aside at the same instant as a serpent glided beneath
the herbage, and was about to strike at him.

"Snakes, now. Snakes in the island, after the bears and the tigers!" he
exclaimed.

Yes! It was one of those reptiles well-known by the noise they make, a
rattlesnake of the most venomous species: a giant of the Crotalus family!

Carefinotu threw himself between Godfrey and the reptile, which hurried off
under a thick bush.

But the negro pursued it and smashed in its head with a blow of the axe.
When Godfrey rejoined him, the two halves of the reptile were writhing on the
blood-stained soil.

Then other serpents, not less dangerous, appeared in great abundance on this
part of the prairie which was separated by the stream from Will Tree.


Was it then a sudden invasion of reptiles? Was Phina Island going to become
the rival of ancient Tenos, whose formidable ophidians rendered it famous in
antiquity, and which gave its name to the viper?

"Come on! come on!" exclaimed Godfrey, motioning to Carefinotu to
quicken the pace.

He was uneasy. Strange presentiments agitated him without his being able to
control them.

Under their influence, fearing some approaching misfortune, he had hastened
his return to Will Tree.

But matters became serious when he reached the planks across the river.

Screams of terror resounded from beneath the sequoias--cries for help in a
tone of agony which it was impossible to mistake!

"It is Tartlet!" exclaimed Godfrey. "The unfortunate man has been attacked!
Quick! quick!"

Once over the bridge, about twenty paces further on, Tartlet was perceived
running as fast as his legs could carry him.

An enormous crocodile had come out of the river and was pursuing him with
its jaws wide open. The poor man, distracted, mad with fright, instead of turning
to the right or the left, was keeping in a straight line, and so running the risk of
being caught. Suddenly he stumbled. He fell. He was lost.

Godfrey halted. In the presence of this imminent danger his coolness never
forsook him for an instant. He brought his gun to his shoulder, and aimed at the
crocodile. The well-aimed bullet struck the monster, and it made a bound to one
side and fell motionless on the ground.

Carefinotu rushed towards Tartlet and lifted him up. Tartlet had escaped with
a fright! But what a fright!

It was six o'clock in the evening.

A moment afterwards Godfrey and his two companions had reached Will
Tree.

How bitter were their reflections during their evening repast! What long
sleepless hours were in store for the inhabitants of Phina Island, on whom
misfortunes were now crowding.

As for the professor, in his anguish he could only repeat the words which
expressed the whole of his thoughts, "I had much rather be off!"


CHAPTER XXI.

WHICH ENDS WITH QUITE A SURPRISING REFLECTION BY THE
NEGRO CAREFINOTU.

The winter season, so severe in these latitudes, had come at last. The first
frosts had already been felt, and there was every promise of rigorous weather.
Godfrey was to be congratulated on having established his fireplace in the tree. It
need scarcely be said that the work at the palisade had been completed, and that
a sufficiently solid door now assured the closure of the fence.

During the six weeks which followed, that is to say, until the middle of
December, there had been a good many wretched days on which it was
impossible to venture forth. At the outset there came terrible squalls. They shook
the group of sequoias to their very roots. They strewed the ground with broken
branches, and so furnished an ample reserve for the fire.

Then it was that the inhabitants of Will Tree clothed themselves as warmly as
they could. The woollen stuffs found in the box were used during the few
excursions necessary for revictualling, until the weather became so bad that even
these were forbidden. All hunting was at an end, and the snow fell in such
quantity that Godfrey could have believed himself in the inhospitable latitudes of
the Arctic Ocean.

It is well known that Northern America, swept by the Polar winds, with no
obstacle to check them, is one of the coldest countries on the globe. The winter
there lasts until the month of April. Exceptional precautions have to be taken
against it. It was the coming of the winter as it did which gave rise to the thought
that Phina Island was situated in a higher latitude than Godfrey had supposed.

Hence the necessity of making the interior of Will Tree as comfortable as
possible. But the suffering from rain and cold was cruel. The reserves of
provisions were unfortunately insufficient, the preserved turtle flesh gradually
disappeared. Frequently there had to be sacrificed some of the sheep or goats or
agouties, whose numbers had but slightly increased since their arrival in the
island.

With these new trials, what sad thoughts haunted Godfrey!

It happened also that for a fortnight he fell into a violent fever. Without the
tiny medicine-chest which afforded the necessary drugs for his treatment, he
might never have recovered. Tartlet was ill-suited to attend to the petty cares that
were necessary during the continuance of the malady. It was to Carefinotu that
he mainly owed his return to health.

But what remembrances and what regrets! Who but himself could he blame
for having got into a situation of which he could not even see the end? How
many times in his delirium did he call Phina, whom he never should see again,


and his Uncle Will, from whom he beheld himself separated for ever! Ah! he had
to alter his opinion of this Crusoe life which his boyish imagination had made
his ideal! Now he was contending with reality! He could no longer even hope to
return to the domestic hearth.

So passed this miserable December, at the end of which Godfrey began to
recover his strength.

As for Tartlet, by special grace, doubtless, he was always well. But what
incessant lamentations! What endless jeremiads! As the grotto of Calypso after
the departure of Ulysses, Will Tree "resounded no more to his song"--that of his
fiddle--for the cold had frozen the strings!

It should be said too that one of the gravest anxieties of Godfrey was not
only the reappearance of dangerous animals, but the fear of the savages returning
in great numbers to Phina Island, the situation of which was known to them.
Against such an invasion the palisade was but an insufficient barrier. All things
considered, the refuge offered by the high branches of the sequoia appeared
much safer, and the rendering the access less difficult was taken in hand. It
would always be easy to defend the narrow orifice by which the top of the trunk
was reached.

With the aid of Carefinotu Godfrey began to cut regular ledges on each side,
like the steps of a staircase, and these, connected by a long cord of vegetable
fibre, permitted of rapid ascent up the interior.

"Well," said Godfrey, when the work was done, "that gives us a town house
below and a country house above!"

"T had rather have a cellar, if it was in Montgomery Street!" answered Tartlet.

Christmas arrived. Christmas kept in such style throughout the United States
of America! The New Year's Day, full of memories of childhood, rainy, snowy,
cold, and gloomy, began the new year under the most melancholy auspices.

It was six months since the survivors of the Dream had remained without
communication with the rest of the world.

The commencement of the year was not very cheering. It made Godfrey and
his companions anticipate that they would still have many trials to encounter.

The snow never ceased falling until January 18th. The flocks had to be let
out to pasture to get what feed they could. At the close of the day, a very cold
damp night enveloped the island, and the space shaded by the sequoias was
plunged in profound obscurity.

Tartlet and Carefinotu, stretched on their beds inside Will Tree, were trying
in vain to sleep. Godfrey, by the struggling light of a torch, was turning over the
pages of his Bible.

About ten o'clock a distant noise, which came nearer and nearer, was heard


outside away towards the north. There could be no mistake. It was the wild
beasts prowling in the neighbourhood, and, alarming to relate, the howling of the
tiger and of the hyena, and the roaring of the panther and the lion were this time
blended in one formidable concert.

Godfrey, Tartlet, and the negro sat up, each a prey to indescribable anguish.
If at this unaccountable invasion of ferocious animals Carefinotu shared the
alarm of his companions, his astonishment was quite equal to his fright.

During two mortal hours all three kept on the alert. The howlings sounded at
times close by; then they suddenly ceased, as if the beasts, not knowing the
country, were roaming about all over it. Perhaps then Will Tree would escape an
attack!

"It doesn't matter if it does," thought Godfrey. "If we do not destroy these
animals to the very last one, there will be no safety for us in the island!"

A little after midnight the roaring began again in full strength at a moderate
distance away. Impossible now to doubt but that the howling army was
approaching Will Tree!

Yes! It was only too certain! But whence came these wild animals? They
could not have recently landed on Phina Island! They must have been there then
before Godfrey's arrival! But how was it that all of them had remained hidden
during his walks and hunting excursions, as well across the centre as in the most
out-of-the-way parts to the south? For Godfrey had never found a trace of them.
Where was the mysterious den which vomited forth lions, hyenas, panthers,
tigers? Amongst all the unaccountable things up to now this was indeed the most
unaccountable.

Carefinotu could not believe what he heard. We have said that his
astonishment was extreme. By the light of the fire which illuminated the interior
of Will Tree there could be seen on his black face the strangest of grimaces.

Tartlet in the comer, groaned and lamented, and moaned again. He would
have asked Godfrey all about it, but Godfrey was not in the humour to reply. He
had a presentiment of a very great danger, he was seeking for a way to retreat
from it.

Once or twice Carefinotu and he went out to the centre of the palisade. They
wished to see that the door was firmly and strongly shut.

Suddenly an avalanche of animals appeared with a huge tumult along the
front of Will Tree.

It was only the goats and sheep and agouties. Terrified at the howling of the
wild beasts, and scenting their approach, they had fled from their pasturage to
take shelter behind the palisade.

"We must open the door!" exclaimed Godfrey.


Carefinotu nodded his head. He did not want to know the language to
understand what Godfrey meant.

The door was opened, and the frightened flock rushed into the enclosure.

But at that instant there appeared through the opening a gleaming of eyes in
the depths of the darkness which the shadow of the sequoias rendered still more
profound.

There was no time to close the enclosure!

To jump at Godfrey, seize him in spite of himself, push him into the dwelling
and slam the door, was done by Carefinotu like a flash of lightning.

New roarings indicated that three or four wild beasts had just cleared the
palisade.

Then these horrible roarings were mingled with quite a concert of bleatings
and groanings of terror. The domestic flock were taken as in a trap and delivered
over to the clutches of the assailants.

Godfrey and Carefinotu, who had climbed up to the two small windows in
the bark of the sequoia, endeavoured to see what was passing in the gloom.

Evidently the wild animals--tigers or lions, panthers or hyenas, they did not
know which yet--had thrown themselves on the flock and begun their slaughter.

At this moment, Tartlet, in a paroxysm of blind terror, seized one of the
muskets, and would have taken a chance shot out of one of the windows.

Godfrey stopped him.

"No!" said he. "In this darkness our shots will be lost, and we must not waste
our ammunition! Wait for daylight!"

He was right. The bullets would just as likely have struck the domestic as the
wild animals--more likely in fact, for the former were the most numerous. To
save them was now impossible. Once they were sacrificed, the wild beasts,
thoroughly gorged, might quit the enclosure before sunrise. They would then see
how to act to guard against a fresh invasion.

It was most important too, during the dark night, to avoid as much as
possible revealing to these animals the presence of human beings, whom they
might prefer to the flock. Perhaps they would thus avoid a direct attack against
Will Tree.

As Tartlet was incapable of understanding either this reasoning or any other,
Godfrey contented himself with depriving him of his weapon. The professor then
went and threw himself on his bed and freely anathematized all travels and
travellers and maniacs who could not remain quietly at their own firesides.

Both his companions resumed their observations at the windows.

Thence they beheld, without the power of interference, the horrible massacre
which was taking place in the gloom. The cries of the sheep and the goats


gradually diminished as the slaughter of the animals was consummated, although
the greater part had escaped outside, where death, none the less certain, awaited
them. This loss was irreparable for the little colony; but Godfrey was not then
anxious about the future. The present was disquieting enough to occupy all his
thoughts.

There was nothing they could do, nothing they could try, to hinder this work
of destruction.

Godfrey and Carefinotu kept constant watch, and now they seemed to see
new shadows coming up and passing into the palisade, while a fresh sound of
footsteps struck on their ears.

Evidently certain belated beasts, attracted by the odour of the blood which
impregnated the air, had traced the scent up to Will Tree.

They ran to and fro, they rushed round and round the tree and gave forth
their hoarse and angry growls. Some of the shadows jumped on the ground like
enormous cats. The slaughtered flock had not been sufficient to satisfy their
rage.

Neither Godfrey nor his companions moved. In keeping completely
motionless they might avoid a direct attack.

An unlucky shot suddenly revealed their presence and exposed them to the
greatest danger.

Tartlet, a prey to a veritable hallucination, had risen. He had seized a
revolver; and this time, before Godfrey and Carefinotu could hinder him, and not
knowing himself what he did, but believing that he saw a tiger standing before
him, he had fired! The bullet passed through the door of Will Tree.

"Fool!" exclaimed Godfrey, throwing himself on Tartlet, while the negro
seized the weapon.

It was too late. The alarm was given, and growlings still more violent
resounded without. Formidable talons were heard tearing the bark of the sequoia.
Terrible blows shook the door, which was too feeble to resist such an assault.

"We must defend ourselves!" shouted Godfrey.

And, with his gun in his hand and his cartridge-pouch round his waist, he
took his post at one of the windows.

To his great surprise, Carefinotu had done the same! Yes! the black, seizing
the second musket--a weapon which he had never before handled--had filled his
pockets with cartridges and taken his place at the second window.

Then the reports of the guns began to echo from the embrasures. By the
flashes, Godfrey on the one side, and Carefinotu on the other, beheld the foes
they had to deal with.

There, in the enclosure, roaring with rage, howling at the reports, rolling


beneath the bullets which struck many of them, leapt of lions and tigers, and
hyenas and panthers, at least a score. To their roarings and growlings which
reverberated from afar, there echoed back those of other ferocious beasts running
up to join them. Already the now distant roaring could be heard as they
approached the environs of Will Tree. It was as though quite a menagerie of wild
animals had been suddenly set free on the island!

[Illustration: Of lions and tigers quite a score. page 252]

However, Godfrey and Carefinotu, without troubling themselves about
Tartlet, who could be of no use, were keeping as cool as they could, and
refraining from firing unless they were certain of their aim. Wishing to waste not
a shot, they waited till a shadow passed in front of them. Then came the flash
and the report, and then a growl of grief told them that the animal had been hit.

A quarter of an hour elapsed, and then came a respite. Had the wild beasts
given up the attack which had cost the lives of so many amongst them? Were
they waiting for the day to recommence the attempt under more favourable
conditions?

Whatever might be the reason, neither Godfrey nor Carefinotu desired to
leave his post. The black had shown himself no less ready with the gun than
Godfrey. If that was due only to the instinct of imitation, it must be admitted that
it was indeed surprising.

About two o'clock in the morning there came a new alarm--more furious than
before. The danger was imminent, the position in the interior of Will Tree was
becoming untenable. New growlings resounded round the foot of the sequoia.
Neither Godfrey nor Carefinotu, on account of the situation of the windows,
which were cut straight through, could see the assailants, nor, in consequence,
could they fire with any chance of success.

It was now the door which the beasts attacked, and it was only too evident
that it would be beaten in by their weight or torn down by their claws.

Godfrey and the black had descended to the ground. The door was already
shaking beneath the blows from without. They could feel the heated breath
making its way in through the cracks in the bark.

Godfrey and Carefinotu attempted to prop back the door with the stakes
which kept up the beds, but these proved quite useless.

It was obvious that in a little while it would be driven in, for the beasts were
mad with rage--particularly as no shots could reach them.

Godfrey was powerless. If he and his companions were inside Will Tree
when the assailants broke in, their weapons would be useless to protect them.

Godfrey had crossed his arms. He saw the boards of the door open little by
little. He could do nothing. In a moment of hesitation, he passed his hand across


his forehead, as if in despair. But soon recovering his self-possession, he
shouted,--

"Up we go! Up! All of us!"

And he pointed to the narrow passage which led up to the fork inside Will
‘Tree.

Carefinotu and he, taking their muskets and revolvers, supplied themselves
with cartridges.

And now he turned to make Tartlet follow them into these heights where he
had never ventured before.

Tartlet was no longer there. He had started up while his companions were
firing.

"Up!" repeated Godfrey.

It was a last retreat, where they would assuredly be sheltered from the wild
beasts. If any tiger or panther attempted to come up into the branches of the
sequoia, it would be easy to defend the hole through which he would have to
pass.

Godfrey and Carefinotu had scarcely ascended thirty feet, when the roaring
was heard in the interior of Will Tree. A few moments more and they would
have been surprised. The door had just fallen in. They both hurried along, and at
last reached the upper end of the hole.

A scream of terror welcomed them. It was Tartlet, who imagined he saw a
panther or tiger! The unfortunate professor was clasping a branch, frightened
almost out of his life lest he should fall.

Carefinotu went to him, and compelled him to lean against an upright bough,
to which he firmly secured him with his belt.

Then, while Godfrey selected a place whence he could command the
opening, Carefinotu went to another spot whence he could deliver a cross fire.

And they waited.

Under these circumstances it certainly looked as though the besieged were
safe from attack.

Godfrey endeavoured to discover what was passing beneath them; but the
night was still too dark. Then he tried to hear; and the growlings, which never
ceased, showed that the assailants had no thought of abandoning the place.

Suddenly, towards four o'clock in the morning, a great light appeared at the
foot of the tree. At once it shot out through the door and windows. At the same
time a thick smoke spread forth from the upper opening and lost itself in the
higher branches.

"What is that now?" exclaimed Godfrey.

It was easily explained. The wild beasts, in ravaging the interior of Will Tree,


had scattered the remains of the fire. The fire had spread to the things in the
room. The flame had caught the bark, which had dried and become combustible.
The gigantic sequoia was ablaze below.

The position was now more terrible than it had ever been. By the light of the
flames, which illuminated the space beneath the grove, they could see the wild
beasts leaping round the foot of Will Tree.

At the same instant, a fearful explosion occurred. The sequoia, violently
wrenched, trembled from its roots to its summit.

It was the reserve of gunpowder which had exploded inside Will Tree, and
the air, violently expelled from the opening, rushed forth like the gas from a
discharging cannon.

Godfrey and Carefinotu were almost torn from their resting-places. Had
Tartlet not been lashed to the branch, he would assuredly have been hurled to the
ground.

The wild beasts, terrified at the explosion, and more or less wounded, had
taken to flight.

But at the same time the conflagration, fed by the sudden combustion of the
powder, had considerably extended. It swiftly grew in dimensions as it crept up
the enormous stem.

Large tongues of flame lapped the interior, and the highest soon reached the
fork, and the dead wood snapped and crackled like shots from a revolver. A huge
glare lighted up, not only the group of giant trees, but even the whole of the
coast from Flag Point to the southern cape of Dream Bay.

Soon the fire had reached the lower branches of the sequoia, and threatened
to invade the spot where Godfrey and his companions had taken refuge. Were
they then to be devoured by the flames, with which they could not battle, or had
they but the last resource of throwing themselves to the ground to escape being
burnt alive? In either case they must die!

Godfrey sought about for some means of escape. He saw none!

Already the lower branches were ablaze and a dense smoke was struggling
with the first gleams of dawn which were rising in the east.

At this moment there was a horrible crash of rending and breaking. The
sequoia, burnt to the very roots, cracked violently--it toppled over--it fell!

But as it fell the stem met the stems of the trees which environed it; their
powerful branches were mingled with its own, and so it remained obliquely
cradled at an angle of about forty-five degrees from the ground.

At the moment that the sequoia fell, Godfrey and his companions believed
themselves lost!

"Nineteenth of January!" exclaimed a voice, which Godfrey, in spite of his


astonishment, immediately recognized.

It was Carefinotu! Yes, Carefinotu had just pronounced these words, and in
that English language which up to then he had seemed unable to speak or to
understand!

"What did you say?" asked Godfrey, as he followed him along the branches.

"I said, Mr. Morgan," answered Carefinotu, "that to-day your Uncle Will
ought to reach us, and that if he doesn't turn up we are done for!"


CHAPTER XXII.

WHICH CONCLUDES BY EXPLAINING WHAT UP TO NOW HAD
APPEARED INEXPLICABLE.

At that instant, and before Godfrey could reply, the report of firearms was
heard not far from Will Tree.

At the same time one of those rain storms, regular cataracts in their fury, fell
in a torrential shower just as the flames devouring the lower branches were
threatening to seize upon the trees against which Will Tree was resting.

What was Godfrey to think after this series of inexplicable events?
Carefinotu speaking English like a cockney, calling him by his name,
announcing the early arrival of Uncle Will, and then the sudden report of the
firearms?

He asked himself if he had gone mad; but he had no time for insoluble
questions, for below him--hardly five minutes after the first sound of the guns--a
body of sailors appeared hurrying through the trees.

Godfrey and Carefinotu slipped down along the stem, the interior of which
was still burning.

But the moment that Godfrey touched the ground, he heard himself spoken
to, and by two voices which even in his trouble it was impossible for him not to
recognize.

"Nephew Godfrey, I have the honour to salute you!"

"Godfrey! Dear Godfrey!"

"Uncle Will! Phina! You!" exclaimed Godfrey, astounded.

Three seconds afterwards he was in somebody's arms, and was clasping that
somebody in his own.

At the same time two sailors, at the order of Captain Turcott who was in
command, climbed up along the sequoia to set Tartlet free, and, with all due
respect, pluck him from the branch as if he were a fruit.

And then the questions, the answers, the explanations which passed!

"Uncle Will! You?"


"Yes! me!"

"And how did you discover Phina Island?"

"Phina Island!" answered William W. Kolderup. "You should say Spencer
Island! Well, it wasn't very difficult. I bought it six months ago!"

"Spencer Island!"

"And you gave my name to it, you dear Godfrey!" said the young lady.

"The new name is a good one, and we will keep to it," answered the uncle;
"but for geographers this is Spencer Island, only three days' journey from San
Francisco, on which I thought it would be a good plan for you to serve your
apprenticeship to the Crusoe business!"

"Oh! Uncle! Uncle Will! What is it you say?" exclaimed Godfrey. "Well, if
you are in earnest, I can only answer that I deserved it! But then, Uncle Will, the
wreck of the Dream?"

"Sham!" replied William W. Kolderup, who had never seemed in such a good
humour before. "The Dream was quietly sunk by means of her water ballast,
according to the instructions I had given Turcott. You thought she sank for good,
but when the captain saw that you and Tartlet had got safely to land he brought
her up and steamed away. Three days later he got back to San Francisco, and he
it is who has brought us to Spencer Island on the date we fixed!"

"Then none of the crew perished in the wreck?"

"None--unless it was the unhappy Chinaman who hid himself away on board
and could not be found!"

"But the canoe?"

"Sham! The canoe was of my own make."

"But the savages?"

"Sham! The savages whom luckily you did not shoot!"

"But Carefinotu?"

"Sham! Carefinotu was my faithful Jup Brass, who played his part of Friday
marvellously well, as I see."

"Yes," answered Godfrey. "He twice saved my life--once from a bear, once
from a tiger--"

"The bear was sham! the tiger was sham!" laughed William W. Kolderup.
"Both of them were stuffed with straw, and landed before you saw them with Jup
Brass and his companions!"

"But he moved his head and his paws!"

"By means of a spring which Jup Brass had fixed during the night a few
hours before the meetings which were prepared for you."

"What! all of them?" repeated Godfrey, a little ashamed at having been taken
in by these artifices.


"Yes! Things were going too smoothly in your island, and we had to get up a
little excitement!"

"Then," answered Godfrey, who had begun to laugh, "if you wished to make
matters unpleasant for us, why did you send us the box which contained
everything we wanted?"

"A box?" answered William W. Kolderup. "What box? I never sent you a
box! Perhaps by chance--"

And as he said so he looked towards Phina, who cast down her eyes and
turned away her head.

"Oh! indeed!--a box! but then Phina must have had an accomplice--"

And Uncle Will turned towards Captain Turcott, who laughingly answered,--

"What could I do, Mr. Kolderup? I can sometimes resist you--but Miss
Phina--it was too difficult! And four months ago, when you sent me to look
round the island, I landed the box from my boat--"

"Dearest Phina!" said Godfrey, seizing the young lady's hand.

"Turcott, you promised to keep the secret!" said Phina with a blush.

And Uncle William W. Kolderup, shaking his big head, tried in vain to hide
that he was touched.

But if Godfrey could not restrain his smiles as he listened to the explanations
of Uncle Will, Professor Tartlet did not laugh in the least! He was excessively
mortified at what he heard! To have been the object of such a mystification, he, a
professor of dancing and deportment! And so advancing with much dignity he
observed,--

"Mr. William Kolderup will hardly assert, I imagine, that the enormous
crocodile, of which I was nearly the unhappy victim, was made of pasteboard
and wound up with a spring?"

"A crocodile?" replied the uncle.

"Yes, Mr. Kolderup," said Carefinotu, to whom we had better return his
proper name of Jup Brass. "Yes, a real live crocodile, which went for Mr. Tartlet,
and which I did not have in my collection!"

Godfrey then related what had happened, the sudden appearance of the wild
beasts in such numbers, real lions, real tigers, real panthers, and then the
invasion of the snakes, of which during four months they had not seen a single
specimen in the island!

William W. Kolderup at this was quite disconcerted. He knew nothing about
it. Spencer Island--it had been known for a long time--never had any wild beasts,
did not possess even a single noxious animal; it was so stated in the deeds of
sale.

Neither did he understand what Godfrey told him of the attempts he had


made to discover the origin of the smoke which had appeared at different points
on the island. And he seemed very much troubled to find that all had not passed
on the island according to his instructions, and that the programme had been
seriously interfered with.

As for Tartlet, he was not the sort of man to be humbugged. For his part he
would admit nothing, neither the sham shipwreck, nor the sham savages, nor the
sham animals, and above all he would never give up the glory which he had
gained in shooting with the first shot from his gun the chief of the Polynesian
tribe--one of the servants of the Kolderup establishment, who turned out to be as
well as he was.

All was described, all was explained, except the serious matter of the real
wild beasts and the unknown smoke. Uncle Will became very thoughtful about
this. But, like a practical man, he put off, by an effort of the will, the solution of
the problems, and addressing his nephew,--

"Godfrey," said he, "you have always been so fond of islands, that I am sure
it will please you to hear that this is yours--wholly yours! I make you a present
of it! You can do what you like with it! I never dreamt of bringing you away by
force; and I would not take you away from it! Be then a Crusoe for the rest of
your life, if your heart tells you to--"

"I!" answered Godfrey. "I! All my life!"

Phina stepped forward.

"Godfrey," she asked, "would you like to remain on your island?"

"I would rather die!" he exclaimed.

But immediately he added, as he took the young lady's hand,--

"Well, yes, I will remain; but on three conditions. The first is, you stay with
me, dearest Phina; the second is, that Uncle Will lives with us; and the third is,
that the chaplain of the Dream marries us this very day!"

"There is no chaplain on board the Dream, Godfrey!" replied Uncle Will.
"You know that very well. But I think there is still one left in San Francisco, and
that we can find some worthy minister to perform the service! I believe I read
your thoughts when I say that before to-morrow we shall put to sea again!"

Then Phina and Uncle Will asked Godfrey to do the honours of his island.
Behold them then walking under the group of sequoias, along the stream up to
the little bridge.

Alas! of the habitation at Will Tree nothing remained. The fire had
completely devoured the dwelling in the base of the tree! Without the arrival of
William W. Kolderup, what with the approaching winter, the destruction of their
stores, and the genuine wild beasts in the island, our Crusoes would have
deserved to be pitied.


"Uncle Will!" said Godfrey. "If I gave the island the name of Phina, let me
add that I gave our dwelling the name of Will Tree!"

"Well," answered the uncle, "we will take away some of the seed, and plant it
in my garden at 'Frisco!"

During the walk they noticed some wild animals in the distance; but they
dared not attack so formidable a party as the sailors of the Dream. But none the
less was their presence absolutely incomprehensible.

Then they returned on board, not without Tartlet asking permission to bring
off "his crocodile"--a permission which was granted.

That evening the party were united in the saloon of the Dream, and there was
quite a cheerful dinner to celebrate the end of the adventures of Godfrey Morgan
and his marriage with Phina Hollaney.

On the morrow, the 20th of January, the Dream set sail under the command
of Captain Turcott. At eight o'clock in the moming Godfrey, not without
emotion, saw the horizon in the west wipe out, as if it were a shadow, the island
on which he had been to school for six months--a school of which he never
forgot the lessons.

The passage was rapid; the sea magnificent; the wind favourable. This time
the Dream went straight to her destination! There was no one to be mystified!
She made no tackings without number as on the first voyage! She did not lose
during the night what she had gained during the day!

And so on the 23rd of January, after passing at noon through the Golden
Gate, she entered the vast bay of San Francisco, and came alongside the wharf in
Merchant Street.

And what did they then see?

They saw issue from the hold a man who, having swum to the Dream during
the night while she was anchored at Phina Island, had succeeded in stowing
himself away for the second time!

And who was this man?

It was the Chinaman, Seng Vou, who had made the passage back as he had
made the passage out!

Seng Vou advanced towards William W. Kolderup.

"I hope Mr. Kolderup will pardon me," said he very politely. "When I took
my passage in the Dream, I thought she was going direct to Shanghai, and then I
should have reached my country, but I leave her now, and return to San
Francisco."

Every one, astounded at the apparition, knew not what to answer, and
laughingly gazed at the intruder.

"But," said William W. Kolderup at last, "you have not remained six months


in the hold, I suppose?"
"No!" answered Seng Vou.
"Where have you been, then?"


"On the island!"
"You!" exclaimed Godfrey.
Ves


"Then the smoke?"

"A man must have a fire!"

"And you did not attempt to come to us, to share our living?"

"A Chinaman likes to live alone," quietly replied Seng Vou. "He is sufficient
for himself, and he wants no one!"

And thereupon this eccentric individual bowed to William W. Kolderup,
landed, and disappeared.

"That is the stuff they make real Crusoes of!" observed Uncle Will. "Look at
him and see if you are like him! It does not matter, the English race would do no
good by absorbing fellows of that stamp!"

"Good!" said Godfrey, "the smoke is explained by the presence of Seng Vou;
but the beasts?"

"And my crocodile!" added Tartlet; "I should like some one to explain my
crocodile!"

William W. Kolderup seemed much embarrassed, and feeling in turn quite
mystified, passed his hand over his forehead as if to clear the clouds away.

"We shall know later on," he said. "Everything is found by him who knows
how to seek!"

A few days afterwards there was celebrated with great pomp the wedding of
the nephew and pupil of William W. Kolderup. That the young couple were
made much of by all the friends of the wealthy merchant can easily be imagined.

At the ceremony Tartlet was perfect in bearing, in everything, and the pupil
did honour to the celebrated professor of dancing and deportment.

Now Tartlet had an idea. Not being able to mount his crocodile on a scarf-
pin--and much he regretted it--he resolved to have it stuffed. The animal
prepared in this fashion--hung from the ceiling, with the jaws half open, and the
paws outspread--would make a fine ornament for his room. The crocodile was
consequently sent to a famous taxidermist, and he brought it back to Tartlet a
few days afterwards. Every one came to admire the monster who had almost
made a meal of Tartlet.

"You know, Mr. Kolderup, where the animal came from?" said the celebrated
taxidermist, presenting his bill.

"No, I do not," answered Uncle Will.


"But it had a label underneath its carapace."

"A label!" exclaimed Godfrey.

"Here it is," said the celebrated taxidermist.

And he held out a piece of leather on which, in indelible ink, were written
these words,--

"From Hagenbeck, Hamburg, "To J. R. Taskinar, Stockton, U.S.A."

When William W. Kolderup had read these words he burst into a shout of
laughter. He understood all.

It was his enemy, J. R. Taskinar, his conquered competitor, who, to be
revenged, had bought a cargo of wild beasts, reptiles, and other objectionable
creatures from a well-known purveyor to the menageries of both hemispheres,
and had landed them at night in several voyages to Spencer Island. It had cost
him a good deal, no doubt, to do so; but he had succeeded in infesting the
property of his rival, as the English did Martinique, if we are to believe the
legend, before it was handed over to France.

There was thus no more to explain of the remarkable occurrences on Phina
Island.

"Well done!" exclaimed William W. Kolderup. "I could not have done better
myself!"

"But with those terrible creatures," said Phina, "Spencer Island--"

"Phina Island--" interrupted Godfrey.

"Phina Island," continued the bride, with a smile, "is quite uninhabitable."

"Bah!" answered Uncle Will; "we can wait till the last lion has eaten up the
last tiger!"

"And then, dearest Phina," said Godfrey, "you will not be afraid to pass a
season there with me?"

"With you, my dear husband, I fear nothing from anywhere," answered
Phina, "and as you have not had your voyage round the world--"

"We will have it together," said Godfrey, "and if an unlucky chance should
ever make me a real Crusoe--"

"You will ever have near you the most devoted of Crusoe-esses!"

THE END.


THE ENGLISH AT THE NORTH POLE
PART I OF THE ADVENTURES OF CAPTAIN HATTERAS
BY


JULES VERNE


CHAPTER I


THE "FORWARD"


"To-morrow, at low tide, the brig Forward, Captain K. Z----, Richard
Shandon mate, will start from New Prince's Docks for an unknown destination."

The foregoing might have been read in the Liverpool Herald of April 5th,
1860. The departure of a brig is an event of little importance for the most
commercial port in England. Who would notice it in the midst of vessels of all
sorts of tonnage and nationality that six miles of docks can hardly contain?
However, from daybreak on the 6th of April a considerable crowd covered the
wharfs of New Prince's Docks--the innumerable companies of sailors of the
town seemed to have met there. Workmen from the neighbouring wharfs had left
their work, merchants their dark counting-houses, tradesmen their shops. The
different-coloured omnibuses that ran along the exterior wall of the docks
brought cargoes of spectators at every moment; the town seemed to have but one
pre-occupation, and that was to see the Forward go out.

The Forward was a vessel of a hundred and seventy tons, charged with a
screw and steam-engine of a hundred and twenty horse-power. It might easily
have been confounded with the other brigs in the port. But though it offered
nothing curious to the eyes of the public, connoisseurs remarked certain
peculiarities in it that a sailor cannot mistake. On board the Nautilus, anchored at
a little distance, a group of sailors were hazarding a thousand conjectures about
the destination of the Forward.

"I don't know what to think about its masting,” said one; "it isn't usual for
steamboats to have so much sail."

"That ship," said a quartermaster with a big red face--"that ship will have to
depend more on her masts than her engine, and the topsails are the biggest
because the others will be often useless. I haven't got the slightest doubt that the
Forward is destined for the Arctic or Antarctic seas, where the icebergs stop the
wind more than is good for a brave and solid ship."

"You must be right, Mr. Cornhill," said a third sailor. "Have you noticed her
stern, how straight it falls into the sea?"

"Yes," said the quartermaster, "and it is furnished with a steel cutter as sharp
as a razor and capable of cutting a three-decker in two if the Forward were
thrown across her at top speed."

"That's certain," said a Mersey pilot; "for that 'ere vessel runs her fourteen


knots an hour with her screw. It was marvellous to see her cutting the tide when
she made her trial trip. I believe you, she's a quick un."

"The canvas isn't intricate either," answered Mr. Cornhill; "it goes straight
before the wind, and can be managed by hand. That ship is going to try the Polar
seas, Or my name isn't what it is. There's something else--do you see the wide
helm-port that the head of her helm goes through?"

"It's there, sure enough," answered one; "but what does that prove?"

"That proves, my boys," said Mr. Cornhill with disdainful satisfaction, "that
you don't know how to put two and two together and make it four; it proves that
they want to be able to take off the helm when they like, and you know it's a
manoeuvre that's often necessary when you have ice to deal with."

"That's certain," answered the crew of the Nautilus.

"Besides," said one of them, "the way she's loaded confirms Mr. Cornhill's
opinion. Clifton told me. The Forward is victualled and carries coal enough for
five or six years. Coals and victuals are all its cargo, with a stock of woollen
garments and sealskins."

"Then," said the quartermaster, "there is no more doubt on the matter; but
you, who know Clifton, didn't he tell you anything about her destination?"

"He couldn't tell me; he doesn't know; the crew was engaged without
knowing. He'll only know where he's going when he gets there."

"I shouldn't wonder if they were going to the devil," said an unbeliever: "it
looks like it."

"And such pay," said Clifton's friend, getting warm--"five times more than
the ordinary pay. If it hadn't been for that, Richard Shandon wouldn't have found
a soul to go with him. A ship with a queer shape, going nobody knows where,
and looking more like not coming back than anything else, it wouldn't have
suited this child."

"Whether it would have suited you or not," answered Cornhill, "you couldn't
have been one of the crew of the Forward."

"And why, pray?"

"Because you don't fulfil the required conditions. I read that all married men
were excluded, and you are in the category, so you needn't talk. Even the very
name of the ship is a bold one. The Forward--where is it to be forwarded to?
Besides, nobody knows who the captain is."

"Yes, they do," said a simple-faced young sailor.

"Why, you don't mean to say that you think Shandon is the captain of the
Forward?" said Cornhill.

"But----" answered the young sailor--

"Why, Shandon is commander, and nothing else; he's a brave and bold sailor,


an experienced whaler, and a jolly fellow worthy in every respect to be the
captain, but he isn't any more captain than you or I. As to who is going to
command after God on board he doesn't know any more than we do. When the
moment has come the true captain will appear, no one knows how nor where, for
Richard Shandon has not said and hasn't been allowed to say to what quarter of
the globe he is going to direct his ship."

"But, Mr. Cornhill," continued the young sailor, "I assure you that there is
someone on board who was announced in the letter, and that Mr. Shandon was
offered the place of second to."

"What!" said Cornhill, frowning, "do you mean to maintain that the Forward
has a captain on board?"

"Yes, Mr. Cornhill."

"Where did you get your precious information from?"

"From Johnson, the boatswain."

"From Johnson?"

"Yes, sir."

"Johnson told you so?"

"He not only told me so, but he showed me the captain."

"He showed him to you!" said Cornhill, stupefied. "And who is it, pray?"

"A dog."

"What do you mean by a dog?"

"A dog on four legs."

Stupefaction reigned amongst the crew of the Nautilus. Under any other
circumstances they would have burst out laughing. A dog captain of a vessel of a
hundred and seventy tons burden! It was enough to make them laugh. But really
the Forward was such an extraordinary ship that they felt it might be no
laughing matter, and they must be sure before they denied it. Besides, Cornhill
himself didn't laugh.

"So Johnson showed you the new sort of captain, did he?" added he,
addressing the young sailor, "and you saw him?"

"Yes, sir, aS plainly as I see you now."

"Well, and what do you think about it?" asked the sailors of the
quartermaster.

"I don't think anything,” he answered shortly. "I don't think anything, except
that the Forward is a ship belonging to the devil, or madmen fit for nothing but
Bedlam."

The sailors continued silently watching the Forward, whose preparations for
departure were drawing to an end; there was not one of them who pretended that
Johnson had only been laughing at the young sailor. The history of the dog had


already made the round of the town, and amongst the crowd of spectators many
a one looked out for the dog-captain and believed him to be a supernatural
animal. Besides, the Forward had been attracting public attention for some
months past. Everything about her was marvellous; her peculiar shape, the
mystery which surrounded her, the incognito kept by the captain, the way
Richard Shandon had received the proposition to direct her, the careful selection
of the crew, her unknown destination, suspected only by a few--all about her was
strange.

To a thinker, dreamer, or philosopher nothing is more affecting than the
departure of a ship; his imagination plays round the sails, sees her struggles with
the sea and the wind in the adventurous journey which does not always end in
port; when in addition to the ordinary incidents of departure there are
extraordinary ones, even minds little given to credulity let their imagination run
wild.

So it was with the Forward, and though the generality of people could not
make the knowing remarks of Quartermaster Cornhill, it did not prevent the ship
forming the subject of Liverpool gossip for three long months. The ship had
been put in dock at Birkenhead, on the opposite side of the Mersey. The builders,
Scott and Co., amongst the first in England, had received an estimate and
detailed plan from Richard Shandon; it informed them of the exact tonnage,
dimensions, and store room that the brig was to have. They saw by the details
given that they had to do with a consummate seaman. As Shandon had
considerable funds at his disposal, the work advanced rapidly, according to the
recommendation of the owner. The brig was constructed of a solidity to
withstand all tests; it was evident that she was destined to resist enormous
pressure, for her ribs were built of teak-wood, a sort of Indian oak, remarkable
for its extreme hardness, and were, besides, plated with iron. Sailors asked why
the hull of a vessel made so evidently for resistance was not built of sheet-iron
like other steamboats, and were told it was because the mysterious engineer had
his own reasons for what he did.

Little by little the brig grew on the stocks, and her qualities of strength and
delicacy struck connoisseurs. As the sailors of the Nautilus had remarked, her
stern formed a right angle with her keel; her steel prow, cast in the workshop of
R. Hawthorn, of Newcastle, shone in the sun and gave a peculiar look to the
brig, though otherwise she had nothing particularly warlike about her. However,
a 16-pounder cannon was installed on the forecastle; it was mounted on a pivot,
so that it might easily be turned in any direction; but neither the cannon nor the
stern, steel-clad as they were, succeeded in looking warlike.

On the 5th of February, 1860, this strange vessel was launched in the midst


of an immense concourse of spectators, and the trial trip was perfectly
successful. But if the brig was neither a man-of-war, a merchant vessel, nor a
pleasure yacht--for a pleasure trip is not made with six years’ provisions in the
hold--what was it? Was it a vessel destined for another Franklin expedition? It
could not be, because in 1859, the preceding year, Captain McClintock had
returned from the Arctic seas, bringing the certain proof of the loss of the
unfortunate expedition. Was the Forward going to attempt the famous North-
West passage? What would be the use? Captain McClure had discovered it in
1853, and his lieutenant, Creswell, was the first who had the honour of rounding
the American continent from Behring's Straits to Davis's Straits. Still it was
certain to competent judges that the Forward was prepared to face the ice
regions. Was it going to the South Pole, farther than the whaler Weddell or
Captain James Ross? But, if so, what for?

The day after the brig was floated her engine was sent from Hawthorn's
foundry at Newcastle. It was of a hundred and twenty horse-power, with
oscillating cylinders, taking up little room; its power was considerable for a
hundred-and-seventy-ton brig, with so much sail, too, and of such fleetness. Her
trial trips had left no doubt on that subject, and even the boatswain, Johnson, had
thought right to express his opinion to Clifton's friend--

"When the Forward uses her engine and sails at the same time, her sails will
make her go the quickest."

Clifton's friend did not understand him, but he thought anything possible of a
ship commanded by a dog. After the engine was installed on board, the stowage
of provisions began. This was no slight work, for the vessel was to carry enough
for six years. They consisted of dry and salted meat, smoked fish, biscuit, and
flour; mountains of tea and coffee were thrown down the shafts in perfect
avalanches. Richard Shandon presided over the management of this precious
cargo like a man who knows what he is about; all was stowed away, ticketed,
and numbered in perfect order; a very large provision of the Indian preparation
called pemmican, which contains many nutritive elements in a small volume,
was also embarked. The nature of the provisions left no doubt about the length
of the cruise, and the sight of the barrels of lime-juice, lime-drops, packets of
mustard, grains of sorrel and cochlearia, all antiscorbutic, confirmed the opinion
on the destination of the brig for the ice regions; their influence is so necessary
in Polar navigation. Shandon had doubtless received particular instructions about
this part of the cargo, which, along with the medicine-chest, he attended to
particularly.

Although arms were not numerous on board, the powder-magazine
overflowed. The one cannon could not pretend to use the contents. That gave


people more to think about. There were also gigantic saws and powerful
instruments, such as levers, leaden maces, handsaws, enormous axes, etc.,
without counting a considerable quantity of blasting cylinders, enough to blow
up the Liverpool Customs--all that was strange, not to say fearful, without
mentioning rockets, signals, powder-chests, and beacons of a thousand different
sorts. The numerous spectators on the wharfs of Prince's Docks admired likewise
a long mahogany whaler, a tin pirogue covered with gutta-percha, and a certain
quantity of halkett-boats, a sort of indiarubber cloaks that can be transformed
into canoes by blowing in their lining. Expectation was on the qui vive, for the
Forward was going out with the tide.


CHAPTER II


AN UNEXPECTED LETTER


The letter received by Richard Shandon, eight months before, ran as
follows:--

"ABERDEEN,

"August 2nd, 1859.

"To Mr. Richard Shandon,

"Liverpool.

"SIR,--I beg to advise you that the sum of sixteen thousand pounds sterling
has been placed in the hands of Messrs. Marcuart and Co., bankers, of Liverpool.
I join herewith a series of cheques, signed by me, which will allow you to draw
upon the said Messrs. Marcuart for the above-mentioned sum. You do not know
me, but that is of no consequence. I know you: that is sufficient. I offer you the
place of second on board the brig Forward for a voyage that may be long and
perilous. If you agree to my conditions you will receive a salary of 500 pounds,
and all through the voyage it will be augmented one-tenth at the end of each
year. The Forward is not yet in existence. You must have it built so as to be
ready for sea at the beginning of April, 1860, at the latest. Herewith is a detailed
plan and estimate. You will take care that it is scrupulously followed. The ship is
to be built by Messrs. Scott and Co., who will settle with you. I particularly
recommend you the choice of the Forward's crew; it will be composed of a
captain, myself, of a second, you, of a third officer, a boatswain, two engineers,
an ice pilot, eight sailors, and two others, eighteen men in all, comprising Dr.
Clawbonny, of this town, who will introduce himself to you when necessary. The
Forward's crew must be composed of Englishmen without incumbrance; they
should be all bachelors and sober--for no spirits, nor even beer, will be allowed
on board--ready to undertake anything, and to bear with anything. You will give
the preference to men of a sanguine constitution, as they carry a greater amount
of animal heat. Offer them five times the usual pay, with an increase of one-tenth
for each year of service. At the end of the voyage five hundred pounds will be
placed at the disposition of each, and two thousand at yours. These funds will be
placed with Messrs. Marcuart and Co. The voyage will be long and difficult, but
honourable, so you need not hesitate to accept my conditions. Be good enough to
send your answer to K. Z., Poste Restante, Goteborg, Sweden.

"P.S.--On the 15th of February next you will receive a large Danish dog, with


hanging lips, and tawny coat with black stripes. You will take it on board and
have it fed with oaten bread, mixed with tallow grease. You will acknowledge
the reception of the said dog to me under the same initials as above, Poste
Restante, Leghorn, Italy.

"The captain of the Forward will introduce himself to you when necessary.
When you are ready to start you will receive further instructions.

"THE CAPTAIN OF THE 'FORWARD,'

"KR, Zig


CHAPTER Il


DR. CLAWBONNY


Richard Shandon was a good sailor; he had been commander of whalers in
the Arctic seas for many years, and had a wide reputation for skill. He might
well be astonished at such a letter, and so he was, but astonished like a man used
to astonishments. He fulfilled, too, all the required conditions: he had no wife,
children, or relations; he was as free as a man could be. Having no one to
consult, he went straight to Messrs. Marcuart's bank.

"If the money is there," he said to himself, "I'll undertake the rest."

He was received by the firm with all the attention due to a man with sixteen
thousand pounds in their safes. Sure of that fact, Shandon asked for a sheet of
letter-paper, and sent his acceptance in a large sailor's hand to the address
indicated. The same day he put himself in communication with the Birkenhead
shipbuilders, and twenty-four hours later the keel of the Forward lay on the
stocks in the dockyard.

Richard Shandon was a bachelor of forty, robust, energetic, and brave, three
sailor-like qualities, giving their possessor confidence, vigour, and sang-froid.
He was reputed jealous and hard to be pleased, so he was more feared than loved
by his sailors. But this reputation did not increase the difficulty of finding a
crew, for he was known to be a clever commander. He was afraid that the
mystery of the enterprise would embarrass his movements, and he said to
himself, "The best thing I can do is to say nothing at all; there are sea-dogs who
will want to know the why and the wherefore of the business, and as I know
nothing myself, I can't tell them. K. Z. is a queer fish, but after all he knows me,
and has confidence in me; that's enough. As to the ship, she will be a handsome
lass, and my name isn't Richard Shandon if she is not destined for the Frozen
Seas. But I shall keep that to myself and my officers."

Upon which Richard Shandon set about recruiting his crew upon the
conditions of family and health exacted by the captain. He knew a brave fellow
and capital sailor, named James Wall. Wall was about thirty, and had made more
than one trip to the North Seas. Shandon offered him the post of third officer,
and he accepted blindly; all he cared for was to sail, as he was devoted to his
profession. Shandon told him and Johnson (whom he engaged as boatswain) all
he knew about the business.

"Just as soon go there as anywhere else," answered Wall. "If it's to seek the


North-West passage, many have been and come back."

"Been, yes; but come back I don't answer for," said Johnson; "but that's no
reason for not going."

"Besides, if we are not mistaken in our conjectures," said Shandon, "the
voyage will be undertaken under good conditions. The Forward's a bonny lass,
with a good engine, and will stand wear and tear. Eighteen men are all the crew
we want."

"Eighteen men?" said Johnson. "That's just the number that the American,
Kane, had on board when he made his famous voyage towards the North Pole."

"It's a singular fact that there's always some private individual trying to cross
the sea from Davis's Straits to Behring's Straits. The Franklin expeditions have
already cost England more than seven hundred and sixty thousand pounds
without producing any practical result. Who the devil means to risk his fortune
in such an enterprise?"

"We are reasoning now on a simple hypothesis," said Shandon. "I don't know
if we are really going to the Northern or Southern Seas. Perhaps we are going on
a voyage of discovery. We shall know more when Dr. Clawbonny comes; I
daresay he will tell us all about it."

"There's nothing for it but to wait," answered Johnson; "I'll go and hunt up
some solid subjects, captain; and as to their animal heat, I guarantee beforehand
you can trust me for that."

Johnson was a valuable acquisition; he understood the navigation of these
high latitudes. He was quartermaster on board the Phoenix, one of the vessels of
the Franklin expedition of 1853. He was witness of the death of the French
lieutenant Bellot, whom he had accompanied in his expedition across the ice.
Johnson knew the maritime population of Liverpool, and started at once on his
recruiting expedition. Shandon, Wall, and he did their work so well that the crew
was complete in the beginning of December. It had been a difficult task; many,
tempted by the high pay, felt frightened at the risk, and more than one enlisted
boldly who came afterwards to take back his word and enlistment money,
dissuaded by his friends from undertaking such an enterprise. All of them tried
to pierce the mystery, and worried Shandon with questions; he sent them to
Johnson.

"I can't tell you what I don't know," he answered invariably; "you'll be in
good company, that's all I can tell you. You can take it or leave it alone."

And the greater number took it.

"I have only to choose," added the boatswain; "such salary has never been
heard of in the memory of sailors, and then the certainty of finding a handsome
capital when we come back. Only think: it's tempting enough."


"The fact is," answered the sailor, "it is tempting; enough to live on till the
end of one's days."

"I don't hide from you," continued Johnson, "that the cruise will be long,
painful, and perilous; that is formally stated in our instructions, and you ought to
know what you undertake; you will very likely be required to attempt all that it
is possible for human beings to do, and perhaps more. If you are the least bit
frightened, if you don't think you may just as well finish yonder as here, you'd
better not enlist, but give way to a bolder man."

"But, Mr. Johnson," continued the sailor, for the want of something better to
say, "at least you know the captain?"

"The captain is Richard Shandon till another comes."

Richard Shandon, in his secret heart, hoped that the command would remain
with him, and that at the last moment he should receive precise instructions as to
the destination of the Forward. He did all he could to spread the report in his
conversations with his officers, or when following the construction of the brig as
it grew in the Birkenhead dockyard, looking like the ribs of a whale turned
upside down. Shandon and Johnson kept strictly to their instructions touching
the health of the sailors who were to form the crew; they all looked hale and
hearty, and had enough heat in their bodies to suffice for the engine of the
Forward; their supple limbs, their clear and florid complexions were fit to react
against the action of intense cold. They were confident and resolute men,
energetically and solidly constituted. Of course they were not all equally
vigorous; Shandon had even hesitated about taking some of them, such as the
sailors Gripper and Garry, and the harpooner Simpson, because they looked
rather thin; but, on the whole, their build was good; they were a warm-hearted
lot, and their engagement was signed.

All the crew belonged to the same sect of the Protestant religion; during
these long campaigns prayer in common and the reading of the Bible have a
good influence over the men and sustain them in the hour of discouragement; it
was therefore important that they should be all of the same way of thinking.
Shandon knew by experience the utility of these practices, and their influence on
the mind of the crew; they are always employed on board ships that are intended
to winter in the Polar Seas. The crew once got together, Shandon and his two
officers set about the provisions; they strictly followed the instructions of the
captain; these instructions were clear, precise, and detailed, and the least articles
were put down with their quality and quantity. Thanks to the cheques at the
commander's disposition, every article was paid for at once with a discount of 8
per cent, which Richard carefully placed to the credit of K. Z.

Crew, provisions, and cargo were ready by January, 1860; the Forward


began to look shipshape, and Shandon went daily to Birkenhead. On the morning
of the 23rd of January he was, as usual, on board one of the Mersey ferry-boats
with a helm at either end to prevent having to turn it; there was a thick fog, and
the sailors of the river were obliged to direct their course by means of the
compass, though the passage lasts scarcely ten minutes. But the thickness of the
fog did not prevent Shandon seeing a man of short stature, rather fat, with an
intelligent and merry face and an amiable look, who came up to him, took him
by the two hands, and shook them with an ardour, a petulance, and a familiarity
"quite meridional," as a Frenchman would have said. But if this person did not
come from the South, he had got his temperament there; he talked and
gesticulated with volubility; his thought must come out or the machine would
burst. His eyes, small as those of witty men generally are, his mouth, large and
mobile, were safety-pipes which allowed him to give passage to his overflowing
thoughts; he talked, and talked, and talked so much and so fast that Shandon
couldn't understand a word he said. However, this did not prevent the Forward's
mate from recognising the little man he had never seen before; a lightning flash
traversed his mind, and when the other paused to take breath, Shandon made
haste to get out the words, "Doctor Clawbonny!"

"Himself in person, commander! I've been at least half a quarter of an hour
looking for you, asking everybody everywhere! Just think how impatient I got;
five minutes more and I should have lost my head! And so you are the
commander Richard? You really exist? You are not a myth? Your hand, your
hand! I want to shake it again. It is Richard Shandon's hand, and if there is a
commander Shandon, there's a brig Forward to command; and if he commands
he will start, and if he starts he'll take Dr. Clawbonny on board."

"Well, yes, doctor, I am Richard Shandon; there is a brig Forward, and it will
start."

"That's logic," answered the doctor, after taking in a large provision of
breathing air--"that's logic. And I am ready to jump for joy at having my dearest
wishes gratified. I've wanted to undertake such a voyage. Now with you,
commander----"

"T don't----" began Shandon.

"With you,” continued Clawbonny, without hearing him, "we are sure to go
far and not to draw back for a trifle."

"But----" began Shandon again.

"For you have shown what you are made of, commander; I know your deeds
of service. You are a fine sailor!"

"If you will allow me----"

"No, I won't have your bravery, audacity, and skill put an instant in doubt,


even by you! The captain who chose you for his mate is a man who knows what
he's about, I can tell you."

"But that's nothing to do with it," said Shandon, impatient.

"What is it, then? Don't keep me in suspense another minute."

"You don't give me time to speak. Tell me, if you please, doctor, how it
comes that you are to take part in the expedition of the Forward."

"Read this letter, this worthy letter, the letter of a brave captain--very laconic,
but quite sufficient."

Saying which the doctor held out the following letter to Shandon:--

"INVERNESS,

"Jan. 22nd, 1860.

"To Dr. Clawbonny.

"If Dr. Clawbonny wishes to embark on board the Forward for a long cruise,
he may introduce himself to the commander, Richard Shandon, who has received
orders concerning him.

"THE CAPTAIN OF THE 'FORWARD,'

OK. Ze"

"This letter reached me this morning, and here I am, ready to embark."

"But, doctor, do you know where we are going to?"

"I haven't the slightest idea, and I do not care so that it is somewhere. They
pretend that I am learned; they are mistaken, commander. I know nothing, and if
I have published a few books that don't sell badly, I ought not to have done it; the
public is silly for buying them. I know nothing, I tell you. I am only an ignorant
man. When I have the offer of completing, or rather of going over again, my
knowledge of medicine, surgery, history, geography, botany, mineralogy,
conchology, geodesy, chemistry, natural philosophy, mechanics, and
hydrography, why I accept, of course."

"Then," said Shandon, disappointed, "you do not know where the Forward is
bound for?"

"Yes, I do; it is bound for where there is something to learn, to discover, and
to compare--where we shall meet with other customs, other countries, other
nations, to study in the exercise of their functions; it is going, in short, where I
have never been."

"But I want to know something more definite than that," cried Shandon.

"Well, I have heard that we are bound for the Northern Seas."

"At least," asked Shandon, "you know the captain?"

"Not the least bit in the world! But he is an honest fellow, you may believe
me."

The commander and the doctor disembarked at Birkenhead; the former told


the doctor all he knew about the situation of things, and the mystery inflamed the
imagination of the doctor. The sight of the brig caused him transports of joy.
From that day he stopped with Shandon, and went every day to pay a visit to the
shell of the Forward. Besides, he was specially appointed to overlook the
installation of the ship's medicine-chest. For Dr. Clawbonny was a doctor, and a
good one, though practising little. At the age of twenty-five he was an ordinary
practitioner; at the age of forty he was a savant, well known in the town; he was
an influential member of all the literary and scientific institutions of Liverpool.
His fortune allowed him to distribute counsels which were none the worse for
being gratuitous; beloved as a man eminently lovable must always be, he had
never wronged any one, not even himself; lively and talkative, he carried his
heart in his hand, and put his hand into that of everybody. When it was known in
Liverpool that he was going to embark on board the Forward his friends did all
they could to dissuade him, and only fixed him more completely in his
determination, and when the doctor was determined to do anything no one could
prevent him. From that time the suppositions and apprehensions increased, but
did not prevent the Forward being launched on the 5th of February, 1860. Two
months later she was ready to put to sea. On the 15th of March, as the letter of
the captain had announced, a dog of Danish breed was sent by railway from
Edinburgh to Liverpool, addressed to Richard Shandon. The animal seemed
surly, peevish, and even sinister, with quite a singular look in his eyes. The name
of the Forward was engraved on his brass collar. The commander installed it on
board the same day, and acknowledged its reception to K. Z. at Leghorn. Thus,
with the exception of the captain, the crew was complete. It was composed as
follows:--

1. K. Z., captain; 2. Richard Shandon, commander; 3. James Wall, third
officer; 4. Dr. Clawbonny; 5. Johnson, boatswain; 6. Simpson, harpooner; 7.
Bell, carpenter; 8. Brunton, chief engineer; 9. Plover, second engineer; 10.
Strong (negro), cook; 11. Foker, ice-master; 12. Wolsten, smith; 13. Bolton,
sailor; 14. Garry, sailor; 15. Clifton, sailor; 16. Gripper, sailor; 17. Pen, sailor;
18. Warren, stoker.


CHAPTER IV


DOG-CAPTAIN


The day of departure arrived with the 5th of April. The admission of the
doctor on board had given the crew more confidence. They knew that where the
worthy doctor went they could follow. However, the sailors were still uneasy,
and Shandon, fearing that some of them would desert, wished to be off. With the
coast out of sight, they would make up their mind to the inevitable.

Dr. Clawbonny's cabin was situated at the end of the poop, and occupied all
the stern of the vessel. The captain's and mate's cabins gave upon deck. The
captain's remained hermetically closed, after being furnished with different
instruments, furniture, travelling garments, books, clothes for changing, and
utensils, indicated in a detailed list. According to the wish of the captain, the key
of the cabin was sent to Lubeck; he alone could enter his room.

This detail vexed Shandon, and took away all chance of the chief command.
As to his own cabin, he had perfectly appropriated it to the needs of the
presumed voyage, for he thoroughly understood the needs of a Polar expedition.
The room of the third officer was placed under the lower deck, which formed a
vast sleeping-room for the sailors' use; the men were very comfortably lodged,
and would not have found anything like the same convenience on board any
other ship; they were cared for like the most priceless cargo: a vast stove
occupied all the centre of the common room. Dr. Clawbonny was in his element;
he had taken possession of his cabin on the 6th of February, the day after the
Forward was launched.

"The happiest of animals," he used to say, "is a snail, for it can make a shell
exactly to fit it; I shall try to be an intelligent snail."

And considering that the shell was to be his lodging for a considerable time,
the cabin began to look like home; the doctor had a savant's or a child's pleasure
in arranging his scientific traps. His books, his herbals, his set of pigeon-holes,
his instruments of precision, his chemical apparatus, his collection of
thermometers, barometers, hygrometers, rain-gauges, spectacles, compasses,
sextants, maps, plans, flasks, powders, bottles for medicine-chest, were all
classed in an order that would have shamed the British Museum. The space of
six square feet contained incalculable riches: the doctor had only to stretch out
his hand without moving to become instantaneously a doctor, a mathematician,
an astronomer, a geographer, a botanist, or a conchologist. It must be


acknowledged that he was proud of his management and happy in his floating
sanctuary, which three of his thinnest friends would have sufficed to fill. His
friends came to it in such numbers that even a man as easy-going as the doctor
might have said with Socrates, "My house is small, but may it please Heaven
never to fill it with friends!"

To complete the description of the Forward it is sufficient to say that the
kennel of the large Danish dog was constructed under the window of the
mysterious cabin but its savage inhabitant preferred wandering between decks
and in the hold; it seemed impossible to tame him, and no one had been able to
become his master; during the night he howled lamentably, making the hollows
of the ship ring in a sinister fashion. Was it regret for his absent master? Was it
the instinct of knowing that he was starting for a perilous voyage? Was it a
presentiment of dangers to come? The sailors decided that it was for the latter
reason, and more than one pretended to joke who believed seriously that the dog
was of a diabolical kind. Pen, who was a brutal man, was going to strike him
once, when he fell, unfortunately, against the angle of the capstan, and made a
frightful wound in his head. Of course this accident was placed to the account of
the fantastic animal. Clifton, the most superstitious of the crew, made the
singular observation that when the dog was on the poop he always walked on the
windward side, and afterwards, when the brig was out at sea, and altered its tack,
the surprising animal changed its direction with the wind the same as the captain
of the Forward would have done in his place. Dr. Clawbonny, whose kindness
and caresses would have tamed a tiger, tried in vain to win the good graces of the
dog; he lost his time and his pains. The animal did not answer to any name ever
written in the dog calendar, and the crew ended by calling him Captain, for he
appeared perfectly conversant with ship customs; it was evident that it was not
his first trip. From such facts it is easy to understand the boatswain's answer to
Clifton's friend, and the credulity of those who heard it; more than one repeated
jokingly that he expected one day to see the dog take human shape and
command the manoeuvres with a resounding voice.

If Richard Shandon did not feel the same apprehensions he was not without
anxiety, and the day before the departure, in the evening of April 5th, he had a
conversation on the subject with the doctor, Wall, and Johnson in the poop cabin.
These four persons were tasting their tenth grog, and probably their last, for the
letter from Aberdeen had ordered that all the crew, from the captain to the stoker,
should be teetotallers, and that there should be no wine, beer, nor spirits on board
except those given by the doctor's orders. The conversation had been going on
about the departure for the last hour. If the instructions of the captain were
realised to the end, Shandon would receive his last instructions the next day.


"If the letter," said the commander, "does not tell me the captain's name, it
must at least tell me the destination of the brig, or I shall not know where to take
her to."

"If I were you," said the impatient doctor, "I should start whether I get a
letter or no; they'll know how to send after you, you may depend."

"You are ready for anything, doctor; but if so, to what quarter of the globe
should you set sail?"

"To the North Pole, of course; there's not the slightest doubt about that."

"Why should it not be the South Pole?" asked Wall.

"The South Pole is out of the question. No one with any sense would send a
brig across the whole of the Atlantic. Just reflect a minute, and you'll see the
impossibility."

"The doctor has an answer to everything," said Wall.

"Well, we'll say north," continued Shandon. "But where north? To
Spitzbergen or Greenland? Labrador or Hudson's Bay? Although all directions
end in insuperable icebergs, I am not less puzzled as to which to take. Have you
an answer to that, doctor?"

"No," he answered, vexed at having nothing to say; "but if you don't get a
letter what shall you do?"

"T shall do nothing; I shall wait."

"Do you mean to say you won't start?" cried Dr. Clawbonny, agitating his
glass in despair.

"Certainly I do."

"And that would be the wisest plan," said Johnson tranquilly, while the
doctor began marching round the table, for he could not keep still; "but still, if
we wait too long, the consequences may be deplorable; the season is good now if
we are really going north, as we ought to profit by the breaking up of the ice to
cross Davis's Straits; besides, the crew gets more and more uneasy; the friends
and companions of our men do all they can to persuade them to leave the
Forward, and their influence may be pernicious for us."

"Besides," added Wall, "if one of them deserted they all would, and then I
don't know how you would get another crew together."

"But what can I do?" cried Shandon.

"What you said you would do," replied the doctor; "wait and wait till to-
morrow before you despair. The captain's promises have all been fulfilled up to
now with the greatest regularity, and there's no reason to believe we shan't be
made acquainted with our destination when the proper time comes. I haven't the
slightest doubt that to-morrow we shall be sailing in the Irish Channel, and I
propose we drink a last grog to our pleasant voyage. It begins in an


unaccountable fashion, but with sailors like you there are a thousand chances
that it will end well."

And all four drank to their safe return.

"Now, commander," continued Johnson, "if you will allow me to advise you,
you will prepare everything to start; the crew must think that you know what you
are about. If you don't get a letter to-morrow, set sail; do not get up the steam,
the wind looks like holding out, and it will be easy enough to sail; let the pilot
come on board; go out of the docks with the tide, and anchor below Birkenhead;
our men won't be able to communicate with land, and if the devil of a letter
comes it will find us as easily there as elsewhere."

"By heavens! you are right, Johnson!" cried the doctor, holding out his hand
to the old sailor.

"So be it," answered Shandon.

Then each one entered his cabin, and waited in feverish sleep for the rising
of the sun. The next day the first distribution of letters took place in the town,
and not one bore the address of the commander, Richard Shandon. Nevertheless,
he made his preparations for departure, and the news spread at once all over
Liverpool, and, as we have already seen, an extraordinary affluence of spectators
crowded the wharfs of New Prince's Docks. Many of them came on board to
shake hands for the last time with a comrade, or to try and dissuade a friend, or
to take a look at the brig, and to know its destination; they were disappointed at
finding the commander more taciturn and reserved than ever. He had his reasons
for that.

Ten o'clock struck. Eleven followed. The tide began to go out that day at
about one o'clock in the afternoon. Shandon from the top of the poop was
looking at the crowd with uneasy eyes, trying to read the secret of his destiny on
one of the faces. But in vain. The sailors of the Forward executed his orders in
silence, looking at him all the time, waiting for orders which did not come.
Johnson went on preparing for departure. The weather was cloudy and the sea
rough; a south-easter blew with violence, but it was easy to get out of the
Mersey.

At twelve o'clock nothing had yet been received. Dr. Clawbonny marched up
and down in agitation, looking through his telescope, gesticulating, impatient for
the sea, as he said. He felt moved, though he struggled against it. Shandon bit his
lips till the blood came. Johnson came up to him and said--

"Commander, if we want to profit by the tide, there is no time to be lost; we
shall not be clear of the docks for at least an hour."

Shandon looked round him once more and consulted his watch. The twelve
o'clock letters had been distributed. In despair he told Johnson to start. The


boatswain ordered the deck to be cleared of spectators, and the crowd made a
general movement to regain the wharves while the last moorings were unloosed.
Amidst the confusion a dog's bark was distinctly heard, and all at once the
animal broke through the compact mass, jumped on to the poop, and, as a
thousand spectators can testify, dropped a letter at Shandon's feet.

"A letter!" cried Shandon. "He is on board, then?"

"He was, that's certain, but he isn't now," said Johnson, pointing to the
deserted deck.

Shandon held the letter without opening it in his astonishment.

"But read it, read it, I say," said the doctor.

Shandon looked at it. The envelope had no postmark or date; it was
addressed simply to:

"RICHARD SHANDON,

"Commander on board the brig

"Forward."

Shandon opened the letter and read as follows:--

"Sail for Cape Farewell. You will reach it by the 20th of April. If the captain
does not appear on board, cross Davis's Straits, and sail up Baffin's Sea to
Melville Bay.

"THE CAPTAIN OF THE 'FORWARD,'

"Kelis"

Shandon carefully folded this laconic epistle, put it in his pocket, and gave
the order for departure. His voice, which rang above the east wind, had
something solemn in it.

Soon the Forward had passed the docks, and directed by a Liverpool pilot
whose little cutter followed, went down the Mersey with the current. The crowd
precipitated itself on to the exterior wharf along the Victoria Docks in order to
get a last glimpse of the strange brig. The two topsails, the foresail and the
brigantine sail were rapidly set up, and the Forward, worthy of its name, after
having rounded Birkenhead Point, sailed with extraordinary fleetness into the
Irish Sea.


CHAPTER V


OUT AT SEA


The wind was favourable, though it blew in April gales. The Forward cut
through the waves, and towards three o'clock crossed the mail steamer between
Liverpool and the Isle of Man. The captain hailed from his deck the last adieu
that the Forward was destined to hear.

At five o'clock the pilot left the command in the hands of Richard Shandon,
the commander of the brig, and regained his cutter, which, turning round, soon
disappeared on the south-west. Towards evening the brig doubled the Calf of
Man at the southern extremity of the island. During the night the sea was very
rough, but the Forward behaved well, left the point of Ayr to the north-west, and
directed its course for the Northern Channel. Johnson was right; once out at sea
the maritime instinct of the sailors gained the upper hand. Life on board went on
with regularity.

The doctor breathed in the sea air with delight; he walked about vigorously
in the squalls, and for a savant he was not a bad sailor.

"The sea is splendid," said he to Johnson, coming up on deck after breakfast.
"T have made its acquaintance rather late, but I shall make up for lost time."

"You are right, Mr. Clawbonny. I would give all the continents of the world
for a corner of the ocean. They pretend that sailors soon get tired of their
profession, but I've been forty years on the sea and I love it as much as the first
day."

"It is a great pleasure to feel a good ship under one's feet, and if I'm not a bad
judge the Forward behaves herself well."

"You judge rightly, doctor," answered Shandon, who had joined the talkers;
"she is a good ship, and I acknowledge that a vessel destined for navigation
amongst ice has never been better equipped. That reminds me that thirty years
ago Captain James Ross, sailing for the North-West passage----"

"In the Victory," added the doctor quickly, "a brig about the same tonnage as
ours, with a steam-engine too."

"What! you know about that?"

"Judge if I do," answered the doctor. "Machines were then in their infancy,
and the Victory's kept her back; the captain, James Ross, after having vainly
repaired it bit by bit, finished by taking it down, and abandoned it at his first
winter quarters."


"The devil!" said Shandon. "You know all about it, I see."

"Yes. I've read the works of Parry, Ross, and Franklin, and the reports of
McClure, Kennedy, Kane, and McClintock, and I remember something of what
I've read. I can tell you, too, that this same McClintock, on board the Fox, a
screw brig in the style of ours, went easier to his destination than any of the men
who preceded him."

"That's perfectly true," answered Shandon; "he was a bold sailor was
McClintock; I saw him at work. You may add that, like him, we shall find
ourselves in Davis's Straits in April, and if we succeed in passing the ice our
voyage will be considerably advanced."

"Unless," added the doctor, "it happens to us like it did to the Fox in 1857, to
be caught the very first year by the ice in Baffin's Sea, and have to winter in the
midst of the icebergs."

"We must hope for better luck," answered Johnson. "If a ship like the
Forward can't take us where we want to go, we must renounce all hope for ever."

"Besides," said the doctor, "if the captain is on board he will know better
than we do what must be done. We know nothing as yet; his letter says nothing
about what our voyage is for."

"It is a good deal to know which way to go," answered Shandon quickly.
"We can do without the captain and his instructions for another month at least.
Besides, you know what I think about it."

"A short time ago," said the doctor, "I thought like you that the captain would
never appear, and that you would remain commander of the ship; but now----"

"Now what?" replied Shandon in an impatient tone.

"Since the arrival of the second letter I have modified that opinion."

"Why, doctor?"

"Because the letter tells you the route to follow, but leaves you ignorant of
the Forward's destination; and we must know where we are going to. How the
deuce are you to get a letter now we are out at sea? On the coast of Greenland
the service of the post must leave much to wish for. I believe that our gentleman
is waiting for us in some Danish settlement--at Holsteinborg or Uppernawik; he
has evidently gone there to complete his cargo of sealskins, buy his sledges and
dog, and, in short, get together all the tackle wanted for a voyage in the Arctic
Seas. I shouldn't be at all surprised to see him come out of his cabin one of these
fine mornings and begin commanding the ship in anything but a supernatural
way."

"It's possible," answered Shandon drily; "but in the meantime the wind is
getting up, and I can't risk my gallant sails in such weather."

Shandon left the doctor and gave the order to reef the topsails.


"He takes it to heart," said the doctor to the boatswain.

"Yes," answered the latter, "and it's a great pity, for you may be right, Mr.
Clawbonny."

In the evening of Saturday the Forward doubled the Mull of Galloway,
whose lighthouse shone to the north-east; during the night they left the Mull of
Cantyre to the north, and Cape Fair, on the coast of Ireland, to the east. Towards
three o'clock in the morning, the brig, leaving Rathlin Island on her starboard
side, disembogued by the Northern Channel into the ocean. It was Sunday, the
8th of April, and the doctor read some chapters of the Bible to the assembled
seamen. The wind then became a perfect hurricane, and tended to throw the brig
on to the Irish coast; she pitched, and rolled, and tossed, and if the doctor was
not seasick it was because he would not be, for nothing was easier. At noon Cape
Malinhead disappeared towards the south; it was the last European ground that
these bold sailors were to perceive, and more than one watched it out of sight,
destined never to see it again. They were then in 55 degrees 57 minutes latitude
and 7 degrees 40 minutes longitude by the Greenwich meridian.

The storm spent itself out about nine o'clock in the evening; the Forward,
like a good sailor, maintained her route north-west. She showed by her behaviour
during the day what her sailing capacities were, and as the Liverpool
connoisseurs had remarked, she was above all, a sailing vessel. During the
following days the Forward gained the north-west with rapidity; the wind veered
round south, and the sea had a tremendous swell on; the brig was then going
along under full sail. Some petrels and puffins came sailing over the poop; the
doctor skilfully shot one of the latter, and it fell, fortunately, on the deck. The
harpooner, Simpson, picked it up and brought it to its owner.

"Nasty game that, Mr. Clawbonny," he said.

"Tt will make an excellent meal, on the contrary," said the doctor.

"You don't mean to say you are going to eat that thing?"

"And so are you, old fellow," said the doctor, laughing.

"Poh!" replied Simpson, "but it's oily and rancid, like all other sea birds."

"Never mind!" answered the doctor, "I have a peculiar way of cooking that
game, and if you recognise it for a sea bird I'll consent never to kill another in
my life."

"Do you know how to cook, then?"

"A savant ought to know how to do a little of everything."

"You'd better take care, Simpson," said the boatswain; "the doctor's a clever
man, and he'll make you take this puffin for a grouse."

The fact is that the doctor was quite right about his fowl; he took off all the
fat, which all lies under the skin, principally on the thighs, and with it


disappeared the rancidity and taste of fish which is so disagreeable in a sea bird.
Thus prepared the puffin was declared excellent, and Simpson acknowledged it
the first.

During the late storm Richard Shandon had been able to judge of the
qualities of his crew; he had watched each man narrowly, and knew how much
each was to be depended upon.

James Wall was devoted to Richard, understood quickly and executed well,
but he might fail in initiative; he placed him in the third rank. Johnson was used
to struggle with the sea; he was an old stager in the Arctic Ocean, and had
nothing to learn either in audacity or sang-froid. The harpooner, Simpson, and
the carpenter, Bell, were sure men, faithful to duty and discipline. The ice-
master, Foker, was an experienced sailor, and, like Johnson, was capable of
rendering important service. Of the other sailors Garry and Bolton seemed to be
the best; Bolton was a gay and talkative fellow; Garry was thirty-five, with an
energetic face, but rather pale and sad-looking. The three sailors, Clifton,
Gripper, and Pen, seemed less ardent and resolute; they easily grumbled. Gripper
wanted to break his engagement even before the departure of the Forward; a sort
of shame kept him on board. If things went on all right, if there were not too
many risks to run, no dangers to encounter, these three men might be depended
upon; but they must be well fed, for it might be said that they were led by their
stomachs. Although warned beforehand, they grumbled at having to be
teetotallers; at their meals they regretted the brandy and gin; it did not, however,
make them spare the tea and coffee, which was prodigally given out on board.
As to the two engineers, Brunton and Plover, and the stoker, Warren, there had
been nothing for them to do as yet, and Shandon could not tell anything about
their capabilities.

On the 14th of April the Forward got into the grand current of the Gulf
Stream, which, after ascending the eastern coast of America to Newfoundland,
inclines to the north-east along the coast of Norway. They were then in 57
degrees 37 minutes latitude by 22 degrees 58 minutes longitude, at two hundred
miles from the point of Greenland. The weather grew colder, and the
thermometer descended to thirty-two degrees, that is to say to freezing point.

The doctor had not yet begun to wear the garments he destined for the Arctic
Seas, but he had donned a sailor's dress like the rest; he was a queer sight with
his top-boots, in which his legs disappeared, his vast oilcloth hat, his jacket and
trousers of the same; when drenched with heavy rains or enormous waves the
doctor looked like a sort of sea-animal, and was proud of the comparison.

During two days the sea was extremely rough; the wind veered round to the
north-west, and delayed the progress of the Forward. From the 14th to the 16th


of April the swell was great, but on the Monday there came such a torrent of rain
that the sea became calm immediately. Shandon spoke to the doctor about this
phenomenon.

"It confirms the curious observations of the whaler Scoresby, who laid it
before the Royal Society of Edinburgh, of which I have the honour to be an
honorary member. You see that when it rains the waves are not very high, even
under the influence of a violent wind, and when the weather is dry the sea is
more agitated, even when there is less wind."

"But how is this phenomenon accounted for?"

"Very simply; it is not accounted for at all."

Just then the ice-master, who was keeping watch on the crossbars of the
topsails, signalled a floating mass on the starboard, at about fifteen miles
distance before the wind.

"An iceberg here!" cried the doctor.

Shandon pointed his telescope in the direction indicated, and confirmed the
pilot's announcement.

"That is curious!" said the doctor.

"What! you are astonished at last!" said the commander, laughing.

"I am surprised, but not astonished," answered the doctor, laughing; "for the
brig Ann, of Poole, from Greenspond, was caught in 1813 in perfect ice-fields, in
the forty-fourth degree of north latitude, and her captain, Dayernent, counted
them by hundreds!"

"I see you can teach us something, even upon that subject."

"Very little," answered Clawbonny modestly; "it is only that ice has been met
with in even lower latitudes."

"I knew that already, doctor, for when I was cabinboy on board the war-sloop
Fly----"

"In 1818," continued the doctor, "at the end of March, almost in April, you
passed between two large islands of floating ice under the forty-second degree of
latitude."

"Well, I declare you astonish me!" cried Shandon.

"But the iceberg doesn't astonish me, as we are two degrees further north."

"You are a well, doctor," answered the commander, "and all we have to do is
to be water-buckets."

"You will draw me dry sooner than you think for; and now, Shandon, if we
could get a nearer look at this phenomenon, I should be the happiest of doctors."

"Just so, Johnson," said Shandon, calling his boatswain. "It seems to me that
the breeze is getting up."

"Yes, commander," answered Johnson; "we are making very little way, and


the currents of Davis's Straits will soon be against us."

"You are right, Johnson, and if we wish to be in sight of Cape Farewell on
the 20th of April we must put the steam on, or we shall be thrown on the coasts
of Labrador. Mr. Wall, will you give orders to light the fires?"

The commander's orders were executed, an hour afterwards the steam was
up, the sails were furled, and the screw cutting the waves sent the Forward
against the north-west wind.


CHAPTER VI


THE GREAT POLAR CURRENT


A short time after the flights of birds became more and more numerous.
Petrels, puffins, and mates, inhabitants of those desolate quarters, signalled the
approach of Greenland. The Forward was rapidly nearing the north, leaving to
her leeward a long line of black smoke.

On Tuesday the 17th of April, about eleven o'clock in the morning, the ice-
master signalled the first sight of the ice-blink; it was about twenty miles to the
N.N.W. This glaring white strip was brilliantly lighted up, in spite of the
presence of thick clouds in the neighbouring parts of the sky. Experienced people
on board could make no mistake about this phenomenon, and declared, from its
whiteness, that the blink was owing to a large ice-field, situated at about thirty
miles out of sight, and that it proceeded from the reflection of luminous rays.
Towards evening the wind turned round to the south, and became favourable;
Shandon put on all sail, and for economy's sake caused the fires to be put out.
The Forward, under her topsails and foresails, glided on towards Cape Farewell.

At three o'clock on the 18th they came across the ice-stream, and a white
thick line of a glaring colour cut brilliantly the lines of the sea and sky. It was
evidently drifting from the eastern coast of Greenland more than from Davis's
Straits, for ice generally keeps to the west coast of Baffin's Sea. An hour
afterwards the Forward passed in the midst of isolated portions of the ice-
stream, and in the most compact parts, the icebergs, though welded together,
obeyed the movements of the swell. The next day the man at the masthead
signalled a vessel. It was the Valkirien, a Danish corvette, running alongside the
Forward, and making for the bank of Newfoundland. The current of the Strait
began to make itself felt, and Shandon had to put on sail to go up it. At this
moment the commander, the doctor, James Wall, and Johnson were assembled
on the poop examining the direction and strength of the current. The doctor
wanted to know if the current existed also in Baffin's Sea.

"Without the least doubt," answered Shandon, "and the sailing vessels have
much trouble to stem it."

"Besides there," added Wall, "you meet with it on the eastern coast of
America, as well as on the western coast of Greenland."

"There," said the doctor, "that is what gives very singular reason to the
seekers of the North-West passage! That current runs about five miles an hour,


and it is a little difficult to suppose that it springs from the bottom of a gulf."

"It is so much the more probable, doctor," replied Shandon, "that if this
current runs from north to south we find in Behring's Straits a contrary current
which runs from south to north, and which must be the origin of this one."

"According to that," replied the doctor, "we must admit that America is
totally unconnected with the Polar lands, and that the waters of the Pacific run
round the coasts of America into the Atlantic. On the other hand, the greater
elevation of the waters of the Pacific gives reason to the supposition that they
fall into the European seas."

"But," sharply replied Shandon, "there must be facts to establish that theory,
and if there are any," added he with irony, "our universally well-informed doctor
ought to know them."

"Well," replied the above-mentioned, with amiable satisfaction, "if it
interests you, I can tell you that whales, wounded in Davis's Straits, are caught
some time afterwards in the neighbourhood of Tartary with the European
harpoon still in their flanks."

"And unless they have been able to double Cape Horn or the Cape of Good
Hope," replied Shandon, "they must necessarily have rounded the septentrional
coasts of America--that's what I call indisputable, doctor."

"However, if you were not convinced, my dear fellow," said the doctor,
smiling, "I could still produce other facts, such as driftwood, of which Davis's
Straits are full, larch, aspen, and other tropical trees. Now we know that the Gulf
Stream hinders those woods from entering the Straits. If, then, they come out of
it they can only get in from Behring's Straits."

"T am convinced, doctor, and I avow that it would be difficult to remain
incredulous with you."

"Upon my honour," said Johnson, "there's something that comes just in time
to help our discussion. I perceive in the distance a lump of wood of certain
dimensions; if the commander permits it we'll haul it in, and ask it the name of
its country."

"That's it," said the doctor, "the example after the rule."

Shandon gave the necessary orders; the brig was directed towards the piece
of wood signalled, and soon afterwards, not without trouble, the crew hoisted it
on deck. It was the trunk of a mahogany tree, gnawed right into the centre by
worms, but for which circumstance it would not have floated.

"This is glorious," said the doctor enthusiastically, "for as the currents of the
Atlantic could not carry it to Davis's Straits, and as it has not been driven into the
Polar basin by the streams of septentrional America, seeing that this tree grew
under the Equator, it is evident that it comes in a straight line from Behring; and


look here, you see those sea-worms which have eaten it, they belong to a hot-
country species."

"It is evident," replied Wall, "that the people who do not believe in the
famous passage are wrong.”

"Why, this circumstance alone ought to convince them," said the doctor; "I
will just trace you out the itinerary of that mahogany; it has been floated towards
the Pacific by some river of the Isthmus of Panama or Guatemala, from thence
the current has dragged it along the American coast as far as Behring's Straits,
and in spite of everything it was obliged to enter the Polar Seas. It is neither so
old nor so soaked that we need fear to assign a recent date to its setting out; it
has had the good luck to get clear of the obstacles in that long suite of straits
which lead out of Baffin's Bay, and quickly seized by the boreal current came by
Davis's Straits to be made prisoner by the Forward to the great joy of Dr.
Clawbonny, who asks the commander's permission to keep a sample of it."

"Do so," said Shandon, "but allow me to tell you that you will not be the only
proprietor of such a wreck. The Danish governor of the Isle of Disko----"

"On the coast of Greenland," continued the doctor, "possesses a mahogany
table made from a trunk fished up under the same circumstances. I know it, but I
don't envy him his table, for if it were not for the bother, I should have enough
there for a whole bedroom."

During the night, from Wednesday to Thursday, the wind blew with extreme
violence, and driftwood was seen more frequently. Nearing the coast offered
many dangers at an epoch in which icebergs were so numerous; the commander
caused some of the sails to be furled, and the Forward glided away under her
foresail and foremast only. The thermometer sank below freezing-point. Shandon
distributed suitable clothing to the crew, a woollen jacket and trousers, a flannel
shirt, wadmel stockings, the same as those the Norwegian country-people wear,
and a pair of perfectly waterproof sea-boots. As to the captain, he contented
himself with his natural fur, and appeared little sensible to the change in the
temperature; he had, no doubt, gone through more than one trial of this kind, and
besides, a Dane had no right to be difficult. He was seen very little, as he kept
himself concealed in the darkest parts of the vessel.

Towards evening the coast of Greenland peeped out through an opening in
the fog. The doctor, armed with his glass, could distinguish for an instant a line
of peaks, ridged with large blocks of ice; but the fog closed rapidly on this
vision, like the curtain of a theatre falling in the most interesting moment of the
piece.

On the morning of the 20th of April the Forward was in sight of an iceberg a
hundred and fifty feet high, stranded there from time immemorial; the thaws had


taken no effect on it, and had respected its strange forms. Snow saw it; James
Ross took an exact sketch of it in 1829; and in 1851 the French lieutenant Bellot
saw it from the deck of the Prince Albert. Of course the doctor wished to keep a
memento of the celebrated mountain, and made a clever sketch of it. It is not
surprising that such masses should be stranded and adhere to the land, for to
each foot above water they have two feet below, giving, therefore, to this one
about eighty fathoms of depth.

At last, under a temperature which at noon was only 12 degrees, under a
snowy and foggy sky, Cape Farewell was perceived. The Forward arrived on the
day fixed; if it pleased the unknown captain to come and occupy his position in
such diabolical weather he would have no cause to complain.

"There you are, then," said the doctor to himself, "cape so celebrated and so
well named! Many have cleared it like us who were destined never to see it
again. Is it, then, an eternal adieu said to one's European friends? You have all
passed it. Frobisher, Knight, Barlow, Vaughan, Scroggs, Barentz, Hudson,
Blosseville, Franklin, Crozier, Bellot, never to come back to your domestic
hearth, and that cape has been really for you the cape of adieus."

It was about the year 970 that some navigators left Iceland and discovered
Greenland. Sebastian Cabot forced his way as far as latitude 56 degrees in 1498.
Gaspard and Michel Cotreal, in 1500 and 1502, went as far north as 60 degrees;
and Martin Frobisher, in 1576, arrived as far as the bay that bears his name. To
John Davis belongs the honour of having discovered the Straits in 1585; and two
years later, in a third voyage, that bold navigator and great whaler reached the
sixty-third parallel, twenty-seven degrees from the Pole.

Barentz in 1596, Weymouth in 1602, James Hall in 1605 and 1607, Hudson,
whose name was given to that vast bay which hollows out so profoundly the
continent of America, James Poole, in 1611, advanced far into the Strait in
search of that North-West passage the discovery of which would have
considerably shortened the track of communication between the two worlds.
Baffin, in 1616, found the Straits of Lancaster in the sea that bears his own
name; he was followed, in 1619, by James Munk, and in 1719 by Knight,
Barlow, Vaughan, and Scroggs, of whom no news has ever been heard. In 1776
Lieutenant Pickersgill, sent out to meet Captain Cook, who tried to go up
Behring's Straits, reached the sixty-eighth degree; the following year Young, for
the same purpose, went as far north as Woman's Island.

Afterwards came Captain James Ross, who, in 1818, rounded the coasts of
Baffin's Sea, and corrected the hydrographic errors of his predecessors. Lastly, in
1819 and 1820, the celebrated Parry passed through Lancaster Straits, and
penetrated, in spite of unnumbered difficulties, as far as Melville Island, and won


the prize of 5,000 pounds promised by Act of Parliament to the English sailors
who would reach the hundred and seventeenth meridian by a higher latitude than
the seventy-seventh parallel.

In 1826 Beechey touched Chamisso Island; James Ross wintered from 1829
to 1833 in Prince Regent Straits, and amongst other important works discovered
the magnetic pole. During this time Franklin, by an overland route, traversed the
septentrional coasts of America from the River Mackenzie to Turnagain Point.
Captain Back followed in his steps from 1823 to 1835, and these explorations
were completed in 1839 by Messrs. Dease and Simpson and Dr. Rae.

Lastly, Sir John Franklin, wishing to discover the North-West passage, left
England in 1845 on board the Erebus and the Terror; he penetrated into Baffin's
Sea, and since his passage across Disko Island no news had been heard of his
expedition.

That disappearance determined the numerous investigations which have
brought about the discovery of the passage, and the survey of these Polar
continents, with such indented coast lines. The most daring English, French, and
American sailors made voyages towards these terrible countries, and, thanks to
their efforts, the maps of that country, so difficult to make, figured in the list of
the Royal Geographical Society of London. The curious history of these
countries was thus presented to the doctor's imagination as he leaned on the rail,
and followed with his eyes the long track left by the brig. Thoughts of the bold
navigators weighed upon his mind, and he fancied he could perceive under the
frozen arches of the icebergs the pale ghosts of those who were no more.


CHAPTER VII


DAVIS'S STRAITS


During that day the Forward cut out an easy road amongst the half-broken
ice; the wind was good, but the temperature very low; the currents of air blowing
across the ice-fields brought with them their penetrating cold. The night required
the severest attention; the floating icebergs drew together in that narrow pass; a
hundred at once were often counted on the horizon; they broke off from the
elevated coasts under the teeth of the grinding waves and the influence of the
spring season, in order to go and melt or to be swallowed up in the depths of the
ocean. Long rafts of wood, with which it was necessary to escape collision, kept
the crew on the alert; the crow's nest was put in its place on the mizenmast; it
consisted of a cask, in which the ice-master was partly hidden to protect him
from the cold winds while he kept watch over the sea and the icebergs in view,
and from which he signalled danger and sometimes gave orders to the crew. The
nights were short; the sun had reappeared since the 31st of January in
consequence of the refraction, and seemed to get higher and higher above the
horizon. But the snow impeded the view, and if it did not cause complete
obscurity it rendered navigation laborious.

On the 21st of April Desolation Cape appeared in the midst of thick mists;
the crew were tired out with the constant strain on their energies rendered
necessary ever since they had got amongst the icebergs; the sailors had not had a
minute's rest; it was soon necessary to have recourse to steam to cut a way
through the heaped-up blocks. The doctor and Johnson were talking together on
the stern, whilst Shandon was snatching a few hours' sleep in his cabin.
Clawbonny was getting information from the old sailor, whose numerous
voyages had given him an interesting and sensible education. The doctor felt
much friendship for him, and the boatswain repaid it with interest.

"You see, Mr. Clawbonny," Johnson used to say, "this country is not like all
others; they call it Greenland, but there are very few weeks in the year when it
justifies its name."

"Who knows if in the tenth century this land did not justify its name?" added
the doctor. "More than one revolution of this kind has been produced upon our
globe, and I daresay I should astonish you if I were to tell you that according to
Icelandic chronicles two thousand villages flourished upon this continent about
eight or nine hundred years ago."


"You would so much astonish me, Mr. Clawbonny, that I should have some
difficulty in believing you, for it is a miserable country."

"However miserable it may be, it still offers a sufficient retreat to its
inhabitants, and even to civilised Europeans."

"Without doubt! We met men at Disko and Uppernawik who consented to
live in such climates; but my ideas upon the matter were that they lived there by
compulsion and not by choice."

"I daresay you are right, though men get accustomed to everything, and the
Greenlanders do not appear to me so unfortunate as the workmen of our large
towns; they may be unfortunate, but they are certainly not unhappy. I say
unhappy, but the word does not translate my thought, for if these people have not
the comforts of temperate countries, they are formed for a rude climate, and find
pleasures in it which we are not able to conceive."

"I suppose we must think so, as Heaven is just. Many, many voyages have
brought me upon these coasts, and my heart always shrinks at the sight of these
wretched solitudes; but they ought to have cheered up these capes, promontories,
and bays with more engaging names, for Farewell Cape and Desolation Cape are
not names made to attract navigators."

"IT have also remarked that," replied the doctor, "but these names have a
geographical interest that we must not overlook. They describe the adventures of
those who gave them those names. Next to the names of Davis, Baffin, Hudson,
Ross, Parry, Franklin, and Bellot, if I meet with Cape Desolation I soon find
Mercy Bay; Cape Providence is a companion to Port Anxiety; Repulsion Bay
brings me back to Cape Eden, and leaving Turagain Point I take refuge in
Refuge Bay. I have there under my eyes an unceasing succession of perils,
misfortunes, obstacles, successes, despairs, and issues, mixed with great names
of my country, and, like a series of old-fashioned medals, that nomenclature
retraces in my mind the whole history of these seas."

"You are quite right, Mr. Clawbonny, and I hope we shall meet with more
Success Bays than Despair Capes in our voyage."

"I hope so too, Johnson; but, I say, is the crew come round a little from its
terrors?"

"Yes, a little; but since we got into the Straits they have begun to talk about
the fantastic captain; more than one of them expected to see him appear at the
extremity of Greenland; but between you and me, doctor, doesn't it astonish you
a little too?"

"Tt does indeed, Johnson."

"Do you believe in the captain's existence?"

"Of course I do."


"But what can be his reasons for acting in that manner?"

"If I really must tell you the whole of my thoughts, Johnson, I believe that
the captain wished to entice the crew far enough out to prevent them being able
to come back. Now if he had been on board when we started they would all have
wanted to know our destination, and he might have been embarrassed."

"But why so?"

"Suppose he should wish to attempt some superhuman enterprise, and to
penetrate where others have never been able to reach, do you believe if the crew
knew it they would ever have enlisted? As it is, having got so far, going farther
becomes a necessity."

"That's very probable, Mr. Clawbonny. I have known more than one intrepid
adventurer whose name alone was a terror, and who would never have found any
one to accompany him in his perilous expeditions----"

"Excepting me," ventured the doctor.

"And me, after you,” answered Johnson, "and to follow you; I can venture to
affirm that our captain is amongst the number of such adventurers. No matter,
we shall soon see; I suppose the unknown will come as captain on board from
the coast of Uppernawik or Melville Bay, and will tell us at last where it is his
good pleasure to conduct the ship."

"I am of your opinion, Johnson, but the difficulty will be to get as far as
Melville Bay. See how the icebergs encircle us from every point! They scarcely
leave a passage for the Forward. Just examine that immense plain over there."

"The whalers call that in our language an ice-field, that is to say a continued
surface of ice the limits of which cannot be perceived."

"And on that side, that broken field, those long pieces of ice more or less
joined at their edges?"

"That is a pack; if it was of a circular form we should call it a patch; and, if
the form was longer, a stream."

"And there, those floating icebergs?"

"Those are drift-ice; if they were a little higher they would be icebergs or
hills; their contact with vessels is dangerous, and must be carefully avoided.
Here, look over there: on that ice-field there is a protuberance produced by the
pressure of the icebergs; we call that a hummock; if that protuberance was
submerged to its base we should call it a calf. It was very necessary to give
names to all those forms in order to recognise them."

"Tt is truly a marvellous spectacle!" exclaimed the doctor, contemplating the
wonders of the Boreal Seas; "there is a field for the imagination in such
pictures!"

"Yes," answered Johnson, "ice often takes fantastic shapes, and our men are


not behindhand in explaining them according to their own notions."

"Isn't that assemblage of ice-blocks admirable? Doesn't it look like a foreign
town, an Eastern town, with its minarets and mosques under the pale glare of the
moon? Further on there is a long series of Gothic vaults, reminding one of Henry
the Seventh's chapel or the Houses of Parliament."

"They would be houses and towns very dangerous to inhabit, and we must
not sail too close to them. Some of those minarets yonder totter on their base,
and the least of them would crush a vessel like the Forward."

"And yet sailors dared to venture into these seas before they had steam at
their command! How ever could a sailing vessel be steered amongst these
moving rocks?"

"Nevertheless, it has been accomplished, Mr. Clawbonny. When the wind
became contrary--and that has happened to me more than once--we quietly
anchored to one of those blocks, and we drifted more or less with it and waited
for a favourable moment to set sail again. I must acknowledge that such a
manner of voyaging required months, whilst with a little good fortune we shall
only want a few days."

"Tt seems to me," said the doctor, "that the temperature has a tendency to get
lower."

"That would be a pity," answered Johnson, "for a thaw is necessary to break
up these masses and drive them away into the Atlantic; besides, they are more
numerous in Davis's Straits, for the sea gets narrower between Capes
Walsingham and Holsteinborg; but on the other side of the 67th degree we shall
find the seas more navigable during the months of May and June."

"Yes; but first of all we must get to the other side."

"Yes, we must get there, Mr. Clawbonny. In June and July we should have
found an open passage, like the whalers do, but our orders were precise; we were
to be here in April. I am very much mistaken if our captain has not his reasons
for getting us out here so early."

The doctor was right in stating that the temperature was lowering; the
thermometer at noon only indicated 6 degrees, and a north-west breeze was
getting up, which, although it cleared the sky, assisted the current in precipitating
the floating masses of ice into the path of the Forward. All of them did not obey
the same impulsion, and it was not uncommon to encounter some of the highest
masses drifting in an opposite direction, seized at their base by an undercurrent.

It is easy to understand the difficulties of this kind of navigation; the
engineers had not a minute's rest; the engines were worked from the deck by
means of levers, which opened, stopped, and reversed them according to the
orders of the officers on watch. Sometimes the brig had to hasten through an


opening in the ice-fields, sometimes to struggle against the swiftness of an
iceberg which threatened to close the only practicable issue, or, again, some
block, suddenly overthrown, compelled the brig to back quickly so as not to be
crushed to pieces. This mass of ice, carried along, broken up and amalgamated
by the northern current, crushed up the passage, and if seized by the frost would
oppose an impassable barrier to the passage of the Forward.

Birds were found in innumerable quantities on these coasts, petrels and other
sea-birds fluttered about here and there with deafening cries, a great number of
big-headed, short-necked sea-gulls were amongst them; they spread out their
long wings and braved in their play the snow whipped by the hurricane. This
animation of the winged tribe made the landscape more lively.

Numerous pieces of wood were floating to leeway, clashing with noise; a few
enormous, bloated-headed sharks approached the vessel, but there was no
question of chasing them, although Simpson, the harpooner, was longing to have
a hit at them. Towards evening several seals made their appearance, nose above
water, swimming between the blocks.

On the 22nd the temperature again lowered; the Forward put on all steam to
catch the favourable passes: the wind was decidedly fixed in the north-west; all
sails were furled.

During that day, which was Sunday, the sailors had little to do. After the
reading of Divine service, which was conducted by Shandon, the crew gave
chase to sea-birds, of which they caught a great number. They were suitably
prepared according to the doctor's method, and furnished an agreeable increase
of provisions to the tables of the officers and crew.

At three o'clock in the afternoon the Forward had attained Thin de Sael,
Sukkertop Mountain; the sea was very rough; from time to time a vast and
inopportune fog fell from the grey sky; however, at noon an exact observation
could be taken. The vessel was in 65 degrees 20 minutes latitude by 54 degrees
22 minutes longitude. It was necessary to attain two degrees more in order to
meet with freer and more favourable navigation.

During the three following days, the 24th, 25th, and 26th of April, the
Forward had a continual struggle with the ice; the working of the machines
became very fatiguing. The steam was turned off quickly or got up again at a
moment's notice, and escaped whistling from its valves. During the thick mist
the nearing of icebergs was only known by dull thundering produced by the
avalanches; the brig was instantly veered; it ran the risk of being crushed against
the heaps of fresh-water ice, remarkable for its crystal transparency, and as hard
as a rock.

Richard Shandon never missed completing his provision of water by


embarking several tons of ice every day. The doctor could not accustom himself
to the optical delusions that refraction produces on these coasts. An iceberg
sometimes appeared to him like a small white lump within reach, when it was at
least at ten or twelve miles' distance. He endeavoured to accustom his eyesight to
this singular phenomenon, so that he might be able to correct its errors rapidly.

At last the crew were completely worn out by their labours in hauling the
vessel alongside of the ice-fields and by keeping it free from the most menacing
blocks by the aid of long perches. Nevertheless, the Forward was still held back
in the impassable limits of the Polar Circle on Friday, the 27th of April.


CHAPTER VIII


GOSSIP OF THE CREW


However, the Forward managed, by cunningly slipping into narrow
passages, to gain a few more minutes north; but instead of avoiding the enemy, it
was soon necessary to attack it. The ice-fields, several miles in extent, were
getting nearer, and as these moving heaps often represent a pressure of more than
ten millions of tons, it was necessary to give a wide berth to their embraces. The
ice-saws were at once installed in the interior of the vessel, in such a manner as
to facilitate immediate use of them. Part of the crew philosophically accepted
their hard work, but the other complained of it, if it did not refuse to obey. At the
same time that they assisted in the installation of the instruments, Garry, Bolton,
Pen and Gripper exchanged their opinions.

"By Jingo!" said Bolton gaily, "I don't know why the thought strikes me that
there's a very jolly tavern in Water-street where it's comfortable to be between a
glass of gin and a bottle of porter. Can't you imagine it, Gripper?"

"To tell you the truth," quickly answered the questioned sailor, who generally
professed to be in a bad temper, "I don't imagine it here."

"It's for the sake of talking, Gripper; it's evident that the snow towns Dr.
Clawbonny admires so don't contain the least public where a poor sailor can get
a half-pint of brandy."

"That's sure enough, Bolton; and you may as well add that there's nothing
worth drinking here. It's a nice idea to deprive men of their grog when they are
in the Northern Seas."

"But you know," said Garry, "that the doctor told us it was to prevent us
getting the scurvy. It's the only way to make us go far."

"But I don't want to go far, Garry; it's pretty well to have come this far
without trying to go where the devil is determined we shan't."

"Well, we shan't go, that's all," replied Pen. "I declare I've almost forgotten
the taste of gin."

"But remember what the doctor says," replied Bolton.

"It's all very fine for them to talk. It remains to be seen if it isn't an excuse for
being skinny with the drink."

"Pen may be right, after all," said Gripper.

"His nose is too red for that," answered Bolton. "Pen needn't grumble if it
loses a little of its colour in the voyage."


"What's my nose got to do with you?" sharply replied the sailor, attacked in
the most sensitive place. "My nose doesn't need any of your remarks; take care
of your own."

"Now, then, don't get angry, Pen; I didn't know your nose was so touchy. I
like a glass of whisky as well as anybody, especially in such a temperature; but if
I know it'll do me more harm than good, I go without."

"You go without," said Warren, the stoker; "but everyone don't go without."

"What do you mean, Warren?" asked Garry, looking fixedly at him.

"I mean that for some reason or other there are spirits on board, and I know
they don't go without in the stern."

"And how do you know that?" asked Garry.

Warren did not know what to say: he talked for the sake of talking.

"You see Warren don't know anything about it, Garry," said Bolton.

"Well," said Pen, "we'll ask the commander for a ration of gin; we've earned
it well and we'll see what he says."

"I wouldn't if I were you," answered Garry.

"Why?" cried Pen and Gripper.

"Because he'll refuse. You knew you weren't to have any when you enlisted;
you should have thought of it then."

"Besides," replied Bolton, who took Garry's part because he liked his
character, "Richard Shandon isn't master on board; he obeys, like us."

"Who is master if he isn't?"

"The captain."

"Always that unfortunate captain!" exclaimed Pen. "Don't you see that on
these ice-banks there's no more a captain than there is a public? It's a polite way
of refusing us what we've a right to claim."

"But if there's a captain," replied Bolton, "I'll bet two months' pay we shall
see him before long."

"T should like to tell the captain a bit of my mind," said Pen.

"Who's talking about the captain?" said a new-comer. It was Clifton, the
sailor, a superstitious and envious man. "Is anything new known about the
captain?" he asked.

"No," they all answered at once.

"Well, I believe we shall find him one fine morning installed in his cabin,
and no one will know how he got there."

"Get along, do!" replied Bolton. "Why, Clifton, you imagine that he's a
hobgoblin--a sort of wild child of the Highlands."

"Laugh as much as you like, Bolton, you won't change my opinion. Every
day as I pass his cabin I look through the keyhole. One of these fine mornings I


shall come and tell you what he's like."

"Why, he'll be like everyone else," said Pen, "and if he thinks he'll be able to
do what he likes with us, he'll find himself mistaken, that's all!"

"Pen don't know him yet," said Bolton, "and he's beginning to quarrel with
him already."

"Who doesn't know him?" said Clifton, looking knowing; "I don't know that
he don't!"

"What the devil do you mean?" asked Gripper.

"I know very well what I mean."

"But we don't."

"Well, Pen has quarrelled with him before."

"With the captain?"

"Yes, the dog-captain--it's all one."

The sailors looked at one another, afraid to say anything.

"Man or dog," muttered Pen, "I declare that that animal will have his account
one of these days."

"Come, Clifton," asked Bolton seriously, "you don't mean to say that you
believe the dog is the real captain?"

"Indeed I do," answered Clifton with conviction. "If you noticed things like I
do, you would have noticed what a queer beast it is."

"Well, tell us what you've noticed."

"Haven't you noticed the way he walks on the poop with such an air of
authority, looking up at the sails as if he were on watch?"

"That's true enough," added Gripper, "and one evening I actually found him
with his paws on the paddle-wheel."

"You don't mean it!" said Bolton.

"And now what do you think he does but go for a walk on the ice-fields,
minding neither the bears nor the cold?"

"That's true enough," said Bolton.

"Do you ever see that ‘ere animal, like an honest dog, seek men's company,
sneak about the kitchen, and set his eyes on Mr. Strong when's he taking
something good to the commander? Don't you hear him in the night when he
goes away two or three miles from the vessel, howling fit to make your blood
run cold, as if it weren't easy enough to feel that sensation in such a temperature
as this? Again, have you ever seen him feed? He takes nothing from any one.
His food is always untouched and unless a secret hand feeds him on board, I may
say that he lives without eating, and if he's not unearthly, I'm a fool!"

"Upon my word," said Bell, the carpenter, who had heard all Clifton's
reasoning, "I shouldn't be surprised if such was the case." The other sailors were


silenced.

"Well, at any rate, where's the Forward going to?"

"I don't know anything about it," replied Bell. "Richard Shandon will receive
the rest of his instructions in due time."

"But from whom?"

"From whom?"

"Yes, how?" asked Bolton, becoming pressing.

"Now then, answer, Bell!" chimed in all the other sailors.

"By whom? how? Why, I don't know," said the carpenter, embarrassed in his
turn.

"Why, by the dog-captain," exclaimed Clifton. "He has written once already;
why shouldn't he again? If I only knew half of what that 'ere animal knows, I
shouldn't be embarrassed at being First Lord of the Admiralty!"

"So then you stick to your opinion that the dog is the captain?"

"Yes."

"Well," said Pen in a hoarse voice, "if that 'ere animal don't want to turn up
his toes in a dog's skin, he's only got to make haste and become a man, or I'm
hanged if I don't settle him."

"What for?" asked Garry.

"Because I choose," replied Pen brutally; "besides, it's no business of any
one."

"Enough talking, my boys," called out Mr. Johnson, interfering just in time,
for the conversation was getting hot. "Get on with your work, and set up your
saws quicker than that. We must clear the iceberg."

"What! on a Friday?" replied Clifton, shrugging his shoulders. "You'll see
she won't get over the Polar circle as easily as you think."

The efforts of the crew were almost powerless during the whole day. The
Forward could not separate the ice-fields even by going against them full speed,
and they were obliged to anchor for the night. On Saturday the temperature
lowered again under the influence of an easterly wind. The weather cleared up,
and the eye could sweep over the white plains in the distance, which the
reflection of the sun's rays rendered dazzling. At seven in the morning the
thermometer marked eight degrees below zero. The doctor was tempted to stay
quietly in his cabin, and read the Arctic voyages over again; but, according to his
custom, he asked himself what would be the most disagreeable thing he could
do, which he settled was to go on deck and assist the men to work in such a
temperature. Faithful to the line of conduct he had traced out for himself, he left
his well-warmed cabin and came to help in hauling the vessel. His was a
pleasant face, in spite of the green spectacles by which he preserved his eyes


from the biting of the reflected rays; in his future observations he was always
careful in making use of his snow spectacles, in order to avoid ophthalmia, very
frequent in these high latitudes.

Towards evening the Forward had made several miles further north, thanks
to the activity of the men and Shandon's skill, which made him take advantage of
every favourable circumstance; at midnight he had got beyond the sixty-sixth
parallel, and the fathom line declared twenty-three fathoms of water; Shandon
discovered that he was on the shoal where Her Majesty's ship Victoria struck,
and that land was drawing near, thirty miles to the east. But now the heaps of ice,
which up till now had been motionless, divided and began to move; icebergs
seemed coming from every point of the horizon; the brig was entangled in a
series of moving rocks, the crushing force of which it was impossible to resist.
Moving became so difficult that Garry, the best helmsman, took the wheel; the
mountains had a tendency to close up behind the brig; it then became essential to
cut through the floating ice, and prudence as well as duty ordered them to go
ahead. Difficulties became greater from the impossibility that Shandon found in
establishing the direction of the vessel amongst such changing points, which
kept moving without offering one firm perspective. The crew was divided into
two tacks, larboard and starboard; each one, armed with a long perch with an
iron point, drove back the two threatening blocks. Soon the Forward entered into
a pass so narrow, between two high blocks, that the extremity of her yards struck
against the walls, hard as rock; by degrees she entangled herself in the midst of a
winding valley, filled up with eddies of snow, whilst the floating ice was
crashing and splitting with sinister cracklings. But it soon became certain that
there was no egress from this gullet. An enormous block, caught in the channel,
was driving rapidly on to the Forward! It seemed impossible to avoid it, and
equally impossible to back out along a road already obstructed.

Shandon and Johnson, standing on the prow, were contemplating the
position. Shandon was pointing with his right hand at the direction the helmsman
was to take, and with his left was conveying to James Wall, posted near the
engineer, his orders for the working of the machine.

"How will this end?" asked the doctor of Johnson.

"As it may please God," replied the boatswain.

The block of ice, at least a hundred feet high, was only about a cable's length
from the Forward, and threatened to pound her under it.

"Cursed luck!" exclaimed Pen, swearing frightfully.

"Silence!" exclaimed a voice which it was impossible to recognise in the
midst of the storm.

The block seemed to be precipitating itself upon the brig; there was a


moment of undefinable anguish; the men forsook their poles and flocked to the
stern in spite of Shandon's orders.

Suddenly a frightful sound was heard; a genuine waterspout fell upon deck,
heaved up by an enormous wave. A cry of terror rang out from the crew whilst
Garry, at the helm, held the Forward in a straight line in spite of the frightful
incumbrance. When their frightened looks were drawn towards the mountain of
ice it had disappeared; the pass was free, and further on a long channel,
illuminated by the oblique rays of the sun, allowed the brig to pursue her track.

"Well, Mr. Clawbonny," said Johnson, "can you explain to me the cause of
that phenomenon?"

"It is a very simple one," answered the doctor, "and happens very often.
When those floating bodies are disengaged from each other by the thaw, they sail
away separately, maintaining their balance; but by degrees, as they near the
south, where the water is relatively warmer, their base, shaken by the collision
with other icebergs, begins to melt and weaken; it then happens that their centre
of gravity is displaced, and, naturally, they overturn. Only, if that one had turned
over two minutes later, it would have crushed our vessel to pieces."


CHAPTER IX


NEWS


The Polar circle was cleared at last. On the 30th of April, at midday, the
Forward passed abreast of Holsteinborg; picturesque mountains rose up on the
eastern horizon. The sea appeared almost free from icebergs, and the few there
were could easily be avoided. The wind veered round to the south-east, and the
brig, under her mizensail, brigantine, topsails, and her topgallant sail, sailed up
Baffin's Sea. It had been a particularly calm day, and the crew were able to take a
little rest. Numerous birds were swimming and fluttering about round the vessel;
amongst others, the doctor observed some alca-alla, very much like the teal,
with black neck, wings and back, and white breast; they plunged with vivacity,
and their immersion often lasted forty seconds.

The day would not have been remarkable if the following fact, however
extraordinary it may appear, had not occurred on board. At six o'clock in the
morning Richard Shandon, re-entering his cabin after having been relieved,
found upon the table a letter with this address:

"To the Commander,

"RICHARD SHANDON,

"On board the 'FORWARD,'

"Baffin's Sea."

Shandon could not believe his own eyes, and before reading such a strange
epistle he caused the doctor, James Wall and Johnson to be called, and showed
them the letter.

"That grows very strange," said Johnson.

"It's delightful!" thought the doctor.

"At last," cried Shandon, "we shall know the secret."

With a quick hand he tore the envelope and read as follows:

"COMMANDER,--The captain of the Forward is pleased with the coolness,
skill, and courage that your men, your officers, and yourself have shown on the
late occasions, and begs you to give evidence of his gratitude to the crew.

"Have the goodness to take a northerly direction towards Melville Bay, and
from thence try and penetrate into Smith's Straits.

"THE CAPTAIN OF THE Forward,

"K. Z.

"Monday, April 30th,


"Abreast of Cape Walsingham."

"Is that all?" cried the doctor.

"That's all," replied Shandon, and the letter fell from his hands.

"Well," said Wall, "this chimerical captain doesn't even mention coming on
board, so I conclude that he never will come."

"But how did this letter get here?" said Johnson.

Shandon was silent.

"Mr. Wall is right," replied the doctor, after picking up the letter and turning
it over in every direction; "the captain won't come on board for an excellent
reason----"

"And what's that?" asked Shandon quickly.

"Because he is here already," replied the doctor simply.

"Already!" said Shandon. "What do you mean?"

"How do you explain the arrival of this letter if such is not the case?"

Johnson nodded his head in sign of approbation.

"It is not possible!" said Shandon energetically. "I know every man of the
crew. We should have to believe, in that case, that the captain has been with us
ever since we set sail. It is not possible, I tell you. There isn't one of them that I
haven't seen for more than two years in Liverpool; doctor, your supposition is
inadmissible."

"Then what do you admit, Shandon?"

"Everything but that! I admit that the captain, or one of his men, has profited
by the darkness, the fog, or anything you like, in order to slip on board; we are
not very far from land; there are Esquimaux kayaks that pass unperceived
between the icebergs; someone may have come on board and left the letter; the
fog was intense enough to favour their design."

"And to hinder them from seeing the brig," replied the doctor; "if we were
not able to perceive an intruder slip on board, how could he have discovered the
Forward in the midst of a fog?"

"That is evident," exclaimed Johnson.

"I come back, then," said the doctor, "to my first hypothesis. What do you
think about it, Shandon?"

"I think what you please," replied Shandon fiercely, "with the exception of
supposing that this man is on board my vessel."

"Perhaps," added Wall, "there may be amongst the crew a man of his who
has received instructions from him."

"That's very likely," added the doctor.

"But which man?" asked Shandon. "I tell you I have known all my men a
long time."


"Anyhow," replied Johnson, "if this captain shows himself, let him be man or
devil, we'll receive him; but we have another piece of information to draw from
this letter."

"What's that?" asked Shandon.

"Why, that we are to direct our path not only towards Melville Bay, but again
into Smith's Straits."

"You are right," answered the doctor.

"Smith's Straits?" echoed Shandon mechanically.

"It is evident," replied Johnson, "that the destination of the Forward is not to
seek a North-West passage, as we shall leave to our left the only track that leads
to it--that is to say, Lancaster Straits; that's what forebodes us difficult navigation
in unknown seas."

"Yes, Smith's Straits," replied Shandon, "that's the route the American Kane
followed in 1853, and at the price of what dangers! For a long time he was
thought to be lost in those dreadful latitudes! However, as we must go, go we
must. But where? how far? To the Pole?"

"And why not?" cried the doctor.

The idea of such an insane attempt made the boatswain shrug his shoulders.

"After all," resumed James Wall, "to come back to the captain, if he exists, I
see nowhere on the coast of Greenland except Disko or Uppernawik where he
can be waiting for us; in a few days we shall know what we may depend upon."

"But," asked the doctor of Shandon, "aren't you going to make known the
contents of that letter to the crew?"

"With the commander's permission," replied Johnson, "I should do nothing
of the kind."

"And why so?" asked Shandon.

"Because all that mystery tends to discourage the men: they are already very
anxious about the fate of our expedition, and if the supernatural side of it is
increased it may produce very serious results, and in a critical moment we could
not rely upon them. What do you say about it, commander?"

"And you, doctor--what do you think?" asked Shandon.

"T think Johnson's reasoning is just."

"And you, Wall?"

"Unless there's better advice forthcoming, I shall stick to the opinion of these
gentlemen."

Shandon reflected seriously during a few minutes, and read the letter over
again carefully.

"Gentlemen," said he, "your opinion on this subject is certainly excellent, but
I cannot adopt it."


"Why not, Shandon?" asked the doctor.

"Because the instructions of this letter are formal: they command me to give
the captain's congratulations to the crew, and up till to-day I have always blindly
obeyed his orders in whatever manner they have been transmitted to me, and I
cannot----"

"But----" said Johnson, who rightly dreaded the effect of such a
communication upon the minds of the sailors.

"My dear Johnson," answered Shandon, "your reasons are excellent, but
read--'he begs you to give evidence of his gratitude to the crew.”

"Act as you think best," replied Johnson, who was besides a very strict
observer of discipline. "Are we to muster the crew on deck?"

"Do so," replied Shandon.

The news of a communication having been received from the captain spread
like wildfire on deck; the sailors quickly arrived at their post, and the
commander read out the contents of the mysterious letter. The reading of it was
received in a dead silence; the crew dispersed, a prey to a thousand suppositions.
Clifton had heard enough to give himself up to all the wanderings of his
superstitious imagination; he attributed a considerable share in this incident to
the dog-captain, and when by chance he met him in his passage he never failed
to salute him. "I told you the animal could write," he used to say to the sailors.
No one said anything in answer to this observation, and even Bell, the carpenter
himself, would not have known what to answer.

Nevertheless it was certain to all that, in default of the captain, his spirit or
his shadow watched on board; and henceforward the wisest of the crew
abstained from exchanging their opinions about him.

On the 1st of May, at noon, they were in 68 degrees latitude and 56 degrees
32 minutes longitude. The temperature was higher and the thermometer marked
twenty-five degrees above zero. The doctor was amusing himself with watching
the antics of a white bear and two cubs on the brink of a pack that lengthened out
the land. Accompanied by Wall and Simpson, he tried to give chase to them by
means of the canoe; but the animal, of a rather warlike disposition, rapidly led
away its offspring, and consequently the doctor was compelled to renounce
following them up.

Chilly Cape was doubled during the night under the influence of a favourable
wind, and soon the high mountains of Disko rose in the horizon. Godhavn Bay,
the residence of the Governor-General of the Danish Settlements, was left to the
right. Shandon did not consider it worth while to stop, and soon outran the
Esquimaux pirogues who were endeavouring to reach his ship.

The Island of Disko is also called Whale Island. It was from this point that


on the 12th of July, 1845, Sir John Franklin wrote to the Admiralty for the last
time. It was also on that island on the 27th of August, 1859, that Captain
McClintock set foot on his return, bringing back, alas! proofs too complete of
the loss of the expedition. The coincidence of these two facts were noted by the
doctor; that melancholy conjunction was prolific in memories, but soon the
heights of Disko disappeared from his view.

There were, at that time, numerous icebergs on the coasts, some of those
which the strongest thaws are unable to detach; the continual series of ridges
showed themselves under the strangest forms.

The next day, towards three o'clock, they were bearing on to Sanderson Hope
to the north-east. Land was left on the starboard at a distance of about fifteen
miles; the mountains seemed tinged with a red-coloured bistre. During the
evening, several whales of the finners species, which have fins on their backs,
came playing about in the midst of the ice-trails, throwing out air and water from
their blow-holes. It was during the night between the 3rd and 4th of May that the
doctor saw for the first time the sun graze the horizon without dipping his
luminous disc into it. Since the 31st of January the days had been getting longer
and longer till the sun went down no more. To strangers not accustomed to the
persistence of this perpetual light it was a constant subject of astonishment, and
even of fatigue; it is almost impossible to understand to what extent obscurity is
requisite for the well-being of our eyes. The doctor experienced real pain in
getting accustomed to this light, rendered still more acute by the reflection of the
sun's rays upon the plains of ice.

On May 5th the Forward headed the seventy-second parallel; two months
later they would have met with numerous whalers under these high latitudes, but
at present the straits were not sufficiently open to allow them to penetrate into
Baffin's Bay. The following day the brig, after having headed Woman's Island,
came in sight of Uppernawik, the most northerly settlement that Denmark
possesses on these coasts.


CHAPTER X


DANGEROUS NAVIGATION


Shandon, Dr. Clawbonny, Johnson, Foker, and Strong, the cook, went on
shore in the small boat. The governor, his wife, and five children, all of the
Esquimaux race, came politely to meet the visitors. The doctor knew enough
Danish to enable him to establish a very agreeable acquaintance with them;
besides, Foker, who was interpreter of the expedition, as well as ice-master,
knew about twenty words of the Greenland language, and if not ambitious,
twenty words will carry you far. The governor was born on the island, and had
never left his native country. He did the honours of the town, which is composed
of three wooden huts, for himself and the Lutheran minister, of a school, and
magazines stored with the produce of wrecks. The remainder consists of snow-
huts, the entrance to which is attained by creeping through a hole.

The greater part of the population came down to greet the Forward, and
more than one native advanced as far as the middle of the bay in his kayak,
fifteen feet long and scarcely two wide. The doctor knew that the word
Esquimaux signified raw-fish-eater, and he likewise knew that the name was
considered an insult in the country, for which reason he did not fail to address
them by the title of Greenlanders, and nevertheless only by the look of their oily
sealskin clothing, their boots of the same material, and all their greasy tainted
appearance, it was easy to discover their accustomed food. Like all
Ichthyophagans, they were half-eaten up with leprosy; and yet, for all that, were
in no worse health.

The Lutheran minister and his wife, with whom the doctor promised himself
a private chat, were on a journey towards Proven on the south of Uppernawik; he
was therefore reduced to getting information out of the governor. This chief
magistrate did not seem to be very learned; a little less and he would have been
an ass, a little more and he would have known how to read. The doctor, however,
questioned him upon the commercial affairs, the customs and manners of the
Esquimaux, and learnt by signs that seals were worth about 40 pounds delivered
in Copenhagen, a bearskin forty Danish dollars, a blue foxskin four, and a white
one two or three dollars. The doctor also wished, with an eye to completing his
personal education, to visit one of the Esquimaux huts; it is almost impossible to
imagine of what a learned man who is desirous of knowledge is capable. Happily
the opening of those hovels was too narrow, and the enthusiastic fellow was not


able to crawl in; it was very lucky for him, for there is nothing more repulsive
than that accumulation of things living and dead, seal flesh or Esquimaux flesh,
rotten fish and infectious wearing apparel, which constitute a Greenland hovel;
no window to revive the unbreathable air, only a hole at the top of the hut, which
gives free passage to the smoke, but does not allow the stench to go out.

Foker gave these details to the doctor, who did not curse his corpulence the
less for that. He wished to judge for himself about these emanations, sui generis.

"T am sure," said he, "one gets used to it in the long run."

In the long run depicts Dr. Clawbonny in a single phrase. During the
ethnographical studies of the worthy doctor, Shandon, according to his
instructions, was occupied in procuring means of transport to cross the ice. He
had to pay 4 pounds for a sledge and six dogs, and even then he had great
difficulty in persuading the natives to part with them. Shandon wanted also to
engage Hans Christian, the clever dog-driver, who made one of the party of
Captain McClintock's expedition; but, unfortunately, Hans was at that time in
Southern Greenland. Then came the grand question, the topic of the day, was
there in Uppernawik a European waiting for the passage of the Forward? Did the
governor know if any foreigner, an Englishman probably, had settled in those
countries? To what epoch could he trace his last relations with whale or other
ships? To these questions the governor replied that not one single foreigner had
landed on that side of the coast for more than ten months.

Shandon asked for the names of the last whalers seen there; he knew none of
them. He was in despair.

"You must acknowledge, doctor, that all this is quite inconceivable. Nothing
at Cape Farewell, nothing at Disko Island, nothing at Uppernawik."

"If when we get there you repeat 'Nothing in Melville Bay,’ I shall greet you
as the only captain of the Forward."

The small boat came back to the brig towards evening, bringing back the
visitors. Strong, in order to change the food a little, had procured several dozens
of eider-duck eggs, twice as big as hens' eggs, and of greenish colour. It was not
much, but the change was refreshing to a crew fed on salted meat. The wind
became favourable the next day, but, however, Shandon did not command them
to get under sail; he still wished to stay another day, and for conscience’ sake to
give any human being time to join the Forward. He even caused the 16-pounder
to be fired from hour to hour; it thundered out with a great crash amidst the
icebergs, but the noise only frightened the swarms of molly-mokes and rotches.
During the night several rockets were sent up, but in vain. And thus they were
obliged to set sail.

On the 8th of May, at six o'clock in the morning, the Forward under her


topsails, foresails, and topgallant, lost sight of the Uppernawik settlement, and
the hideous stakes to which were hung seal-guts and deer-paunches. The wind
was blowing from the south-east, and the temperature went up to thirty-two
degrees. The sun pierced through the fog, and the ice was getting a little
loosened under its dissolving action. But the reflection of the white rays
produced a sad effect on the eyesight of several of the crew. Wolsten, the
gunsmith, Gripper, Clifton, and Bell were struck with snow blindness, a kind of
weakness in the eyes very frequent in spring, and which determines, amongst the
Esquimaux, numerous cases of blindness. The doctor advised those who were so
afflicted and their companions in general to cover their faces with green gauze,
and he was the first to put his own prescription into execution.

The dogs bought by Shandon at Uppernawik were of a rather savage nature,
but in the end they became accustomed to the ship; the captain did not take the
arrival of these new comrades too much to heart, and he seemed to know their
habits. Clifton was not the last to remark the fact that the captain must already
have been in communication with his Greenland brethren, as on land they were
always famished and reduced by incomplete nourishment; they only thought of
recruiting themselves by the diet on board.

On the 9th of May the Forward touched within a few cables' length the most
westerly of the Baffin Isles. The doctor noticed several rocks in the bay between
the islands and the continent, those called Crimson Cliffs; they were covered
over with snow as red as carmine, to which Dr. Kane gives a purely vegetable
origin. Clawbonny wanted to consider this phenomenon nearer, but the ice
prevented them approaching the coast; although the temperature had a tendency
to rise, it was easy enough to see that the icebergs and ice-streams were
accumulating to the north of Baffin's Sea. The land offered a very different
aspect from that of Uppernawik; immense glaciers were outlined on the horizon
against a greyish sky. On the 10th the Forward left Hingston Bay on the right,
near to the seventy-fourth degree of latitude. Several hundred miles westward
the Lancaster Channel opened out into the sea.

But afterwards that immense extent of water disappeared under enormous
fields of ice, upon which hummocks rose up as regularly as a crystallisation of
the same substance. Shandon had the steam put on, and up to the 11th of May
the Forward wound amongst the sinuous rocks, leaving the print of a track on
the sky, caused by the black smoke from her funnels. But new obstacles were
soon encountered; the paths were getting closed up in consequence of the
incessant displacement of the floating masses; at every minute a failure of water
in front of the Forward's prow became imminent, and if she had been nipped it
would have been difficult to extricate her. They all knew it, and thought about it.


On board this vessel, without aim or known destination, foolishly seeking to
advance towards the north, some symptoms of hesitation were manifested
amongst those men, accustomed to an existence of danger; many, forgetting the
advantages offered, regretted having ventured so far, and already a certain
demoralisation prevailed in their minds, still more increased by Clifton's fears,
and the idle talk of two or three of the leaders, such as Pen, Gripper, Warren, and
Wolston.

To the uneasiness of the crew were joined overwhelming fatigues, for on the
12th of May the brig was closed in on every side; her steam was powerless, and
it was necessary to force a road through the ice-fields. The working of the saws
was very difficult in the floes, which measured from six to seven feet in
thickness. When two parallel grooves divided the ice for the length of a hundred
feet, they had to break the interior part with hatchets or handspikes; then took
place the elongation of the anchors, fixed in a hole by means of a thick auger;
afterwards the working of the capstan began, and in this way the vessel was
hauled over. The greatest difficulty consisted in driving the smashed pieces
under the floes in order to open up a free passage for the ship, and to thrust them
away they were compelled to use long iron-spiked poles.

At last, what with the working of the saws, the hauling, the capstan and
poles, incessant, dangerous, and forced work, in the midst of fogs or thick snow,
the temperature relatively low, ophthalmic suffering and moral uneasiness, all
contributed to discourage the crew, and react on the men's imagination. When
sailors have an energetic, audacious, and convinced man to do with, who knows
what he wants, where he is bound for, and what end he has in view, confidence
sustains them in spite of everything. They make one with their chief, feeling
strong in his strength, and quiet in his tranquillity; but on the brig it was felt that
the commander was not sure of himself, that he hesitated before his unknown
end and destination. In spite of his energetic nature, his weakness showed itself
in his changing orders, incomplete manoeuvres, stormy reflections, and a
thousand details which could not escape the notice of the crew.

Besides, Shandon was not captain of the ship, a sufficient reason for
argument about his orders; from argument to a refusal to obey the step is easy.
The discontented soon added to their number the first engineer, who up to now
had remained a slave to his duty.

On May 16th, six days after the Forward's arrival at the icebergs, Shandon
had not gained two miles northward, and the ice threatened to freeze in the brig
till the following season. This was becoming dangerous. Towards eight in the
evening Shandon and the doctor, accompanied by Garry, went on a voyage of
discovery in the midst of the immense plains; they took care not to go too far


away from the vessel, as it was difficult to fix any landmarks in those white
solitudes, the aspects of which changed constantly.

The refraction produced strange effects; they still astonished the doctor;
where he thought he had only one foot to leap he found it was five or six, or the
contrary; and in both cases the result was a fall, if not dangerous, at least painful,
on the frozen ice as hard as glass.

Shandon and his two companions went in search of a practicable passage.
Three miles from the ship they succeeded, not without trouble, in climbing the
iceberg, which was perhaps three hundred feet high.

From this point their view extended over that desolated mass which looked
like the ruins of a gigantic town with its beaten-down obelisks, its overthrown
steeples and palaces turned upside down all in a lump--in fact, a genuine chaos.
The sun threw long oblique rays of a light without warmth, as if heat-absorbing
substances were placed between it and that gloomy country. The sea seemed to
be frozen to the remotest limits of view.

"How shall we get through?" exclaimed the doctor.

"I have not the least idea," replied Shandon; "but we will get through, even if
we are obliged to employ powder to blow up those mountains, for I certainly
won't let that ice shut me up till next spring.”

"Nevertheless, such was the fate of the Fox, almost in these same quarters.
Never mind," continued the doctor, "we shall get through with a little
philosophy. Believe me, that is worth all the engines in the world."

"You must acknowledge," replied Shandon, "that the year doesn't begin
under very favourable auspices."

"That is incontestable, and I notice that Baffin's Sea has a tendency to return
to the same state in which it was before 1817."

"Then you think, doctor, that the present state of things has not always
existed?"

"Yes; from time to time there are vast breakings up which scientific men can
scarcely explain; thus, up to 1817 this sea was constantly obstructed, when
suddenly an immense cataclysm took place which drove back these icebergs into
the ocean, the great part of which were stranded on Newfoundland Bank. From
that time Baffin's Bay has been almost free, and has become the haunt of
numerous whalers."

"Then, since that epoch, voyages to the north have been easier?"

"Incomparably so; but for the last few years it has been observed that the bay
has a tendency to be closed up again, and according to investigations made by
navigators, it may probably be so for a long time--a still greater reason for us to
go on as far as possible. Just now we look like people who get into unknown


galleries, the doors of which are always shut behind them."

"Do you advise me to back out?" asked Shandon, endeavouring to read the
answer in the doctor's eyes.

"I! I have never known how to take a step backward, and should we never
return, I say 'Go ahead.' However, I should like to make known to you that if we
do anything imprudent, we know very well what we are exposed to."

"Well, Garry, what do you think about it?" asked Shandon of the sailor.

"I? Commander, I should go on; I'm of the same opinion as Mr. Clawbonny;
but you do as you please; command, and we will obey."

"They don't all speak like you, Garry," replied Shandon. "They aren't all in an
obedient humour! Suppose they were to refuse to execute my orders?"

"Commander," replied Garry coldly, "I have given you my advice because
you asked me for it; but you are not obliged to act upon it."

Shandon did not reply; he attentively examined the horizon, and descended
with his two companions on to the ice-field.


CHAPTER XI


THE DEVIL'S THUMB


During the commander's absence the men had gone through divers works in
order to make the ship fit to avoid the pressure of the ice-fields. Pen, Clifton,
Gripper, Bolton, and Simpson were occupied in this laborious work; the stoker
and the two engineers were even obliged to come to the aid of their comrades,
for, from the instant they were not wanted at the engine, they again became
sailors, and, as such, they could be employed in all kinds of work on board. But
this was not accomplished without a great deal of grumbling.

"T'll tell you what," said Pen, "I've had enough of it, and if in three days the
breaking up isn't come, I'll swear to God that I'll chuck up!"

"You'll chuck up?" replied Gripper; "you'd do better to help us to back out.
Do you think we are in the humour to winter here till next year?"

"To tell you the truth, it would be a dreary winter," said Plover, "for the ship
is exposed from every quarter."

"And who knows," added Brunton, "if even next spring we should find the
sea freer than it is now?"

"We aren't talking about next spring," said Pen; "to-day's Thursday; if next
Sunday morning the road ain't clear, we'll back out south."

"That's the ticket!" cried Clifton.

"Are you all agreed?" said Pen.

"Yes," answered all his comrades.

"That's right enough," answered Warren, "for if we are obliged to work like
this, hauling the ship by the strength of our arms, my advice is to backwater."

"We'll see about that on Sunday," answered Wolsten.

"As soon as I get the order," said Brunton, "I'll soon get my steam up."

"Or we'd manage to get it up ourselves," said Clifton.

"If any of the officers," said Pen, "wants to have the pleasure of wintering
here, we'll let him. He can build himself a snow-hut like the Esquimaux."

"Nothing of the kind, Pen,” replied Brunton; "we won't leave anybody. You
understand that, you others. Besides, I don't think it would be difficult to
persuade the commander; he already seems very uncertain, and if we were
quietly to propose it----"

"I don't know that," said Plover; "Richard Shandon is a hard, headstrong
man, and we should have to sound him carefully."


"When I think," replied Bolton, with a covetous sigh, "that in a month we
might be back in Liverpool; we could soon clear the southern ice-line. The pass
in Davis's Straits will be open in the beginning of June, and we shall only have
to let ourselves drift into the Atlantic."

"Besides," said the prudent Clifton, "if we bring back the commander with
us, acting under his responsibility, our pay and bounty money will be sure;
whilst if we return alone it won't be so certain."

"That's certain!" said Plover; "that devil of a Clifton speaks like a book. Let
us try to have nothing to explain to the Admiralty; it's much safer to leave no one
behind us."

"But if the officers refuse to follow us?" replied Pen, who wished to push his
comrades to an extremity.

To such a question they were puzzled to reply.

"We shall see about it when the time comes," replied Bolton; "besides, it
would be enough to win Richard Shandon over to our side. We shall have no
difficulty about that."

"Anyhow," said Pen, swearing, "there's something I'll leave here if I get an
arm eaten in the attempt."

"Ah! you mean the dog,” said Plover.

"Yes, the dog; and before long I'll settle his hash!"

"The more so," replied Clifton, coming back to his favourite theme, "that the
dog is the cause of all our misfortunes."

"He's cast an evil spell over us," said Plover.

"It's through him we're in an iceberg," said Gripper.

"He's the cause that we've had more ice against us than has ever been seen at
this time of year," said Wolsten.

"He's the cause of my bad eyes," said Brunton.

"He's cut off the gin and brandy," added Pen.

"He's the cause of everything," said the assembly, getting excited.

"And he's captain into the bargain!" cried Clifton.

"Well, captain of ill-luck," said Pen, whose unreasonable fury grew stronger
at every word; "you wanted to come here, and here you'll stay."

"But how are we to nap him?" said Plover.

"We've a good opportunity," replied Clifton; "the commander isn't on deck,
the lieutenant is asleep in his cabin, and the fog's thick enough to stop Johnson
seeing us."

"But where's the dog?" cried Pen.

"He's asleep near the coalhole," replied Clifton, "and if anybody wants----"

"T'll take charge of him," answered Pen furiously.


'


"Look out, Pen, he's got teeth that could snap an iron bar in two."

"If he moves I'll cut him open," cried Pen, taking his knife in one hand. He
bounced in between decks, followed by Warren, who wanted to help him in his
undertaking. They quickly came back, carrying the animal in their arms, strongly
muzzled, with his paws bound tightly together. They had taken him by surprise
whilst he slept, so that the unfortunate dog could not escape them.

"Hurrah for Pen!" cried Plover.

"What do you mean to do with him now you've got him?" asked Clifton.

"Why, drown him, and if ever he gets over it----" replied Pen, with a fearful
smile of satisfaction.

About two hundred steps from the vessel there was a seal-hole, a kind of
circular crevice cut out by the teeth of that amphibious animal, hollowed out
from underneath, and through which the seal comes up to breathe on to the
surface of the ice. To keep this aperture from closing up he has to be very careful
because the formation of his jaws would not enable him to bore through the hole
again from the outside, and in a moment of danger he would fall a prey to his
enemies. Pen and Warren directed their steps towards this crevice, and there, in
spite of the dog's energetic efforts, he was unmercifully precipitated into the sea.
An enormous lump of ice was then placed over the opening, thus closing all
possible issue to the poor animal, walled up in a watery prison.

"Good luck to you, captain," cried the brutal sailor.

Shortly afterwards Pen and Warren returned on deck. Johnson had seen
nothing of this performance. The fog thickened round about the ship, and snow
began to fall with violence. An hour later, Richard Shandon, the doctor, and
Garry rejoined the Forward. Shandon had noticed a pass in a north-eastern
direction of which he was resolved to take advantage, and gave his orders in
consequence. The crew obeyed with a certain activity, not without hinting to
Shandon that it was impossible to go further on, and that they only gave him
three more days' obedience. During a part of the night and the following day the
working of the saws and the hauling were actively kept up; the Forward gained
about two miles further north. On the 18th she was in sight of land, and at five or
six cable-lengths from a peculiar peak, called from its strange shape the Devil's
Thumb.

It was there that the Prince Albert in 1851, and the Advance with Kane, in
1853, were kept prisoners by the ice for several weeks. The odd form of the
Devil's Thumb, the dreary deserts in its vicinity, the vast circus of icebergs--
some of them more than three hundred feet high--the cracking of the ice,
reproduced by the echo in so sinister a manner, rendered the position of the
Forward horribly dreary. Shandon understood the necessity of getting out of it


and going further ahead. Twenty-four hours later, according to his estimation, he
had been able to clear the fatal coast for about two miles, but this was not
enough. Shandon, overwhelmed with fear, and the false situation in which he
was placed, lost both courage and energy; in order to obey his instructions and
get further north, he had thrown his vessel into an excessively perilous situation.
The men were worn out by the hauling; it required more than three hours to
hollow out a channel twenty feet long, through ice that was usually from four to
five feet thick. The health of the crew threatened to break down. Shandon was
astonished at the silence of his men and their unaccustomed obedience, but he
feared that it was the calm before the storm. Who can judge, then, of his painful
disappointment, surprise, and despair when he perceived that in consequence of
an insensible movement of the ice-field the Forward had, during the night from
the 18th to the 19th, lost all the advantage she had gained with so much toil? On
the Saturday morning they were once more opposite the ever-threatening Devil's
Thumb, and in a still more critical position. The icebergs became more
numerous, and drifted by in the fog like phantoms. Shandon was in a state of
complete demoralisation, for fright had taken possession of the dauntless man
and his crew. Shandon had heard the dog's disappearance spoken about, but
dared not punish those who were guilty of it. He feared that a rebellion might be
the consequence. The weather was fearful during the whole day; the snow rose
up in thick whirlpools, wrapping up the Forward in an impenetrable cloak.
Sometimes, under the action of the storm, the fog was torn asunder, and
displayed towards land, raised up like a spectre, the Devil's Thumb.

The Forward was anchored to an immense block of ice; it was all that could
be done; there was nothing more to attempt; the obscurity became denser, and
the man at the helm could not see James Wall, who was on duty in the bow.
Shandon withdrew to his cabin, a prey to unremitting uneasiness; the doctor was
putting his voyage notes in order; one half the crew remained on deck, the other
half stayed in the common cabin. At one moment, when the storm increased in
fury, the Devil's Thumb seemed to rise up out of all proportion in the midst of
the fog.

"Good God!" cried Simpson, drawing back with fright.

"What the devil's that?" said Foker, and exclamations rose up in every
direction.

"It is going to smash us!"

"We are lost!"

"Mr. Wall! Mr. Wall!"

"It's all over with us!"

"Commander! Commander!"


These cries were simultaneously uttered by the men on watch. Wall fled to
the quarter-deck, and Shandon, followed by the doctor, rushed on deck to look.
In the midst of the fog the Devil's Thumb seemed to have suddenly neared the
brig, and seemed to have grown in a most fantastic manner. At its summit rose
up a second cone, turned upside down and spindled on its point; its enormous
mass threatened to crush the ship, as it was oscillating and ready to fall. It was a
most fearful sight; every one instinctively drew back, and several sailors, leaping
on to the ice, abandoned the ship.

"Let no one move!" cried the commander in a severe voice. "Every one to his
post!"

"How now, my friends? There's nothing to be frightened at!" said the doctor.
"There's no danger! Look, commander, look ahead, Mr. Wall; it's only an effect
of the mirage, nothing else."

"You are quite right, Mr. Clawbonny," answered Johnson; "those fools were
frightened at a shadow."

After the doctor had spoken most of the sailors drew near, and their fear
changed to admiration at the wonderful phenomenon, which shortly disappeared
from sight.

"They call that a mirage?" said Clifton. "Well, you may believe me that the
devil has something to do with it."

"That's certain!" replied Gripper.

But when the fog cleared away it disclosed to the eyes of the commander an
immense free and unexpected passage; it seemed to run away from the coast, and
he therefore determined to seize such a favourable hazard. Men were placed on
each side of the creek, hawsers were lowered down to them, and they began to
tow the vessel in a northerly direction. During long hours this work was actively
executed in silence. Shandon caused the steam to be got up, in order to take
advantage of the fortunate discovery of this channel.

"This," said he to Johnson, "is a most providential hazard, and if we can only
get a few miles ahead, we shall probably get to the end of our misfortunes."

"Brunton! stir up the fires, and as soon as there's enough pressure let me
know. In the meantime our men will pluck up their courage--that will be so much
gained. They are in a hurry to run away from the Devil's Thumb; we'll take
advantage of their good inclinations!"

All at once the progress of the Forward was abruptly arrested.

"What's up?" cried Shandon. "I say, Wall! have we broken our tow-ropes?"

"Not at all, commander," answered Wall, looking over the side. "Hallo! Here
are the men coming back again. They are climbing the ship's side as if the devil
was at their heels."


"What the deuce can it be?" cried Shandon, rushing forward.

"On board! On board!" cried the terrified sailors.

Shandon looked in a northerly direction, and shuddered in spite of himself. A
strange animal, with appalling movements, whose foaming tongue emerged from
enormous jaws, was leaping about at a cable's length from the ship. In
appearance he seemed to be about twenty feet high, with hair like bristles; he
was following up the sailors, whilst his formidable tail, ten feet long, was
sweeping the snow and throwing it up in thick whirlwinds. The sight of such a
monster riveted the most daring to the spot.

"It's a bear!" said one.

"It's the Gevaudan beast!"

"It's the lion of the Apocalypse!"

Shandon ran to his cabin for a gun he always kept loaded. The doctor armed
himself, and held himself in readiness to fire upon an animal which, by its
dimensions, recalled the antediluvian quadrupeds. He neared the ship in
immense leaps; Shandon and the doctor fired at the same time, when, suddenly,
the report of their firearms, shaking the atmospheric stratum, produced an
unexpected effect. The doctor looked attentively, and burst out laughing.

"It's the refraction!" he exclaimed.

"Only the refraction!" repeated Shandon. But a fearful exclamation from the
crew interrupted them.

"The dog!" said Clifton.

"The dog, captain!" repeated all his comrades.

"Himself!" cried Pen; "always that cursed brute."

They were not mistaken--it was the dog. Having got loose from his shackles,
he had regained the surface by another crevice. At that instant the refraction,
through a phenomenon common to these latitudes, caused him to appear under
formidable dimensions, which the shaking of the air had dispersed; but the
vexatious effect was none the less produced upon the minds of the sailors, who
were very little disposed to admit an explanation of the fact by purely physical
reasons. The adventure of the Devil's Thumb, the reappearance of the dog under
such fantastic circumstances, gave the finishing touch to their mental faculties,
and murmurs broke out on all sides.


CHAPTER XII


CAPTAIN HATTERAS


The Forward, under steam, rapidly made its way between the ice-mountains
and the icebergs. Johnson was at the wheel. Shandon, with his snow spectacles,
was examining the horizon, but his joy was of short duration, for he soon
discovered that the passage ended in a circus of mountains. However, he
preferred going on, in spite of the difficulty, to going back. The dog followed the
brig at a long distance, running along the plain, but if he lagged too far behind a
singular whistle could be distinguished, which he immediately obeyed. The first
time this whistle was heard the sailors looked round about them; they were alone
on deck all together, and no stranger was to be seen; and yet the whistle was
again heard from time to time. Clifton was the first alarmed.

"Do you hear?" said he. "Just look how that animal answers when he hears
the whistle."

"I can scarcely believe my eyes," answered Gripper.

"It's all over!" cried Pen. "I don't go any further."

"Pen's right!" replied Brunton; "it's tempting God!"

"Tempting the devil!" replied Clifton. "I'd sooner lose my bounty money than
go a step further."

"We shall never get back!" said Bolton in despair.

The crew had arrived at the highest pitch of insubordination.

"Not a step further!" cried Wolsten. "Are you all of the same mind?"

"Ay! ay!" answered all the sailors.

"Come on, then,” said Bolton; "let's go and find the commander; I'll
undertake the talking."

The sailors in a tight group swayed away towards the poop. The Forward at
the time was penetrating into a vast circus, which measured perhaps 800 feet in
diameter, and with the exception of one entrance--that by which the vessel had
come--was entirely closed up.

Shandon said that he had just imprisoned himself; but what was he to do?
How were they to retrace their steps? He felt his responsibility, and his hand
grasped the telescope. The doctor, with folded arms, kept silent; he was
contemplating the walls of ice, the medium altitude of which was over 300 feet.
A foggy dome remained suspended above the gulf. It was at this instant that
Bolton addressed his speech to the commander.


"Commander!" said he in a trembling voice, "we can't go any further."

"What do you say?" replied Shandon, whose consciousness of disregarded
authority made the blood rise to the roots of his hair.

"Commander," replied Bolton, "we say that we've done enough for that
invisible captain, and we are decided to go no further ahead."

"You are decided?" cried Shandon. "You talk thus, Bolton? Take care!"

"Your threats are all the same to us," brutally replied Pen; "we won't go an
inch further."

Shandon advanced towards the mutineers; at the same time the mate came up
and said in a whisper: "Commander, if you wish to get out of here we haven't a
minute to lose; there's an iceberg drifting up the pass, and it is very likely to cork
up all issue and keep us prisoners."

Shandon examined the situation.

"You will give an account of your conduct later on, you fellows," said he.
"Now heave aboard!"

The sailors rushed to their posts, and the Forward quickly veered round; the
fires were stuffed with coals; the great question was to outrun the floating
mountain. It was a struggle between the brig and the iceberg. The former, in
order to get through, was running south; the latter was drifting north, ready to
close up every passage.

"Steam up! steam up!" cried Shandon. "Do you hear, Brunton?"

The Forward glided like a bird amidst the struggling icebergs, which her
prow sent to the right-about; the brig's hull shivered under the action of the
screw, and the manometer indicated a prodigious tension of steam, for it whistled
with a deafening noise.

"Load the valves!" cried Shandon, and the engineer obeyed at the risk of
blowing up the ship; but his despairing efforts were in vain. The iceberg, caught
up by an undercurrent, rapidly approached the pass. The brig was still about
three cables’ length from it, when the mountain, entering like a corner-stone into
the open space, strongly adhered to its neighbours and closed up all issue.

"We are lost!" cried Shandon, who could not retain the imprudent words.

"Lost!" repeated the crew.

"Let them escape who can!" said some.

"Lower the shore boats!" said others.

"To the steward's room!" cried Pen and several of his band, "and if we are to
be drowned, let's drown ourselves in gin!"

Disorder among the men was at its height. Shandon felt himself overcome;
when he wished to command, he stammered and hesitated. His thought was
unable to make way through his words. The doctor was walking about in


agitation. Johnson stoically folded his arms and said nothing. All at once a
strong, imperious, and energetic voice was heard to pronounce these words:

"Every man to his post and tack about!"

Johnson started, and, hardly knowing what he did, turned the wheel rapidly.
He was just in time, for the brig, launched at full speed, was about to crush
herself against her prison walls. But while Johnson was instinctively obeying,
Shandon, Clawbonny, the crew, and all down to the stoker Warren, who had
abandoned his fires, even black Strong, who had left his cooking, were all
mustered on deck, and saw emerge from that cabin the only man who was in
possession of the key, and that man was Garry, the sailor.

"Sir!" cried Shandon, becoming pale. "Garry--you--by what right do you
command here?"

"Dick," called out Garry, reproducing that whistle which had so much
surprised the crew. The dog, at the sound of his right name, jumped with one
bound on to the poop and lay quietly down at his master's feet. The crew did not
say a word. The key which the captain of the Forward alone possessed, the dog
sent by him, and who came thus to verify his identity, that commanding accent
which it was impossible to mistake--all this acted strongly on the minds of the
sailors, and was sufficient to establish Garry's authority.

Besides, Garry was no longer recognisable; he had cut off the long whiskers
which had covered his face, which made it look more energetic and imperious
than ever; dressed in the clothes of his rank which had been deposited in the
cabin, he appeared in the insignia of commander.

Then immediately, with that mobility which characterised them, the crew of
the Forward cried out--"Three cheers for the captain!"

"Shandon!" said the latter to his second, "muster the crew; I am going to
inspect it!"

Shandon obeyed and gave orders with an altered voice. The captain
advanced to meet his officers and men, saying something suitable to each, and
treating each according to his past conduct. When he had finished the inspection,
he returned on to the poop, and with a calm voice pronounced the following
words:

"Officers and sailors, like you, I am English, and my motto is that of Nelson,
‘England expects that every man will do his duty.’ As an Englishman I am
resolved, we are resolved, that no bolder men shall go further than we have been.
As an Englishman I will not allow, we will not allow, other people to have the
glory of pushing further north themselves. If ever human foot can step upon the
land of the North Pole, it shall be the foot of an Englishman. Here is our
country's flag. I have equipped this vessel, and consecrated my fortune to this


enterprise, and, if necessary, I shall consecrate to it my life and yours; for I am
determined that these colours shall float on the North Pole. Take courage. From
this day, for every degree we can gain northwards the sum of a thousand pounds
will be awarded to you. There are ninety, for we are now in the seventy-second.
Count them. Besides, my name is enough. It means energy and patriotism. I am
Captain Hatteras!"

"Captain Hatteras!" exclaimed Shandon, and that name, well known to
English sailors, was whispered amongst the crew.

"Now," continued Hatteras, "anchor the brig to the ice, put out the fires, and
each of you return to your usual work. Shandon, I wish to hold a council with
you relative to affairs on board. Join me with the doctor, Wall, and the boatswain
in my cabin. Johnson, disperse the men."

Hatteras, calm and haughty, quietly left the poop. In the meantime Shandon
was anchoring the brig.

Who, then, was this Hatteras, and for what reason did his name make such a
profound impression upon the crew? John Hatteras was the only son of a London
brewer, who died in 1852 worth six millions of money. Still young, he embraced
the maritime career in spite of the splendid fortune awaiting him. Not that he felt
any vocation for commerce, but the instinct of geographical discoveries was dear
to him. He had always dreamt of placing his foot where no mortal foot had yet
soiled the ground.

At the age of twenty he was already in possession of the vigorous
constitution of a thin and sanguine man; an energetic face, with lines
geometrically traced; a high and perpendicular forehead; cold but handsome
eyes; thin lips, which set off a mouth from which words rarely issued; a middle
stature; solidly-jointed limbs, put in motion by iron muscles; the whole forming
a man endowed with a temperament fit for anything. When you saw him you felt
he was daring; when you heard him you knew he was coldly determined; his was
a character that never drew back, ready to stake the lives of others as well as his
own. It was well to think twice before following him in his expeditions.

John Hatteras was proud of being an Englishman. A Frenchman once said to
him, with what he thought was refined politeness and amiability:

"If I were not a Frenchman I should like to be an Englishman."

"And if I were not an Englishman," answered Hatteras, "I should like to be
an Englishman."

That answer revealed the character of the man. It was a great grief to him
that Englishmen had not the monopoly of geographical discoveries, and were, in
fact, rather behind other nations in that field.

Christopher Columbus, the discoverer of America, was a Genoese; Vasco da


Gama, a Portuguese, discovered India; another Portuguese, Fernando de
Andrada, China; and a third, Magellan, the Terra del Fuego. Canada was
discovered by Jacques Cartier, a Frenchman; Labrador, Brazil, the Cape of Good
Hope, the Azores, Madeira, Newfoundland, Guinea, Congo, Mexico, Cape
Blanco, Greenland, Iceland, the South Seas, California, Japan, Cambodia, Peru,
Kamtchatka, the Philippines, Spitzbergen, Cape Horn, Behring's Straits,
Tasmania, New Zealand, New Brittany, New Holland, Louisiana, Jean Mayen
Island, were discovered by Icelanders, Scandinavians, French, Russians,
Portuguese, Danes, Spaniards, Genoese, and Dutch, but not one by an
Englishman. Captain Hatteras could not reconcile himself to the fact that
Englishmen were excluded from the glorious list of navigators who made the
great discoveries of the 15th and 16th centuries.

Hatteras consoled himself a littke when he turned to more modern times.
Then Englishmen had the best of it with Sturt, Burke, Wills, King, and Grey in
Australia; with Palliser in America; with Cyril Graham, Wadington, and
Cummingham in India; with Burton, Speke, Grant, and Livingstone in Africa.

But for a man like Hatteras this was not enough; from his point of view these
bold travellers were improvers rather than inventors; and he was determined to
do something better, and he would have invented a country if he could, only to
have the honour of discovering it. Now he had noticed that, although
Englishmen did not form a majority amongst ancient discoverers, and that he
had to go back to Cook in 1774 to obtain New Caledonia and the Sandwich Isles,
where the unfortunate captain perished in 1778, yet there existed, nevertheless, a
comer of the globe where they seemed to have united all their efforts. This
comer was precisely the boreal lands and seas of North America. The list of
Polar discoveries may be thus written:

Nova Zembla, discovered by Willoughby, in 1553; Weigatz Island, by
Barrough, in 1556; the West Coast of Greenland, by Davis, in 1585; Davis's
Straits, by Davis, in 1587; Spitzbergen, by Willoughby, in 1596; Hudson's Bay,
by Hudson, in 1610; Baffin's Bay, by Baffin, in 1616.

In more modern times, Hearne, Mackenzie, John Ross, Parry, Franklin,
Richardson, Beechey, James Ross, Back, Dease, Simpson, Rae, Inglefield,
Belcher, Austin, Kellett, Moore, McClure, Kennedy, and McClintock have
continually searched those unknown lands.

The limits of the northern coasts of America had been fixed, and the North-
West passage almost discovered, but this was not enough; there was something
better still to be done, and John Hatteras had twice attempted it by equipping two
ships at his own expense. He wanted to reach the North Pole, and thus crown the
series of English discoveries by one of the most illustrious attempts. To attain the


Pole was the aim of his life.

After a few successful cruises in the Southern seas, Hatteras endeavoured for
the first time, in 1846, to go north by Baffin's Sea; but he could not get beyond
the seventy-fourth degree of latitude; he was then commanding the sloop
Halifax. His crew suffered atrocious torments, and John Hatteras pushed his
adventurous rashness so far, that, afterwards, sailors were little tempted to
recommence similar expeditions under such a chief.

However, in 1850 Hatteras succeeded in enrolling on the schooner Farewell
about twenty determined men, tempted principally by the high prize offered for
their audacity. It was upon that occasion that Dr. Clawbonny entered into
correspondence with John Hatteras, whom he did not know, requesting to join
the expedition, but happily for the doctor the post was already filled up. The
Farewell, following the track taken in 1817 by the Neptune from Aberdeen, got
up to the north of Spitzbergen as far as the seventy-sixth degree of latitude.
There the expedition was compelled to winter. But the sufferings of the crew
from the intense cold were so great that not a single man saw England again,
with the exception of Hatteras himself, who was brought back to his own
country by a Danish whaler after a walk of more than two hundred miles across
the ice.

The sensation produced by the return of this one man was immense. Who in
future would dare to follow Hatteras in his mad attempts? However, he did not
despair of beginning again. His father, the brewer, died, and he became
possessor of a nabob's fortune. Soon after a geographical fact bitterly stirred up
John Hatteras. A brig, the Advance, manned by seventeen men, equipped by a
merchant named Grinnell, under the command of Dr. Kane, and sent in search of
Sir John Franklin, advanced in 1853 through Baffin's Sea and Smith's Strait,
beyond the eighty-second degree of boreal latitude, much nearer the Pole than
any of his predecessors. Now, this vessel was American, Grinnell was American,
and Kane was American. The Englishman's disdain for the Yankee will be easily
understood; in the heart of Hatteras it changed to hatred; he was resolved to
outdo his audacious competitor and reach the Pole itself.

For two years he had been living incognito in Liverpool, passing himself off
as a Sailor; he recognised in Richard Shandon the man he wanted; he sent him an
offer by an anonymous letter, and one to Dr. Clawbonny at the same time. The
Forward was built, armed, and equipped. Hatteras took great care to conceal his
name, for had it been known he would not have found a single man to
accompany him. He was determined not to take the command of the brig except
in a moment of danger, and when his crew had gone too far to draw back. He
had in reserve, as we have seen, such offers of money to make to the men that


not one of them would refuse to follow him to the other end of the world; and, in
fact, it was right to the other end of the world that he meant to go. Circumstances
had become critical, and John Hatteras had made himself known. His dog, the
faithful Dick, the companion of his voyages, was the first to recognise him.
Luckily for the brave and unfortunately for the timid, it was well and duly
established that John Hatteras was the captain of the Forward.


CHAPTER XIII


THE PROJECTS OF HATTERAS


The appearance of this bold personage was appreciated in different ways by
the crew; part of them completely rallied round him, either from love of money
or daring; others submitted because they could not help themselves, reserving
their right to protest later on; besides, resistance to such a man seemed, for the
present, difficult. Each man went back to his post. The 20th of May fell on a
Sunday, and was consequently a day of rest for the crew. A council was held by
the captain, composed of the officers, Shandon, Wall, Johnson, and the doctor.

"Gentlemen," said the captain in that voice at the same time soft and
imperious which characterised him, "you are aware that I intend to go as far as
the Pole. I wish to know your opinion about this enterprise. Shandon, what do
you think about it?"

"It is not for me to think, captain," coldly replied Shandon; "I have only to
obey."

Hatteras was not surprised at the answer.

"Richard Shandon," continued he, not less coldly, "I beg you will say what
you think about our chance of success."

"Very well, captain," answered Shandon, "facts are there, and answer for me;
attempts of the same kind up till now have always failed; I hope we shall be
more fortunate."

"We shall be. What do you think, gentlemen?"

"As far as I am concerned," replied the doctor, "I consider your plan
practicable, as it is certain that some day navigators will attain the boreal Pole. I
don't see why the honour should not fall to our lot."

"There are many things in our favour," answered Hatteras; "our measures are
taken in consequence, and we shall profit by the experience of those who have
gone before us. And thereupon, Shandon, accept my thanks for the care you have
taken in fitting out this ship; there are a few evil-disposed fellows amongst the
crew that I shall have to bring to reason, but on the whole I have only praises to
give you."

Shandon bowed coldly. His position on the Forward, which he thought to
command, was a false one. Hatteras understood this, and did not insist further.

"As to you, gentlemen," he continued, turning to Wall and Johnson, "I could
not have secured officers more distinguished for courage and experience."


"Well, captain, I'm your man," answered Johnson, "and although your
enterprise seems to me rather daring, you may rely upon me till the end."

"And on me too," said James Wall.

"As to you, doctor, I know what you are worth."

"You know more than I do, then," quickly replied the doctor.

"Now, gentlemen,” continued Hatteras, "it is well you should learn upon
what undeniable facts my pretension to arrive at the Pole is founded. In 1817 the
Neptune got up to the north of Spitzbergen, as far as the eighty-second degree. In
1826 the celebrated Parry, after his third voyage to the Polar Seas, started also
from Spitzbergen Point, and by the aid of sledge-boats went a hundred and fifty
miles northward. In 1852 Captain Inglefield penetrated into Smith's Inlet as far
as seventy-eight degrees thirty-five minutes latitude. All these vessels were
English, and Englishmen, our countrymen, commanded them." Here Hatteras
paused. "I ought to add," he continued, with a constrained look, and as though
the words were unable to leave his lips--"I must add that, in 1854, Kane, the
American, commanding the brig Advance, went still higher, and that his
lieutenant, Morton, going across the ice-fields, hoisted the United States
standard on the other side of the eighty-second degree. This said, I shall not
return to the subject. Now what remains to be known is this, that the captains of
the Neptune, the Enterprise, the Isabel, and the Advance ascertained that
proceeding from the highest latitudes there existed a Polar basin entirely free
from ice."

"Free from ice!" exclaimed Shandon, interrupting the captain, "that is
impossible!"

"You will notice, Shandon," quietly replied Hatteras, whose eye shone for an
instant, "that I quote names and facts as a proof. I may even add that during
Captain Parry's station on the border of Wellington Channel, in 1851, his
lieutenant, Stewart, also found himself in the presence of open sea, and this
peculiarity was confirmed during Sir Edward Beecher's wintering in 1853, in
Northumberland Bay, in 76 degrees 52 minutes N. latitude, and 99 degrees 20
minutes longitude. The reports are incontestable, and it would be most unjust not
to admit them."

"However, captain," continued Shandon, "those reports are so contradictory."

"You are mistaken, Shandon," cried Dr. Clawbonny. "These reports do not
contradict any scientific assertion, the captain will allow me to tell you."

"Go on, doctor," answered Hatteras.

"Well, listen, Shandon; it evidently follows from geographical facts, and
from the study of isotherm lines, that the coldest point of the globe is not at the
Pole itself; like the magnetic point, it deviates several degrees from the Pole. The


calculations of Brewster, Bergham, and several other natural philosophers show
us that in our hemisphere there are two cold Poles; one is situated in Asia at 79
degrees 30 minutes N. latitude, and by 120 degrees E. longitude, and the other in
America at 78 degrees N. latitude, and 97 degrees W. longitude. It is with the
latter that we have to do, and you see, Shandon, we have met with it at more than
twelve degrees below the Pole. Well, why should not the Polar Sea be as equally
disengaged from ice as the sixty-sixth parallel is in summer--that is to say, the
south of Baffin's Bay?"

"That's what I call well pleaded," replied Johnson. "Mr. Clawbonny speaks
upon these matters like a professional man."

"It appears very probable," chimed in James Wall.

"All guess-work," answered Shandon obstinately.

"Well, Shandon," said Hatteras, "let us take into consideration either case;
either the sea is free from ice or it is not so, and neither of these suppositions can
hinder us from attaining the Pole. If the sea is free the Forward will take us there
without trouble; if it is frozen we will attempt the adventure upon our sledges.
This, you will allow, is not impracticable. When once our brig has attained the
eighty-third degree we shall only have six hundred miles to traverse before
reaching the Pole."

"And what are six hundred miles?" quickly answered the doctor, "when it is
known that a Cossack, Alexis Markoff, went over the ice sea along the northern
coast of the Russian Empire, in sledges drawn by dogs, for the space of eight
hundred miles in twenty-four days?"

"Do you hear that, Shandon?" said Hatteras; "can't Englishmen do as much
as a Cossack?"

"Of course they can," cried the impetuous doctor.

"Of course," added the boatswain.

"Well, Shandon?" said the captain.

"I can only repeat what I said before, captain," said Shandon--"I will obey."

"Very good. And now," continued Hatteras, "let us consider our present
situation. We are caught by the ice, and it seems to me impossible, for this year
at least, to get into Smith's Strait. Well, here, then, this is what I propose."

Hatteras laid open upon the table one of the excellent maps published in
1859 by the order of the Admiralty.

"Be kind enough to follow me. If Smith's Strait is closed up from us,
Lancaster Strait, on the west coast of Baffin's Sea, is not. I think we ought to
ascend that strait as far as Barrow Strait, and from there sail to Beechey Island;
the same track has been gone over a hundred times by sailing vessels;
consequently with a screw we can do it easily. Once at Beechey Island we will


go north as far as possible, by Wellington Channel, up to the outlet of the creek
which joins Wellington's and Queen's Channels, at the very point where the open
sea was perceived. It is now only the 20th of May; in a month, if circumstances
favour us, we shall have attained that point, and from there we'll drive forward
towards the Pole. What do you think about it, gentlemen?"

"It is evidently the only track to follow," replied Johnson.

"Very well, we will take it from to-morrow. I shall let them rest to-day as it is
Sunday. Shandon, you will take care that religious service be attended to; it has a
beneficial effect on the minds of men, and a sailor above all needs to place
confidence in the Almighty."

"It shall be attended to, captain," answered Shandon, who went out with the
lieutenant and the boatswain.

"Doctor!" said Hatteras, pointing towards Shandon, "there's a man whose
pride is wounded; I can no longer rely upon him."

Early the following day the captain caused the pirogue to be lowered in order
to reconnoitre the icebergs in the vicinity, the breadth of which did not exceed
200 yards. He remarked that through a slow pressure of the ice the basin
threatened to become narrower. It became urgent, therefore, to make an aperture
to prevent the ship being crushed in a vice of the mountains. By the means
employed by John Hatteras, it is easy to observe that he was an energetic man.

He first had steps cut out in the walls of ice, and by their means climbed to
the summit of an iceberg. From that point he saw that it was easy for him to cut
out a road towards the south-west. By his orders a blasting furnace was hollowed
nearly in the heart of the mountain. This work, rapidly put into execution, was
terminated by noon on Monday. Hatteras could not rely on his eight or ten pound
blasting cylinders, which would have had no effect on such masses as those.
They were only sufficient to shatter ice-fields. He therefore had a thousand
pounds of powder placed in the blasting furnace, of which the diffusive direction
was carefully calculated. This mine was provided with a long wick, bound in
gutta-percha, the end of which was outside. The gallery conducting to the mine
was filled up with snow and lumps of ice, which the cold of the following night
made as hard as granite. The temperature, under the influence of an easterly
wind, came down to twelve degrees.

At seven the next morning the Forward was held under steam, ready to profit
by the smallest issue. Johnson was charged with setting fire to the wick, which,
according to calculation, would burn for half an hour before setting fire to the
mine. Johnson had, therefore, plenty of time to regain the brig; ten minutes after
having executed Hatteras's order he was again at his post. The crew remained on
deck, for the weather was dry and bright; it had left off snowing.


Hatteras was on the poop, chronometer in hand, counting the minutes;
Shandon and the doctor were with him. At eight thirty-five a dull explosion was
heard, much less loud than any one would have supposed. The outline of the
mountains was changed all at once as if by an earthquake; thick white smoke
rose up to a considerable height in the sky, leaving long crevices in the iceberg,
the top part of which fell in pieces all round the Forward. But the path was not
yet free; large blocks of ice remained suspended above the pass on the adjacent
mountains, and there was every reason to fear that they would fall and close up
the passage. Hatteras took in the situation at one glance.


"Wolsten!" cried he.

The gunsmith hastened up.

"Yes, captain?" cried he.

"Load the gun in the bow with a triple charge," said Hatteras, "and wad it as
hard as possible."

"Are we going to attack the mountain with cannon-balls?" asked the doctor.

"No," answered Hatteras, "that would be useless. No bullet, Wolsten, but a
triple charge of powder. Look sharp!"

A few minutes after the gun was loaded.

"What does he mean to do without a bullet?" muttered Shandon between his
teeth.

"We shall soon see," answered the doctor.

"Ready, captain!" called out Wolsten.

"All right!" replied Hatteras.

"Brunton!" he called out to the engineer, "a few turns ahead."

Brunton opened the sliders, and the screw being put in movement, the
Forward neared the mined mountain.

"Aim at the pass!" cried the captain to the gunsmith. The latter obeyed, and
when the brig was only half a cable's length from it, Hatteras called out:

"Fire!"

A formidable report followed his order, and the blocks, shaken by the
atmospheric commotion, were suddenly precipitated into the sea; the disturbance
amongst the strata of the air had been sufficient to accomplish this.

"All steam on, Brunton! Straight for the pass, Johnson!"

The latter was at the helm; the brig, driven along by her screw, which turned
in the foaming waves, dashed into the middle of the then opened pass; it was
time, for scarcely had the Forward cleared the opening than her prison closed up
again behind her. It was a thrilling moment, and on board there was only one
stout and undisturbed heart--that of the captain. The crew, astonished at the
manoeuvre, cried out:

"Hurrah for the captain!"


CHAPTER XIV


EXPEDITION IN SEARCH OF FRANKLIN


On Wednesday, the 23rd of May, the Forward had again taken up her
adventurous navigation, cleverly tacking amongst the packs and _ icebergs.
Thanks to steam, that obedient force which so many of our Polar sea navigators
have had to do without, she appeared to be playing in the midst of the moving
rocks. She seemed to recognise the hand of an experienced master, and like a
horse under an able rider, she obeyed the thought of her captain. The temperature
rose. At six o'clock in the morning the thermometer marked twenty-six degrees,
at six in the evening twenty-nine degrees, and at midnight twenty-five degrees;
the wind was lightly blowing from the south-east.

On Thursday, towards three in the moming, the Forward was in sight of
Possession Bay, on the coast of America. At the entrance to Lancaster Strait,
shortly after, the crew caught a glimpse of Bumey Cape. A few Esquimaux
pulled off towards the vessel, but Hatteras did not take the trouble to wait for
them. The Byam-Martin peaks, which overlook Cape Liverpool, were sighted to
the left, and soon disappeared in the evening mists, which also prevented any
observation being taken from Cape Hay. This cape is so low that it gets
confounded with the ice on the coast, a circumstance which often renders the
hydrographic determination of the Polar seas extremely difficult.

Puffins, ducks, and white sea-gulls showed up in very great numbers. The
Forward was then in latitude 74 degrees 1 minute, and in longitude 77 degrees
15 minutes. The snowy hoods of the two mountains, Catherine and Elizabeth,
rose up above the clouds.

On Friday, at six o'clock, Cape Warender was passed on the right side of the
strait, and on the left Admiralty Inlet, a bay that has been little explored by
navigators, who are generally in a hurry to sail away west. The sea became
rather rough, and the waves often swept the deck of the brig, throwing up pieces
of ice. The land on the north coast, with its high table lands almost level, and
which reverberated the sun's rays, offered a very curious appearance.

Hatteras wanted to run along the north coast, in order to reach Beechey
Island and the entrance to Wellington Channel sooner; but continual icebergs
compelled him, to his great annoyance, to follow the southern passes. That was
why, on the 26th of May, the Forward was abreast of Cape York in a thick fog
interspersed with snow; a very high mountain, almost perpendicular, caused it to


be recognised. The weather cleared up a little, and the sun, towards noon,
appeared for an instant, allowing a tolerably good observation to be taken; 74
degrees 4 minutes latitude and 84 degrees 23 minutes longitude. The Forward
was then at the extremity of Lancaster Strait.

Hatteras pointed out to the doctor on his map the route already taken, and the
one he meant to follow. The position of the brig at the time was very interesting.

"T should like to have been further north," said he, "but no one can do the
impossible; see, this is our exact situation."

And the captain pricked his map at a short distance from Cape York.

"We are in the centre of this four-road way, open to every wind, fenced by
the outlets of Lancaster Strait, Barrow Strait, Wellington Channel, and Regent's
Passage; it is a point that all navigators in these seas have been obliged to come
to."

"Well," replied the doctor, "it must have puzzled them greatly; four cross-
roads with no sign-posts to tell them which to take. How did Parry, Ross, and
Franklin manage?"

"They did not manage at all, they were managed; they had no choice, I can
assure you; sometimes Barrow Strait was closed to one of them, and the next
year another found it open; sometimes the vessel was irresistibly drawn towards
Regent's Passage, so that we have ended by becoming acquainted with these
inextricable seas."

"What a singular country!" said the doctor, examining the map. "It is all in
pieces, and they seem to have no logical connection. It seems as if the land in the
vicinity of the North Pole had been cut up like this on purpose to make access to
it more difficult, whilst that in the other hemisphere quietly terminates in
tapered-out points like those of Cape Horn, the Cape of Good Hope, and the
Indian Peninsula. Is it the greater rapidity of the equator which has thus modified
matters, whilst the land at the extremities, yet fluid from the creation, has not
been able to get condensed or agglomerated together, for want of a sufficiently
rapid rotation?"

"That must be the case, for everything on earth is logical, and ‘nothing is that
errs from law,' and God often allows men to discover His laws; make use of His
permission, doctor."

"Unfortunately, I shall not be able to take much advantage of it,” said the
doctor, "but the wind here is something dreadful," added he, muffling himself up
as well as he could.

"Yes, we are quite exposed to the north wind, and it is turning us out of our
road."

"Anyhow it ought to drive the ice down south, and level a clear road."


"It ought to do so, doctor, but the wind does not always do what it ought.
Look, that ice-bank seems impenetrable. Never mind, we will try to reach
Griffith Island, sail round Cornwallis Island, and get into Queen's Channel
without going by Wellington Channel. Nevertheless I positively desire to touch
at Beechey Island in order to renew my coal provision."

"What do you mean?" asked the astonished doctor.

"I mean that, according to orders from the Admiralty, large provisions have
been deposited on that island in order to provide for future expeditions, and
although Captain McClintock took some in 1859, I assure you that there will be
some left for us."

"By-the-bye," said the doctor, "these parts have been explored for the last
fifteen years, and since the day when the proof of the loss of Franklin was
acquired, the Admiralty has always kept five or six cruisers in these seas. If I am
not mistaken, Griffith Island, which I see there on the map, almost in the middle
of the cross-roads, has become a general meeting-place for navigators."

"It is so, doctor; and Franklin's unfortunate expedition resulted in making
known these distant countries to us."

"That is true, captain, for since 1845 expeditions have been very numerous.
It was not until 1848 that we began to be uneasy about the disappearance of the
Erebus and the Terror, Franklin's two vessels. It was then that we saw the
admiral's old friend, Dr. Richardson, at the age of seventy, go to Canada, and
ascend Coppermine River as far as the Polar Sea; and James Ross, commanding
the Enterprise and Investigation, set out from Uppernawik in 1848 and arrived at
Cape York, where we now are. Every day he threw a tub containing papers into
the sea, for the purpose of making known his whereabouts. During the mists he
caused the cannon to be fired, and had sky-rockets sent up at night along with
Bengal lights, and kept under sail continually. He wintered in Port Leopold from
1848 to 1849, where he took possession of a great number of white foxes, and
caused brass collars, upon which was engraved the indication of the whereabouts
of ships and the store depots, to be riveted on their necks. Afterwards they were
dispersed in all directions; in the following spring he began to search the coasts
of North Somerset on sledges in the midst of dangers and privations from which
almost all his men fell ill or lame. He built up cairns in which he inclosed brass
cylinders with the necessary memoranda for rallying the lost expedition. While
he was away his lieutenant McClure explored the northern coasts of Barrow
Strait, but without result. James Ross had under his orders two officers who,
later on, were destined to become celebrities--McClure, who cleared the North-
West passage, and McClintock, who discovered the remains of Sir John
Franklin."


"Yes; they are now two good and brave English captains. You know the
history of these seas well, doctor, and you will benefit us by telling us about it.
There is always something to be gained by hearing about such daring attempts."

"Well, to finish all I know about James Ross: he tried to reach Melville
Island by a more westerly direction, but he nearly lost his two vessels, for he was
caught by the ice and driven back into Baffin's Sea."

"Driven back?" repeated Hatteras, contracting his brows; "forced back in
spite of himself?"

"Yes, and without having discovered anything," continued the doctor; "and
ever since that year, 1850, English vessels have never ceased to plough these
seas, and a reward of twenty thousand pounds was offered to any one who might
find the crews of the Erebus and Terror. Captains Kellett and Moore had already,
in 1848, attempted to get through Behring's Strait. In 1850 and 1851 Captain
Austin wintered in Cornwallis Island; Captain Parry, on board the Assistance and
the Resolute, explored Wellington Channel; John Ross, the venerable hero of the
magnetic pole, set out again with his yacht, the Felix, in search of his friend; the
brig Prince Albert went on a first cruise at the expense of Lady Franklin; and,
lastly, two American ships, sent out by Grinnell with Captain Haven, were
drifted out of Wellington Channel and thrown back into Lancaster Strait. It was
during this year that McClintock, who was then Austin's lieutenant, pushed on as
far as Melville Island and Cape Dundas, the extreme points attained by Parry in
1819; it was then that he found traces of Franklin's wintering on Beechey Island
in 1845."

"Yes," answered Hatteras, "three of his sailors had been buried there--three
men more fortunate than the others!"

The doctor nodded in approval of Hatteras's remark, and continued:

"During 1851 and 1852 the Prince Albert went on a second voyage under the
French lieutenant, Bellot; he wintered at Batty Bay, in Prince Regent Strait,
explored the south-west of Somerset, and reconnoitred the coast as far as Cape
Walker. During that time the Enterprise and the Investigator returned to England
and passed under the command of Collinson and McClure for the purpose of
rejoining Kellett and Moore in Behring's Straits; whilst Collinson came back to
winter at Hong-Kong, McClure made the best of his way onward, and after
being obliged to winter three times--from 1850 to '51; from 1851 to '52; and
from 1852 to '53--he discovered the North-West passage without learning
anything of Franklin's fate. During 1852 and '53 a new expedition composed of
three sailing vessels, the Resolute, the Assistance, the North Star, and two
steamers, the Pioneer and Intrepid, set sail under the command of Sir Edward
Belcher, with Captain Kellett under him; Sir Edward visited Wellington Channel,


wintered in Northumberland Bay, and went over the coast, whilst Kellett,
pushing on to Bridport in Melville Island, explored, without success, that part of
the boreal land. It was at this time that news was spread in England that two
ships, abandoned in the midst of icebergs, had been descried near the coast of
New Scotland. Lady Franklin immediately had prepared the little screw Isabelle,
and Captain Inglefield, after having steamed up Baffin's Bay as far as Victoria
Point on the eightieth parallel, came back to Beechey Island no more successful
than his predecessors. At the beginning of 1855, Grinnell, an American, fitted up
a fresh expedition, and Captain Kane tried to penetrate to the Pole----"

"But he didn't do it," cried Hatteras violently; "and what he didn't do we will,
with God's help!"

"I know, captain," answered the doctor, "and I mention it because this
expedition is of necessity connected with the search for Franklin. But it had no
result. I was almost forgetting to tell you that the Admiralty, considering
Beechey Island as the general rendezvous of expeditions, charged Captain
Inglefield, who then commanded the steamer Phoenix, to transport provisions
there in 1853; Inglefield set out with Lieutenant Bellot, and lost the brave officer
who for the second time had devoted his services to England; we can have more
precise details upon this catastrophe, as our boatswain, Johnson, was witness to
the misfortune."

"Lieutenant Bellot was a brave Frenchman," said Hatteras, "and his memory
is honoured in England."

"By that time," continued the doctor, "Belcher's fleet began to come back
little by little; not all of it, for Sir Edward had been obliged to abandon the
Assistance in 1854, as McClure had done with the Investigator in 1853. In the
meantime, Dr. Rae, in a letter dated the 29th of July, 1854, and addressed from
Repulse Bay, which he had succeeded in reaching through America, sent word
that the Esquimaux of King William's Land were in possession of different
objects taken from the wrecks of the Erebus and Terror; there was then not the
least doubt about the fate of the expedition; the Phoenix, the North Star, and
Collinson's vessel then came back to England, leaving the Arctic Seas
completely abandoned by English ships. But if the Government seemed to have
lost all hope it was not so with Lady Franklin, and with the remnants of her
fortune she fitted out the Fox, commanded by McClintock, who set sail in 1857,
and wintered in the quarters where you made your apparition; he reached
Beechey Island on the 11th of August, 1858, wintered a second time in Bellot's
Strait, began his search again in February, 1859, and on the 6th of May found the
document which cleared away all doubt about the fate of the Erebus and the
Terror, and returned to England at the end of the year. That is all that has


happened for fifteen years in these fateful countries, and since the return of the
Fox not a single vessel has returned to attempt success in the midst of these
dangerous seas."

"Well," replied Hatteras, "we will attempt it."


CHAPTER XV


THE "FORWARD" DRIVEN BACK SOUTH


The weather cleared up towards evening, and land was clearly distinguished
between Cape Sepping and Cape Clarence, which runs east, then south, and is
joined to the coast on the west by a rather low neck of land. The sea at the
entrance to Regent Strait was free from ice, with the exception of an
impenetrable ice-bank, a little further than Port Leopold, which threatened to
stop the Forward in her north-westerly course. Hatteras was greatly vexed, but
he did not show it; he was obliged to have recourse to petards in order to force
an entrance to Port Leopold; he reached it on Sunday, the 27th of May; the brig
was solidly anchored to the enormous icebergs, which were as upright, hard, and
solid as rocks.

The captain, followed by the doctor, Johnson, and his dog Dick, immediately
leaped upon the ice, and soon reached land. Dick leaped with joy, for since he
had recognised the captain he had become more sociable, keeping his grudge
against certain men of the crew for whom his master had no more friendship
than he. The port was not then blocked up with ice that the east winds generally
heaped up there; the earth, intersected with peaks, offered at their summits
graceful undulations of snow. The house and lantern erected by James Ross were
still in a tolerable state of preservation; but the provisions seemed to have been
ransacked by foxes and bears, the recent traces of which were easily
distinguished. Men, too, had had something to do with the devastation, for a few
remains of Esquimaux huts remained upon the shores of the Bay. The six graves
inclosing the remains of the six sailors of the Enterprise and the Investigator
were recognisable by a slight swelling of the ground; they had been respected
both by men and animals. In placing his foot for the first time on boreal land, the
doctor experienced much emotion. It is impossible to imagine the feelings with
which the heart is assailed at the sight of the remains of houses, tents, huts, and
magazines that Nature so marvellously preserves in those cold countries.

"There is that residence," he said to his companions, "which James Ross
himself called the Camp of Refuge; if Franklin's expedition had reached this
spot, it would have been saved. There is the engine which was abandoned here,
and the stove at which the crew of the Prince Albert warmed themselves in
1851. Things have remained just as they were, and any one would think that
Captain Kennedy had only left yesterday. Here is the long boat which sheltered


him and his for a few days, for this Kennedy, separated from his ship, was in
reality saved by Lieutenant Bellot, who braved the October temperature in order
to go to his assistance."

"I knew that brave and worthy officer," said Johnson.

Whilst the doctor was examining with all an antiquarian's enthusiasm the
vestiges of previous winterings, Hatteras was occupied in piling together the
various provisions and articles of fuel, which were only to be found in very
small quantities. The following day was employed in transporting them on
board. The doctor, without going too far from the ship, surveyed the country, and
took sketches of the most remarkable points of view. The temperature rose by
degrees, and the heaped-up snow began to melt. The doctor made an almost
complete collection of northern birds, such as gulls, divers, eider-down ducks,
which are very much like common ducks, with white breasts and backs, blue
bellies, the top of the head blue, and the remainder of the plumage white, shaded
with green; several of them had already their breasts stripped of that beautiful
down with which the male and female line their nests. The doctor also perceived
large seals taking breath on the surface of the ice, but could not shoot one. In his
excursions he discovered the high water mark, a stone upon which the following
signs are engraved:

(E. I.) 1849,

and which indicate the passage of the Enterprise and Investigator; he pushed
forward as far as Cape Clarence to the spot where John and James Ross, in 1833,
waited with so much impatience for the breaking up of the ice. The land was
strewn with skulls and bones of animals, and traces of Esquimaux habitations
could be still distinguished.

The doctor wanted to raise up a cairn on Port Leopold, and deposit in it a
note indicating the passage of the Forward, and the aim of the expedition. But
Hatteras would not hear of it; he did not want to leave traces behind of which a
competitor might take advantage. In spite of his good motives the doctor was
forced to yield to the captain's will. Shandon blamed the captain's obstinacy,
which prevented any ships following the trace of the Forward in case of
accident. Hatteras would not give way. His lading was finished on Monday
night, and he attempted once more to gain the north by breaking open the ice-
bank; but after dangerous efforts he was forced to resign himself, and to go down
Regent's Channel again; he would not stop at Port Leopold, which, open to-day,
might be closed again to-morrow by an unexpected displacement of ice-fields, a
very frequent phenomenon in these seas, and which navigators ought particularly
to take into consideration.

If Hatteras did not allow his uneasiness to be outwardly perceived, it did not


prevent him feeling it inwardly. His desire was to push northward, whilst, on the
contrary, he found himself constrained to put back southward. Where should he
get to in that case? Should he be obliged to put back to Victoria Harbour, in
Boothia Gulf, where Sir John Ross wintered in 1833? Would he find Bellot Strait
open at that epoch, and could he ascend Peel Strait by rounding North Somerset?
Or, again, should he, like his predecessors, find himself captured during several
winters, and be compelled to exhaust his strength and provisions? These fears
were fermenting in his brain; he must decide one way or other. He heaved about,
and struck out south. The width of Prince Regent's Channel is about the same
from Port Leopold to Adelaide Bay. The Forward, more favoured than the ships
which had preceded her, and of which the greater number had required more
than a month to descend the channel, even in a more favourable season, made
her way rapidly amongst the icebergs; it is true that other ships, with the
exception of the Fox, had no steam at their disposal, and had to endure the
caprices of an uncertain and often foul wind.

In general the crew showed little wish to push on with the enterprising
Hatteras; the men were only too glad to perceive that the vessel was taking a
southerly direction. Hatteras would have liked to go on regardless of
consequences.

The Forward rushed along under the pressure of her engines, the smoke from
which twisted round the shining points of the icebergs; the weather was
constantly changing from dry cold to snowy fogs. The brig, which drew little
water, sailed along the west coast; Hatteras did not wish to miss the entrance to
Bellot Strait, as the only outlet to the Gulf of Boothia on the south was the strait,
only partially known to the Fury and the Hecla; if he missed the Bellot Strait, he
might be shut up without possibility of egress.

In the evening the Forward was in sight of Elwin Bay, known by its high
perpendicular rocks; on the Tuesday morning Batty Bay was sighted, where the
Prince Albert anchored for its long wintering on the 10th of September, 1851.
The doctor swept the whole coast with his telescope. It was from this point that
the expeditions radiated that established the geographical configuration of North
Somerset. The weather was clear, and the profound ravines by which the bay is
surrounded could be clearly distinguished.

The doctor and Johnson were perhaps the only beings on board who took any
interest in these deserted countries. Hatteras was always intent upon his maps,
and said little; his taciturnity increased as the brig got more and more south; he
often mounted the poop, and there with folded arms, and eyes lost in vacancy, he
stood for hours. His orders, when he gave any, were curt and rough. Shandon
kept a cold silence, and kept himself so much aloof by degrees that at last he had


no relations with Hatteras except those exacted by the service; James Wall
remained devoted to Shandon, and regulated his conduct accordingly. The
remainder of the crew waited for something to turn up, ready to take any
advantage in their own interest. There was no longer that unity of thought and
communion of ideas on board which are so necessary for the accomplishment of
anything great, and this Hatteras knew to his sorrow.

During the day two whales were perceived rushing towards the south; a
white bear was also seen, and was shot at without any apparent success. The
captain knew the value of an hour under the circumstances, and would not allow
the animal to be chased.

On Wednesday morning the extremity of Regent's Channel was passed; the
angle on the west coast was followed by a deep curve in the land. By consulting
his map the doctor recognised the point of Somerset House, or Fury Point.

"There," said he to his habitual companion--"there is the very spot where the
first English ship, sent into these seas in 1815, was lost, during the third of
Parry's voyages to the Pole; the Fury was so damaged by the ice on her second
wintering, that her crew were obliged to desert her and return to England on
board her companion ship the Hecla."

"That shows the advantage of having a second ship," answered Johnson. "It
is a precaution that Polar navigators ought not to neglect, but Captain Hatteras
wasn't the sort of man to trouble himself with another ship."

"Do you think he is imprudent, Johnson?" asked the doctor.

"T? I think nothing, Mr. Clawbonny. Do you see those stakes over there with
some rotten tent-rags still hanging to them?"

"Yes; that's where Parry disembarked his provisions from his ship, and, if I
remember rightly, the roof of his tent was a topsail."

"Everything must be greatly changed since 1825!"

"Not so much as any one might think. John Ross owed the health and safety
of his crew to that fragile habitation in 1829. When the Prince Albert sent an
expedition there in 1851, it was still existing; Captain Kennedy had it repaired,
nine years ago now. It would be interesting to visit it, but Hatteras isn't in the
humour to stop!"

"I daresay he is right, Mr. Clawbonny; if time is money in England, here it is
life, and a day's or even an hour's delay might make all the difference."

During the day of Thursday, the 1st of June, the Forward cut across Creswell
Bay; from Fury Point the coast rose towards the north in perpendicular rocks
three hundred feet high; it began to get lower towards the south; some snow
summits looked like neatly-cut tables, whilst others were shaped like pyramids,
and had other strange forms.


The weather grew milder during that day, but was not so clear; land was lost
to sight, and the thermometer went up to thirty-two degrees; seafowl fluttered
about, the flocks of wild ducks were seen flying north; the crew could divest
themselves of some of their garments, and the influence of the Arctic summer
began to be felt. Towards evening the Forward doubled Cape Garry at a quarter
of a mile from the shore, where the soundings gave from ten to twelve fathoms;
from thence she kept near the coast as far as Brentford Bay. It was under this
latitude that Bellot Strait was to be met with; a strait the existence of which Sir
John Ross did not even guess at during his expedition in 1828; his maps
indicated an uninterrupted coast-line, whose irregularities he noted with the
utmost care; the entrance to the strait must therefore have been blocked up by ice
at the time. It was really discovered by Kennedy in April, 1852, and he gave it
the name of his lieutenant, Bellot, as "a just tribute," he said, "to the important
services rendered to our expedition by the French officer."


CHAPTER XVI


THE MAGNETIC POLE


Hatteras felt his anxiety increase as he neared the strait; the fate of his
voyage depended upon it; up till now he had done more than his predecessors,
the most fortunate of whom, McClintock, had taken fifteen months to reach this
part of the Polar Seas; but it was little or nothing if he did not succeed in clearing
Bellot Strait; he could not retrace his steps, and would be blocked up till the
following year.

He trusted the care of examining the coast to no one but himself; he mounted
the crow's nest and passed several hours there during the morning of Saturday.
The crew perfectly understood the ship's position; profound silence reigned on
board; the engine slackened steam, and the Forward kept as near land as
possible; the coast bristled with icebergs, which the warmest summers do not
melt; an experienced eye alone could distinguish an opening between them.
Hatteras compared his maps with the land. As the sun showed himself for an
instant towards noon, he caused Shandon and Wall to take a pretty exact
observation, which was shouted to him. All the crew suffered the tortures of
anxiety for half the day, but towards two o'clock these words were shouted from
the top of the mizenmast:

"Veer to the west, all steam on."

The brig instantly obeyed; her prow was directed towards the point
indicated; the sea foamed under the screws, and the Forward, with all speed on,
entered between two ice-streams. The road was found, Hatteras descended upon
deck, and the ice-master took his place.

"Well, captain,” said the doctor, "we are in the famous strait at last."

"Yes," answered Hatteras, lowering his voice; "but getting in isn't everything;
we must get out too," and so saying he regained his cabin.

"He's right," said the doctor; "we are here in a sort of mousetrap, with
scarcely enough space for working the brig, and if we are forced to winter in the
strait!... Well, we shan't be the first that have had to do it, and they got over it,
and so shall we."

The doctor was not mistaken. It was in that very place, in a little sheltered
harbour called Kennedy Harbour by McClintock himself, that the Fox wintered
in 1858. The high granite chain and the steep cliffs of the two banks were clearly
discernible.


Bellot Strait is seventeen miles long and a mile wide, and about six or seven
fathoms deep. It lies between mountains whose height is estimated at 1,600 feet.
It separates North Somerset from Boothia Land.

It is easy to understand that there is not much elbow-room for vessels in such
a strait. The Forward advanced slowly, but it did advance; tempests are frequent
in the strait, and the brig did not escape them; by Hatteras's order all sails were
furled; but, notwithstanding all precautions, the brig was much knocked about;
the waves dashed over her, and her smoke fled towards the east with astonishing
rapidity; her course was not certain amongst the moving ice; the barometer fell;
it was difficult to stop on deck, and most of the men stayed below to avoid
useless suffering.

Hatteras, Johnson, and Shandon remained on the poop in spite of the gales of
snow and rain; as usual the doctor had asked himself what would be the most
disagreeable thing he could do, and answered himself by going on deck at once;
it was impossible to hear and difficult to see one another, so that he kept his
reflections to himself. Hatteras tried to see through the fog; he calculated that
they would be at the mouth of the strait at six o'clock, but when the time came all
issue seemed closed up; he was obliged to wait and anchor the brig to an iceberg;
but he stopped under pressure all night.

The weather was frightful. The Forward threatened to break her chains at
every instant; it was feared that the iceberg to which they were anchored, torn
away at its base under the violent west wind, would float away with the brig.
The officers were constantly on the look-out and under extreme apprehension;
along with the snow there fell a perfect hail of ice torn off from the surface of the
icebergs by the strength of the wind; it was like a shower of arrows bristling in
the atmosphere. The temperature rose singularly during this terrible night; the
thermometer marked fifty-seven degrees, and the doctor, to his great
astonishment, thought he saw flashes of lightning in the south, followed by the
roar of far-off thunder that seemed to corroborate the testimony of the whaler
Scoresby, who observed a similar phenomenon above the sixty-fifth parallel.
Captain Parry was also witness to a similar meteorological wonder in 1821.

Towards five o'clock in the morning the weather changed with astonishing
rapidity; the temperature went down to freezing point, the wind turned north, and
became calmer. The western opening to the strait was in sight, but entirely
obstructed. Hatteras looked eagerly at the coast, asking himself if the passage
really existed. However, the brig got under way, and glided slowly amongst the
ice-streams, whilst the icebergs pressed noisily against her planks, the packs at
that epoch were still from six to seven feet thick; they were obliged carefully to
avoid their pressure, for if the brig had resisted them she would have run the risk


of being lifted up and turned over on her side. At noon, for the first time, they
could admire a magnificent solar phenomenon, a halo with two parhelia; the
doctor observed it, and took its exact dimensions; the exterior bow was only
visible over an extent of thirty degrees on each side of its horizontal diameter;
the two images of the sun were remarkably clear; the colours of the luminous
bows proceeded from inside to outside, and were red, yellow, green, and very
light blue--in short, white light without any assignable exterior limit. The doctor
remembered the ingenious theory of Thomas Young about these meteors; this
natural philosopher supposed that certain clouds composed of prisms of ice are
suspended in the atmosphere; the rays of the sun that fall on the prisms are
decomposed at angles of sixty and ninety degrees. Halos cannot, therefore, exist
in a calm atmosphere. The doctor thought this theory very probable. Sailors
accustomed to the boreal seas generally consider this phenomenon as the
precursor of abundant snow. If their observation was just, the position of the
Forward became very difficult. Hatteras, therefore, resolved to go on fast; during
the remainder of the day and following night he did not take a minute's rest,
sweeping the horizon with his telescope, taking advantage of the least opening,
and losing no occasion of getting out of the strait.

But in the moming he was obliged to stop before the insuperable ice-bank.
The doctor joined him on the poop. Hatteras went with him apart where they
could talk without fear of being overheard.

"We are in for it," began Hatteras; "it is impossible to go any further."

"Is there no means of getting out?" asked the doctor.

"None. All the powder in the Forward would not make us gain half a mile!"

"What shall we do, then?" said the doctor.

"I don't know. This cursed year has been unfavourable from the beginning."

"Well," answered the doctor, "if we must winter here, we must. One place is
as good as another."

"But," said Hatteras, lowering his voice, "we must not winter here, especially
in the month of June. Wintering is full of physical and moral danger. The crew
would be unmanageable during a long inaction in the midst of real suffering. I
thought I should be able to stop much nearer the Pole than this!"

"Luck would have it so, or Baffin's Bay wouldn't have been closed."

"It was open enough for that American!" cried Hatteras in a rage.

"Come, Hatteras," said the doctor, interrupting him on purpose, "to-day is
only the 5th of June; don't despair; a passage may suddenly open up before us;
you know that the ice has a tendency to break up into several blocks, even in the
calmest weather, as if a force of repulsion acted upon the different parts of it; we
may find the sea free at any minute."


"If that minute comes we shall take advantage of it. It is quite possible that,
once out of Bellot Strait, we shall be able to go north by Peel Strait or
McClintock Channel, and then----"

"Captain," said James Wall, who had come up while Hatteras was speaking,
"the ice nearly carries off our rudder."

"Well," answered Hatteras, "we must risk it. We must be ready day and night.
You must do all you can to protect it, Mr. Wall, but I can't have it removed."

"But----" added Wall.

"That is my business," said Hatteras severely, and Wall went back to his post.

"I would give five years of my life," said Hatteras, in a rage, "to be up north.
I know no more dangerous passage. To add to the difficulty, the compass is no
guide at this distance from the magnetic pole: the needle is constantly shifting its
direction."

"I acknowledge," answered the doctor, "that navigation is difficult, but we
knew what we had to expect when we began our enterprise, and we ought not to
be surprised at it."

"Ah, doctor, my crew is no longer what it was; the officers are spoiling the
men. I could make them do what I want by offering them a pecuniary reward,
but I am not seconded by my officers, but they shall pay dearly for it!"

"You are exaggerating, Hatteras."

"No, I am not. Do you think the crew is sorry for the obstacles that I meet
with? On the contrary, they hope they will make me abandon my projects. They
do not complain now, and they won't as long as the Forward is making for the
south. The fools! They think they are getting nearer England! But once let me go
north and you'll see how they'll change! I swear, though, that no living being will
make me deviate from my line of conduct. Only let me find a passage, that's all!"

One of the captain's wishes was fulfilled soon enough. There was a sudden
change during the evening; under some influence of the wind, the current, or the
temperature, the ice-fields were separated; the Forward went along boldly,
breaking up the ice with her steel prow; she sailed along all night, and the next
morming about six cleared Bellot Strait. But that was all; the northern passage
was completely obstructed--to the great disgust of Hatteras. However, he had
sufficient strength of character to hide his disappointment, and as if the only
passage open was the one he preferred, he let the Forward sail down Franklin
Strait again; not being able to get up Peel Strait, he resolved to go round Prince
of Wales's Land to get into McClintock Channel. But he felt he could not deceive
Shandon and Wall as to the extent of his disappointment. The day of the 6th of
June was uneventful; the sky was full of snow, and the prognostics of the halo
were fulfilled.


During thirty-six hours the Forward followed the windings of Boothia Land,
unable to approach Prince of Wales's Land; the captain counted upon getting
supplies at Beechey Island; he arrived on the Thursday at the extremity of
Franklin Strait, where he again found the road to the north blocked up. It was
enough to make him despair; he could not even retrace his steps; the icebergs
pushed him onwards, and he saw the passages close up behind him as if there
never had existed open sea where he had passed an hour before. The Forward
was, therefore, not only prevented from going northwards, but could not stop
still an instant for fear of being caught, and she fled before the ice as a ship flies
before a storm.

On Friday, the 8th of June, they arrived near the shore of Boothia, at the
entrance to James Ross Strait, which they were obliged to avoid, as its only issue
is on the west, near the American coasts.

Observations taken at noon from this point gave 70 degrees 5 minutes 17
seconds latitude, and 96 degrees 46 minutes 45 seconds longitude; when the
doctor heard that he consulted his map, and saw they were at the magnetic pole,
at the very place where James Ross, the nephew of Sir John, had fixed it. The
land was low near the coast, and at about a mile's distance became slightly
elevated, sixty feet only. The Forward's boiler wanted cleaning, and the captain
caused the brig to be anchored to an ice-field, and allowed the doctor and the
boatswain to land. He himself cared for nothing but his pet project, and stayed in
his cabin, consulting his map of the Pole.

The doctor and his companion easily succeeded in reaching land; the doctor
took a compass to make experiments with. He wished to try if James Ross's
conclusions hold good. He easily discovered the limestone heap raised by Ross;
he ran to it; an opening allowed him to see, in the interior, the tin case in which
James Ross had placed the official report of his discoveries. No living being
seemed to have visited this desolate coast for the last thirty years. In this spot a
loadstone needle, suspended as delicately as possible, immediately moved into
an almost vertical position under the magnetic influence; if the centre of
attraction was not immediately under the needle, it could only be at a trifling
distance. The doctor made the experiment carefully, and found that the imperfect
instruments of James Ross had given his vertical needle an inclination of 89
degrees 59 minutes, making the real magnetic point at a minute's distance from
the spot, but that his own at a little distance gave him an inclination of 90
degrees.

"Here is the exact spot of the world's magnetic pole," said the doctor, rapping
the earth.

"Then," said the boatswain, "there's no loadstone mountain, after all."


"Of course not; that mountain was only a credulous hypothesis. As you see,
there isn't the least mountain capable of attracting ships, of attracting their iron
anchor after anchor and nail after nail, and you see it respects your shoes as
much as any other land on the globe."

"Then how do you explain----"

"Nothing is explained, Johnson; we don't know enough for that yet. But it is
certain, exact, mathematical, that the magnetic pole is in this very spot!"

"Ah, Mr. Clawbonny! how happy the captain would be to say as much of the
boreal pole!"

"He will some day, Johnson, you will see."

"T hope he will," answered the boatswain.

He and the doctor elevated a cairn on the exact spot where the experiment
had been made, and returned on board at five o'clock in the evening.


CHAPTER XVII


THE FATE OF SIR JOHN FRANKLIN


The Forward succeeded in cutting straight across James Ross Strait, but not
without difficulty; the crew were obliged to work the saws and use petards, and
they were worn out with fatigue. Happily the temperature was bearable, and
thirty degrees higher than that experienced by James Ross at the same epoch.
The thermometer marked thirty-four degrees.

On Saturday they doubled Cape Felix at the northern extremity of King
William's Land, one of the middle-sized isles of the northern seas. The crew
there experienced a strong and painful sensation, and many a sad look was
turned towards the island as they sailed by the coast. This island had been the
theatre of the most terrible tragedy of modern times. Some miles to the west the
Erebus and the Terror had been lost for ever. The sailors knew about the
attempts made to find Admiral Franklin and the results, but they were ignorant
of the affecting details of the catastrophe. While the doctor was following the
progress of the ship on his map, several of them, Bell, Bolton, and Simpson,
approached and entered into conversation with him. Their comrades, animated
by curiosity, soon followed them; while the brig flew along with extreme
rapidity, and the coast with its bays, capes, and promontories passed before their
eyes like a gigantic panorama.

Hatteras was marching up and down the poop with quick steps. The doctor,
on the deck, looked round, and saw himself surrounded by almost the whole
crew. He saw how powerful a recital would be in such a situation, and he
continued the conversation begun with Johnson as follows:--

"You know how Franklin began, my friends; he was a cabin-boy like Cook
and Nelson; after having employed his youth in great maritime expeditions, he
resolved in 1845 to launch out in search of the North-West passage; he
commanded the Erebus and the Terror, two vessels, already famous, that had just
made an Antarctic campaign under James Ross, in 1840. The Erebus, equipped
by Franklin, carried a crew of seventy men, officers and sailors, with Fitz-James
as captain; Gore and Le Vesconte, lieutenants; Des Voeux, Sargent, and Couch,
boatswains; and Stanley as surgeon. The Terror had sixty-eight men, Captain
Crozier; Lieutenants Little, Hodgson, and Irving; Horesby and Thomas were the
boatswains, and Peddie the surgeon. In the names on the map of the capes,
Straits, points, and channels, you may read those of these unfortunate men, not


one of whom was destined ever again to see his native land. There were a
hundred and thirty-eight men in all! We know that Franklin's last letters were
addressed from Disko Island, and were dated July 12th, 1845. 'I hope,’ he said,
‘to get under way to-night for Lancaster Strait.' What happened after his
departure from Disko Bay? The captains of two whalers, the Prince of Wales and
the Enterprise, perceived the two ships in Melville Bay for the last time, and
after that day nothing was heard of them. However, we can follow Franklin in
his westerly course: he passed through Lancaster and Barrow Straits, and arrived
at Beechey Island, where he passed the winter of 1845 and '46."

"But how do you know all this?" asked Bell, the carpenter.

"By three tombs which Austin discovered on that island in 1850. Three of
Franklin's sailors were buried there, and by a document which was found by
Lieutenant Hobson, of the Fox, which bears the date of April 25th, 1848, we
know that after their wintering the Erebus and the Terror went up Wellington
Strait as far as the seventy-seventh parallel; but instead of continuing their route
northwards, which was, probably, not practicable, they returned south."

"And that was their ruin!" said a grave voice. "Safety lay to the north."

Every one turned round. Hatteras, leaning on the rail of the poop, had just
uttered that terrible observation.

"There is not a doubt," continued the doctor, "that Franklin's intention was to
get back to the American coast; but tempests stopped him, and on the 12th
September, 1846, the two ships were seized by the ice, at a few miles from here,
to the north-west of Cape Felix; they were dragged along N.N.W. to Victoria
Point over there," said the doctor, pointing to a part of the sea. "Now," he
continued, "the ships were not abandoned till the 22nd of April, 1848. What
happened during these nineteen months? What did the poor unfortunate men do?
They, doubtless, explored the surrounding land, attempting any chance of safety,
for the admiral was an energetic man, and if he did not succeed----"

"Very likely his crew betrayed him," added Hatteras.

The sailors dared not raise their eyes; these words pricked their conscience.

"To end my tale, the fatal document informs us also that John Franklin
succumbed to fatigue on the 11th of June, 1847. Honour to his memory!" said
the doctor, taking off his hat. His audience imitated him in silence.

"What became of the poor fellows for the next ten months after they had lost
their chief? They remained on board their vessels, and only resolved to abandon
them in April, 1848; a hundred and five men out of a hundred and thirty-eight
were still living; thirty-three were dead! Then Captain Crozier and Captain Fitz-
James raised a cairn on Victory Point, and there deposited their last document.
See, my friends, we are passing the point now! You can still see the remains of


the cairn placed on the extreme point, reached by John Ross in 1831. There is
Jane Franklin Cape. There is Franklin Point. There is Le Vesconte Point. There is
Erebus Bay, where the boat made out of the debris of one of the vessels was
found on a sledge. Silver spoons, provisions in abundance, chocolate, tea, and
religious books were found there too. The hundred and five survivors, under
Captain Crozier, started for Great Fish River. Where did they get to? Did they
succeed in reaching Hudson's Bay? Did any survive? What became of them after
this last departure?"

"IT will tell you what became of them," said John Hatteras in a firm voice.
"Yes, they did try to reach Hudson's Bay, and they split up into several parties!
Yes, they did make for the south! A letter from Dr. Rae in 1854 contained the
information that in 1850 the Esquimaux had met on King William's Land a
detachment of forty men travelling on the ice, and dragging a boat, thin,
emaciated, worn out by fatigue and suffering! Later on they discovered thirty
corpses on the continent and five on a neighbouring island, some half-buried,
some left without burial, some under a boat turned upside down, others under the
remains of a tent; here an officer with his telescope on his shoulder and a loaded
gun at his side, further on a boiler with the remnants of a horrible meal! When
the Admiralty received these tidings it begged the Hudson's Bay Company to
send its most experienced agents to the scene. They descended Back River to its
mouth. They visited the islands of Montreal, Maconochie, and Ogle Point. But
they discovered nothing. All the poor wretches had died from misery, suffering,
and hunger, whilst trying to prolong their existence by the dreadful resource of
cannibalism. That is what became of them on the southern route. Well! Do you
still wish to march in their footsteps?"

His trembling voice, his passionate gestures and beaming face, produced an
indescribable effect. The crew, excited by its emotion before this fatal land, cried
out with one voice: "To the north! To the north!"

"Yes, to the north! Safety and glory lie to the north. Heaven is for us! The
wind is changing; the pass is free!"

So saying, Hatteras gave orders to turn the vessel; the sailors went to work
with alacrity; the ice streams got clear little by little; the Forward, with all steam
on, made for McClintock Channel. Hatteras was right when he counted upon a
more open sea; he followed up the supposed route taken by Franklin, sailing
along the western coast of Prince of Wales's Land, then pretty well known,
whilst the opposite shore is still unknown. It was evident that the breaking up of
the ice had taken place in the eastern locks, for this strait appeared entirely free;
the Forward made up for lost time; she fled along so quickly that she passed
Osborne Bay on the 14th of June, and the extreme points attained by the


expeditions of 1851. Icebergs were still numerous, but the sea did not threaten to
quit the keel of the Forward.


CHAPTER XVIII


THE NORTHERN ROUTE


The crew seemed to have returned to its habits of discipline and obedience.
There was little fatiguing work to do, and they had a good deal of leisure. The
temperature kept above freezing point, and it seemed as if the thaw had removed
the great obstacles to navigation.

Dick, now sociable and familiar, had made great friends with Dr. Clawbonny.
But as in most friendships one friend has to give way to the other, it must be
acknowledged it was not the dog. Dick did what he liked with the doctor, who
obeyed him as if he were the dog. He was amiable with most of the sailors and
officers on board, only by instinct, doubtless, he shunned Shandon's society; he
also kept up a grudge against Pen and Foker; he vented his hatred of them by
growling at their approach. But they dare not now attack the captain's dog--his
"familiar," as Clifton called him. On the whole the crew had plucked up courage
again and worked well.

"It seems to me," said James Wall one day to Richard Shandon, "that our
men took the captain's speech seriously; they no longer seem to be doubtful of
success."

"The more fools they!" answered Shandon. "If they reflected, if they
examined the situation, they would see that we are going out of one imprudence
into another."

"But," continued Wall, "the sea is open now, and we are getting back into
well-known tracks; aren't you exaggerating a bit, Shandon?"

"No, I am not exaggerating; the dislike I feel to Hatteras is not blinding me.
Have you seen the coal-holes lately?"

"No," answered Wall.

"Well, then, go and examine them: you will see how much there's left. He
ought to have navigated under sail, and have kept the engine for currents and
contrary winds; he ought only to have used his coal where he was obliged; who
can tell where we shall be kept, and for how many years? But Hatteras only
thinks about getting north. Whether the wind is contrary or not, he goes along at
full steam, and if things go on as they are doing now, we shall soon be in a pretty
pickle."

"If what you say is true, it is very serious."

"Yes, it is, because of the wintering. What shall we do without coal in a


country where even the thermometer freezes?"

"But, if I am not mistaken, the captain counts upon renewing his stock of
coal at Beechey Island. It appears there is a large provision there."

"And suppose we can't reach Beechey Island, what will become of us then?"

"You are right, Shandon; Hatteras seems to me very imprudent; but why
don't you expostulate with him on the subject?"

"No," said Shandon, with ill-concealed bitterness, "I won't say a word. It is
nothing to do with me now. I shall wait to see what turns up; I shall obey orders,
and not give my opinion where it isn't wanted."

"Allow me to tell you that you are in the wrong, Shandon; you have as much
interest in setting yourself against the captain's imprudence as we have."

"He wouldn't listen to me if I were to speak; do you think he would?"

Wall dared not answer in the affirmative, and he added--

"But perhaps he would listen to the crew."

"The crew!" answered Shandon, shrugging his shoulders; "you don't know
the crew. The men know they are nearing the 72nd parallel, and that they will
earn a thousand pounds for every degree above that."

"The captain knew what he was doing when he offered them that."

"Of course he did, and for the present he can do what he likes with them."

"What do you mean?"

"IT mean that while they have nothing to do, and there is an open sea, they
will go on right enough; but wait till difficulty and danger come, and you will
see how much they'll think about the money!"

"Then you don't think Hatteras will succeed?"

"No, he will not; to succeed in such an enterprise there must be a good
understanding between him and his officers, and that does not exist. Hatteras is a
madman; all his past career proves it. Well, we shall see; perhaps circumstances
will force them to give the command to a less adventurous captain."

"Still," said Wall, shaking his head, "he will always have on his side----"

"Dr. Clawbonny, a man who only cares for science, and Johnson, a sailor
who only cares to obey, and perhaps two more men like Bell, the carpenter; four
at the most, and we are eighteen on board! No, Wall, Hatteras has not got the
confidence of his men, and he knows it, so he bribes them; he profited cleverly
by the Franklin affair, but that won't last, I tell you, and if he doesn't reach
Beechey Island he's a lost man!"

"Suppose the crew should take it into its head----"

"Don't tell the crew what I think," answered Shandon quickly; "the men will
soon see for themselves. Besides, just now we must go north. Who knows if
Hatteras won't find that way will bring us back sooner? At the end of


McClintock Channel lies Melville Bay, and from thence go the straits that lead to
Baffin's Bay. Hatteras must take care! The way to the east is easier than the road
to the north!"

Hatteras was not mistaken in his opinion that Shandon would betray him if
he could. Besides, Shandon was right in attributing the contentment of the men
to the hope of gain. Clifton had counted exactly how much each man would
have. Without reckoning the captain and the doctor, who would not expect a
share in the bounty-money, there remained sixteen men to divide it amongst. If
ever they succeeded in reaching the Pole, each man would have 1,125 pounds--
that is to say, a fortune. It would cost the captain 18,000 pounds, but he could
afford it. The thoughts of the money inflamed the minds of the crew, and they
were now as anxious to go north as before they had been eager to turn south. The
Forward during the day of June 16th passed Cape Aworth. Mount Rawlinson
raised its white peaks towards the sky; the snow and fog made it appear colossal,
as they exaggerated its distance; the temperature still kept some degrees above
freezing point; improvised cascades and cataracts showed themselves on the
sides of the mountains, and avalanches roared down with the noise of artillery
discharges. The glaciers, spread out in long white sheets, projected an immense
reverberation into space. Boreal nature, in its struggle with the frost, presented a
splendid spectacle. The brig went very near the coast; on some sheltered rocks
rare heaths were to be seen, the pink flowers lifting their heads timidly out of the
snows, and some meagre lichens of a reddish colour and the shoots of a dwarf
willow.

At last, on the 19th of June, at the famous seventy-third parallel, they
doubled Cape Minto, which forms one of the extremities of Ommaney Bay; the
brig entered Melville Bay, surnamed by Bolton Money Bay; the merry sailors
joked about the name, and made Dr. Clawbonny laugh heartily. Notwithstanding
a strong breeze from the northeast, the Forward made considerable progress, and
on the 23rd of June she passed the 74th degree of latitude. She was in the midst
of Melville Bay, one of the most considerable seas in these regions. This sea was
crossed for the first time by Captain Parry in his great expedition of 1819, and it
was then that his crew earned the prize of 5,000 pounds promised by Act of
Parliament. Clifton remarked that there were two degrees from the 72nd to the
74th; that already placed 125 pounds to his credit. But they told him that a
fortune was not worth much there, and that it was of no use being rich if he
could not drink his riches, and he had better wait till he could roll under a
Liverpool table before he rejoiced and rubbed his hands.


CHAPTER XIX


A WHALE IN SIGHT


Melville Bay, though easily navigable, was not free from ice; ice-fields lay as
far as the utmost limits of the horizon; a few icebergs appeared here and there,
but they were immovable, as if anchored in the midst of the frozen fields. The
Forward, with all steam on, followed the wide passes where it was easy to work
her. The wind changed frequently from one point of the compass to another. The
variability of the wind in the Arctic Seas is a remarkable fact; sometimes a dead
calm is followed in a few minutes by a violent tempest, as the Forward found to
her cost on the 23rd of June in the midst of the immense bay. The more constant
winds blow from off the ice-bank on to the open sea, and are intensely cold. On
that day the thermometer fell several degrees; the wind veered round to the
south, and violent gusts, sweeping over the ice-fields, brought a thick snow
along with them. Hatteras immediately caused the sails that helped the screw to
be furled, but not quickly enough to prevent his little foresail being carried away
in the twinkling of an eye. Hatteras worked his ship with the greatest composure,
and did not leave the deck during the tempest; he was obliged to fly before the
weather and to turn westward. The wind raised up enormous waves, in the midst
of which blocks of ice balanced themselves; these blocks were of all sizes and
shapes, and had been struck off the surrounding ice-fields; the brig was tossed
about like a child's plaything, and morsels of the packs were thrown over her
hull; at one instant she was lying perpendicularly along the side of a liquid
mountain; her steel prow concentrated the light, and shone like a melting metal
bar; at another she was down an abyss, plunging her head into whirlwinds of
snow, whilst her screws, out of the water, turned in space with a sinister noise,
striking the air with their paddles. Rain mixed with the snow and fell in torrents.

The doctor could not miss such an occasion of getting wet to the skin; he
remained on deck, a prey to that emotional admiration which a scientific man
must necessarily feel during such a spectacle. His nearest neighbour could not
have heard him speak, so he said nothing and watched; but whilst watching he
was witness to an odd phenomenon, peculiar to hyperborean regions. The
tempest was confined to a restricted area, and only extended for about three or
four miles; the wind that passes over ice-fields loses much of its strength and
cannot carry its violence far out; the doctor perceived from time to time, through
an opening in the tempest, a calm sky and a quiet sea beyond some ice-fields.


The Forward would therefore only have to take advantage of some channels left
by the ice to find a peaceful navigation again, but she ran the risk of being
thrown on to one of the moving banks which followed the movement of the
swell. However, in a few hours Hatteras succeeded in getting his ship into a calm
sea, whilst the violence of the hurricane spent itself at a few cables' length from
the Forward. Melville Bay no longer presented the same aspect; under the
influence of the winds and the waves a great number of icebergs, detached from
the coast, floated northward, running against one another in every direction.
There were several hundreds of them, but the bay is very wide, and the brig
easily avoided them. The spectacle of these floating masses was magnificent;
they seemed to be having a grand race for it on the open sea. The doctor was
getting quite excited with watching them, when the harpooner, Simpson, came
up and made him look at the changing tints in the sea; they varied from a deep
blue to olive green; long stripes stretched north and south in such decided lines
that the eye could follow each shade out of sight. Sometimes a transparent sheet
of water would follow a perfectly opaque sheet.

"Well, Mr. Clawbonny, what do you think of that?" said Simpson.

"I am of the same opinion as the whaler Scoresby on the nature of the
different coloured waters; blue water has no animalculae, and green water is full
of them. Scoresby has made several experiments on this subject, and I think he is
right."

"Well, sir, I know something else about the colours in the sea, and if I were a
whaler I should be precious glad to see them."

"But I don't see any whales," answered the doctor.

"You won't be long before you do, though, I can tell you. A whaler is lucky
when he meets with those green stripes under this latitude."

"Why?" asked the doctor, who always liked to get information from anybody
who understood what they were talking about.

"Because whales are always found in great quantities in green water."

"What's the reason of that?"

"Because they find plenty of food in them."

"Are you sure of that?"

"T've seen it a hundred times, at least, in Baffin Sea; why shouldn't it be the
same in Melville Bay? Besides, look there, Mr. Clawbonny," added Simpson,
leaning over the barricading.

"Why any one would think it was the wake of a ship!"

"It is an oily substance that the whale leaves behind. The animal can't be far
off!"

The atmosphere was impregnated with a strong oily odour, and the doctor


attentively watched the surface of the water. The prediction of the harpooner was
soon accomplished. Foker called out from the masthead--

"A whale alee!"

All looks turned to the direction indicated. A small spout was perceived
coming up out of the sea about a mile from the brig.

"There she spouts!" cried Simpson, who knew what that meant.

"She has disappeared!" answered the doctor.

"Oh, we could find her again easily enough if necessary!" said Simpson, with
an accent of regret. To his great astonishment, and although no one dared ask for
it, Hatteras gave orders to man the whaler. Johnson went aft to the stern, while
Simpson, harpoon in hand, stood in the bow. They could not prevent the doctor
joining the expedition. The sea was pretty calm. The whaler soon got off, and in
ten minutes was a mile from the brig. The whale had taken in another provision
of air, and had plunged again; but she soon returned to the surface and spouted
out that mixture of gas and mucus that escapes from her air-holes.

"There! There!" said Simpson, pointing to a spot about eight hundred yards
from the boat. It was soon alongside the animal, and as they had seen her from
the brig too, she came nearer, keeping little steam on. The enormous cetacean
disappeared and reappeared as the waves rose and fell, showing its black back
like a rock in open sea. Whales do not swim quickly unless they are pursued, and
this one only rocked itself in the waves. The boat silently approached along the
green water; its opacity prevented the animal seeing the enemy. It is always an
agitating spectacle when a fragile boat attacks one of these monsters; this one
was about 130 feet long, and it is not rare, between the 72nd and the 80th degree,
to meet with whales more than 180 feet long. Ancient writers have described
animals more than 700 feet long, but they drew upon their imagination for their
facts. The boat soon neared the whale; on a sign from Simpson the men rested on
their oars, and brandishing his harpoon, the experienced sailor threw it with all
his strength; it went deep into the thick covering of fat. The wounded whale
struck the sea with its tail and plunged. The four oars were immediately raised
perpendicularly; the cord fastened to the harpoon, and attached to the bow, rolled
rapidly out and dragged the boat along, steered cleverly by Johnson.

The whale got away from the brig and made for the moving icebergs; she
kept on for more than half-an-hour; they were obliged to wet the cord fastened to
the harpoon to prevent it catching fire by rubbing against the boat. When the
whale seemed to be going along a little more slowly, the cord was pulled in little
by little and rolled up; the whale soon reappeared on the surface of the sea,
which she beat with her formidable tail: veritable waterspouts fell in a violent
rain on to the boat. It was getting nearer. Simpson had seized a long lance, and


was preparing to give close battle to the animal, when all at once the whale
glided into a pass between two mountainous icebergs. The pursuit then became
really dangerous.

"The devil!" said Johnson.

"Go ahead," cried Simpson; "we've got her!"

"But we can't follow her into the icebergs!" said Johnson, steering steadily.

"Yes we can!" cried Simpson.

"No, no!" cried some of the sailors.

"Yes, yes!" said others.

During the discussion the whale had got between two floating mountains
which the swell was bringing close together. The boat was being dragged into
this dangerous part when Johnson rushed to the fore, an axe in his hand, and cut
the cord. He was just in time; the two mountains came together with a
tremendous crash, crushing the unfortunate animal.

"The whale's lost!" cried Simpson.

"But we are saved!" answered Johnson.

"Well," said the doctor, who had not moved, "that was worth seeing!"

The crushing force of these ice-mountains is enormous. The whale was
victim to an accident that often happens in these seas. Scoresby relates that in the
course of a single summer thirty whales perished in the same way in Baffin's
Sea; he saw a three-master flattened in a minute between two immense walls of
ice. Other vessels were split through, as if with a lance, by pointed icicles a
hundred feet long, meeting through the planks. A few minutes afterwards the
boat hailed the brig, and was soon in its accustomed place on deck.

"It is a lesson for those who are imprudent enough to adventure into the
channels amongst the ice!" said Shandon in a loud voice.


CHAPTER XX


BEECHEY ISLAND


On the 25th of June the Forward arrived in sight of Cape Dundas at the
north-western extremity of Prince of Wales's Land. There the difficulty of
navigating amongst the ice grew greater. The sea is narrower there, and the line
made by Crozier, Young, Day, Lowther, and Garret Islands, like a chain of forts
before a roadstead, forced the ice-streams to accumulate in this strait. The brig
took from the 25th to the 30th of June to make as much way as she would have
done in one day under any other circumstances; she stopped, retraced her steps,
waiting for a favourable occasion so as not to miss Beechey Island, using a great
deal of coal, as the fires were only moderated when she had to halt, but were
never put out, so that she might be under pressure day and night. Hatteras knew
the extent of his coal provision as well as Shandon, but as he was certain of
getting his provision renewed at Beechey Island he would not lose a minute for
the sake of economy; he had been much delayed by his forced march southward,
and although he had taken the precaution of leaving England before the month of
April, he did not find himself more advanced than preceding expeditions had
been at the same epoch. On the 30th they sighted Cape Walker at the north-
eastern extremity of Prince of Wales's Land; it was the extreme point that
Kennedy and Bellot perceived on the 3rd of May, 1852, after an excursion across
the whole of North Somerset. Before that, in 1851, Captain Ommaney, of the
Austin expedition, had the good luck to revictual his detachments there. This
cape is very high, and remarkable for its reddish-brown colour; from there, when
the weather is clear, the view stretches as far as the entrance to Wellington
Channel. Towards evening they saw Cape Bellot, separated from Cape Walker
by McLeon Bay. Cape Bellot was so named in the presence of the young French
officer, for whom the English expedition gave three cheers. At this spot the coast
is made of yellowish limestone, presenting a very rugged outline; it is defended
by enormous icebergs which the north winds pile up there in a most imposing
way. It was soon lost to sight by the Forward as she opened a passage amongst
the ice to get to Beechey Island through Barrow Strait. Hatteras resolved to go
straight on, and, so as not to be drifted further than the island, scarcely quitted
his post during the following days; he often went to the masthead to look out for
the most advantageous channels. All that pluck, skill, and genius could do he did
while they were crossing the strait. Fortune did not favour him, for the sea is


generally more open at this epoch. But at last, by dint of sparing neither his
steam, his crew, nor himself, he attained his end.

On the 3rd of July, at 11 o'clock in the morning, the ice-master signalled land
to the north. After taking an observation Hatteras recognised Beechey Island,
that general meeting-place of Arctic navigators. Almost all ships that adventure
in these seas stop there. Franklin wintered there for the first time before getting
into Wellington Strait, and Creswell, with Lieutenant McClure, after having
cleared 170 miles on the ice, rejoined the Phoenix and returned to England. The
last ship which anchored at Beechey Island before the Forward was the Fox;
McClintock revictualled there the 11th of August, 1858, and repaired the
habitations and magazines; only two years had elapsed since then, and Hatteras
knew all these details. The boatswain's heart beat with emotion at the sight of
this island; when he had visited it he was quartermaster on board the Phoenix;
Hatteras questioned him about the coast line, the facilities for anchoring, how far
they could go inland, &c.; the weather was magnificent, and the temperature
kept at 57 degrees.

"Well, Johnson," said the captain, "do you know where you are?"

"Yes, sir, that is Beechey Island; only you must let us get further north--the
coast is more easy of access."

"But where are the habitations and the magazines?" said Hatteras.

"Oh, you can't see them till you land; they are sheltered behind those little
hills you see yonder."

"And is that where you transported a considerable quantity of provisions?"

"Yes, sir; the Admiralty sent us here in 1853, under the command of Captain
Inglefield, with the steamer Phoenix and a transport ship, the Breadalbane,
loaded with provisions; we brought enough with us to revictual a whole
expedition."

"But the commander of the Fox took a lot of them in 1858," said Hatteras.

"That doesn't matter, sir; there'll be plenty left for you; the cold preserves
them wonderfully, and we shall find them as fresh and in as good a state of
preservation as the first day."

"What I want is coal," said Hatteras; "I have enough provisions for several
years."

"We left more than a thousand tons there, so you can make your mind easy."

"Are we getting near?" said Hatteras, who, telescope in hand, was watching
the coast.

"You see that point?" continued Johnson. "When we have doubled it we shall
be very near where we drop anchor. It was from that place that we started for
England with Lieutenant Creswell and the twelve invalids from the Investigator.


We were fortunate enough to bring back McClure's lieutenant, but the officer
Bellot, who accompanied us on board the Phoenix, never saw his country again!
It is a painful thing to think about. But, captain, I think we ought to drop anchor
here."

"Very well," answered Hatteras, and he gave his orders in consequence. The
Forward was in a little bay naturally sheltered on the north, east, and south, and
at about a cable's length from the coast.

"Mr. Wall," said Hatteras, "have the long boat got ready to transport the coal
on board. I shall land in the pirogue with the doctor and the boatswain. Will you
accompany us, Mr. Shandon?"

"As you please," answered Shandon.

A few minutes later the doctor, armed as a sportsman and a savant, took his
place in the pirogue along with his companions; in ten minutes they landed on a
low and rocky coast.

"Lead the way, Johnson," said Hatteras. "You know it, I suppose?"

"Perfectly, sir; only there's a monument here that I did not expect to find!"

"That!" cried the doctor; "I know what it is; let us go up to it; the stone itself
will tell us."

The four men advanced, and the doctor said, after taking off his hat--

"This, my friends, is a monument in memory of Franklin and his
companions."

Lady Franklin had, in 1855, confided a black marble tablet to Doctor Kane,
and in 1858 she gave a second to McClintock to be raised on Beechey Island.
McClintock accomplished this duty religiously, and placed the stone near a
funeral monument erected to the memory of Bellot by Sir John Barrow.

The tablet bore the following inscription:

"TO THE MEMORY OF FRANKLIN, CROZIER, FITZ-JAMES, AND
ALL THEIR VALIANT BRETHREN OFFICERS AND FAITHFUL
COMPANIONS who suffered for the cause of science and for their country's
glory.

"This stone is erected near the place where they passed their first Arctic
winter, and from whence they departed to conquer obstacles or to die.

"It perpetuates the regret of their countrymen and friends who admire them,
and the anguish, conquered by Faith, of her who lost in the chief of the
expedition the most devoted and most affectionate of husbands.

"Tt is thus that He led them to the supreme haven where all men take their
rest.

"1855."

This stone, on a forlorn coast of these far-off regions, appealed mournfully to


the heart; the doctor, in presence of these touching regrets, felt his eyes fill with
tears. At the very same place which Franklin and his companions passed full of
energy and hope, there only remained a block of marble in remembrance! And
notwithstanding this sombre warning of destiny, the Forward was going to
follow in the track of the Erebus and the Terror. Hatteras was the first to rouse
himself from the perilous contemplation, and quickly climbed a rather steep hill,
almost entirely bare of snow.

"Captain," said Johnson, following him, "we shall see the magazines from
here."

Shandon and the doctor joined them on the summit. But from there the eye
contemplated the vast plains, on which there remained no vestige of a habitation.

"That is singular!" cried the boatswain.

"Well, and where are the magazines?" said Hatteras quickly.

"I don't know--I don't see----" stammered Johnson.

"You have mistaken the way," said the doctor.

"Tt seemed to me that this was the very place," continued Johnson.

"Well," said Hatteras, impatiently "where are we to go now?"

"We had better go down, for I may be mistaken. I may have forgotten the
exact locality in seven years!"

"Especially when the country is so uniformly monotonous!" added the
doctor.


"And yet----" murmured Johnson.
Shandon had not spoken a word. After walking for a few minutes, Johnson
stopped.


"But no," he cried, "I am not mistaken!"

"Well?" said Hatteras, looking round him.

"Do you see that swell of the ground?" asked the boatswain, pointing to a
sort of mound with three distinct swells on it.

"What do you conclude from that?" asked the doctor.

"Those are the three graves of Franklin's sailors. I am sure now that I am not
mistaken; the habitations ought to be about a hundred feet from here, and if they
are not, they----"

He dared not finish his sentence; Hatteras had rushed forward, a prey to
violent despair. There, where the wished-for stores on which he had counted
ought to have been, there ruin, pillage and destruction had been before him. Who
had done it? Animals would only have attacked the provisions, and there did not
remain a single rag from the tent, a piece of wood or iron, and, more terrible still,
not a fragment of coal! It was evident that the Esquimaux had learnt the value of
these objects from their frequent relations with Europeans; since the departure of


the Fox they had fetched everything away, and had not left a trace even of their
passage. A slight coating of snow covered the ground. Hatteras was confounded.
The doctor looked and shook his head. Shandon still said nothing, but an
attentive observer would have noticed his lips curl with a cruel smile. At this
moment the men sent by Lieutenant Wall came up; they soon saw the state of
affairs. Shandon advanced towards the captain, and said:

"Mr. Hatteras, we need not despair; happily we are near the entrance to
Barrow Strait, which will take us back to Baffin's Sea!"

"Mr. Shandon," answered Hatteras, "happily we are near the entrance to
Wellington Strait, and that will take us north!"

"But how shall we get along, captain?"

"With the sails, sir. We have two months' firing left, and that is enough for
our wintering.”

"But allow me to tell you----" added Shandon.

"I will allow you to follow me on board my ship, sir," answered Hatteras,
and turning his back on his second, he returned to the brig and shut himself up in
his cabin. For the next two days the wind was contrary, and the captain did not
show up on deck. The doctor profited by the forced sojourn to go over Beechey
Island; he gathered some plants, which the temperature, relatively high, allowed
to grow here and there on the rocks that the snow had left, some heaths, a few
lichens, a sort of yellow ranunculus, a sort of plant something like sorrel, with
wider leaves and more veins, and some pretty vigorous saxifrages. He found the
fauna of this country much richer than the flora; he perceived long flocks of
geese and cranes going northward, partridges, eider ducks of a bluish black,
sandpipers, a sort of wading bird of the scolopax class, northern divers, plungers
with very long bodies, numerous ptarmites, a sort of bird very good to eat,
dovekies with black bodies, wings spotted with white, feet and beak red as coral;
noisy bands of kittywakes and fat loons with white breasts, represented the
omithology of the island. The doctor was fortunate enough to kill a few grey
hares, which had not yet put on their white winter fur, and a blue fox which Dick
ran down skilfully. Some bears, evidently accustomed to dread the presence of
men, would not allow themselves to be got at, and the seals were extremely
timid, doubtless for the same reason as their enemies the bears. The class of
articulated animals was represented by a single mosquito, which the doctor
caught to his great delight, though not till it had stung him. As a conchologist he
was less favoured, and only found a sort of mussel and some bivalve shells.


CHAPTER XXI


THE DEATH OF BELLOT


The temperature during the days of the 3rd and 4th of July kept up to 57
degrees; this was the highest thermometric point observed during the campaign.
But on Thursday, the 5th, the wind turned to the south-east, and was
accompanied by violent snowstorms. The thermometer fell during the preceding
night to 23 degrees. Hatteras took no notice of the murmurs of the crew, and
gave orders to get under way. For the last thirteen days, from Cape Dundas, the
Forward had not been able to gain one more degree north, so the party
represented by Clifton was no longer satisfied, but wished like Hatteras to get
into Wellington Channel, and worked away with a will. The brig had some
difficulty in getting under sail; but Hatteras having set his mizensail, his topsails,
and his gallantsails during the night, advanced boldly in the midst of fields of ice
which the current was drifting south. The crew were tired out with this winding
navigation, which kept them constantly at work at the sails. Wellington Channel
is not very wide; it is bounded by North Devon on the east and Cornwallis Island
on the west; this island was long believed to be a peninsula. It was Sir John
Franklin who first sailed round it in 1846, starting west, and coming back to the
same point to the north of the channel. The exploration of Wellington Channel
was made in 1851 by Captain Penny in the whalers Lady Franklin and Sophia;
one of his lieutenants, Stewart, reached Cape Beecher in latitude 76 degrees 20
minutes, and discovered the open sea--that open sea which was Hatteras's dream!

"What Stewart found I shall find," said he to the doctor; "then I shall be able
to set sail to the Pole."

"But aren't you afraid that your crew----"

"My crew!" said Hatteras severely. Then in a low tone--"Poor fellows!"
murmured he, to the great astonishment of the doctor. It was the first expression
of feeling he had heard the captain deliver.

"No," he repeated with energy, "they must follow me! They shall follow
me!"

However, although the Forward had nothing to fear from the collision of the
ice-streams, which were still pretty far apart, they made very little progress
northward, for contrary winds often forced them to stop. They passed Capes
Spencer and Innis slowly, and on Tuesday, the 10th, cleared 75 degrees to the
great delight of Clifton. The Forward was then at the very place where the


American ships, the Rescue and the Advance, encountered such terrible dangers.
Doctor Kane formed part of this expedition; towards the end of September, 1850,
these ships got caught in an ice-bank, and were forcibly driven into Lancaster
Strait. It was Shandon who related this catastrophe to James Wall before some of
the brig's crew.

"The Advance and the Rescue," he said to them, "were so knocked about by
the ice, that they were obliged to leave off fires on board; but that did not prevent
the temperature sinking 18 degrees below zero. During the whole winter the
unfortunate crews were kept prisoners in the ice-bank, ready to abandon their
ships at any moment; for three weeks they did not even change their clothes.
They floated along in that dreadful situation for more than a thousand miles,
when at last they were thrown into the middle of Baffin's Sea."

The effect of this speech upon a crew already badly disposed can be well
imagined. During this conversation Johnson was talking to the doctor about an
event that had taken place in those very quarters; he asked the doctor to tell him
when the brig was in latitude 75 degrees 30 minutes, and when they passed it he
cried:

"Yes, it was just there!" in saying which tears filled his eyes.

"You mean that Lieutenant Bellot died there?" said the doctor.

"Yes, Mr. Clawbonny. He was as good and brave a fellow as ever lived! It
was upon this very North Devon coast! It was to be, I suppose, but if Captain
Pullen had returned on board sooner it would not have happened."

"What do you mean, Johnson?"

"Listen to me, Mr. Clawbonny, and you will see on what a slight thread
existence often hangs. You know that Lieutenant Bellot went his first campaign
in search of Franklin in 1850?"

"Yes, on the Prince Albert."

"Well, when he got back to France he obtained permission to embark on
board the Phoenix under Captain Inglefield; I was a sailor on board. We came
with the Breadalbane to transport provisions to Beechey Island!"

"Those provisions we, unfortunately, did not find. Well?"

"We reached Beechey Island in the beginning of August; on the 10th Captain
Inglefield left the Phoenix to rejoin Captain Pullen, who had been separated
from his ship, the North Star, for a month. When he came back he thought of
sending his Admiralty despatches to Sir Edward Belcher, who was wintering in
Wellington Channel. A little while after the departure of our captain, Captain
Pullen got back to his ship. Why did he not arrive before the departure of
Captain Inglefield? Lieutenant Bellot, fearing that our captain would be long
away, and knowing that the Admiralty despatches ought to be sent at once,


offered to take them himself. He left the command of the two ships to Captain
Pullen, and set out on the 12th of August with a sledge and an indiarubber boat.
He took the boatswain of the North Star (Harvey) with him, and three sailors,
Madden, David Hook, and me. We supposed that Sir Edward Belcher was to be
found in the neighbourhood of Beecher Cape, to the north of the channel; we
made for it with our sledge along the eastern coast. The first day we encamped
about three miles from Cape Innis; the next day we stopped on a block of ice
about three miles from Cape Bowden. As land lay at about three miles' distance,
Lieutenant Bellot resolved to go and encamp there during the night, which was
as light as the day; he tried to get to it in his indiarubber canoe; he was twice
repulsed by a violent breeze from the south-east; Harvey and Madden attempted
the passage in their turn, and were more fortunate; they took a cord with them,
and established a communication between the coast and the sledge; three objects
were transported by means of the cord, but at the fourth attempt we felt our
block of ice move; Mr. Bellot called out to his companions to drop the cord, and
we were dragged to a great distance from the coast. The wind blew from the
south-east, and it was snowing; but we were not in much danger, and the
lieutenant might have come back as we did."

Here Johnson stopped an instant to take a glance at the fatal coast, and
continued:

"After our companions were lost to sight we tried to shelter ourselves under
the tent of our sledge, but in vain; then, with our knives, we began to cut out a
house in the ice. Mr. Bellot helped us for half an hour, and talked to us about the
danger of our situation. I told him I was not afraid. "By God's help,’ he answered,
'we Shall not lose a hair of our heads.' I asked him what o'clock it was, and he
answered, 'About a quarter-past six.’ It was a quarter-past six in the morning of
Thursday, August 18th. Then Mr. Bellot tied up his books, and said he would go
and see how the ice floated; he had only been gone four minutes when I went
round the block of ice to look for him; I saw his stick on the opposite side of a
crevice, about five fathoms wide, where the ice was broken, but I could not see
him anywhere. I called out, but no one answered. The wind was blowing great
guns. I looked all round the block of ice, but found no trace of the poor
lieutenant."

"What do you think had become of him?" said the doctor, much moved.

"IT think that when Mr. Bellot got out of shelter the wind blew him into the
crevice, and, as his greatcoat was buttoned up he could not swim. Oh! Mr.
Clawbonny, I never was more grieved in my life! I could not believe it! He was a
victim to duty, for it was in order to obey Captain Pullen's instructions that he
tried to get to land. He was a good fellow, everybody liked him; even the


Esquimaux, when they learnt his fate from Captain Inglefield on his return from
Pound Bay, cried while they wept, as I am doing now, ‘Poor Bellot! poor
Bellot!""

"But you and your companion, Johnson," said the doctor, "how did you
manage to reach land?"

"Oh! we stayed twenty-four hours more on the block of ice, without food or
firing; but at last we met with an ice-field; we jumped on to it, and with the help
of an oar we fastened ourselves to an iceberg that we could guide like a raft, and
we got to land, but without our brave officer."

By the time Johnson had finished his story the Forward had passed the fatal
coast, and Johnson lost sight of the place of the painful catastrophe. The next day
they left Griffin Bay to the starboard, and, two days after, Capes Grinnell and
Helpmann; at last, on the 14th of July, they doubled Osborn Point, and on the
15th the brig anchored in Baring Bay, at the extremity of the channel. Navigation
had not been very difficult; Hatteras met with a sea almost as free as that of
which Belcher profited to go and winter with the Pioneer and the Assistance as
far north as 77 degrees. It was in 1852 and 1853, during his first wintering, for
he passed the winter of 1853 to 1854 in Baring Bay, where the Forward was now
at anchor. He suffered so much that he was obliged to leave the Assistance in the
midst of the ice. Shandon told all these details to the already discontented
sailors. Did Hatteras know how he was betrayed by his first officer? It is
impossible to say; if he did, he said nothing about it.

At the top of Baring Bay there is a narrow channel which puts Wellington
and Queen's Channel into communication with each other. There the rafts of ice
lie closely packed. Hatteras tried, in vain, to clear the passes to the north of
Hamilton Island; the wind was contrary; five precious days were lost in useless
efforts. The temperature still lowered, and, on the 19th of July, fell to 26 degrees;
it got higher the following day; but this foretaste of winter made Hatteras afraid
of waiting any longer. The wind seemed to be going to keep in the west, and to
stop the progress of the ship. However, he was in a hurry to gain the point where
Stewart had met with the open sea. On the 19th he resolved to get into the
Channel at any price; the wind blew right on the brig, which might, with her
screw, have stood against it, had not Hatteras been obliged to economise his fuel;
on the other hand, the Channel was too wide to allow the men to haul the brig
along. Hatteras, not considering the men's fatigue, resolved to have recourse to
means often employed by whalers under similar circumstances. The men took it
in turns to row, so as to push the brig on against the wind. The Forward
advanced slowly up the Channel. The men were worn out and murmured loudly.
They went on in that manner till the 23rd of July, when they reached Baring


Island in Queen's Channel. The wind was still against them. The doctor thought
the health of the men much shaken, and perceived the first symptoms of scurvy
amongst them; he did all he could to prevent the spread of the wretched malady,
and distributed limejuice to the men.

Hatteras saw that he could no longer count upon his crew; reasoning and
kindness were ineffectual, so he resolved to employ severity for the future; he
suspected Shandon and Wall, though they dare not speak out openly. Hatteras
had the doctor, Johnson, Bell, and Simpson for him; they were devoted to him
body and soul; amongst the undecided were Foker, Bolton, Wolsten the
gunsmith, and Brunton the first engineer; and they might turn against the captain
at any moment; as to Pen, Gripper, Clifton, and Warren, they were in open
revolt; they wished to persuade their comrades to force the captain to return to
England. Hatteras soon saw that he could not continue to work his ship with
such a crew. He remained twenty-four hours at Baring Island without taking a
step forward. The weather grew cooler still, for winter begins to be felt in July in
these high latitudes. On the 24th the thermometer fell to 22 degrees. Young ice
formed during the night, and if snow fell it would soon be thick enough to bear
the weight of a man. The sea began already to have that dirty colour which
precedes the formation of the first crystals. Hatteras could not mistake these
alarming symptoms; if the channels got blocked up, he should be obliged to
winter there at a great distance from the point he had undertaken the voyage in
order to reach, without having caught a glimpse of that open sea which his
predecessors made out was so near. He resolved, then, to gain several degrees
further north, at whatever cost; seeing that he could not employ oars without the
rowers were willing, nor sail in a contrary wind, he gave orders to put steam on
again.


CHAPTER XXII


BEGINNING OF REVOLT


At this unexpected command, the surprise was great on board the Forward.

"Light the fires!" exclaimed some.

"What with?" asked others.

"When we've only two months' coal in the hold!" said Pen.

"What shall we warm ourselves with in the winter?" asked Clifton.

"We shall be obliged to burn the brig down to her water-line," answered
Gripper.

"And stuff the stove with the masts," added Warren. Shandon looked at Wall.
The stupefied engineers hesitated to go down to the machine-room.

"Did you hear me?" cried the captain in an irritated tone.

Brunton made for the hatchway, but before going down he stopped.

"Don't go, Brunton!" called out a voice.

"Who spoke?" cried Hatteras.

"I did," said Pen, advancing towards the captain.

"And what did you say?" asked Hatteras.

"I say," answered Pen with an oath--"I say, we've had enough of it, and we
won't go any further. You shan't kill us with hunger and work in the winter, and
they shan't light the fires!"

"Mr. Shandon," answered Hatteras calmly, "have that man put in irons!"

"But, captain," replied Shandon, "what the man says----"

"If you repeat what the man says," answered Hatteras, "I'll have you shut up
in your cabin and guarded! Seize that man! Do you hear?" Johnson, Bell, and
Simpson advanced towards the sailor, who was in a terrible passion.

"The first who touches me----" he said, brandishing a handspike. Hatteras
approached him.

"Pen," said he tranquilly, "if you move, I shall blow out your brains!" So
speaking, he cocked a pistol and aimed it at the sailor. A murmur was heard.

"Not a word, men," said Hatteras, "or that man falls dead!" Johnson and Bell
disarmed Pen, who no longer made any resistance, and placed him in the hold.

"Go, Brunton," said Hatteras. The engineer, followed by Plover and Warren,
went down to his post. Hatteras returned to the poop.

"That Pen is a wretched fellow!" said the doctor.

"No man has ever been nearer death!" answered the captain, simply.


The steam was soon got up, the anchors were weighed, and the Forward
veered away east, cutting the young ice with her steel prow. Between Baring
Island and Beecher Point there are a considerable quantity of islands in the midst
of ice-fields; the streams crowd together in the little channels which cut up this
part of the sea; they had a tendency to agglomerate under the relatively low
temperature; hummocks were formed here and there, and these masses, already
more compact, denser, and closer together, would soon form an impenetrable
mass. The Forward made its way with great difficulty amidst the snowstorms.
However, with the mobility that characterises the climate of these regions, the
sun appeared from time to time, the temperature went up several degrees,
obstacles melted as if by magic, and a fine sheet of water lay where icebergs
bristled all the passes. The horizon glowed with those magnificent orange shades
which rest the eye, tired with the eternal white of the snow.

On the 26th of July the Forward passed Dundas Island, and veered
afterwards more to the north; but there Hatteras found himself opposite an ice-
bank eight or nine feet high, formed of little icebergs detached from the coast; he
was obliged to turn west. The uninterrupted cracking of the ice, added to the
noise of the steamer, was like sighs or groans. At last the brig found a channel,
and advanced painfully along it; often an enormous iceberg hindered her course
for hours; the fog hindered the pilot's look-out; as long as he can see for a mile in
front of him, he can easily avoid obstacles; but in the midst of the fog it was
often impossible to see a cable's length, and the swell was very strong.
Sometimes the clouds looked smooth and white as though they were reflections
of the ice-banks; but there were entire days when the yellow rays of the sun
could not pierce the tenacious fog. Birds were still very numerous, and their
cries were deafening; seals, lying idle on the floating ice, raised their heads, very
little frightened, and moved their long necks as the brig passed. Pieces from the
ship's sheathing were often rubbed off in her contact with the ice. At last, after
six days of slow navigation, Point Beecher was sighted to the north on the 1st of
August. Hatteras passed the last few hours at his masthead; the open sea that
Stewart had perceived on May 30th, 1851, about latitude 76 degrees 20 minutes,
could not be far off; but as far as the eye could reach, Hatteras saw no indication
of it. He came down without saying a word.

"Do you believe in an open sea?" asked Shandon of the lieutenant.

"I am beginning not to," answered Wall.

"Wasn't I right to say the pretended discovery was purely imagination? But
they would not believe me, and even you were against me, Wall."

"We shall believe in you for the future, Shandon."

"Yes," said he, "when it's too late," and so saying he went back to his cabin,


where he had stopped almost ever since his dispute with the captain. The wind
veered round south towards evening; Hatteras ordered the brig to be put under
sail and the fires to be put out; the crew had to work very hard for the next few
days; they were more than a week getting to Barrow Point. The Forward had
only made thirty miles in ten days. There the wind turned north again, and the
screw was set to work. Hatteras still hoped to find an open sea beyond the 77th
parallel, as Sir Edward Belcher had done. Ought he to treat these accounts as
apocryphal? or had the winter come upon him earlier? On the 15th of August
Mount Percy raised its peak, covered with eternal snow, through the mist. The
next day the sun set for the first time, ending thus the long series of days with
twenty-four hours in them. The men had ended by getting accustomed to the
continual daylight, but it had never made any difference to the animals; the
Greenland dogs went to their rest at their accustomed hour, and Dick slept as
regularly every evening as though darkness had covered the sky. Still, during the
nights which followed the 15th of August, darkness was never profound;
although the sun set, he still gave sufficient light by refraction. On the 19th of
August, after a pretty good observation, they sighted Cape Franklin on the east
coast and Cape Lady Franklin on the west coast; the gratitude of the English
people had given these names to the two opposite points--probably the last
reached by Franklin: the name of the devoted wife, opposite to that of her
husband, is a touching emblem of the sympathy which always united them.

The doctor, by following Johnson's advice, accustomed himself to support
the low temperature; he almost always stayed on deck braving the cold, the
wind, and the snow. He got rather thinner, but his constitution did not suffer.
Besides, he expected to be much worse off, and joyfully prepared for the
approaching winter.

"Look at those birds," he said to Johnson one day; "they are emigrating south
in flocks! They are shrieking out their good-byes!"

"Yes, Mr. Clawbonny, some instinct tells them they must go, and they set
out."

"There's more than one amongst us who would like to imitate them, I think."
"They are cowards, Mr. Clawbonny; those animals have no provisions as we
have, and are obliged to seek their food where it is to be found. But sailors, with
a good ship under their feet, ought to go to the world's end."

"You hope that Hatteras will succeed, then?"

"He certainly will, Mr. Clawbonny."

"I am of the same opinion as you, Johnson, and if he only wanted one
faithful companion----"

"He'll have two!"


"Yes, Johnson," answered the doctor, shaking hands with the brave sailor.

Prince Albert Land, which the Forward was then coasting, bears also the
name of Grinnell Land, and though Hatteras, from his hatred to the Yankees,
would never call it by its American name, it is the one it generally goes by. It
owes its double appellation to the following circumstances: At the same time
that Penny, an Englishman, gave it the name of Prince Albert, Lieutenant Haven,
commander of the Rescue, called it Grinnell Land in honour of the American
merchant who had fitted out the expedition from New York at his own expense.
Whilst the brig was coasting it, she experienced a series of unheard-of
difficulties, navigating sometimes under sail, sometimes by steam. On the 18th
of August they sighted Britannia Mountain, scarcely visible through the mist,
and the Forward weighed anchor the next day in Northumberland Bay. She was
hemmed in on all sides.


CHAPTER XXIII


ATTACKED BY ICEBERGS


Hatteras, after seeing to the anchoring of his ship, re-entered his cabin and
examined his map attentively. He found himself in latitude 76 degrees 57
minutes and longitude 99 degrees 20 minutes--that is to say, at only three
minutes from the 77th parallel. It was at this very spot that Sir Edward Belcher
passed his first winter with the Pioneer and the Assistance. It was thence that he
organised his sledge and boat excursions. He discovered Table Isle, North
Cornwall, Victoria Archipelago, and Belcher Channel. He reached the 78th
parallel, and saw that the coast was depressed on the south-east. It seemed to go
down to Jones's Strait, the entrance to which lies in Baffin's Bay. But to the
north-west, on the contrary, says his report, an open sea lay as far as the eye
could reach.

Hatteras considered attentively the white part of the map, which represented
the Polar basin free from ice.

"After such testimony as that of Stewart, Penny, and Belcher, I can't have a
doubt about it," he said to himself. "They saw it with their own eyes. But if the
winter has already frozen it! But no; they made their discoveries at intervals of
several years. It exists, and I shall find it! I shall see it."

Hatteras went on to the poop. An intense fog enveloped the Forward; the
masthead could scarcely be distinguished from the deck. However, Hatteras
called down the ice-master from his crow's nest, and took his place. He wished
to profit by the shortest clear interval to examine the north-western horizon.
Shandon did not let the occasion slip for saying to the lieutenant:

"Well, Wall, where is the open sea?"

"You were right, Shandon, and we have only six weeks' coal in the hold."

"Perhaps the doctor will find us some scientific fuel to warm us in the place
of coal," answered Shandon. "I have heard say you can turn fire to ice; perhaps
he'll turn ice to fire." And he entered his cabin, shrugging his shoulders. The next
day was the 20th of August, and the fog cleared away for several minutes. They
saw Hatteras look eagerly at the horizon, and then come down without speaking;
but it was easy to see that his hopes had again been crushed. The Forward
weighed anchor, and took up her uncertain march northward. As the Forward
began to be weather-worn, the masts were unreeved, for they could no longer
rely on the variable wind, and the sails were nearly useless in the winding


channels. Large white marks appeared here and there on the sea like oil spots;
they presaged an approaching frost; as soon as the breeze dropped the sea began
to freeze immediately; but as soon as the wind got up again, the young ice was
broken up and dispersed. Towards evening the thermometer went down to 17
degrees.

When the brig came to a closed-up pass she acted as a battering ram, and ran
at full steam against the obstacle, which she sunk. Sometimes they thought she
was stopped for good; but an unexpected movement of the streams opened her a
new passage, and she took advantage of it boldly. When the brig stopped, the
steam which escaped from the safety-pipes was condensed by the cold air and
fell in snow on to the deck. Another impediment came in the way; the ice-blocks
sometimes got entangled in the paddles, and they were so hard that all the
strength of the machine was not sufficient to break them; it was then necessary
to back the engine and send men to clear the screws with their handspikes. All
this delayed the brig; it lasted thirteen days. The Forward dragged herself
painfully along Penny Strait; the crew grumbled, but obeyed: the men saw now
that it was impossible to go back. Keeping north was less dangerous than
retreating south. They were obliged to think about wintering. The sailors talked
together about their present position, and one day they mentioned it to Richard
Shandon, who, they knew, was on their side. The second officer forgot his duty
as an officer, and allowed them to discuss the authority of the captain before
him.

"You say, then, Mr. Shandon, that we can't go back now?" said Gripper.

"No, it's too late now," answered Shandon.

"Then we must think about wintering,” said another sailor.

"It's the only thing we can do. They wouldn't believe me."

"Another time," said Pen, who had been released, "we shall believe you."

"But as I am not the master----" replied Shandon.

"Who says you mayn't be?" answered Pen. "John Hatteras may go as far as
he likes, but we aren't obliged to follow him."

"You all know what became of the crew that did follow him in his first cruise
to Baffin's Sea?" said Gripper.

"And the cruise of the Farewell under him that got lost in the Spitzbergen
seas!" said Clifton.

"He was the only man that came back," continued Gripper.

"He and his dog," answered Clifton.

"We won't die for his pleasure," added Pen.

"Nor lose the bounty we've been at so much trouble to earn," cried Clifton.
"When we've passed the 78th degree--and we aren't far off it, I know--that will


make just the 375 pounds each."

"But," answered Gripper, "shan't we lose it if we go back without the
captain?"

"Not if we prove that we were obliged to," answered Clifton.

"But it's the captain----"

"You never mind, Gripper," answered Pen; "we'll have a captain and a good
one--that Mr. Shandon knows. When one commander goes mad, folks have done
with him, and they take another; don't they, Mr. Shandon?"

Shandon answered evasively that they could reckon upon him, but that they
must wait to see what turned up. Difficulties were getting thick round Hatteras,
but he was as firm, calm, energetic, and confident as ever. After all, he had done
in five months what other navigators had taken two or three years to do! He
should be obliged to winter now, but there was nothing to frighten brave sailors
in that. Sir John Ross and McClure had passed three successive winters in the
Arctic regions. What they had done he could do too!

"If I had only been able to get up Smith Strait at the north of Baffin's Sea, I
should be at the Pole by now!" he said to the doctor regretfully.

"Never mind, captain!" answered the doctor, "we shall get at it by the 99th
meridian instead of by the 75th; if all roads lead to Rome, it's more certain still
that all meridians lead to the Pole."

On the 31st of August the thermometer marked 13 degrees. The end of the
navigable season was approaching; the Forward left Exmouth Island to the
starboard, and three days after passed Table Island in the middle of Belcher
Channel. At an earlier period it would perhaps have been possible to regain
Baffin's Sea by this channel, but it was not to be dreamt of then; this arm of the
sea was entirely barricaded by ice; ice-fields extended as far as the eye could
reach, and would do so for eight months longer. Happily they could still gain a
few minutes further north on the condition of breaking up the ice with huge
clubs and petards. Now the temperature was so low, any wind, even a contrary
one, was welcome, for in a calm the sea froze in a single night. The Forward
could not winter in her present situation, exposed to winds, icebergs, and the
drift from the channel; a shelter was the first thing to find; Hatteras hoped to
gain the coast of New Cornwall, and to find above Albert Point a bay of refuge
sufficiently sheltered. He therefore pursued his course northward with
perseverance. But on the 8th an impenetrable ice-bank lay in front of him, and
the temperature was at 10 degrees. Hatteras did all he could to force a passage,
continually risking his ship and getting out of danger by force of skill. He could
be accused of imprudence, want of reflection, folly, blindness, but he was a good
sailor, and one of the best! The situation of the Forward became really


dangerous; the sea closed up behind her, and in a few hours the ice got so hard
that the men could run along it and tow the ship in all security.

Hatteras found he could not get round the obstacle, so he resolved to attack it
in front; he used his strongest blasting cylinders of eight to ten pounds of
powder; they began by making a hole in the thick of the ice, and filled it with
snow, taking care to place the cylinder in a horizontal position, so that a greater
portion of the ice might be submitted to the explosion; lastly, they lighted the
wick, which was protected by a gutta-percha tube. They worked at the blasting,
as they could not saw, for the saws stuck immediately in the ice. Hatteras hoped
to pass the next day. But during the night a violent wind raged, and the sea rose
under her crust of ice as if shaken by some submarine commotion, and the
terrified voice of the pilot was heard crying:

"Look out aft!"

Hatteras turned to the direction indicated, and what he saw by the dim
twilight was frightful. A high iceberg, driven back north, was rushing on to the
ship with the rapidity of an avalanche.

"All hands on deck!" cried the captain.

The rolling mountain was hardly half a mile off; the blocks of ice were
driven about like so many huge grains of sand; the tempest raged with fury.

"There, Mr. Clawbonny," said Johnson to the doctor, "we are in something
like danger now."

"Yes," answered the doctor tranquilly, "it looks frightful enough."

"Tt's an assault we shall have to repulse," replied the boatswain.

"It looks like a troop of antediluvian animals, those that were supposed to
inhabit the Pole. They are trying which shall get here first!"

"Well," added Johnson, "I hope we shan't get one of their spikes into us!"

"It's a siege--let's run to the ramparts!"

And they made haste aft, where the crew, armed with poles, bars of iron, and
handspikes, were getting ready to repulse the formidable enemy. The avalanche
came nearer, and got bigger by the addition of the blocks of ice which it caught
in its passage; Hatteras gave orders to fire the cannon in the bow to break the
threatening line. But it arrived and rushed on to the brig; a great crackling noise
was heard, and as it struck on the brig's starboard a part of her barricading was
broken. Hatteras gave his men orders to keep steady and prepare for the ice. It
came along in blocks; some of them weighing several hundredweight came over
the ship's side; the smaller ones, thrown up as high as the topsails, fell in little
spikes, breaking the shrouds and cutting the rigging. The ship was boarded by
these innumerable enemies, which in a block would have crushed a hundred
ships like the Forward. Some of the sailors were badly wounded whilst trying to


keep off the ice, and Bolton had his left shoulder torn open. The noise was
deafening. Dick barked with rage at this new kind of enemy. The obscurity of the
night came to add to the horror of the situation, but did not hide the threatening
blocks, their white surface reflected the last gleams of light. Hatteras's orders
were heard in the midst of the crew's strange struggle with the icebergs. The ship
giving way to the tremendous pressure, bent to the larboard, and the extremity of
her mainyard leaned like a buttress against the iceberg and threatened to break
her mast.

Hatteras saw the danger; it was a terrible moment; the brig threatened to turn
completely over, and the masting might be carried away. An enormous block, as
big as the steamer itself, came up alongside her hull; it rose higher and higher on
the waves; it was already above the poop; it fell over the Forward. All was lost;
it was now upright, higher than the gallant yards, and it shook on its foundation.
A cry of terror escaped the crew. Everyone fled to starboard. But at this moment
the steamer was lifted completely up, and for a little while she seemed to be
suspended in the air, and fell again on to the ice-blocks; then she rolled over till
her planks cracked again. After a minute, which appeared a century, she found
herself again in her natural element, having been turned over the ice-bank that
blocked her passage by the rising of the sea.

"She's cleared the ice-bank!" shouted Johnson, who had rushed to the fore of
the brig.

"Thank God!" answered Hatteras.

The brig was now in the midst of a pond of ice, which hemmed her in on
every side, and though her keel was in the water, she could not move; she was
immovable, but the ice-field moved for her.

"We are drifting, captain!" cried Johnson.

"We must drift," answered Hatteras; "we can't help ourselves."

When daylight came, it was seen that the brig was drifting rapidly northward,
along with a submarine current. The floating mass carried the Forward along
with it. In case of accident, when the brig might be thrown on her side, or
crushed by the pressure of the ice, Hatteras had a quantity of provisions brought
up on deck, along with materials for encamping, the clothes and blankets of the
crew. Taking example from Captain McClure under similar circumstances, he
caused the brig to be surrounded by a belt of hammocks, filled with air, so as to
shield her from the thick of the damage; the ice soon accumulated under a
temperature of 7 degrees, and the ship was surrounded by a wall of ice, above
which her masts only were to be seen. They navigated thus for seven days; Point
Albert, the western extremity of New Cornwall, was sighted on the 10th of
September, but soon disappeared; from thence the ice-field drifted east. Where


would it take them to? Where should they stop? Who could tell? The crew
waited, and the men folded their arms. At last, on the 15th of September, about
three o'clock in the afternoon, the ice-field, stopped, probably, by collision with
another field, gave a violent shake to the brig, and stood still. Hatteras found
himself out of sight of land in latitude 78 degrees 15 minutes and longitude 95
degrees 35 minutes in the midst of the unknown sea, where geographers have
placed the Frozen Pole.


CHAPTER XXIV


PREPARATIONS FOR WINTERING


The southern hemisphere is colder in parallel latitudes than the northern
hemisphere; but the temperature of the new continent is still 15 degrees below
that of the other parts of the world; and in America the countries known under
the name of the Frozen Pole are the most formidable. The average temperature
of the year is 2 degrees below zero. Scientific men, and Dr. Clawbonny amongst
them, explain the fact in the following way. According to them, the prevailing
winds of the northern regions of America blow from the south-west; they come
from the Pacific Ocean with an equal and bearable temperature; but in order to
reach the Arctic Seas they have to cross the immense American territory,
covered with snow, they get cold by contact with it, and then cover the
hyperborean regions with their frigid violence. Hatteras found himself at the
Frozen Pole beyond the countries seen by his predecessors; he, therefore,
expected a terrible winter on a ship lost in the midst of the ice with a crew nearly
in revolt. He resolved to face these dangers with his accustomed energy. He
began by taking, with the help of Johnson's experience, all the measures
necessary for wintering. According to his calculations he had been dragged two
hundred and fifty miles beyond New Cornwall, the last country discovered; he
was Clasped in an ice-field as securely as in a bed of granite, and no power on
earth could extricate him.

There no longer existed a drop of water in the vast seas over which the
Arctic winter reigned. Ice-fields extended as far as the eye could reach, bristling
with icebergs, and the Forward was sheltered by three of the highest on three
points of the compass; the south-east wind alone could reach her. If instead of
icebergs there had been rocks, verdure instead of snow, and the sea in its liquid
State again, the brig would have been safely anchored in a pretty bay sheltered
from the worst winds. But in such a latitude it was a miserable state of things.
They were obliged to fasten the brig by means of her anchors, notwithstanding
her immovability; they were obliged to prepare for the submarine currents and
the breaking up of the ice. When Johnson heard where they were, he took the
greatest precautions in getting everything ready for wintering.

"Tt's the captain's usual luck," said he to the doctor; "we've got nipped in the
most disagreeable point of the whole glove! Never mind; we'll get out of it!"

As to the doctor, he was delighted at the situation. He would not have


changed it for any other! A winter at the Frozen Pole seemed to him desirable.
The crew were set to work at the sails, which were not taken down, and put into
the hold, as the first people who wintered in these regions had thought prudent;
they were folded up in their cases, and the ice soon made them an impervious
envelope. The crow's nest, too, remained in its place, serving as a nautical
observatory; the rigging alone was taken away. It became necessary to cut away
the part of the field that surrounded the brig, which began to suffer from the
pressure. It was a long and painful work. In a few days the keel was cleared, and
on examination was found to have suffered little, thanks to the solidity of its
construction, only its copper plating was almost all torn off. When the ship was
once liberated she rose at least nine inches; the crew then bevelled the ice in the
shape of the keel, and the field formed again under the brig, and offered
sufficient opposition to pressure from without. The doctor helped in all this
work; he used the ice-knife skilfully; he incited the sailors by his happy
disposition. He instructed himself and others, and was delighted to find the ice
under the ship.

"It's a very good precaution!" said he.

"We couldn't do without it, Mr. Clawbonny," said Johnson. "Now we can
raise a snow-wall as high as the gunwale, and if we like we can make it ten feet
thick, for we've plenty of materials."

"That's an excellent idea," answered the doctor. "Snow is a bad conductor of
heat; it reflects it instead of absorbing it, and the heat of the interior does not
escape."

"That's true," said Johnson. "We shall raise a fortification against the cold,
and against animals too, if they take it into their heads to pay us a visit; when the
work is done it will answer, I can tell you. We shall make two flights of steps in
the snow, one from the ship and the other from outside; when once we've cut out
the steps we shall pour water over them, and it will make them as hard as rock.
We shall have a royal staircase."

"It's a good thing that cold makes ice and snow, and so gives us the means of
protecting ourselves against it. I don't know what we should do if it did not."

A roofing of tarred cloth was spread over the deck and descended to the sides
of the brig. It was thus sheltered from all outside impression, and made a capital
promenade; it was covered with two feet and a-half of snow, which was beaten
down till it became very hard, and above that they put a layer of sand,
completely macadamising it.

"With a few trees I should imagine myself in Hyde Park," said the doctor, "or
in one of the hanging gardens of Babylon."

They made a hole at a short distance from the brig; it was round, like a well;


they broke the ice every morning. This well was useful in case of fire or for the
frequent baths ordered to keep the crew in health. In order to spare their fuel,
they drew the water from a greater depth by means of an apparatus invented by a
Frenchman, Francois Arago. Generally, when a ship is wintering, all the objects
which encumber her are placed in magazines on the coast, but it was impossible
to do this in the midst of an ice-field. Every precaution was taken against cold
and damp; men have been known to resist the cold and succumb to damp;
therefore both had to be guarded against. The Forward had been built expressly
for these regions, and the common room was wisely arranged. They had made
war on the corners, where damp takes refuge at first. If it had been quite circular
it would have done better, but warmed by a vast stove and well ventilated, it was
very comfortable; the walls were lined with buckskins and not with woollen
materials, for wool condenses the vapours and impregnates the atmosphere with
damp. The partitions were taken down in the poop, and the officers had a large
comfortable room, warmed by a stove. Both this room and that of the crew had a
sort of antechamber, which prevented all direct communication with the exterior,
and prevented the heat going out; it also made the crew pass more gradually
from one temperature to another. They left their snow-covered garments in these
antechambers, and scraped their feet on scrapers put there on purpose to prevent
any unhealthy element getting in.

Canvas hose let in the air necessary to make the stoves draw; other hose
served for escape-pipes for the steam. Two condensers were fixed in the two
rooms; they gathered the vapour instead of letting it escape, and were emptied
twice a week; sometimes they contained several bushels of ice. By means of the
air-pipes the fires could be easily regulated, and it was found that very little fuel
was necessary to keep up a temperature of 50 degrees in the rooms. But Hatteras
saw with grief that he had only enough coal left for two months' firing. A drying-
room was prepared for the garments that were obliged to be washed, as they
could not be hung in the air or they would have been frozen and spoiled. The
delicate parts of the machine were taken to pieces carefully, and the room where
they were placed was closed up hermetically. The rules for life on board were
drawn up by Hatteras and hung up in the common room. The men got up at six
in the morning, and their hammocks were exposed to the air three times a week;
the floors of the two rooms were rubbed with warm sand every morning; boiling
tea was served out at every meal, and the food varied as much as possible,
according to the different days of the week; it consisted of bread, flour, beef suet
and raisins for puddings, sugar, cocoa, tea, rice, lemon-juice, preserved meat,
salted beef and pork, pickled cabbage and other vegetables; the kitchen was
outside the common rooms, and the men were thus deprived of its heat, but


cooking is a constant source of evaporation and humidity.

The health of men depends a great deal on the food they eat; under these
high latitudes it is of great importance to consume as much animal food as
possible. The doctor presided at the drawing up of the bill of fare.

"We must take example from the Esquimaux," said he; "they have received
their lessons from nature, and are our teachers here; although Arabians and
Africans can live on a few dates and a handful of rice, it is very different here,
where we must eat a great deal and often. The Esquimaux absorb as much as ten
and fifteen pounds of oil in a day. If you do not like oil, you must have recourse
to things rich in sugar and fat. In a word, you want carbon in the stove inside you
as much as the stove there wants coal."

Every man was forced to take a bath in the half-frozen water condensed from
the fire. The doctor set the example; he did it at first as we do all disagreeable
things that we feel obliged to do, but he soon began to take extreme pleasure in
it. When the men had to go out either to hunt or work they had to take great care
not to get frostbitten; and if by accident it happened, they made haste to rub the
part attacked with snow to bring back the circulation of the blood. Besides being
carefully clothed in wool from head to foot, the men wore hoods of buckskin and
sealskin trousers, through which it is impossible for the wind to penetrate. All
these preparations took about three weeks, and the 10th of October came round
without anything remarkable happening.


CHAPTER XXV


AN OLD FOX


That day the thermometer went down to 3 degrees below zero. The weather
was pretty calm, and the cold without breeze was bearable. Hatteras profited by
the clearness of the atmosphere to reconnoitre the surrounding plains; he
climbed one of the highest icebergs to the north, and could see nothing, as far as
his telescope would let him, but ice-fields and icebergs. No land anywhere, but
the image of chaos in its saddest aspect. He came back on board trying to
calculate the probable duration of his captivity. The hunters, and amongst them
the doctor, James Wall, Simpson, Johnson, and Bell, did not fail to supply the
ship with fresh meat. Birds had disappeared; they were gone to less rigorous
southern climates. The ptarmigans, a sort of partridge, alone stay the winter in
these latitudes; they are easily killed, and their great number promised an
abundant supply of game. There were plenty of hares, foxes, wolves, ermine,
and bears; there were enough for any sportsman, English, French, or Norwegian;
but they were difficult to get at, and difficult to distinguish on the white plains
from the whiteness of their fur; when the intense cold comes their fur changes
colour, and white is their winter colour. The doctor found that this change of fur
is not caused by the change of temperature, for it takes place in the month of
October, and is simply a precaution of Providence to guard them from the rigour
of a boreal winter.

Seals were abundant in all their varieties, and were particularly sought after
by the hunters for the sake, not only of their skins, but their fat, which is very
warming; besides which, the liver of these animals makes excellent fuel:
hundreds of them were to be seen, and two or three miles to the north of the brig
the ice was literally perforated all over with the holes these enormous
amphibians make; only they smelt the hunters from afar, and many were
wounded that escaped by plunging under the ice. However, on the 19th, Simpson
managed to catch one at about a hundred yards from the ship; he had taken the
precaution to block up its hole of refuge so that it was at the mercy of the
hunters. It took several bullets to kill the animal, which measured nine feet in
length; its bulldog head, the sixteen teeth in its jaws, its large pectoral fins in the
shape of pinions, and its little tail, furnished with another pair of fins, made it a
good specimen of the family of dog-hound fish. The doctor, wishing to preserve
the head for his natural history collection, and its skin for his future use, had


them prepared by a rapid and inexpensive process. He plunged the body of the
animal into the hole in the ice, and thousands of little prawns soon ate off all the
flesh; in half a day the work was accomplished, and the most skilful of the
honourable corporation of Liverpool tanners could not have succeeded better.

As soon as the sun had passed the autumnal equinox--that is to say, on the
23rd of September--winter may be said to begin in the Arctic regions. The sun
disappears entirely on the 23rd of October, lighting up with its oblique rays the
summits of the frozen mountains. The doctor wished him a traveller's farewell;
he was not going to see him again till February. But obscurity is not complete
during this long absence of the sun; the moon comes each month to take its place
as well as she can; starlight is very bright, and there is besides frequent aurora
borealis, and a refraction peculiar to the snowy horizons; besides, the sun at the
very moment of his greatest austral declination, the 21st of December, is still
only 13 degrees from the Polar horizon, so that there is twilight for a few hours;
only fogs, mists, and snowstorms often plunge these regions into complete
obscurity. However, at this epoch the weather was pretty favourable; the
partridges and the hares were the only animals that had a right to complain, for
the sportsmen did not give them a moment's peace; they set several fox-traps, but
the suspicious animals did not let themselves be caught so easily; they would
often come and eat the snare by scratching out the snow from under the trap; the
doctor wished them at the devil, as he could not get them himself. On the 25th of
October the thermometer marked more than 4 degrees below zero. A violent
tempest set in; the air was thick with snow, which prevented a ray of light
reaching the Forward. During several hours they were very uneasy about Bell
and Simpson, who had gone too far whilst hunting; they did not reach the ship
till the next day, after having lain for a whole day in their buckskins, whilst the
tempest swept the air about them, and buried them under five feet of snow. They
were nearly frozen, and the doctor had some trouble to restore their circulation.

The tempest lasted a week without interruption. It was impossible to stir out.
In a single day the temperature varied fifteen and twenty degrees. During their
forced idleness each one lived to himself; some slept, others smoked, or talked in
whispers, stopping when they saw the doctor or Johnson approach; there was no
moral union between the men; they only met for evening prayers, and on Sunday
for Divine service. Clifton had counted that once the 78th parallel cleared, his
share in the bounty would amount to 375 pounds; he thought that enough, and
his ambition did not go beyond. The others were of the same opinion, and only
thought of enjoying the fortune acquired at such a price. Hatteras was hardly
ever seen. He neither took part in the hunting nor other excursions. He felt no
interest in the meteorological phenomena which excited the doctor's admiration.


He lived for one idea; it was comprehended in three words--the North Pole. He
was constantly looking forward to the moment when the Forward, once more
free, would begin her adventurous voyage again.

In short, it was a melancholy life; the brig, made for movement, seemed
quite out of place as a stationary dwelling; her original form could not be
distinguished amidst the ice and snow that covered her, and she was anything but
a lively spectacle. During these unoccupied hours the doctor put his travelling
notes in order--the notes from which this history is taken; he was never idle, and
the evenness of his humour remained the same, only he was very glad to see the
tempest clearing off so as to allow him to set off hunting once more. On the 3rd
of November, at six in the moming, with a temperature at 5 degrees below zero,
he started, accompanied by Johnson and Bell; the plains of ice were level; the
snow, which covered the ground thickly, solidified by the frost, made the ground
good for walking; a dry and keen cold lightened the atmosphere; the moon shone
in all her splendour, and threw an astonishing light on all the asperities of the
field; their footsteps left marks on the snow, and the moon lighted up their edges,
so that they looked like a luminous track behind the hunters whose shadows fell
on the ice with astonishing outlines.

The doctor had taken his friend Dick with him; he preferred him to the
Greenland dogs to run down the game for a good reason; the latter do not seem
to have the scent of their brethren of more temperate climates. Dick ran on and
often pointed out the track of a bear, but in spite of his skill the hunters had not
even killed a hare after two hours' walking.

"Do you think the game has gone south too?" asked the doctor, halting at the
foot of a hummock.

"Tt looks like it, Mr. Clawbonny," answered the carpenter.

"T don't think so," answered Johnson; "hares, foxes, and bears are
accustomed to the climate; I believe the late tempest is the cause of their
disappearance; but with the south winds they'll soon come back. Ah! if you said
reindeers or musk-oxen it would be a different thing."

"But it appears those, too, are found in troops in Melville Island," replied the
doctor; "that is much further south, I grant you; when Parry wintered there he
always had as much game as he wanted."

"We are not so well off," said Bell; "if we could only get plenty of bear's
flesh I should not complain."

"Bears are very difficult to get at," answered the doctor; "it seems to me they
want civilising."

"Bell talks about the bear's flesh, but we want its fat more than its flesh or its
skin," said Johnson.


"You are right, Johnson; you are always thinking about the fuel."

"How can I help thinking about it? I know if we are ever so careful of it
we've only enough left for three weeks."

"Yes," replied the doctor, "that is our greatest danger, for we are only at the
beginning of November, and February is the coldest month of the year in the
Frozen Zone; however, if we can't get bear's grease we can rely on that of the
seals."

"Not for long, Mr. Clawbonny," answered Johnson. "They'll soon desert us
too; either through cold or fright, they'll soon leave off coming on to the surface
of the ice."

"Then we must get at the bears,” said the doctor; "they are the most useful
animals in these countries: they furnish food, clothes, light, and fuel. Do you
hear, Dick?" continued he, caressing his friend; "we must have a bear, so look
out."

Dick, who was smelling the ice as the doctor spoke, started off all at once,
quick as an arrow. He barked loudly, and, notwithstanding his distance, the
sportsmen heard him distinctly. The extreme distance to which sound is carried
in these low temperatures is astonishing; it is only equalled by the brilliancy of
the constellations in the boreal sky.

The sportsmen, guided by Dick's barking, rushed on his traces; they had to
run about a mile, and arrived quite out of breath, for the lungs are rapidly
suffocated in such an atmosphere. Dick was pointing at about fifty paces from an
enormous mass at the top of a mound of ice.

"We've got him," said the doctor, taking aim.

"And a fine one," added Bell, imitating the doctor.

"It's a queer bear," said Johnson, waiting to fire after his two companions.

Dick barked furiously. Bell advanced to within twenty feet and fired, but the
animal did not seem to be touched. Johnson advanced in his turn, and after
taking a careful aim, pulled the trigger.

"What," cried the doctor, "not touched yet? Why, it's that cursed refraction.
The bear is at least a thousand paces off."

The three sportsmen ran rapidly towards the animal, whom the firing had not
disturbed; he seemed to be enormous, and without calculating the dangers of the
attack, they began to rejoice in their conquest. Arrived within reasonable
distance they fired again; the bear, mortally wounded, gave a great jump and fell
at the foot of the mound. Dick threw himself upon it.

"That bear wasn't difficult to kill," said the doctor.

"Only three shots," added Bell in a tone of disdain, "and he's down."

"It's very singular," said Johnson.


"Unless we arrived at the very moment when it was dying of old age," said
the doctor, laughing.

So speaking, the sportsmen reached the foot of the mound, and, to their great
stupefaction, they found Dick with his fangs in the body of a white fox.

"Well, I never!" cried Bell.

"We kill a bear and a fox falls," added the doctor.

Johnson did not know what to say.

"Why!" said the doctor, with a roar of laughter, "it's the refraction again!"

"What do you mean, Mr. Clawbonny?" asked the carpenter.

"Why, it deceived us about the size as it did about the distance. It made us
see a bear in a fox's skin."

"Well," answered Johnson, "now we've got him, we'll eat him."

Johnson was going to lift the fox on to his shoulders, when he cried like Bell-
-""Well, I never!"

"What is it?" asked the doctor.

"Look, Mr. Clawbonny--look what the animal's got on its neck; it's a collar,
sure enough."

"A collar?" echoed the doctor, leaning over the animal. A half worn-out
collar encircled the fox's neck, and the doctor thought he saw something
engraved on it; he took it off and examined it.

"That bear is more than twelve years old, my friends," said the doctor; "it's
one of James Ross's foxes, and the collar has been round its neck ever since
1848."

"Is it possible?" cried Bell.

"There isn't a doubt about it, and I'm sorry we've shot the poor animal.
During his wintering James Ross took a lot of white foxes in his traps, and had
brass collars put round their necks on which were engraved the whereabouts of
his ships, the Enterprise and the Investigator, and the store magazines. He hoped
one of them might fall into the hands of some of the men belonging to Franklin's
expedition. The poor animal might have saved the lives of the ship's crews, and
it has fallen under our balls."

"Well, we won't eat him,” said Johnson, "especially as he's twelve years old.
Anyway, we'll keep his skin for curiosity sake." So saying he lifted the animal on
his shoulders, and they made their way to the ship, guided by the stars; still their
expedition was not quite fruitless: they bagged several brace of ptarmigans. An
hour before they reached the Forward, a phenomenon occurred which excited
the astonishment of the doctor; it was a very rain of shooting stars; they could be
counted by thousands, like rockets in a display of fireworks. They paled the light
of the moon, and the admirable spectacle lasted several hours. A like meteor was


observed at Greenland by the Moravian brothers in 1799. The doctor passed the
whole night watching it, till it ceased, at seven in the morning, amidst the
profound silence of the atmosphere.


CHAPTER XXVI


THE LAST LUMP OF COAL


It seemed certain that no bears were to be had; several seals were killed
during the days of the 4th, 5th, and 6th of November; then the wind changed,
and the thermometer went up several degrees; but the snowdrifts began again
with great violence. It became impossible to leave the vessel, and the greatest
precaution was needed to keep out the damp. At the end of the week there were
several bushels of ice in the condensers. The weather changed again on the 15th
of November, and the thermometer, under the influence of certain atmospherical
conditions, went down to 24 degrees below zero. It was the lowest temperature
observed up till then. This cold would have been bearable in a quiet atmosphere,
but there was a strong wind which seemed to fill the atmosphere with sharp
blades. The doctor was vexed at being kept prisoner, for the ground was covered
with snow, made hard by the wind, and was easy to walk upon; he wanted to
attempt some long excursion.

It is very difficult to work when it is so cold, because of the shortness of
breath it causes. A man can only do a quarter of his accustomed work; iron
implements become impossible to touch; if one is taken up without precaution, it
causes a pain as bad as a burn, and pieces of skin are left on it. The crew,
confined to the ship, were obliged to walk for two hours on the covered deck,
where they were allowed to smoke, which was not allowed in the common room.
There, directly the fire got low, the ice invaded the walls and the joins in the
flooring; every bolt, nail, or metal plate became immediately covered with a
layer of ice. The doctor was amazed at the instantaneity of the phenomenon. The
breath of the men condensed in the air, and passing quickly from a fluid to a
solid state, fell round them in snow. At a few feet only from the stoves the cold
was intense, and the men stood near the fire in a compact group. The doctor
advised them to accustom their skin to the temperature, which would certainly
get worse, and he himself set the example; but most of them were too idle or too
benumbed to follow his advice, and preferred remaining in the unhealthy heat.
However, according to the doctor, there was no danger in the abrupt changes of
temperature in going from the warm room into the cold. It is only dangerous for
people in perspiration; but the doctor's lessons were thrown away on the greater
part of the crew.

As to Hatteras, he did not seem to feel the influence of the temperature. He


walked silently about at his ordinary pace. Had the cold no empire over his
strong constitution, or did he possess in a supreme degree the natural heat he
wished his sailors to have? Was he so armed in his one idea as to be insensible to
exterior impressions? His men were profoundly astonished at seeing him facing
the 24 degrees below zero; he left the ship for hours, and came back without his
face betraying the slightest mark of cold.

"He is a strange man," said the doctor to Johnson; "he even astonishes me.
He is one of the most powerful natures I have ever studied in my life."

"The fact is," answered Johnson, "that he comes and goes in the open air
without clothing himself more warmly than in the month of June."

"Oh! the question of clothes is not of much consequence," replied the doctor;
"it is of no use clothing people who do not produce heat naturally. It is the same
as if we tried to warm a piece of ice by wrapping it up in a blanket! Hatteras
does not want that; he is constituted so, and I should not be surprised if being by
his side were as good as being beside a stove."

Johnson had the job of clearing the water-hole the next day, and remarked
that the ice was more than ten feet thick. The doctor could observe magnificent
aurora borealis almost every night; from four till eight p.m. the sky became
slightly coloured in the north; then this colouring took the regular form of a pale
yellow border, whose extremities seemed to buttress on to the ice-field. Little by
little the brilliant zone rose in the sky, following the magnetic meridian, and
appeared striated with blackish bands; jets of some luminous matter, augmenting
and diminishing, shot out lengthways; the meteor, arrived at its zenith, was often
composed of several bows, bathed in floods of red, yellow, or green light. It was
a dazzling spectacle. Soon the different curves all joined in one point, and
formed boreal crowns of a heavenly richness. At last the bows joined, the
splendid aurora faded, the intense rays melted into pale, vague, undetermined
shades, and the marvellous phenomenon, feeble, and almost extinguished,
fainted insensibly into the dark southern clouds. Nothing can equal the wonders
of such a spectacle under the high latitudes less than eight degrees from the Pole;
the aurora borealis perceived in temperate regions gives no idea of them--not
even a feeble one; it seems as if Providence wished to reserve its most
astonishing marvels for these climates.

During the duration of the moon several images of her are seen in the sky,
increasing her brilliancy; often simple lunar halos surround her, and she shines
from the centre of her luminous circle with a splendid intensity.

On the 26th of November there was a high tide, and the water escaped with
violence from the water-hole; the thick layer of ice was shaken by the rising of
the sea, and sinister crackings announced the submarine struggle; happily the


ship kept firm in her bed, and her chains only were disturbed. Hatteras had had
them fastened in anticipation of the event. The following days were still colder;
there was a penetrating fog, and the wind scattered the piled-up snow; it became
difficult to see whether the whirlwinds began in the air or on the ice-fields;
confusion reigned.

The crew were occupied in different works on board, the principal of which
consisted in preparing the grease and oil produced by the seals; they had become
blocks of ice, which had to be broken with axes into little bits, and ten barrels
were thus preserved.

All sorts of vessels were useless, and the liquid they contained would only
have broken them when the temperature changed. On the 28th the thermometer
went down to 32 degrees below zero; there was only coal enough left for ten
days, and everyone looked forward to its disappearance with dread. Hatteras had
the poop stove put out for economy's sake, and from that time Shandon, the
doctor, and he stayed in the common room. Hatteras was thus brought into closer
contact with the men, who threw ferocious and stupefied looks at him. He heard
their reproaches, their recriminations, and even their threats, and he could not
punish them. But he seemed to be deaf to everything. He did not claim the place
nearest the fire, but stopped in a corner, his arms folded, never speaking.

In spite of the doctor's recommendations, Pen and his friends refused to take
the least exercise; they passed whole days leaning against the stove or lying
under the blankets of their hammocks. Their health soon began to suffer; they
could not bear up against the fatal influence of the climate, and the terrible
scurvy made its appearance on board. The doctor had, however, begun, some
time ago, to distribute limejuice and lime pastilles every morning; but these
preservatives, generally so efficacious, had very little effect on the malady,
which soon presented the most horrible symptoms. The sight of the poor fellows,
whose nerves and muscles contracted with pain, was pitiable. Their legs swelled
in an extraordinary fashion, and were covered with large blackish blue spots;
their bloody gums and ulcerated lips only gave passage to inarticulate sounds;
the vitiated blood no longer went to the extremities.

Clifton was the first attacked; then Gripper, Brunton, and Strong took to their
hammocks. Those that the malady still spared could not lose sight of their
sufferings; they were obliged to stay there, and it was soon transformed into a
hospital, for out of eighteen sailors of the Forward, thirteen were attacked in a
few days. Pen seemed destined to escape contagion; his vigorous nature
preserved him from it. Shandon felt the first symptoms, but they did not go
further, and exercise kept the two in pretty good health.

The doctor nursed the invalids with the greatest care, and it made him


miserable to see the sufferings he could not alleviate. He did all he could to keep
his companions in good spirits; he talked to them, read to them, and told them
tales, which his astonishing memory made it easy for him to do. He was often
interrupted by the complaints and groans of the invalids, and he stopped his talk
to become once more the attentive and devoted doctor. His health kept up well;
he did not get thinner, and he used to say that it was a good thing for him that he
was dressed like a seal or a whale, who, thanks to its thick layer of fat, easily
supports the Arctic atmosphere. Hatteras felt nothing, either physically or
morally. Even the sufferings of his crew did not seem to touch him. Perhaps it
was because he would not let his face betray his emotions; but an attentive
observer would have remarked that a man's heart beat beneath the iron envelope.
The doctor analysed him, studied him, but did not succeed in classifying so
strange an organisation, a temperament so supernatural. The thermometer
lowered again; the walk on deck was deserted; the Esquimaux dogs alone
frequented it, howling lamentably.

There was always one man on guard near the stove to keep up the fire; it was
important not to let it go out. As soon as the fire got lower, the cold glided into
the room; ice covered the walls, and the humidity, rapidly condensed, fell in
snow on the unfortunate inhabitants of the brig. It was in the midst of these
unutterable tortures that the 8th of December was reached. That morning the
doctor went as usual to consult the exterior thermometer. He found the mercury
completely frozen.

"Forty-four degrees below zero!" he cried with terror. And that day they
threw the last lump of coal into the stove.


CHAPTER XXVII


CHRISTMAS


There was then a movement of despair. The thought of death, and death from
cold, appeared in all its horror; the last piece of coal burnt away as quickly as the
rest, and the temperature of the room lowered sensibly. But Johnson went to
fetch some lumps of the new fuel which the marine animals had furnished him
with, and he stuffed it into the stove; he added some oakum, impregnated with
frozen oil, and soon obtained enough heat. The smell of the grease was
abominable, but how could they get rid of it? They were obliged to get used to it.
Johnson agreed that his expedient left much to wish for, and would have no
success in a Liverpool house.

"However," added he, "the smell may have one good result."

"What's that?" asked the carpenter.

"Tt will attract the bears; they are very fond of the stink."

"And what do we want with bears?" added Bell.

"You know, Bell, we can't depend on the seals; they've disappeared for a
good while to come; if the bears don't come to be tumed into fuel too, I don't
know what will become of us."

"There would be only one thing left; but I don't see how----"

"The captain would never consent; but perhaps we shall be obliged."

Johnson shook his head sadly, and fell into a silent reverie, which Bell did
not interrupt. He knew that their stock of grease would not last more than a week
with the strictest economy.

The boatswain was not mistaken. Several bears, attracted by the fetid
exhalations, were signalled to the windward; the healthy men gave chase to
them, but they are extraordinarily quick, and did not allow themselves to be
approached, and the most skilful shots could not touch them. The ship's crew
was seriously menaced with death from cold; it was impossible to resist such a
temperature more than forty-eight hours, and every one feared the end of the
fuel. The dreaded moment arrived at three o'clock p.m. on the 20th of December.
The fire went out; the sailors looked at each other with haggard eyes. Hatteras
remained immovable in his corner. The doctor as usual marched up and down in
agitation; he was at his wits' end. The temperature of the room fell suddenly to 7
degrees below zero. But if the doctor did not know what to do, some of the
others did. Shandon, calm and resolute, and Pen with anger in his eyes, and two


or three of their comrades, who could still walk, went up to Hatteras.

"Captain!" said Shandon.

Hatteras, absorbed in thought, did not hear him.

"Captain!" repeated Shandon, touching his hand.

Hatteras drew himself up.

"What is it?” he said.

"Our fire is out!"

"What then?" answered Hatteras.

"If you mean to kill us with cold, you had better say so," said Shandon
ironically.

"I mean," said Hatteras gravely, "to require every man to do his duty to the
end."

"There's something higher than duty, captain--there's the right to one's own
preservation. I repeat that the fire is out, and if it is not relighted, not one of us
will be alive in two days."

"T have no fuel," answered Hatteras, with a hollow voice.

"Very well," cried Pen violently, "if you have no fuel, we must take it where
we can!"

Hatteras grew pale with anger.

"Where?" said he.

"On board," answered the sailor insolently.

"On board!" echoed the captain, his fists closed, his eyes sparkling.

He had seized an axe, and he now raised it over Pen's head.

"Wretch!" he cried.

The doctor rushed between the captain and Pen; the axe fell to the ground, its
sharp edge sinking into the flooring. Johnson, Bell, and Simpson were grouped
round Hatteras, and appeared determined to give him their support. But
lamentable and plaintive voices came from the beds.

"Some fire! Give us some fire!" cried the poor fellows.

Hatteras made an effort, and said calmly:

"If we destroy the brig, how shall we get back to England?"

"We might burn some of the rigging and the gunwale, sir," said Johnson.

"Besides, we should still have the boats left," answered Shandon; "and we
could build a smaller vessel with the remains of the old one!"

"Never!" answered Hatteras.

"But----" began several sailors, raising their voices.

"We have a great quantity of spirits of wine," answered Hatteras; "burn that
to the last drop."

"Ah, we didn't think of that!" said Johnson, with affected cheerfulness, and


by the help of large wicks steeped in spirits he succeeded in raising the
temperature a few degrees.

During the days that followed this melancholy scene the wind went round to
the south, and the thermometer went up. Some of the men could leave the vessel
during the least damp part of the day; but ophthalmia and scurvy kept the greater
number on board; besides, neither fishing nor hunting was practicable. But it was
only a short respite from the dreadful cold, and on the 25th, after an unexpected
change in the wind, the mercury again froze; they were then obliged to have
recourse to the spirits of wine thermometer, which never freezes. The doctor
found, to his horror, that it marked 66 degrees below zero; men had never been
able to support such a temperature. The ice spread itself in long tarnished mirrors
on the floor; a thick fog invaded the common room; the damp fell in thick snow;
they could no longer see one another; the extremities became blue as the heat of
the body left them; a circle of iron seemed to be clasping their heads, and made
them nearly delirious. A still more fearful symptom was that their tongues could
no longer articulate a word.

From the day they had threatened to burn his ship, Hatteras paced the deck
for hours. He was guarding his treasures; the wood of the ship was his own flesh,
and whoever cut a piece off cut off one of his limbs. He was armed, and mounted
guard, insensible to the cold, the snow, and the ice, which stiffened his garments
and enveloped him in granite armour. His faithful Dick accompanied him, and
seemed to understand why he was there.

However, on Christmas Day he went down to the common room. The doctor,
taking advantage of what energy he had left, went straight to him, and said--

"Hatteras, we shall all die if we get no fuel."

"Never!" said Hatteras, knowing what was coming.

"We must," said the doctor gently.

"Never!" repeated Hatteras with more emphasis still. "I will never consent!
They can disobey me if they like!"

Johnson and Bell took advantage of the half-permission, and rushed on deck.
Hatteras heard the wood crack under the axe. He wept. What a Christmas Day
for Englishmen was that on board the Forward! The thought of the great
difference between their position and that of the happy English families who
rejoiced in their roast beef, plum pudding, and mince pies added another pang to
the miseries of the unfortunate crew. However, the fire put a little hope and
confidence into the men; the boiling of coffee and tea did them good, and the
next week passed less miserably, ending the dreadful year 1860; its early winter
had defeated all Hatteras's plans.

On the 1st of January, 1861, the doctor made a discovery. It was not quite so


cold, and he had resumed his interrupted studies; he was reading Sir Edward
Belcher's account of his expedition to the Polar Seas; all at once a passage struck
him; he read it again and again. It was where Sir Edward Belcher relates that
after reaching the extremity of Queen's Channel he had discovered important
traces of the passage and residence of men. "They were," said he, "very superior
habitations to those which might be attributed to the wandering Esquimaux. The
walls had foundations, the floors of the interior had been covered with a thick
layer of fine gravel, and were paved. Reindeer, seal, and walrus bones were seen
in great quantities. We found some coal." At the last words the doctor was struck
with an idea; he carried the book to Hatteras and showed him the passage.

"They could not have found coal on this deserted coast," said Hatteras; "it is
not possible!"

"Why should we doubt what Belcher says? He would not have recorded such
a fact unless he had been certain and had seen it with his own eyes."

"And what then, doctor?"

"We aren't a hundred miles from the coast where Belcher saw the coal, and
what is a hundred miles' excursion? Nothing. Longer ones than that have often
been made across the ice."

"We will go," said Hatteras.

Johnson was immediately told of their resolution, of which he strongly
approved; he told his companions about it: some were glad, others indifferent.

"Coal on these coasts!" said Wall, stretched on his bed of pain.

"Let them go," answered Shandon mysteriously.

But before Hatteras began his preparations for the journey, he wished to be
exactly certain of the Forward's position. He was obliged to be mathematically
accurate as to her whereabouts, because of finding her again. His task was very
difficult; he went upon deck and took at different moments several lunar
distances and the meridian heights of the principal stars. These observations
were hard to make, for the glass and mirrors of the instrument were covered with
ice from Hatteras's breath; he burnt his eyelashes more than once by touching the
brass of the glasses. However, he obtained exact bases for his calculations, and
came down to make them in the room. When his work was over, he raised his
head in astonishment, took his map, pricked it, and looked at the doctor.

"What is it?” asked the latter.

"In what latitude were we at the beginning of our wintering?"

"We were in latitude 78 degrees 15 minutes, by longitude 95 degrees 35
minutes; exactly at the Frozen Pole."

"Well," said Hatteras, in a low tone, "our ice-field has been drifting! We are
two degrees farther north and farther west, and three hundred miles at least from


your store of coal!"
"And those poor fellows don't know," said the doctor.
"Hush!" said Hatteras, putting his finger on his lips.


CHAPTER XXVIII


PREPARATIONS FOR DEPARTURE


Hatteras would not inform his crew of their situation, for if they had known
that they had been dragged farther north they would very likely have given
themselves up to the madness of despair. The captain had hidden his own
emotions at his discovery. It was his first happy moment during the long months
passed in struggling with the elements. He was a hundred and fifty miles farther
north, scarcely eight degrees from the Pole! But he hid his delight so profoundly
that even the doctor did not suspect it; he wondered at seeing an unwonted
brilliancy in the captain's eyes; but that was all, and he never once thought of the
reason.

The Forward, by getting nearer the Pole, had got farther away from the coal
repository observed by Sir Edward Belcher; instead of one hundred, it lay at two
hundred and fifty miles farther south. However, after a short discussion about it
between Hatteras and Clawbonny, the journey was persisted in. If Belcher had
written the truth--and there was no reason for doubting his veracity--they should
find things exactly in the same state as he had left them, for no new expedition
had gone to these extreme continents since 1853. There were few or no
Esquimaux to be met with in that latitude. They could not be disappointed on the
coast of New Cornwall as they had been on Beechey Island. The low
temperature preserves the objects abandoned to its influence for any length of
time. All probabilities were therefore in favour of this excursion across the ice. It
was Calculated that the expedition would take, at the most, forty days, and
Johnson's preparations were made in consequence.

The sledge was his first care; it was in the Greenland style, thirty-five inches
wide and twenty-four feet long. The Esquimaux often make them more than fifty
feet long. This one was made of long planks, bent up front and back, and kept
bent like a bow by two thick cords; the form thus given to it gave it increased
resistance to shocks; it ran easily on the ice, but when the snow was soft on the
ground it was put upon a frame; to make it glide more easily it was rubbed,
Esquimaux fashion, with sulphur and snow. Six dogs drew it; notwithstanding
their leanness these animals did not appear to suffer from the cold; their
buckskin harness was in good condition, and they could draw a weight of two
thousand pounds without fatigue. The materials for encampment consisted of a
tent, should the construction of a snow-house be impossible, a large piece of


mackintosh to spread over the snow, to prevent it melting in contact with the
human body, and lastly, several blankets and buffalo-skins. They took the halkett
boat too.

The provisions consisted of five cases of pemmican, weighing about four
hundred and fifty pounds; they counted one pound of pemmican for each man
and each dog; there were seven dogs including Dick, and four men. They also
took twelve gallons of spirits of wine--that is to say, about one hundred fifty
pounds weight--a sufficient quantity of tea and biscuit, a portable kitchen with
plenty of wicks, oakum, powder, ammunition, and two double-barrelled guns.
They also used Captain Parry's invention of indiarubber belts, in which the
warmth of the body and the movement of walking keeps coffee, tea, and water in
a liquid state. Johnson was very careful about the snow-shoes; they are a sort of
wooden patten, fastened on with leather straps; when the ground was quite hard
and frozen they could be replaced by buckskin moccasins; each traveller had two
pairs of both.

These preparations were important, for any detail omitted might occasion the
loss of an expedition; they took four whole days. Each day at noon Hatteras took
care to set the position of his ship; they had ceased to drift; he was obliged to be
certain in order to get back. He next set about choosing the men he should take
with him; some of them were not fit either to take or leave, but the captain
decided to take none but sure companions, as the common safety depended upon
the success of the excursion. Shandon was, therefore, excluded, which he did not
seem to regret. James Wall was ill in bed. The state of the sick got no worse,
however, and as the only thing to do for them was to rub them with limejuice,
and give them doses of it, the doctor was not obliged to stop, and he made one of
the travellers. Johnson very much wished to accompany the captain in his
perilous enterprise, but Hatteras took him aside, and said, in an affectionate tone:

"Johnson, I have confidence in you alone. You are the only officer in whose
hands I can leave my ship. I must know that you are there to overlook Shandon
and the others. They are kept prisoners here by the winter, but I believe them
capable of anything. You will be furnished with my formal instructions, which,
in case of need, will give you the command. You will take my place entirely. Our
absence will last four or five weeks at the most. I shall not be anxious, knowing
you are where I cannot be. You must have wood, Johnson, I know, but, as far as
possible, spare my poor ship. Do you understand me, Johnson?"

"Yes, sir," answered the old sailor, "I'll stop if you wish."

"Thank you," said Hatteras, shaking his boatswain's hand; "and if we don't
come back, wait for the next breaking-up time, and try to push forward towards
the Pole. But if the others won't go, don't mind us, and take the Forward back to


England."

"Are those your last commands, captain?"

"Yes, my express commands," answered Hatteras.

"Very well, sir, they shall be carried out," said Johnson simply.

The doctor regretted his friend, but he thought Hatteras had acted wisely in
leaving him. Their other two travelling companions were Bell the carpenter and
Simpson. The former was in good health, brave and devoted, and was the right
man to render service during the encampments on the snow; Simpson was not so
sure, but he accepted a share in the expedition, and his hunting and fishing
capabilities might be of the greatest use. The expedition consisted, therefore, of
four men, Hatteras, Clawbonny, Bell, and Simpson, and seven dogs. The
provisions had been calculated in consequence. During the first days of January
the temperature kept at an average of 33 degrees below zero. Hatteras was very
anxious for the weather to change; he often consulted the barometer, but it is of
little use in such high latitudes. A clear sky in these regions does not always
bring cold, and the snow does not make the temperature rise; the barometer is
uncertain; it goes down with the north and east winds; low, it brought fine
weather; high, snow or rain. Its indications could not, therefore, be relied upon.

At last, on January 5th, the mercury rose to 18 degrees below zero, and
Hatteras resolved to start the next day; he could not bear to see his ship burnt
piece by piece before his eyes; all the poop had gone into the stove. On the 6th,
then, in the midst of whirlwinds of snow, the order for departure was given. The
doctor gave his last orders about the sick; Bell and Simpson shook hands silently
with their companions. Hatteras wished to say his good-byes aloud, but he saw
himself surrounded by evil looks and thought he saw Shandon smile ironically.
He was silent, and perhaps hesitated for an instant about leaving the Forward,
but it was too late to turn back; the loaded sledge, with the dogs harnessed to it,
awaited him on the ice-field. Bell started the first; the others followed.

Johnson accompanied the travellers for a quarter of a mile, then Hatteras
begged him to return on board, and the old sailor went back after making a long
farewell gesture. At that moment Hatteras turned a last look towards the brig,
and saw the extremity of her masts disappear in the dark clouds of the sky.


CHAPTER XXIX


ACROSS THE ICE


The little troop descended towards the south-east. Simpson drove the sledge.
Dick helped him with zeal, and did not seem astonished at the new occupation of
his companions. Hatteras and the doctor walked behind, whilst Bell went on in
front, sounding the ice with his iron-tipped stick. The rising of the thermometer
indicated approaching snow; it soon fell in thick flakes, and made the journey
difficult for the travellers; it made them deviate from the straight line, and
obliged them to walk slower; but, on an average, they made three miles an hour.
The surface of the ice was unequal, and the sledge was often in danger of being
overturned, but by great care it was kept upright.

Hatteras and his companions were clothed in skins more useful than elegant.
Their heads and faces were covered with hoods, their mouths, eyes, and noses
alone coming into contact with the air. If they had not been exposed the breath
would have frozen their coverings, and they would have been obliged to take
them off with the help of an axe--an awkward way of undressing. The
interminable plain kept on with fatiguing monotony; icebergs of uniform aspect
and hummocks whose irregularity ended by seeming always the same; blocks
cast in the same mould, and icebergs between which tortuous valleys wound.
The travellers spoke little, and marched on, compass in hand. It is painful to
open one's mouth in such an atmosphere; sharp icicles form immediately
between one's lips, and the breath is not warm enough to melt them. Bell's steps
were marked in the soft ground, and they followed them attentively, certain of
being able to go where he had been before.

Numerous traces of bears and foxes crossed their path, but not an animal was
seen that day. It would have been dangerous and useless to hunt them, as the
sledge was sufficiently freighted. Generally in this sort of excursion travellers
leave provision-stores along their route; they place them in hiding-places of
snow, out of reach of animals; unload during the journey, and take up the
provisions on their return. But Hatteras could not venture to do this on moveable
ice-fields, and the uncertainty of the route made the return the same way
exceedingly problematic. At noon Hatteras caused his little troop to halt under
shelter of an ice-wall. Their breakfast consisted of pemmican and boiling tea; the
latter beverage comforted the cold wayfarers. They set out again after an hour's
rest. The first day they walked about twenty miles, and in the evening both men


and dogs were exhausted. However, notwithstanding their fatigue, they were
obliged to construct a snow-house in which to pass the night. It took about an
hour and a half to build. Bell showed himself very skilful. The ice-blocks were
cut out and placed above one another in the form of a dome; a large block at the
top made the vault. Snow served for mortar and filled up the chinks. It soon
hardened and made a single block of the entire structure. It was reached by a
narrow opening, through which the doctor squeezed himself painfully, and the
others followed him. The supper was rapidly prepared with spirits of wine. The
interior temperature of the snow-house was bearable, as the wind which raged
outside could not penetrate. When their repast, which was always the same, was
over, they began to think of sleep. A mackintosh was spread over the floor and
kept them from the damp. Their stockings and shoes were dried by the portable
grate, and then three of the travellers wrapped themselves up in their blankets,
leaving the fourth to keep watch; he watched over the common safety, and
prevented the opening getting blocked up, for if it did they would be buried
alive.

Dick shared the snow-house; the other dogs remained outside, and after their
supper they squatted down in the snow, which made them a blanket. The men
were tired out with their day's walk, and soon slept. The doctor took his turn on
guard at three o'clock in the morning. There was a tempest during the night, the
gusts of which thickened the walls of the snow-house. The next day, at six
o'clock, they set out again on their monotonous march. The temperature lowered
several degrees, and hardened the ground so that walking was easier. They often
met with mounds or cairns something like the Esquimaux hiding-places. The
doctor had one demolished, and found nothing but a block of ice.

"What did you expect, Clawbonny?" said Hatteras. "Are we not the first men
who have set foot here?"

"It's very likely we are, but who knows?" answered the doctor.

"I do not want to lose my time in useless search," continued the captain; "I
want to be quick back to my ship, even if we don't find the fuel."

"I believe we are certain of doing that," said the doctor.

"I often wish I had not left the Forward," said Hatteras; "a captain's place is
on board."

"Johnson is there."

"Yes; but--well, we must make haste, that's all."

The procession marched along rapidly; Simpson excited the dogs by calling
to them; in consequence of a phosphorescent phenomenon they seemed to be
running on a ground in flames, and the sledges seemed to raise a dust of sparks.
The doctor went on in front to examine the state of the snow, but all at once he


disappeared. Bell, who was nearest to him, ran up.

"Well, Mr. Clawbonny," he called out in anxiety, "where are you?"

"Doctor!" called the captain.

"Here, in a hole," answered a reassuring voice; "throw me a cord, and I shall
soon be on the surface of the globe again."

They threw a cord to the doctor, who was at the bottom of a hole about ten
feet deep; he fastened it round his waist, and his companions hauled him up with
difficulty.

"Are you hurt?" asked Hatteras.

"Not a bit," answered the doctor, shaking his kind face, all covered with
snow.

"But how did you tumble down there?"

"Oh, it was the refraction's fault," he answered laughing. "I thought I was
stepping across about a foot's distance, and I fell into a hole ten feet deep! I
never shall get used to it. It will teach us to sound every step before we advance.
Ears hear and eyes see all topsy-turvy in this enchanted spot."

"Can you go on?" asked the captain.

"Oh, yes; the little fall has done me more good than harm."

In the evening the travellers had marched twenty-five miles; they were worn
out, but it did not prevent the doctor climbing up an iceberg while the snow-
house was being built. The full moon shone with extraordinary brilliancy in the
clearest sky; the stars were singularly bright; from the top of the iceberg the view
stretched over an immense plain, bristling with icebergs; they were of all sizes
and shapes, and made the field look like a vast cemetery, in which twenty
generations slept the sleep of death. Notwithstanding the cold, the doctor
remained a long time in contemplation of the spectacle, and his companions had
much trouble to get him away; but they were obliged to think of rest; the snow-
hut was ready; the four companions burrowed into it like moles, and soon slept
the sleep of the just.

The next day and the following ones passed without any particular incident;
the journey was easy or difficult according to the weather; when it was cold and
clear they wore their moccasins and advanced rapidly, when damp and
penetrating, their snow-shoes, and made little way. They reached thus the 15th of
January; the moon was in her last quarter, and was only visible for a short time;
the sun, though still hidden below the horizon, gave six hours of a sort of
twilight, not sufficient to see the way by; they were obliged to stake it out
according to the direction given by the compass. Bell led the way; Hatteras
marched in a straight line behind him; then Simpson and the doctor, taking it in
turns, so as only to see Hatteras, and keep in a straight line. But notwithstanding


all their precautions, they deviated sometimes thirty or forty degrees; they were
then obliged to stake it out again. On Sunday, the 15th of January, Hatteras
considered he had made a hundred miles to the south; the morning was
consecrated to the mending of different articles of clothing and encampment;
divine service was not forgotten. They set out again at noon; the temperature was
cold, the thermometer marked only 32 degrees below zero in a very clear
atmosphere.

All at once, without warning of any kind, a vapour rose from the ground in a
complete state of congelation, reaching a height of about ninety feet, and
remaining stationary; they could not see a foot before them; it clung to their
clothing, and bristled it with ice. Our travellers, surprised by the frost-rime, had
all the same idea--that of getting near one another. They called out, "Bell!"
"Simpson!" "This way, doctor!" "Where are you, captain?" But no answers were
heard; the vapour did not conduct sound. They all fired as a sign of rallying. But
if the sound of the voice appeared too weak, the detonation of the firearms was
too strong, for it was echoed in all directions, and produced a confused rumble
without appreciable direction. Each acted then according to his instincts.
Hatteras stopped, folded his arms, and waited. Simpson contented himself with
stopping his sledge. Bell retraced his steps, feeling the traces with his hands. The
doctor ran hither and thither, bumping against the icebergs, falling down, getting
up, and losing himself more and more. At the end of five minutes he said:

"I can't go on like this! What a queer climate! It changes too suddenly, and
the icicles are cutting my face. Captain! I say, captain!"

But he obtained no answer; he discharged his gun, and notwithstanding his
thick gloves, burnt his hand with the trigger. During this operation he thought he
saw a confused mass moving at a few steps from him.

"At last!" said he. "Hatteras! Bell! Simpson! Is it you? Answer, do!"

A hollow growl was the only answer.

"Whatever is that?" thought the doctor. The mass approached, and its outline
was more distinctly seen. "Why, it's a bear!" thought the terrified doctor. It was a
bear, lost too in the frost-rime, passing within a few steps of the men of whose
existence it was ignorant. The doctor saw its enormous paws beating the air, and
did not like the situation. He jumped back and the mass disappeared like a
phantom. The doctor felt the ground rising under his feet; climbing on all-fours
he got to the top of a block, then another, feeling the end with his stick. "It's an
iceberg!" he said to himself: "if I get to the top I shall be saved." So saying he
climbed to a height of about eighty feet; his head was higher than the frozen fog,
of which he could clearly see the top. As he looked round he saw the heads of
his three companions emerging from the dense fluid.


"Hatteras!"

"Doctor!"

"Bell!"

"Simpson!"

The four names were all shouted at the same time; the sky, lightened by a
magnificent halo, threw pale rays which coloured the frost-rime like clouds, and
the summits of the icebergs seemed to emerge from liquid silver. The travellers
found themselves circumscribed by a circle less than a hundred feet in diameter.
Thanks to the purity of the upper layers of air, they could hear each other
distinctly, and could talk from the top of their icebergs. After the first shots they
had all thought the best thing they could do was to climb.

"The sledge!" cried the captain.

"It's eighty feet below us," answered Simpson.

"In what condition?"

"In good condition."

"What about the bear?" asked the doctor.

"What bear?" asked Bell.

"The bear that nearly broke my head," answered the doctor.

"If there is a bear we must go down," said Hatteras.

"If we do we shall get lost again," said the doctor.

"And our dogs?" said Hatteras.

At this moment Dick's bark was heard through the fog.

"That's Dick," said Hatteras; "there's something up; I shall go down."

Growls and barks were heard in a fearful chorus. In the fog it sounded like an
immense humming in a wadded room. Some struggle was evidently going on.

"Dick! Dick!" cried the captain, re-entering the frost-rime.

"Wait a minute, Hatteras; I believe the fog is clearing off," called out the
doctor. So it was, but lowering like the waters of a pond that is being emptied; it
seemed to enter the ground from whence it sprang; the shining summits of the
icebergs grew above it; others, submerged till then, came out like new islands;
by an optical illusion the travellers seemed to be mounting with their icebergs
above the fog. Soon the top of the sledge appeared, then the dogs, then about
thirty other animals, then enormous moving masses, and Dick jumping about in
and out of the fog.

"Foxes!" cried Bell.

"Bears!" shouted the doctor. "Five!"

"Our dogs! Our provisions!" cried Simpson. A band of foxes and bears had
attacked the sledge, and were making havoc with the provisions. The instinct of
pillage made them agree; the dogs barked furiously, but the herd took no notice,


and the scene of destruction was lamentable.

"Fire!" cried the captain, discharging his gun. His companions imitated him.
Upon hearing the quadruple detonation the bears raised their heads, and with a
comical growl gave the signal for departure; they went faster than a horse could
gallop, and, followed by the herd of foxes, soon disappeared amongst the
northern icebergs.


CHAPTER XXX


THE CAIRN


The frost-rime had lasted about three-quarters of an hour; quite long enough
for the bears and foxes to make away with a considerable quantity of provisions
which they attacked all the more greedily, arriving, as they did, when the animals
were perishing with hunger from the long winter. They had torn open the
covering of the sledge with their enormous paws; the cases of pemmican were
open, and half-empty; the biscuit-bags pillaged, the provisions of tea spilt over
the snow, a barrel of spirits of wine broken up, and its precious contents run out;
the camping materials lying all about. The wild animals had done their work.

"The devils have done for us!" said Bell.

"What shall we do now?" said Simpson.

"Let us first see how much we've lost," said the doctor; "we can talk after."

Hatteras said nothing, but began picking up the scattered objects. They
picked up all the pemmican and biscuit that was still eatable. The loss of so
much spirits of wine was deplorable, as without it it was impossible to get any
hot drinks--no tea nor coffee.

The doctor made an inventory of the provisions that were left, and found that
the animals had eaten two hundred pounds of pemmican and a hundred and fifty
pounds of biscuit; if the travellers continued their journey they would be obliged
to put themselves on half-rations. They deliberated about what was to be done
under the circumstances. Should they return to the brig and begin their
expedition again? But how could they resolve to lose the hundred and fifty miles
already cleared? and coming back without the fuel, how would they be received
by the crew? and which of them would begin the excursion again? It was evident
that the best thing to do was to go on, even at the price of the worst privations.
The doctor, Hatteras, and Bell were for going on, but Simpson wanted to go
back; his health had severely suffered from the fatigues of the journey, and he
grew visibly weaker; but at last, seeing he was alone in his opinion, he took his
place at the head of the sledge, and the little caravan continued its route. During
the three following days, from the 15th to the 17th of January, the monotonous
incidents of the journey took place again. They went on more slowly; the
travellers were soon tired; their legs ached with fatigue, and the dogs drew with
difficulty. Their insufficient food told upon them. The weather changed with its
usual quickness, going suddenly from intense cold to damp and penetrating fogs.


On the 18th of January the aspect of the ice-field changed all at once. A great
number of peaks, like pyramids, ending in a sharp point at a great elevation,
showed themselves on the horizon. The soil in certain places was seen through
the layer of snow; it seemed to consist of schist and quartz, with some
appearance of calcareous rock. At last the travellers had reached terra firma,
and, according to their estimation, the continent must be New Cornwall. The
doctor was delighted to tread on solid ground once more; the travellers had only
a hundred more miles to go before reaching Belcher Cape; but the trouble of
walking increased on this rocky soil, full of inequalities, crevices, and
precipices; they were obliged to plunge into the interior of the land and climb the
high cliffs on the coast, across narrow gorges, in which the snow was piled up to
a height of thirty or forty feet. The travellers soon had cause to regret the levels
they had left, on which the sledge rolled so easily. Now they were obliged to
drag it with all their strength. The dogs were worn out, and had to be helped; the
men harnessed themselves along with them, and wore themselves out too. They
were often obliged to unload the provisions in order to get over a steep hill,
whose frozen surface gave no hold. Some passages ten feet long took hours to
clear. During the first day they only made about five miles on that land, so well
named Cornwall. The next day the sledge attained the upper part of the cliffs; the
travellers were too exhausted to construct their snow-house, and were obliged to
pass the night under the tent, enveloped in their buffalo-skins, and drying their
stockings by placing them on their chests. The consequences of such a state of
things may be readily imagined; during the night the thermometer went down to
44 degrees below zero, and the mercury froze.

The health of Simpson became alarming; an obstinate cold, violent
rheumatism, and intolerable pain forced him to lie down on the sledge, which he
could no longer guide. Bell took his place; he was not well, but was obliged not
to give in. The doctor also felt the influence of his terrible winter excursion, but
he did not utter a complaint; he marched on in front, leaning on his stick; he
lighted the way; he helped in everything. Hatteras, impassive, impenetrable,
insensible, in as good health as the first day, with his iron constitution, followed
the sledge in silence. On the 20th of January the weather was so bad that the
least effort caused immediate prostration; but the difficulties of the ground
became so great that Hatteras and Bell harnessed themselves along with the
dogs; the front of the sledge was broken by an unexpected shock, and they were
forced to stop and mend it. Such delays occurred several times a day. The
travellers were journeying along a deep ravine up to their waists in snow, and
perspiring, notwithstanding the violent cold. No one spoke. All at once Bell
looked at the doctor in alarm, picked up a handful of snow, and began to rub his


companion's face with all his might.

"What the deuce, Bell?" said the doctor, struggling.

But Bell went on rubbing.

"Are you mad? You've filled my eyes, nose, and mouth with snow. What is
it?"

"Why," answered Bell, "if you've got a nose left, you owe it to me."

"A nose?" said the doctor, putting his hand to his face.

"Yes, Mr. Clawbonny, you were quite frostbitten; your nose was quite white
when I looked at you, and without my bit of rubbing you would be minus nose."

"Thanks, Bell," said the doctor; "I'll do the same for you in case of need."

"I hope you will, Mr. Clawbonny, and I only wish we had nothing worse to
look forward to!"

"You mean Simpson! Poor fellow, he is suffering dreadfully!"

"Do you fear for him?" asked Hatteras quickly.

"Yes, captain," answered the doctor.

"What do you fear?"

"A violent attack of scurvy. His legs swell already, and his gums are
attacked; the poor fellow is lying under his blankets on the sledge, and every
shock increases his pain. I pity him, but I can't do anything for him!"

"Poor Simpson!" said Bell.

"Perhaps we had better stop a day or two," said the doctor.

"Stop!" cried Hatteras, "when the lives of eighteen men depend upon our
return! You know we have only enough provisions left for twenty days."

Neither the doctor nor Bell could answer that, and the sledge went on its
way. In the evening they stopped at the foot of an ice-hill, out of which Bell soon
cut a cavern; the travellers took refuge in it, and the doctor passed the night in
nursing Simpson; he was a prey to the scurvy, and constant groans issued from
his terrified lips.

"Ah, Mr. Clawbonny, I shall never get over it. I wish I was dead already."

"Take courage, my poor fellow!" answered the doctor, with pity in his tone,
and he answered Simpson's complaints by incessant attention. Though half-dead
with fatigue, he employed a part of the night in making the sick man a soothing
draught, and rubbed him with limejuice. Unfortunately it had little effect, and did
not prevent the terrible malady spreading. The next day they were obliged to lift
the poor fellow on to the sledge, although he begged and prayed them to leave
him to die in peace, and begin their painful march again.

The freezing mists wet the three men to the skin; the snow and sleet beat in
their faces; they did the work of beasts of burden, and had not even sufficient
food. Dick ran hither and thither, discovering by instinct the best route to follow.


During the morning of the 23rd of January, when it was nearly dark, for the new
moon had not yet made her appearance, Dick ran on first; he was lost to sight for
several hours. Hatteras became anxious, as there were many bear-marks on the
ground; he was considering what had better be done, when a loud barking was
heard in front. The little procession moved on quicker, and soon came upon the
faithful animal in the depth of a ravine. Dick was set as if he had been petrified
in front of a sort of cairn, made of limestone, and covered with a cement of ice.

"This time," said the doctor, disengaging himself from the traces, "it's really
a Cairn; we can't be mistaken."

"What does it matter to us?" said Hatteras.

"Why, if it is a cairn, it may inclose something that would be useful to us--
some provisions perhaps."

"As if Europeans had ever been here!" said Hatteras, shrugging his
shoulders.

"But if not Europeans, it may be that the Esquimaux have hidden some
product of their hunting here. They are accustomed to doing it, I think."

"Well, look if you like, Clawbonny, but I don't think it is worth your while."

Clawbonny and Bell, armed with their pickaxes made for the cairn. Dick
kept on barking furiously. The cairn was soon demolished, and the doctor took
out a damp paper. Hatteras took the document and read:

"Altam..., Porpoise, Dec... 13th, 1860, 12.. degrees long... 8.. degrees 35
minutes lat..."

"The Porpoise!" said the doctor.

"T don't know any ship of that name frequenting these seas," said Hatteras.

"It is evident," continued the doctor, "that some sailors, or perhaps some
shipwrecked fellows, have passed here within the last two months."

"That's certain," said Bell.

"What shall we do?" asked the doctor.

"Continue our route," said Hatteras coldly. "I don't know anything about the
Porpoise, but I do know that the Forward is waiting for our return."


CHAPTER XXXxI


THE DEATH OF SIMPSON


The travellers went on their weary way, each thinking of the discovery they
had just made. Hatteras frowned with uneasiness.

"What can the Porpoise be?" he asked himself. "Is it a ship? and if so, what
was it doing so near the Pole?"

At this thought he shivered, but not from the cold. The doctor and Bell only
thought of the result their discovery might have for others or for themselves. But
the difficulties and obstacles in their way soon made them oblivious to
everything but their own preservation.

Simpson's condition grew worse; the doctor saw that death was near. He
could do nothing, and was suffering cruelly on his own account from a painful
ophthalmia which might bring on blindness if neglected. The twilight gave them
enough light to hurt the eyes when reflected by the snow; it was difficult to
guard against the reflection, for the spectacle-glasses got covered with a layer of
opaque ice which obstructed the view, and when so much care was necessary for
the dangers of the route, it was important to see clearly; however, the doctor and
Bell took it in turns to cover their eyes or to guide the sledge. The soil was
volcanic, and by its inequalities made it very difficult to draw the sledge, the
frame of which was getting worm out. Another difficulty was the effect of the
uniform brilliancy of the snow; the ground seemed to fall beneath the feet of the
travellers, and they experienced the same sensation as that of the rolling of a
ship; they could not get accustomed to it, and it made them sleepy, and they
often walked on half in a dream. Then some unexpected shock, fall, or obstacle
would wake them up from their inertia, which afterwards took possession of
them again.

On the 25th of January they began to descend, and their dangers increased.
The least slip might send them down a precipice, and there they would have
been infallibly lost. Towards evening an extremely violent tempest swept the
snow-clad summits; they were obliged to lie down on the ground, and the
temperature was so low that they were in danger of being frozen to death. Bell,
with the help of Hatteras, built a snow-house, in which the poor fellows took
shelter; there they partook of a little pemmican and warm tea; there were only a
few gallons of spirits of wine left, and they were obliged to use them to quench
their thirst, as they could not take snow in its natural state; it must be melted. In


temperate countries, where the temperature scarcely falls below freezing point, it
is not injurious; but above the Polar circle it gets so cold that it cannot be
touched more than a red-hot iron; there is such a difference of temperature that
its absorption produces suffocation. The Esquimaux would rather suffer the
greatest torments than slake their thirst with snow.

The doctor took his turn to watch at three o'clock in the morning, when the
tempest was at its height; he was leaning in a corner of the snow-house, when a
lamentable groan from Simpson drew his attention; he rose to go to him, and
struck his head against the roof; without thinking of the accident he began to rub
Simpson's swollen limbs; after about a quarter of an hour he got up again, and
bumped his head again, although he was kneeling then.

"That's very queer," he said to himself.

He lifted his hand above his head, and felt that the roof was lowering.

"Good God!" he cried; "Hatteras! Bell!"

His cries awoke his companions, who got up quickly, and bumped
themselves too; the darkness was thick.

"The roof is falling in!" cried the doctor.

They all rushed out, dragging Simpson with them; they had no sooner left
their dangerous retreat, than it fell in with a great noise. The poor fellows were
obliged to take refuge under the tent covering, which was soon covered with a
thick layer of snow, which, as a bad conductor, prevented the travellers being
frozen alive. The tempest continued all through the night. When Bell harnessed
the dogs the next morning he found that some of them had begun to eat their
leather harness, and that two of them were very ill, and could not go much
further. However, the caravan set out again; there only remained sixty miles to
go. On the 26th, Bell, who went on in front, called out suddenly to his
companions. They ran up to him, and he pointed to a gun leaning against an
iceberg.

"A gun!" cried the doctor.

Hatteras took it; it was loaded and in good condition.

"The men from the Porpoise can't be far off," said the doctor.

Hatteras remarked that the gun was of American manufacture, and his hands
crisped the frozen barrel. He gave orders to continue the march, and they kept on
down the mountain slope. Simpson seemed deprived of all feeling; he had no
longer the strength to complain. The tempest kept on, and the sledge proceeded
more and more slowly; they scarcely made a few miles in twenty-four hours, and
in spite of the strictest economy, the provisions rapidly diminished; but as long
as they had enough for the return journey, Hatteras kept on.

On the 27th they found a sextant half-buried in the snow, then a leather


bottle; the latter contained brandy, or rather a lump of ice, with a ball of snow in
the middle, which represented the spirit; it could not be used. It was evident that
they were following in the steps of some poor shipwrecked fellows who, like
them, had taken the only practicable route. The doctor looked carefully round for
other cairns, but in vain. Sad thoughts came into his mind; he could not help
thinking that it would be a good thing not to meet with their predecessors; what
could he and his companions do for them? They wanted help themselves; their
clothes were in rags, and they had not enough to eat. If their predecessors were
numerous they would all die of hunger. Hatteras seemed to wish to avoid them,
and could he be blamed? But these men might be their fellow-countrymen, and,
however slight might be the chance of saving them, ought they not to try it? He
asked Bell what he thought about it, but the poor fellow's heart was hardened by
his own suffering, and he did not answer. Clawbonny dared not question
Hatteras, so he left it to Providence.

In the evening of the 27th, Simpson appeared to be at the last extremity; his
limbs were already stiff and frozen; his difficult breathing formed a sort of mist
round his head, and convulsive movements announced that his last hour was
come. The expression of his face was terrible, desperate, and he threw looks of
powerless anger towards the captain. He accused him silently, and Hatteras
avoided him and became more taciturn and wrapped up in himself than ever. The
following night was frightful; the tempest redoubled in violence; the tent was
thrown down three times, and the snowdrifts buried the poor fellows, blinded
them, froze them, and wounded them with the sharp icicles struck off the
surrounding icebergs. The dogs howled lamentably. Simpson lay exposed to the
cruel atmosphere. Bell succeeded in getting up the tent again, which, though it
did not protect them from the cold, kept out the snow. But a more violent gust
blew it down a fourth time, and dragged it along in its fury.

"Oh, we can't bear it any longer!" cried Bell.

"Courage, man, courage!" answered the doctor, clinging to him in order to
prevent themselves rolling down a ravine. Simpson's death-rattle was heard. All
at once, with a last effort, he raised himself up and shook his fist at Hatteras,
who was looking at him fixedly, then gave a fearful cry, and fell back dead in the
midst of his unfinished threat.

"He is dead!" cried the doctor.

"Dead!" repeated Bell.

Hatteras advanced towards the corpse, but was driven back by a gust of
wind.

Poor Simpson was the first victim to the murderous climate, the first to pay
with his life the unreasonable obstinacy of the captain. The dead man had called


Hatteras an assassin, but he did not bend beneath the accusation. A single tear
escaped from his eyes and froze on his pale cheek. The doctor and Bell looked at
him with a sort of terror. Leaning on his stick, he looked like the genius of the
North, upright in the midst of the whirlwind, and frightful in his immobility.

He remained standing thus till the first dawn of twilight, bold, tenacious,
indomitable, and seemed to defy the tempest that roared round him.


CHAPTER XXXII


THE RETURN


The wind went down about six in the morning, and turning suddenly north
cleared the clouds from the sky; the thermometer marked 33 degrees below zero.
The first rays of the sun reached the horizon which they would gild a few days
later. Hatteras came up to his two dejected companions, and said to them, in a
low, sad voice:

"We are still more than sixty miles from the spot indicated by Sir Edward
Belcher. We have just enough provisions to allow us to get back to the brig. If
we go on any further we shall meet with certain death, and that will do good to
no one. We had better retrace our steps."

"That is a sensible resolution, Hatteras," answered the doctor; "I would have
followed you as far as you led us, but our health gets daily weaker; we can
scarcely put one foot before the other; we ought to go back."

"Is that your opinion too, Bell?" asked Hatteras.

"Yes, captain," answered the carpenter.

"Very well," said Hatteras; "we will take two days' rest. We want it. The
sledge wants mending. I think we had better build ourselves a snow-house, and
try to regain a little strength."

After this was settled, our three men set to work with vigour. Bell took the
necessary precautions to assure the solidity of the construction, and they soon
had a good shelter at the bottom of the ravine where the last halt had taken place.
It had cost Hatteras a great effort to interrupt his journey. All their trouble and
pain lost! A useless excursion, which one man had paid for with his life. What
would become of the crew now that all hope of coal was over? What would
Shandon think? Notwithstanding all these painful thoughts, he felt it impossible
to go on any further. They began their preparations for the return journey at
once. The sledge was mended; it had now only two hundred pounds weight to
carry. They mended their clothes, worn-out, torn, soaked with snow, and
hardened by the frost; new moccasins and snow-shoes replaced those that were
worn out. This work took the whole day of the 29th and the morning of the 30th;
the three travellers rested and comforted themselves as well as they could.

During the thirty-six hours passed in the snow-house and on the icebergs of
the ravine, the doctor had noticed that Dick's conduct was very strange; he crept
smelling about a sort of rising in the ground made by several layers of ice; he


kept wagging his tail with impatience, and trying to draw the attention of his
master to the spot. The doctor thought that the dog's uneasiness might be caused
by the presence of Simpson's body, which he and his companions had not yet
had time to bury. He resolved to put it off no longer, especially as they intended
starting early the next morning. Bell and the doctor took their pickaxes and
directed their steps towards the lowest part of the ravine; the mound indicated by
Dick seemed to be a good spot to place the corpse in; they were obliged to bury
it deep to keep it from the bears. They began by removing the layer of soft snow,
and then attacked the ice. At the third blow of his pickaxe the doctor broke some
hard obstacle; he took out the pieces and saw that it was a glass bottle; Bell
discovered a small biscuit-sack with a few crumbs at the bottom.

"Whatever does this mean?" said the doctor.

"T can't think," answered Bell, suspending his work.

They called Hatteras, who came immediately. Dick barked loudly, and began
scratching at the ice.

"Perhaps we have found a provision-store,” said the doctor.

"It is possible," said Bell.

"Go on," said Hatteras.

Some remains of food were drawn out, and a case a quarter full of
pemmican.

"If it is a hiding-place," said Hatteras, "the bears have been before us. See,
the provisions are not intact."

"T am afraid so," answered the doctor; "for----"

He was interrupted by a cry from Bell, who had come upon a man's leg,
stiffened and frozen.

"A corpse," cried the doctor.

"Tt is a tomb," answered Hatteras.

When the corpse was disinterred it turned out to be that of a sailor, about
thirty years old, perfectly preserved. He wore the clothes of an Arctic navigator.
The doctor could not tell how long he had been dead. But after this corpse, Bell
discovered a second, that of a man of fifty, bearing the mark of the suffering that
had killed him on his face.

"These are not buried bodies," cried the doctor, "the poor fellows were
surprised by death just as we find them."

"You are right, Mr. Clawbonny," answered Bell.

"Go on! go on!" said Hatteras.

Bell obeyed tremblingly; for who knew how many human bodies the mound
contained?

"These men have been the victims of the same accident that almost happened


to us," said the doctor. "Their snow-house tumbled in. Let us see if any one of
them is still alive."

The place was soon cleared, and Bell dug out a third body, that of a man of
forty, who had not the cadaverous look of the others. The doctor examined him
and thought he recognised some symptoms of existence.

"He is alive!" he cried.

Bell and he carried the body into the snow-house whilst Hatteras, unmoved,
contemplated their late habitation. The doctor stripped the resuscitated man and
found no trace of a wound on him. He and Bell rubbed him vigorously with
oakum steeped in spirits of wine, and they saw signs of returning consciousness;
but the unfortunate man was in a state of complete prostration, and could not
speak a word. His tongue stuck to his palate as if frozen. The doctor searched his
pockets, but they were empty. He left Bell to continue the friction, and rejoined
Hatteras. The captain had been down into the depths of the snow-house, and had
searched about carefully. He came up holding a half-burnt fragment of a letter.
These words were on it:

... tamont ... orpoise ... w York.

"Altamont!" cried the doctor, of the ship Porpoise, of New York."

"An American," said Hatteras.

"T'll save him," said the doctor, "and then we shall know all about it."

He went back to Altamont whilst Hatteras remained pensive. Thanks to his
attentions, the doctor succeeded in recalling the unfortunate man to life, but not
to feeling; he neither saw, heard, nor spoke, but he lived. The next day Hatteras
said to the doctor:

"We must start at once."

"Yes. The sledge is not loaded; we'll put the poor fellow on it and take him to
the brig."

"Very well; but we must bury these bodies first."

The two unknown sailors were placed under the ruins of the snow-house
again, and Simpson's corpse took Altamont's place. The three travellers buried
their companion, and at seven o'clock in the morning they set out again. Two of
the Greenland dogs were dead, and Dick offered himself in their place. He pulled
with energy.

During the next twenty days the travellers experienced the same incidents as
before. But as it was in the month of February they did not meet with the same
difficulty from the ice. It was horribly cold, but there was not much wind. The
sun reappeared for the first time on the 31st of January, and every day he stopped
longer above the horizon. Bell and the doctor were almost blinded and half-
lame; the carpenter was obliged to walk upon crutches. Altamont still lived, but


he was in a state of complete insensibility. The doctor took great care of him,
although he wanted attention himself; he was getting ill with fatigue. Hatteras
thought of nothing but his ship. What state should he find it in?

On the 24th of February he stopped all of a sudden. A red light appeared
about 300 paces in front, and a column of black smoke went up to the sky.

"Look at that smoke! my ship is burning," said he with a beating heart.

"We are three miles off yet," said Bell; "it can't be the Forward."

"Yes it is," said the doctor; "the mirage makes it seem nearer."

The three men, leaving the sledge to the care of Dick, ran on, and in an
hour's time were in sight of the ship. She was burning in the midst of the ice,
which melted around her. A hundred steps farther a man met them, wringing his
hands before the Forward in flames. It was Johnson. Hatteras ran to him.

"My ship! My ship!" cried he.

"Is that you, captain? Oh, don't come any nearer," said Johnson.

"What is it?" said Hatteras.

"The wretches left forty-eight hours ago, after setting fire to the ship."

"Curse them!" cried Hatteras.

A loud explosion was then heard; the ground trembled; the icebergs fell upon
the ice-field; a column of smoke went up into the clouds, and the Forward blew
up. The doctor and Bell reached Hatteras, who out of the depths of despair cried:

"The cowards have fled! The strong will succeed! Johnson and Bell, you are
courageous. Doctor, you have science. I have faith. To the North Pole! To the
North Pole!"

His companions heard these energetic words, and they did them good; but it
was a terrible situation for these four men, alone, under the 80th degree of
latitude, in the midst of the Polar Regions!

END OF PART I OF THE ADVENTURES OF CAPTAIN HATTERAS


THE FIELD OF ICE
BY JULES VERNE


CHAPTER I.

THE DOCTOR’S INVENTORY.

It was a bold project of Hatteras to push his way to the North Pole, and gain
for his country the honour and glory of its discovery. But he had done all that lay
in human power now, and, after having struggled for nine months against
currents and tempests, shattering icebergs and breaking through almost


insurmountable barriers, amid the cold of an unprecedented winter, after having
outdistanced all his predecessors and accomplished half his task, he suddenly
saw all his hopes blasted. The treachery, or rather the despondency, of his worn-
out crew, and the criminal folly of one or two leading spirits among them had
left him and his little band of men in a terrible situation—helpless in an icy
desert, two thousand five hundred miles away from their native land, and
without even a ship to shelter them.

However, the courage of Hatteras was still undaunted. The three men which
were left him were the

[Illustration: ]

best on board his brig, and while they remained he might venture to hope.

After the cheerful, manly words of the captain, the Doctor felt the best thing
to be done was to look their prospects fairly in the face, and know the exact state
of things. Accordingly, leaving his companions, he stole away alone down to the
scene of the explosion.

Of the Forward, the brig that had been so carefully built and had become so
dear, not a vestige remained. Shapeless blackened fragments, twisted bars of
iron,

[Illustration: ]

cable ends still smouldering, and here and there in the distance spiral wreaths
of smoke, met his eye on all sides. His cabin and all his precious treasures were
gone, his books, and instruments, and collections reduced to ashes. As he stood
thinking mournfully of his irreparable loss, he was joined by Johnson, who
grasped his offered hand in speechless sorrow.

"What’s to become of us?" asked the Doctor.

"Who can tell!" was the old sailor’s reply.

"Anyhow," said Clawbonny, "do not let us despair! Let us be men!"

"Yes, Mr. Clawbonny, you are right. Now is the time to show our mettle. We
are in a bad plight, and how to get out of it, that is the question."

"Poor old brig!" exclaimed the Doctor. "I had grown so attached to her. I
loved her as one loves a house where he has spent a life-time."

"Ay! it’s strange what a hold those planks and beams get on a fellow’s heart."

"And the long-boat—is that burnt?" asked the Doctor.

"No, Mr. Clawbonny. Shandon and his gang have carried it off."

"And the pirogue?"

"Shivered into a thousand pieces? Stop. Do you see those bits of sheet-iron?
That is all that remains of it."

"Then we have nothing but the Halkett-boat?"

"Yes, we have that still, thanks to your idea of taking it with you."


"That isn’t much," said the Doctor.

"Oh, those base traitors!" exclaimed Johnson. "Heaven punish them as they
deserve!"

"Johnson," returned the Doctor, gently, "we must not forget how sorely they
have been tried. Only the best remain good in the evil day; few can stand
trouble. Let us pity our fellow-sufferers, and not curse them."

For the next few minutes both were silent, and then Johnson asked what had
become of the sledge.

"We left it about a mile off," was the reply.

"In charge of Simpson?"

"No, Simpson is dead, poor fellow!"

"Simpson dead!"

"Yes, his strength gave way entirely, and he first sank."

"Poor Simpson! And yet who knows if he isn’t rather to be envied?"

"But, for the dead man we have left behind, we have brought back a dying
one."

"A dying man?"

"Yes, Captain Altamont."

And in a few words he informed Johnson of their discovery.

"An American!" said Johnson, as the recital was ended.

"Yes, everything goes to prove that. But I wonder what the Porpoise was, and
what brought her in these seas?"

"She rushed on to her ruin like the rest of foolhardy adventurers; but, tell me,
did you find the coal?"

The Doctor shook his head sadly.

"No coal! not a vestige! No, we did not even get as far as the place
mentioned by Sir Edward Belcher."

"Then we have no fuel whatever?" said the old sailor.

"No."

"And no provisions?"

"No."

"And no ship to make our way back to England?"

It required courage indeed to face these gloomy realities, but, after a
moment’s silence, Johnson said again—

"Well, at any rate we know exactly how we stand. The first thing to be done
now is to make a hut, for we can’t stay long exposed to this temperature."

"Yes, we’ll soon manage that with Bell’s help," replied the Doctor. "Then we
must go and find the sledge, and bring back the American, and have a
consultation with Hatteras."


"Poor captain,” said Johnson, always forgetting his own troubles, "how he
must feel it!"

Clawbonny and Bell found Hatteras standing motionless, his arms folded in
his usual fashion. He seemed gazing into space, but his face had recovered its
calm, self-possessed expression. His faithful dog stood beside him, like his
master, apparently insensible to the biting cold, though the temperature was 32
degrees below zero.

Bell lay on the ice in an almost inanimate condition. Johnson had to take
vigorous measures to rouse him, but at last, by dint of shaking and rubbing him
with snow, he succeeded.

"Come, Bell," he cried, "don’t give way like this. Exert yourself, my man;
we must have a talk about our situation, and we need a place to put our heads in.
Come and help me, Bell. You haven’t forgotten how to make a snow hut, have
you? There is an iceberg all ready to hand; we’ve only got to hollow it out. Let’s
set to work; we shall find that is the best remedy for us."

Bell tried to shake off his torpor and help his comrade, while Mr. Clawbonny
undertook to go and fetch the sledge and the dogs.

"Will you go with him, captain?" asked Johnson.

"No, my friend," said Hatteras, in a gentle tone, "if the Doctor will kindly
undertake the task. Before the day ends I must come to some resolution, and I
need to be alone to think. Go. Do meantime whatever you think best. I will deal
with the future."

[Illustration: ]

Johnson went back to the Doctor, and said—

"It’s very strange, but the captain seems quite to have got over his anger. I
never heard him speak so gently before."

"So much the better," said Clawbonny. "Believe me, Johnson, that man can
save us yet."

And drawing his hood as closely round his head as possible, the Doctor
seized his iron-tipped staff, and set out without further delay.

Johnson and Bell commenced operations immediately. They had simply to
dig a hole in the heart of a great block of ice; but it was not easy work, owing to
the extreme hardness of the material. However, this very hardness guaranteed the
solidity of the dwelling, and the further their labours advanced the more they
became sheltered.

Hatteras alternately paced up and down, and stood motionless, evidently
shrinking from any approach to the scene of explosion.

In about an hour the Doctor returned, bringing with him Altamont lying on
the sledge, wrapped up in the folds of the tent. The poor dogs were so exhausted


from starvation that they could scarcely draw it along, and they had begun to
gnaw their harness. It was, indeed, high time for feasts and men to take food and
rest.

While the hut was being still further dug out, the Doctor went foraging
about, and had the good fortune to find a little stove, almost undamaged by the
explosion. He soon restored it to working trim, and, by the time the hut was
completed, had filled it with wood and got it lighted. Before long it was roaring,
and diffusing a genial warmth on all sides. The American was brought in and
laid on blankets, and the four Englishmen seated themselves round the fire to
enjoy their scanty meal of biscuit and hot tea, the last remains of the provisions
on the sledge. Not a word was spoken by Hatteras, and the others respected his
silence.

When the meal was over, the Doctor rose and went out, making a sign to
Johnson to follow.

"Come, Johnson," he said, "we will take an inventory of all we have left. We
must know exactly how we are off, and our treasures are scattered in all
directions; so we had better begin, and pick them up as fast as possible, for the
snow may fall at any moment, and then it would be quite useless to look for
anything."

"Don’t let us lose a minute, then," replied Johnson. "Fire and food— those
are our chief wants."

"Very well, you take one side and I’1l take the other, and we’ll search from
the centre to the circumference."

This task occupied two hours, and all they discovered was a little salt meat,
about 50 lbs. of pemmican, three sacks of biscuits, a small stock of chocolate,
five or six pints of brandy, and about 2 lbs. of coffee, picked up bean by bean off
the ice.

Neither blankets, nor hammocks, nor clothing—all had been consumed in the
devouring flame.

This slender store of provisions would hardly last three weeks, and they had
wood enough to supply the stove for about the same time.

[Illustration: The tired-out dogs were harnessed sorely against their will, and
before long returned bringing the few but precious treasures found among the
débris of the brig.—P.9]

Now that the inventory was made, the next business was to fetch the sledge.
The tired-out dogs were harnessed sorely against their will, and before long
returned bringing the few but precious treasures found among the débris of the
brig. These were safely deposited in the hut, and then Johnson and Clawbonny,
half-frozen with their work, resumed their places beside their companions in


misfortune.

CHAPTER II.

FIRST WORDS OF ALTAMONT.

About eight o’clock in the evening, the grey snow clouds cleared away for a
little, and the stars shone out brilliantly in the sky.

Hatteras seized the opportunity and went out silently to take the altitude of
some of the principal constellations. He wished to ascertain if the ice-field was
still drifting.

In half an hour he returned and sat down in a corner of the hut, where he
remained without stirring all night, motionless as if asleep, but in reality buried
in deepest thought.

The next day the snow fell heavily, and the Doctor congratulated himself on
his wise forethought, when he saw the white sheet lying three feet thick over the
scene of the explosion, completely obliterating all traces of the Forward.

It was impossible to venture outside in such weather, but the stove drew
capitally, and made the hut quite comfortable, or at any rate it seemed so to the
Weary, worn out adventurers.

The American was in less pain, and was evidently gradually coming back to
life. He opened his eyes, but could not yet speak, for his lips were so affected by
the scurvy that articulation was impossible, but he could hear and understand all
that was said to him. On learning what had passed, and the circumstances of his
discovery, he expressed his thanks by gestures, and the Doctor was too wise to
let him know how brief his respite from death would prove. In three weeks at
most every vestige of food would be gone.

About noon Hatteras roused himself, and going up to his friends, said—

"We must make up our minds what to do, but I must request Johnson to tell
me first all the particulars of the mutiny on the brig, and how this final act of
baseness came about."

"What good will that do?" said the Doctor. "The fact is certain, and it is no
use thinking over it."

"I differ from your opinion," rejoined Hatteras. "Let me hear the whole affair
from Johnson, and then I will banish it from my thoughts."

"Well," said the boatswain, "this was how it happened. I did all in my power
to prevent, but——"

"I am sure of that, Johnson; and what’s more, I have no doubt the ringleaders
had been hatching their plans for some time."

"That’s my belief too," said the Doctor.

[Illustration: Johnson's Story. —P.11]

"And so it is mine," resumed Johnson; "for almost immediately after your


departure Shandon, supported by the others, took the command of the ship.

I could not resist him, and from that moment everybody did pretty much as
they pleased. Shandon made no attempt to restrain them: it was his policy to
make them believe that their privations and toils were at an end. Economy was
entirely disregarded. A blazing fire was kept up in the stove, and the men were
allowed to eat and drink at discretion; not only tea and coffee was at their
disposal, but all the spirits on board, and on men who had been so long deprived
of ardent liquors, you may guess the result. They went on in this manner from
the 7th to the 15th of January."

"And this was Shandon’s doing?" asked Hatteras.

"Yes, captain."

"Never mention his name to me again! Go on, Johnson."

"It was about the 24th or 25th of January, that they resolved to abandon the
ship. Their plan was to reach the west coast of Baffin’s Bay, and from thence to
embark in the boat and follow the track of the whalers, or to get to some of the
Greenland settlements on the eastern side. Provisions were abundant, and the
sick men were so excited by the hope of return that they were almost well. They
began their preparations for departure by making a sledge which they were to
draw themselves, as they had no dogs. This was not ready till the 15th of
February, and I was always hoping for your arrival, though I half dreaded it too,
for you could have done nothing with the men, and they would have massacred
you rather than remain on board. I tried my influence on each one separately,
remonstrating and reasoning with them, and pointing out the dangers they would
encounter, and also the cowardice of leaving you, but it was a mere waste of
words; not even the best among them would listen to me. Shandon was impatient
to be off, and fixed the 22nd of February for starting. The sledge and the boat
were packed as closely as possible with provisions and spirits, and heaps of
wood, to obtain which they had hewed the brig down to her water-line. The last
day the men ran riot. They completely sacked the ship, and in a drunken
paroxysm Pen and two or three others set it on fire. I fought and struggled
against them, but they threw me down and assailed me with blows, and then the
wretches, headed by Shandon, went off towards the east and were soon out of
sight. I found myself alone on the burning ship, and what could I do? The fire-
hole was completely blocked up with ice. I had not a single drop of water! For
two days the Forward struggled with the flames, and you know the rest."

A long silence followed the gloomy recital, broken at length by Hatteras,
who said—

"Johnson, I thank you; you did all you could to save my ship, but single-
handed you could not resist. Again I thank you, and now let the subject be


dropped. Let us unite efforts for our common salvation. There are four of us,
four companions, four friends, and all our lives are equally precious. Let each
give his opinion on the best course for us to pursue."

"You ask us then, Hatteras," said the Doctor, "we are all devoted to you, and
our words come from our hearts. But will you not state you own views first?"

"That would be little use," said Hatteras, sadly; "my opinion might appear
interested; let me hear all yours first."

"Captain," said Johnson, "before pronouncing on such an important matter, I
wish to ask you a question."

"Ask it, then, Johnson."

"You went out yesterday to ascertain our exact position; well, is the field
drifting or stationary?"

"Perfectly stationary. It had not moved since the last reckoning was made. I
find we are just where we were before we left, in 80° 15" lat. and 97° 35" long."

"And what distance are we from the nearest sea to the west?"

"About six hundred miles."

"And that sea is eS

"Smith’s Sound," was the reply.

"The same that we could not get through last April?"

"The same."

"Well, captain, now we know our actual situation, we are in a better position
to determine our course of action."

"Speak your minds, then," said Hatteras, again burying his head in his hands.

"What do you say, Bell?" asked the Doctor.

"Tt strikes me the case doesn’t need long thinking over," said the carpenter.
"We must get back at once without losing a single day or even a single hour,
either to the south or west, and make our way to the nearest coast, even if we are
two months doing it!"

"We have only food for three weeks," replied Hatteras, without raising his
head.

"Very well," said Johnson, "we must make the journey in three weeks, since
it is our last chance. Even if we can only crawl on our knees before we get to our
destination, we must be there in twenty-five days."

"This part of the Arctic Continent is unexplored. We may have to encounter
difficulties. Mountains and glaciers may bar our progress," objected Hatteras.

"I don’t see that’s any sufficient reason for not attempting it. We shall have to
endure sufferings, no doubt, and perhaps many. We shall have to limit ourselves
to the barest quantities of food, unless our guns should procure us anything."

"There is only about half a pound of powder left," said Hatteras.





"Come now, Hatteras, I know the full weight of your objections, and I am not
deluding myself with vain hopes. But I think I can read your motive. Have you
any practical suggestion to offer?"

"No," said Hatteras, after a little hesitation.

"You don’t doubt our courage," continued the Doctor. "We would follow you
to the last—you know that. But must we not, meantime, give up all hope of
reaching the Pole? Your plans have been defeated by treachery. Natural
difficulties you might have overcome, but you have been outmatched by perfidy
and human weakness. You have done all that man could do, and you would have
succeeded I am certain; but situated as we are now, are you not obliged to
relinquish your projects for the present, and is not a return to England even
positively necessary before you could continue them?"

"Well, captain?” asked Johnson after waiting a considerable time for Hatteras
to reply.

Thus interrogated, he raised his head, and said in a constrained tone—

"You think yourselves quite certain then of reaching the Sound, exhausted
though you are, and almost without food?"

"No," replied the Doctor, "but there is one thing certain, the Sound won’t
come to us, we must go to it. We may chance to find some Esquimaux tribes
further south."

"Besides, isn’t there the chance of falling in with some ship that is wintering
here?" asked Johnson.

"Even supposing the Sound is blocked up, couldn’t we get across to some
Greenland or Danish settlement? At any rate, Hatteras, we can get nothing by
remaining here. The route to England is towards the south, not the north."

"Yes," said Bell, "Mr. Clawbonny is right. We must start, and start at once.
We have been forgetting our country too long already."

"Is this your advice, Johnson?" asked Hatteras again.

"Yes, captain."

"And yours, Doctor?"

"Yes, Hatteras."

Hatteras remained silent, but his face, in spite of himself, betrayed his inward
agitation. The issue of his whole life hung on the decision he had to make, for he
felt that to return to England was to lose all! He could not venture on a fourth
expedition.

The Doctor finding he did not reply, added—

"I ought also to have said, that there is not a moment to lose. The sledge
must be loaded with the provisions at once, and as much wood as possible. I
must confess six hundred miles is a long journey, but we can, or rather we must


make twenty miles a day, which will bring us to the coast about the 26th of
March."

"But cannot we wait a few days yet?" said Hatteras.

"What are you hoping for?" asked Johnson.

"I don’t know. Who can tell the future? It is necessary, too, that you should
get your strength a little recruited. You might sink down on the road with fatigue,
without even a snow hut to shelter you."

"But think of the terrible death that awaits us here," replied the carpenter.

"My friends," said Hatteras, in almost supplicating tones; "you are despairing
too soon. I should propose that we should seek our deliverance towards the
north, but you would refuse to follow me, and yet why should there not be
Esquimaux tribes round about the Pole as well as towards the south? The open
sea, of the existence of which we are certified, must wash the shores of
continents. Nature is logical in all her doings. Consequently vegetation must be
found there when the earth is no longer ice-bound. Is there not a promised land
awaiting us in the north from which you would flee?"

Hatteras became animated as he spoke, and Doctor Clawbonny’s excitable
nature was so wrought upon that his decision began to waver. He was on the
point of yielding, when Johnson, with his wiser head and calmer temperament,
recalled him to reason and duty by calling out—

"Come, Bell, let us be off to the sledge."

"All right," said Bell, and the two had risen to leave the hut, when Hatteras
exclaimed—

"Oh, Johnson! You! you! Well, go! I shall stay, I shall stay!"

"Captain!" said Johnson, stopping in spite of himself.

"IT shall stay, I tell you. Go! Leave me like the rest! Come, Duk, you and I
will stay together."

The faithful dog barked as if he understood, and settled himself down beside
his master. Johnson looked at the Doctor, who seemed at a loss to know what to
do, but came to the conclusion at last that the best way, meantime, was to calm
Hatteras, even at the sacrifice of a day. He was just about to try the force of his
eloquence in this direction, when he felt a light touch on his arm, and turning
round saw Altamont who had crawled out of bed and managed to get on his
knees. He was trying to speak, but his swollen lips could scarcely make a sound.
Hatteras went towards him, and watched his efforts to articulate so attentively
that in a few minutes he made out a word that sounded like Porpoise, and
stooping over him he asked—

"Is it the Porpoise?"

Altamont made a sign in the affirmative, and Hatteras went on with his


queries, now that he had found a clue.

"In these seas?"

The affirmative gesture was repeated.

"Is she in the north?"

"Yes."

"Do you know her position?"

"Yes."

"Exactly?"

"Yes."

For a minute or so, nothing more was said, and the onlookers waited with
palpitating hearts.

Then Hatteras spoke again and said—

"Listen to me. We must know the exact position of your vessel. I will count
the degrees aloud, and you; will stop me when I come to the right one."

The American assented by a motion of the head, and Hatteras began—

"We'll take the longitude first. 105°, No? 106°, 107°? It is to the west, I
suppose?"

"Yes," replied Altamont.

"Let us go on, then: 109°, 110°, 112°, 114°, 116°, 118°, 120°."

"Yes," interrupted the sick man.

[Illustration: ]

"120° of longitude, and how many minutes? I will count."

Hatteras began at number one, and when he got to fifteen, Altamont made a
sign to stop.

"Very good," said Hatteras; "now for the latitude. Are you listening? 80°,
B81? 62%, 83°2"

Again the sign to stop was made.

"Now for the minutes: 5’, 10’, 15’, 20’, 25’, 30’, 35’."

Altamont stopped him once more, and smiled feebly.

"You say, then, that the Porpoise is in longitude 120° 15’, and latitude 83°
go°2"

"Yes," sighed the American, and fell back motionless in the Doctor’s arms,
completely overpowered by the effort he had made.

"Friends!" exclaimed Hatteras; "you see I was right. Our salvation lies
indeed in the north, always in the north. We shall be saved!"

But the joyous, exulting words had hardly escaped his lips before a sudden
thought made his countenance change. The serpent of jealousy had stung him,
for this stranger was an American, and he had reached three degrees nearer the
Pole than the ill-fated Forward.


CHAPTER III.

A SEVENTEEN DAYS’ MARCH.

These first words of Altamont had completely changed the whole aspect of
affairs, but his communication was still incomplete, and, after giving him a little
time to rest, the Doctor undertook the task of conversing again with him, putting
his questions in such a form that a movement of the head or eyes would be a
sufficient answer.

He soon ascertained that the Porpoise was a three-mast American ship, from
New York, wrecked on the ice, with provisions and combustibles in abundance
still on board, and that, though she had been thrown on her side, she had not
gone to pieces, and there was every chance of saving her cargo.

Altamont and his crew had left her two months previously, taking the long
boat with them on a sledge. They intended to get to Smith’s Sound, and reach
some whaler that would take them back to America; but one after another
succumbed to fatigue and illness, till at last Altamont and two men were all that
remained out of thirty; and truly he had survived by a providential miracle, while
his two companions already lay beside him in the sleep of death.

Hatteras wished to know why the Porpoise had come so far north, and
learned in reply that she had been irresistibly driven there by the ice. But his
anxious fears were not satisfied with this explanation, and he asked further what
was the purpose of his voyage. Altamont said he wanted to make the north-west
passage, and this appeared to content the jealous Englishman, for he made no
more reference to the subject. "Well," said the Doctor, "it strikes me that, instead
of trying to get to Baffin’s Bay, our best plan would be to go in search of the
Porpoise, for here lies a ship a full third of the distance nearer, and, more than
that, stocked with everything necessary for winter quarters."


"I see no other course open to us," replied Bell.

"And the sooner we go the better," added Johnson, "for the time we allow
ourselves must depend on our provisions."

"You are right, Johnson," returned the Doctor. "If we start to-morrow, we
must reach the Porpoise by the 15th of March, unless we mean to die of
starvation. What do you say, Hatteras?"

"Let us make preparations immediately, but perhaps the route may be longer
than we suppose.”

"How can that be, captain? The man seems quite sure of the position of his
ship," said the Doctor.

"But suppose the ice-field should have drifted like ours?"

Here Altamont, who was listening attentively, made a sign that he wished to
speak, and, after much difficulty, he succeeded in telling the Doctor that the
Porpoise had struck on rocks near the coast, and that it was impossible for her to
move.

This was reassuring information, though it cut off all hope of returning to
Europe, unless Bell could construct a smaller ship out of the wreck.

[Illustration: ]

No time was lost in getting ready to start. The sledge was the principal thing,
as it needed thorough repair. There was plenty of wood, and, profiting by the
experience they had recently had of this mode of transit, several improvements
were made by Bell.


Inside, a sort of couch was laid for the American, and covered over with the
tent. The small stock of provisions did not add much to the weight, but, to make
up the deficiency, as much wood was piled up on it as it could hold.

The Doctor did the packing, and made an exact calculation of how long their
stores would last. He found that, by allowing three-quarter rations to each man
and full rations to the dogs, they might hold out for three weeks.

Towards seven in the evening, they felt so worn out that they were obliged to
give up work for the night; but, before lying down to sleep, they heaped up the
wood in the stove, and made a roaring fire, determined to allow themselves this
parting luxury. As they gathered round it, basking in the unaccustomed heat, and
enjoying their hot coffee and biscuits and pemmican, they became quite cheerful,
and forgot all their sufferings.

About seven in the morning they set to work again and by three in the
afternoon everything was ready.

It was almost dark, for, though the sun had reappeared above the horizon
since the 31st of January, his light was feeble and of short duration. Happily the


moon would rise about half-past six, and her soft beams would give sufficient
light to show the road.

The parting moment came. Altamont was overjoyed at the idea of starting,
though the jolting would necessarily increase his sufferings, for the Doctor
would find on board the medicines he required for his cure.

They lifted him on to the sledge, and laid him as comfortably as possible,
and then harnessed the dogs, including Duk. One final look towards the icy bed
where the Forward had been, and the little party set out for the Porpoise. Bell
was scout, as before; the Doctor and Johnson took each a side of the sledge, and
lent a helping hand when necessary; while Hatteras walked behind to keep all in
the right track.

They got on pretty quickly, for the weather was good, and the ice smooth and
hard, allowing the sledge to glide easily along, yet the temperature was so low
that men and dogs were soon panting, and had often to stop and take breath.
About seven the moon shone out, and irradiated the whole horizon. Far as the
eye could see, there was nothing visible but a wide-stretching level plain of ice,
without a solitary hummock or patch to relieve the uniformity.

[Illustration: ]

As the Doctor remarked to his companion, it looked like some vast,
monotonous desert.

"Ay! Mr. Clawbonny, it is a desert, but we shan’t die of thirst in it at any
rate."

"That’s a comfort, certainly, but I’ll tell you one thing: it proves, Johnson, we
must be a great distance from any coast. The nearer the coast, the more
numerous the icebergs in general, and you see there is not one in sight."

"The horizon is rather misty, though."

"So it is, but ever since we started, we have been on this same interminable
ice-field."

"Do you know, Mr. Clawbonny, that smooth as this ice is, we are going over
most dangerous ground? Fathomless abysses lie beneath our feet."

"That’s true enough, but they won’t engulph us. This white sheet over them
is pretty tough, I can tell you. It is always getting thicker too; for in these
latitudes, it snows nine days out of ten even in April and May; ay, and in June as
well. The ice here, in some parts, cannot be less than between thirty and forty
feet thick."

"That sounds reassuring, at all events." said Johnson.

"Yes, we’re not like the skaters on the Serpentine—always in danger of
falling through. This ice is strong enough to bear the weight of the Custom
House in Liverpool, or the Houses of Parliament in Westminster."


"Can they reckon pretty nearly what ice will bear, Mr. Clawbonny?" asked
the old sailor, always eager for information.

"What can’t be reckoned now-a-days? Yes, ice two inches thick will bear a
man; three and a half inches, a man on horse-back; five inches, an eight pounder;
eight inches, field artillery; and ten inches, a whole army."

"It is difficult to conceive of such a power of resistance, but you were
speaking of the incessant snow just now, and I cannot help wondering where it
comes from, for the water all round is frozen, and what makes the clouds?"

"That’s a natural enough question, but my notion is that nearly all the snow
or rain that we get here comes from the temperate zones. I fancy each of those
snowflakes was originally a drop of water in some river, caught up by
evaporation into the air, and wafted over here in the shape of clouds; so that it is
not impossible that when we quench our thirst with the melted snow, we are
actually drinking from the very rivers of our own native land."

Just at this moment the conversation was interrupted by Hatteras, who called
out that they were getting out of the straight line. The increasing mist made it
difficult to keep together, and at last, about eight o’clock, they determined to
come to a halt, as they had gone fifteen miles. The tent was put up and the stove
lighted, and after their usual supper they lay down and slept comfortably till
morning.

The calm atmosphere was highly favourable, for though the cold became
intense, and the mercury was always frozen in the thermometer, they found no
difficulty in continuing their route, confirming the truth of Parry’s assertion that
any man suitably clad may walk abroad with impunity in the lowest temperature,
provided there is no wind; while, on the other hand, the least breeze would make
the skin smart acutely, and bring on violent headache, which would soon end in
death.

On the 5th of March a peculiar phenomenon occurred. The sky was perfectly
clear and glittering with stars, when suddenly snow began to fall thick and fast,
though there was not a cloud in the heavens and through the white flakes the
constellations could be seen shining. This curious display lasted two hours, and
ceased before the Doctor could arrive at any satisfactory conclusion as to its
cause.

The moon had ended her last quarter, and complete darkness prevailed now
for seventeen hours out of the twenty-four. The travellers had to fasten
themselves together with a long rope to avoid getting separated, and it was all
but impossible to pursue the right course. Moreover, the brave fellows, in spite
of their iron will, began to show signs of fatigue. Halts became more frequent,
and yet every hour was precious, for the provisions were rapidly coming to an


end.

Hatteras hardly knew what to think as day after day went on without
apparent result, and he asked himself sometimes whether the Porpoise had any
actual existence except in Altamont’s fevered brain, and more than once the idea
even came into his head that perhaps national hatred might have induced the
American to drag them along with himself to certain death.

He told the Doctor his suppositions, who rejected them absolutely, and laid
them down to the score of the unhappy rivalry that had arisen already between
the two captains.

[Illustration: ]

On the 14th of March, after sixteen days’ march the little party found
themselves only yet in the 82° latitude. Their strength was exhausted, and they
had a hundred miles more to go. To increase their sufferings, rations had to be
still further reduced. Each man must be content with a fourth part to allow the
dogs their full quantity.

Unfortunately they could not rely at all on their guns, for only seven charges
of powder were left, and six balls. They had fired at several hares and foxes on
the road already, but unsuccessfully.

However, on the 15th, the Doctor was fortunate enough to surprise a seal
basking on the ice, and, after several shots, the animal was captured and killed.

Johnson soon had it skinned and cut in pieces, but it was so lean that it was
worthless as food, unless its captors would drink the oil like the Esquimaux.

The Doctor was bold enough to make the attempt, but failed in spite of
himself.

Next day several icebergs and hummocks were noticed on the horizon. Was
this a sign that land was near, or was it some ice-field that had broken up? It was
difficult to know what to surmise.

On arriving at the first of these hummocks, the travellers set to work to make
a cave in it where they could rest more comfortably than in the tent, and after
three hours’ persevering toil, were able to light their stove and lie down beside it
to stretch their weary limbs.

CHAPTER IV.


THE LAST CHARGE OF POWDER


Johnson was obliged to take the dogs inside the hut, for they would have
been soon frozen outside in such dry weather. Had it been snowing they would
have been safe enough, for the snow served as a covering, and kept in the natural


heat of the animals.

The old sailor, who made a first-rate dog-driver, tried his beasts with the oily
flesh of the seal; and found, to his joyful surprise, that they ate it greedily. The
Doctor said he was not astonished at this, as in North America the horses were
chiefly fed on fish; and he thought that what would satisfy an herbivorous horse
might surely content an omnivorous dog.

The whole party were soon buried in deep sleep, for they were fairly
overcome with fatigue. Johnson awoke his companions early next morning, and
the march was resumed in haste. Their lives depended now on their speed, for
provisions would only hold out three days longer.

The sky was magnificent; the atmosphere extremely clear, and the
temperature very low. The sun rose in the form of a long ellipse, owing to
refraction, which made his horizontal diameter appear twice the length of his
vertical.

[Illustration: ]

The Doctor, gun in hand, wandered away from the others, braving the
solitude and the cold in the hope of discovering game. He had only sufficient
powder left to load three times, and he had just three balls. That was little
enough should he encounter a bear, for it often takes ten or twelve shots to have
any effect on these enormous animals.

But the brave Doctor would have been satisfied with humbler game. A few
hares or foxes would be a welcome addition to their scanty food; but all that day,
if even he chanced to see one, either he was too far away, or he was deceived by
refraction, and took a wrong aim. He came back to his companions at night with
crestfallen looks, having wasted one ball and one charge of powder.

Next day the route appeared more difficult, and the weary men could hardly
drag themselves along. The dogs had devoured even the entrails of the seal, and
began to gnaw their traces.

A few foxes passed in the distance, and the Doctor lost another ball in
attempting to shoot them.

They were forced to come to a halt early in the evening, though the road was
illumined by a splendid Aurora Borealis; for they could not put one foot before
the other.

Their last meal, on the Sunday evening, was a very sad one—if no
providential help came, their doom was sealed.

Johnson set a few traps before going to sleep, though he had no baits to put
inside them. He was very disappointed to find them all empty in the morning,
and was returning gloomily to the hut, when he perceived a bear of huge
dimensions. The old sailor took it into his head that Heaven had sent this beast


specially for him to kill; and without waking his comrades, he seized the
Doctor’s gun, and was soon in pursuit of his prey. On reaching the right distance,
he took aim; but, just as his finger touched the trigger, he felt his arm tremble.
His thick gloves hampered him, and, flinging them hastily off, he took up the
gun with a firmer grasp. But what a cry of agony escaped him! The skin of his
fingers stuck to the gun as if it had been

red-hot, and he was forced to let it drop. The sudden fall made it go off, and
the last ball was discharged in the air.

The Doctor ran out at the noise of the report, and understood all at a glance.
He saw the animal walking quietly off, and poor Johnson forgetting his
sufferings in his despair.

[Illustration: ]

"Tam a regular milksop!" he exclaimed, "a cry-baby, that can’t stand the least
pain! And at my age, too!"

"Come, Johnson; go in at once, or you will be frost-bitten. Look at your
hands—they are white already! Come, come this minute."

"IT am not worth troubling about, Mr. Clawbonny," said the old boatswain.
"Never mind me!"

"But you must come in, you obstinate fellow. Come, now, I tell you; it will
be too late presently."

At last he succeeded in dragging the poor fellow into the tent, where he made
him plunge his hands into a

bowl of water, which the heat of the stove kept in a liquid state, though still
cold. Johnson’s hands had hardy touched it before it froze immediately.

"You see it was high time you came in; I should have been forced to
amputate soon," said the Doctor.

Thanks to his endeavours, all danger was over in about an hour, but he was
advised to keep his hands at a good distance from the stove for some time still.

That morning they had no breakfast. Pemmican and salt beef were both done.
Not a crumb of biscuit remained. They were obliged to content themselves with
half a cup of hot coffee, and start off again.

They scarcely went three miles before they were compelled to give up for the
day. They had no supper but coffee, and the dogs were so ravenous that they
were almost devouring each other.

Johnson fancied he could see the bear following them in the distance, but he
made no remark to his companions. Sleep forsook the unfortunate men, and their
eyes grew wild and haggard.

Tuesday morning came, and it was thirty-four hours since they had tasted a
morsel of food. Yet these brave, stout-hearted men continued their march,


sustained by their superhuman energy of purpose. They pushed the sledge
themselves, for the dogs could no longer draw it.

At the end of two hours, they sank exhausted. Hatteras urged them to make a
fresh attempt, but his entreaties and supplications were powerless; they could not
do impossibilities.

[Illustration: ]

"Well, at any rate," he said, "I won’t die of cold if I must of hunger." He set
to work to hew out

a hut in an iceberg, aided by Johnson, and really they looked like men
digging their own tomb.

It was hard labour, but at length the task was accomplished. The little house
was ready, and the miserable men took up their abode in it.

In the evening, while the others lay motionless, a sort of hallucination came
over Johnson, and he began raving about bears.

The Doctor roused himself from his torpor, and asked the old man what he
meant, and what bear he was talking about.

"The bear that is following us," replied Johnson.

"A bear following us?"

"Yes, for the last two days!"

"For the last two days! You have seen him?"

"Yes, about a mile to leeward."

"And you never told me, Johnson!"

"What was the good!"

"True enough," said the Doctor; "we have not a single bail to send after
him!"

"No, not even a bit of iron!"

The Doctor was silent for a minute, as if thinking. Then he said—

"Are you quite certain the animal is following us?"

"Yes, Mr. Clawbonny, he is reckoning on a good feed of human flesh!"

"Johnson!" exclaimed the Doctor, grieved at the despairing mood of his
companion.

"He is sure enough of his meal!" continued the

"You have no ball!"

"T’1l make one."

"You have no lead!"

"No, but I have mercury."

So saying, he took the thermometer, which stood at 50° above zero, and went
outside and laid it on a block of ice. Then he came in again, and said,
"Tomorrow! Go to sleep, and wait till the sun rises."


With the first streak of dawn next day, the Doctor and Johnson rushed out to
look at the thermometer. All the mercury had frozen into a compact cylindrical
mass. The Doctor broke the tube and took it out. Here was a hard piece of metal
ready for use.

"It is wonderful, Mr. Clawbonny; you ought to be a proud man."

"Not at all, my friend, I am only gifted with a good memory, and I have read
a great deal."

"How did that help you?"

"Why, I just happened to recollect a fact related by Captain Ross in his
voyages. He states that they pierced a plank, an inch thick, with a bullet made of
mercury. Oil would even have suited my purpose, for, he adds, that a ball of
frozen almond oil splits through a post without breaking in pieces."

"Tt is quite incredible!"

"But it is a fact, Johnson. Well, come now, this bit of metal may save our
lives. We’ll leave it exposed to the air a little while, and go and have a look for
the bear."

Just then Hatteras made his appearance, and the

Doctor told him his project, and showed him the mercury.

The captain grasped his hand silently, and the three hunters went off in quest
of their game.

[Illustration: ]

The weather was very clear, and Hatteras, who was a little ahead of the
others, speedily discovered the bear about three hundred yards distant, sitting on
his hind quarters sniffing the air, evidently scenting the intruders on his domains.

"There he is!" he exclaimed.

"Hush!" cried the Doctor.

But the enormous quadruped, even when he perceived his antagonists, never
stirred, and displayed neither fear nor anger. It would not be easy to get near
him, however, and Hatteras said—

"Friends, this is no idle sport, our very existence is at stake; we must act
prudently."

"Yes," replied the Doctor, "for we have but the one shot to depend upon. We
must not miss, for if Away they went, while the old boatswain slipped behind a
hummock, which completely hid him from the bear, who continued still in the
same place and in the same position.

CHAPTER V.

THE SEAL AND THE BEAR.

"You know, Doctor," said Hatteras, as they returned to the hut, "the polar
bears subsist almost entirely on seals. They’ll lie in wait for them beside the


crevasses for whole days, ready to strangle them the moment their heads appear
above the surface. It is not likely, then, that a bear will be frightened of a seal."

"T think I see what you are after, but it is dangerous."

"Yes, but there is more chance of success than in trying any other plan, so I
mean to risk it. I am going to dress myself in the seal’s skin, and creep along the
ice. Come, don’t let us lose time. Load the gun and give it me."

The Doctor could not say anything, for he would have done the same
himself, so he followed Hatteras silently to the sledge, taking with him a couple
of hatchets for his own and Johnson’s use.

Hatteras soon made his toilette, and slipped into the skin, which was big
enough to cover him almost entirely.

"Now, then, give me the gun," he said, "and you be off to Johnson. I must try
and steal a march on my adversary."

"Courage, Hatteras!" said the Doctor, handing him the weapon, which he had
carefully loaded meanwhile.

"Never fear! but be sure you don’t show yourselves till I fire."

The Doctor soon joined the old boatswain behind the hummock, and told
him what they had been doing. The bear was still there, but moving restlessly
about, as if he felt the approach of danger.

In a quarter of an hour or so the seal made his appearance on the ice. He had
gone a good way round, so as to come on the bear by surprise, and every
movement was so perfect an imitation of a seal, that even the Doctor would have
been deceived if he had not known it was Hatteras.

"It is capital!" said Johnson, in a low voice. The bear had instantly caught
sight of the supposed seal, for he gathered himself up, preparing to make a
spring as the animal came nearer, apparently seeking to return to his native
element, and unaware of the enemy’s proximity. Bruin went to work with
extreme prudence, though his eyes glared with greedy desire to clutch the
coveted prey, for he had probably been fasting a month, if not two. He allowed
his victim to get within ten paces of him, and then sprang forward with a
tremendous bound, but stopped short, stupefied and frightened, within three
steps of Hatteras, who started up that moment, and, throwing off his disguise,
knelt on one knee, and aimed straight at the bear’s heart. He fired, and the huge
monster rolled back on the ice.

[Illustration: ]

"Forward! Forward!" shouted the Doctor, hurrying towards Hatteras, for the
bear had reared on his hind legs, and was striking the air with one paw and
tearing up the snow to stanch his wound with the other.

Hatteras never moved, but waited, knife in hand. He had aimed well, and


fired with a sure and steady aim. Before either of his companions came up he
had plunged the knife in the animal’s throat, and made an end of him, for he fell
down at once to rise no more.

"Hurrah! Bravo!" shouted Johnson and the Doctor, but Hatteras was as cool
and unexcited as possible, and stood with folded arms gazing at his prostrate foe.

"Tt is my turn now," said Johnson. "It is a good thing the bear is killed, but if
we leave him out here much longer, he will get as hard as a stone, and we shall
be able to do nothing with him."

He began forthwith to strip the skin off, and a fine business it was, for the
enormous quadruped was almost as large as an ox. It measured nearly nine feet
long, and four round, and the great tusks in his jaws were three inches long.

On cutting the carcase open, Johnson found nothing but water in the
stomach. The beast had evidently had no food for a long time, yet it was very fat,
and weighed fifteen hundred pounds. The hunters were so famished that they
had hardly patience to carry home the flesh to be cooked, and it needed all the
Doctor’s persuasion to prevent them eating it raw.

On entering the hut, each man with a load on his back, Clawbonny was
struck with the coldness that pervaded the atmosphere. On going up to the stove
he found the fire black out. The exciting business of the morning had made
Johnson neglect his accustomed duty of replenishing the stove.

The Doctor tried to blow the embers into a flame, but finding he could not
even get a red spark, he went out to the sledge to fetch tinder, and get the steel
from Johnson.

The old sailor put his hand into his pocket, but was surprised to find the steel
missing. He felt in the other pockets, but it was not there. Then he went into the
hut again, and shook the blanket he had slept in all night, but his search was still
unsuccessful.

He went back to his companions and said—

"Are you sure, Doctor, you haven’t the steel?"

"Quite, Johnson."

"And you haven’t it either, captain?"

"Not I!" replied Hatteras.

"Tt has always been in your keeping," said the Doctor.

"Well, I have not got it now!" exclaimed Johnson, turning pale.

"Not got the steel!" repeated the Doctor, shuddering involuntarily at the bare
idea of its loss, for it was all the means they had of procuring a fire.

"Look again, Johnson," he said.

The boatswain hurried to the only remaining place he could think of, the
hummock where he had stood to watch the bear. But the missing treasure was


nowhere to be found, and the old sailor returned in despair.

Hatteras looked at him, but no word of reproach escaped his lips. He only
said—

"This is a serious business, Doctor."

"Tt is, indeed!" said Clawbonny.

"We have not even an instrument, some glass that we might take the lens out
of, and use like a burning glass."

"No, and it is a great pity, for the sun’s rays are quite strong enough just now
to light our tinder."

"Well," said Hatteras, "we must just appease our hunger with the raw meat,
and set off again as soon as we can, to try to discover the ship."

"Yes!" replied Clawbonny, speaking to himself, absorbed in his own
reflections. "Yes, that might do at a pinch! Why not? We might try."

"What are you dreaming about?" asked Hatteras.

"An idea has just occurred to me."

"An idea come into your head, Doctor," exclaimed Johnson; "then we are
saved!"

"Will it succeed? that’s the question."

"What’s your project?" said Hatteras.

"We want a lens; well, let us make one."

"How?" asked Johnson.

"With a piece of ice."

"What? Do you think that would do?"

"Why not? All that is needed is to collect the sun’s rays into one common
focus, and ice will serve that purpose as well as the finest crystal."

"Is it possible?" said Johnson.

"Yes, only I should like fresh water ice, it is harder and more transparent than
the other."

"There it is to your hand, if I am not much mistaken," said Johnson, pointing
to a hummock close by.

[Illustration: ]

"I fancy that is fresh water, from the dark look of it, and the green tinge."

"You are right. Bring your hatchet, Johnson."

A good-sized piece was soon cut off, about a foot in diameter, and the Doctor
set to work. He began by chopping it into rough shape with the hatchet; then he
operated upon it more carefully with his knife, making as smooth a surface as
possible, and finished the polishing process with his fingers, rubbing away until
he had obtained as transparent a lens as if it had been made of magnificent
crystal.


The sun was shining brilliantly enough for the Doctor’s experiment. The
tinder was fetched, and held beneath the lens so as to catch the rays in full
power. In a few seconds it took fire, to Johnson’s rapturous delight.

He danced about like an idiot, almost beside himself with joy, and shouted,
"Hurrah! hurrah!" while Clawbonny hurried back into the hut and rekindled the
fire. The stove was soon roaring, and it was not many minutes before the
savoury odour of broiled bear-steaks roused Bell from his torpor.

What a feast this meal was to the poor starving men may be imagined. The
Doctor, however, counselled moderation in eating, and set the example himself.

"This is a glad day for us," he said, "and we have no fear of wanting food all
the rest of our journey. Still we must not forget we have further to go yet, and I
think the sooner we start the better."

"We cannot be far off now," said Altamont, who could almost articulate
perfectly again; "we must be within forty-eight hours’ march of the Porpoise."

"I hope we’ll find something there to make a fire with," said the Doctor,
smiling. "My lens does well enough at present; but it needs the sun, and there are
plenty of days when he does not make his appearance here, within less than four
degrees of the pole."

"Less than four degrees!" repeated Altamont, with a sigh; "yes, my ship went
further than any other has ever ventured."

"Tt is time we started," said Hatteras, abruptly.

"Yes," replied the Doctor, glancing uneasily at the two captains.

The dogs were speedily harnessed to the sledge, and the march resumed.
[Illustration: ]

As they went along, the Doctor tried to get out of Altamont the real motive
that had brought him so far north. But the American made only evasive replies,
and Clawbonny whispered in old Johnson’s ear—

"Two men we’ve got that need looking after."

"You are right," said Johnson.

"Hatteras never says a word to this American, and I must say the man has not
shown himself very grateful. I am here, fortunately."

"Mr. Clawbonny," said Johnson, "now this Yankee has come back to life
again, I must confess I don’t much like the expression of his face."

"IT am much mistaken if he does not suspect the projects of Hatteras."

"Do you think his own were similar?"

"Who knows? These Americans, Johnson, are bold, daring fellows. It is
likely enough an American would try to do as much as an Englishman."

"Then you think that Altamont—"

"I think nothing about it, but his ship is certainly on the road to the North


Pole."

"But didn’t Altamont say that he had been caught among the ice, and
dragged there irresistibly?"

"He said so, but I fancied there was a peculiar smile on his lips while he
spoke."

"Hang it! It would be a bad job, Mr. Clawbonny, if any feeling of rivalry
came between two men of their stamp."

"Heaven forfend! for it might involve the most serious consequences,
Johnson."

"I hope Altamont will remember he owes his life to us?"

"But do we not owe ours to him now? I grant, without us, he would not be
alive at this moment, but without him and his ship, what would become of us?"

"Well, Mr. Clawbonny, you are here to keep things straight anyhow, and that
is a blessing."

"I hope I may manage it, Johnson."

The journey proceeded without any fresh incident, but on the Saturday
morning the travellers found themselves in a region of quite an altered character.
Instead of the wide smooth plain of ice that had hitherto stretched before them,
overturned icebergs and broken hummocks covered the horizon; while the
frequent blocks of fresh-water ice showed that some coast was near.

Next day, after a hearty breakfast off the bear’s paws, the little party
continued their route; but the road became toilsome and fatiguing. Altamont lay
watching the horizon with feverish anxiety—an anxiety shared by all his
companions, for, according to the last reckoning made by Hatteras, they were
now exactly in latitude 83° 35" and longitude 120° 15", and the question of life
or death would be decided before the day was over.

At last, about two o’clock in the afternoon, Altamont started up with a shout
that arrested the whole party, and pointing to a white mass that no eye but his
could have distinguished from the surrounding icebergs, exclaimed in a loud,
ringing voice, "The Porpoise."

CHAPTER VI.


THE PORPOISE


It was the 24th of March, and Palm Sunday, a bright, joyous day in many a
town and village of the Old World, but in this desolate region what mournful
silence prevailed! No willow branches here with their silvery blossom — not
even a single withered leaf to be seen — not a blade of grass!


Yet this was a glad day to the travellers, for it promised them speedy
deliverance from the death that had seemed so inevitable.

They hastened onward, the dogs put forth renewed energy, and Duk barked
his loudest, till, before long, they arrived at the ship. The Porpoise was
completely buried under the snow. All her masts and rigging had been destroyed
in the shipwreck, and she was lying on a bed of rocks so entirely on her side that
her hull was uppermost.

They had to knock away fifteen feet of ice before they could even catch a
glimpse of her, and it was not without great difficulty that they managed to get
on board, and made the welcome discovery that the provision stores had not
been visited by any four-footed marauders. It was quite evident, however, that
the ship was not habitable.

"Never mind!" said Hatteras, "Wwe must build a snow-house, and make
ourselves comfortable on land."

"Yes, but we need not hurry over it," said the Doctor; "let us do it well while
we’re about it, and for a time we can make shift on board; for we must build a
good, substantial house, that will protect us from the bears as well as the cold.
I'll undertake to be the architect, and you shall see what a first-rate job I’1l make
of it."

"I don’t doubt your talents, Mr. Clawbonny," replied Johnson; "but,
meantime, let us see about taking up our abode here, and making an inventory of
the stores we find. There does not seem a boat visible of any description, and I
fear these timbers are in too bad a condition to build a new ship out of them."

"I don’t know that," returned Clawbonny, "time and thought do wonders; but
our first business is to build a house, and not a ship; one thing at a time, I
propose."

"And quite right too," said Hatteras; "so we’ll go ashore again."

They returned to the sledge, to communicate the result of their investigation
to Bell and Altamont; and about four in the afternoon the five men installed
themselves as well as they could on the wreck. Bell had managed to make a
tolerably level floor with planks and spars; the stiffened cushions and hammocks
were placed round the stove to thaw, and were soon fit for use. Altamont, with
the Doctor’s assistance, got on board without much trouble, and a sigh of
satisfaction escaped him as if he felt himself once more at home—a sigh which
to Johnson’s ear boded no good.

The rest of the day was given to repose, and they wound up with a good
supper off the remains of the bear, backed by a plentiful supply of biscuit and hot
tea.

[Illustration: The poor fellows felt like colonists safely arrived at their


destination—P.57]

It was late next morning before Hatteras and his companions woke, for their
minds were not burdened now with any solicitudes about the morrow, and they
might sleep as long as they pleased. The poor fellows felt like colonists safely
arrived at their destination, who had forgotten all the sufferings of the voyage,
and thought only of the new life that lay before them.

"Well, it is something at all events," said the Doctor, rousing himself and
stretching his arms, "for a fellow not to need to ask where he is going to find his
next bed and breakfast."

"Let us see what there is on board before we say much," said Johnson.

The Porpoise has been thoroughly equipped and provisioned for a long
voyage, and, on making an inventory of what stores remained, they found 6150
Ibs. of flour, fat, and raisins; 2000 lbs. of salt beef and pork, 1500 lbs. of
pemmican; 700 lbs. of sugar, and the same of chocolate; a chest and a half of tea,
weighing 96 lbs.; 500 lbs. of rice; several barrels of preserved fruits and
vegetables; a quantity of lime-juice, with all sorts of medicines, and 300 gallons
of rum and brandy. There was also a large supply of gunpowder, ball, and shot,
and coal and wood in abundance.

Altogether, there was enough to last those five men for more than two years,
and all fear of death from starvation or cold was at an end.

"Well, Hatteras, we’re sure of enough to live on now,” said the Doctor, "and
there is nothing to hinder us reaching the Pole."

"The Pole!" echoed Hatteras.

"Yes, why not? Can’t we push our way overland in the summer months?"

"We might overland; but how could we cross water?"

"Perhaps we may be able to build a boat out of some of the ship’s planks."

"Out of an American ship!" exclaimed the captain, contemptuously.

Clawbonny was prudent enough to make no reply, and presently changed the
conversation by saying—

"Well, now we have seen what we have to depend upon, we must begin our
house and store-rooms. We have materials enough at hand; and, Bell, I hope you
are going to distinguish yourself," he added.

"I am ready, Mr. Clawbonny," replied Bell; "and, as for material, there is
enough for a town here with houses and streets."

"We don’t require that; we’ll content ourselves with imitating the Hudson’s
Bay Company. They entrench themselves in fortresses against the Indians and
wild beasts. That’s all we need—a house one side and stores the other, with a
wall and two bastions. I must try to make a plan."

"Ah! Doctor, if you undertake it," said Johnson, "I am sure you’ll make a


good thing of it."

"Well, the first part of the business is to go and choose the ground. Will you
come with us Hatteras?"

"T’ll trust all that to you, Doctor," replied the captain. "I’m going to look
along the coast."

Altamont was too feeble yet to take part in any work, so he remained on the
ship, while the others commenced to explore the unknown continent.

On examining the coast, they found that the Porpoise was in a sort of bay
bristling with dangerous rocks, and that to the west, far as the eye could reach,
the sea extended, entirely frozen now, though if Belcher and Penny were to be
believed, open during the summer months. Towards the north, a promontory
stretched out into the sea, and about three miles away was an island of moderate
size. The roadstead thus formed would have afforded safe anchorage to ships,
but for the difficulty of entering it. A considerable distance inland there was a
solitary mountain, about 3000 feet high, by the Doctor’s reckoning; and half-way
up the steep rocky cliffs that rose from the shore, they noticed a circular plateau,
open on three sides to the bay and sheltered on the fourth by a precipitous wall,
120 feet high.

This seemed to the Doctor the very place for this house, from its naturally
fortified situation. By cutting steps in the ice, they managed to climb up and
examine it more closely.

[Illustration: ]

They were soon convinced they could not have a better foundation, and
resolved to commence operations forthwith, by removing the hard snow more
than ten feet deep, which covered the ground, as both dwelling and storehouses
must have a solid foundation.

This preparatory work occupied the whole of Monday, Tuesday, and
Wednesday. At last they came to hard granite close in grain, and containing
garnets and felspar crystals, which flew out with every stroke of the pickaxe.

[Illustration: ]

The dimensions and plan of the snow-house were then settled by the Doctor.
It was to be divided into three rooms, as all they needed was a bed-room, sitting-
room and kitchen. The sitting-room was to be in the middle, the kitchen to the
left, and the bed-room to the right.

For five days they toiled unremittingly. There was plenty of material, and the
walls required to be thick enough to resist summer thaws. Already the house
began to present an imposing appearance. There were four windows in front,
made of splendid sheets of ice, in Esquimaux fashion, through which the light
came softly in as if through frosted glass.


Outside there was a long covered passage between the two windows of the
sitting-room. This was the entrance hall, and it was shut in by a strong door
taken from the cabin of the Porpoise. The Doctor was highly delighted with his
performance when all was finished, for though it would have been difficult to
say to what style of architecture it belonged, it was strong, and that was the chief
thing.

The next business was to move in all the furniture of the Porpoise. The beds
were brought first and laid down round the large stove in the sleeping room; then
came chairs, tables, arm-chairs, cupboards, and benches for the sitting-room, and
finally the ship furnaces and cooking utensils for the kitchen. Sails spread on the
ground did duty for carpets, and also served for inner doors.

[Illustration: ]

The walls of the house were over five feet thick, and the windows resembled
port-holes for cannon. Every part was as solid as possible, and what more was
wanted? Yet if the Doctor could have had his way, he would have made all
manner of ornamental additions, in humble imitation of the Ice Palace built in St.
Petersburgh in January, 1740, of which he had read an account. He amused his
companions after work in the evening by describing its grandeur, the cannons in
front, and statues of exquisite beauty, and the wonderful elephant that spouted
water out of his trunk by day and flaming naphtha by night—all cut out of ice.
He also depicted the interior, with tables, and toilette tables, mirrors, candelabra,
tapers, beds, mattresses, pillows, curtains, time-pieces, chairs, playing-cards,
wardrobes, completely fitted up—in fact, everything in the way of furniture that
could be mentioned, and the whole entirely composed of ice.

It was on Easter Sunday, the 31st of March, when the travellers installed
themselves in their new abode and after holding divine service in the sitting-
room, they devoted the remainder of the day to rest.

Next morning they set about building the storehouses and powder magazine.
This took a whole week longer, including the time spent in unloading the vessel,
which was a task of considerable difficulty, as the temperature was so low, that
they could not work for many hours at a time. At length on the 8th of April,
provisions, fuel, and ammunition were all safe on terra firma, and deposited in
their respective places. A sort of kennel was constructed a little distance from the
house for the Greenland dogs, which the Doctor dignified by the name of "Dog
Palace." Duk shared his master’s quarters.

All that now remained to be done was to put a parapet right round the plateau
by way of fortification.

[Illustration: ]

By the 15th this was also completed, and the snow-house might bid defiance


to a whole tribe of Esquimaux, or any other hostile invaders, if indeed any
human beings whatever were to be found on this unknown continent, for
Hatteras, who had minutely examined the bay and the surrounding coast, had not
been able to discover the least vestiges of the huts that are generally met with on
shores frequented by Greenland tribes. The shipwrecked sailors of the Porpoise
and Forward seemed to be the first whose feet had ever trod this lone region.

CHAPTER VII.

AN IMPORTANT DISCUSSION.

While all these preparations for winter were going on Altamont was fast
regaining strength. His vigorous constitution triumphed, and he was even able to
lend a helping hand in the unlading of the ship. He was a true type of the
American, a shrewd, intelligent man, full of energy and resolution, enterprising,
bold, and ready for anything. He was a native of New York, he informed his
companions, and had been a sailor from his boyhood.

The Porpoise had been equipped and sent out by a company of wealthy
merchants belonging to the States, at the head of which was the famous Grinnell.

There were many points of resemblance between Altamont and Hatteras, but
no affinities. Indeed, any similarity that there was between them, tended rather to
create discord than to make the men friends. With a greater show of frankness,
he was in reality far more deep and crafty than Hatteras. He was more free and
easy, but not so true-hearted, and somehow his apparent openness did not inspire
such confidence as the Englishman’s gloomy reserve.

[Illustration: ]

The Doctor was in constant dread of a collision between the rival captains,
and yet one must command inevitably, and which should it be! Hatteras had the
men, but Altamont had the ship, and it was hard to say whose was the better
right.

It required all the Doctor’s tact to keep things smooth, for the simplest
conversation threatened to lead to strife.

At last, in spite of all his endeavours, an outbreak occurred on the occasion
of a grand banquet by way of "house-warming," when the new habitation was
completed.

This banquet was Dr Clawbonny’s idea. He was head-cook, and
distinguished himself by the concoction of a wonderful pudding, which would
positively have done no dishonour to the cuisine of the Lord Chancellor of
England.

Bell most opportunely chanced to shoot a white hare and several ptarmigans,
which made an agreeable variety from the pemmican and salt meat.

Clawbonny was master of the ceremonies, and brought in his pudding,


adorning himself with the insignia of his office—a big apron, and a knife
dangling at his belt.

As Altamont did not conform to the teetotal régime of his English
companions, gin and brandy were set on the table after dinner, and the others, by
the Doctor’s orders, joined him in a glass for once, that the festive occasion
might be duly honoured. When the different toasts were being drunk, one was
given to the United States, to which Hatteras made no response.

This important business over, the Doctor introduced an interesting subject of
conversation by saying—

"My friends, it is not enough to have come thus far in spite of so many
difficulties; we have something more yet to do. I propose we should bestow a
name on this continent, where we have found friendly shelter and rest, and not
only on the continent, but on the several bays, peaks, and promontories that we
meet with. This has been invariably done by navigators and is a most necessary
proceeding."

"Quite right," said Johnson, "when once a place is named, it takes away the
feeling of being castaways on an unknown shore."

"Yes," added Bell, "and we might be going on some expedition and obliged
to separate, or go out hunting, and it would make it much easier to find one
another if each locality had a definite name."

[Illustration: ]

"Very well; then," said the Doctor, "since we are all agreed, let us go steadily
to work."

Hatteras had taken no part in the conversation as yet, but seeing all eyes
fixed on him, he rose at last, and said—

"If no one objects, I think the most suitable name we can give our house is
that of its skilful architect, the best man among us. Let us call it ‘Doctor’s
House.’ "

"Just the thing!" said Bell.

"First rate!" exclaimed Johnson, " ‘Doctor’s House!’ "

"We cannot do better," chimed in Altamont. "Hurrah for Doctor Clawbonny."

Three hearty cheers were given, in which Duk joined lustily, barking his
loudest.

"It is agreed then," said Hatteras, "that this house is to be called ‘Doctor’s
House.’ "

The Doctor, almost overcome by his feelings, modestly protested against the
honour; but he was obliged to yield to the wishes of his friends, and the new
habitation was formally named "Doctor’s House."

"Now, then,” said the Doctor, "let us go onto name the most important of our


discoveries."

"There is that immense sea which surrounds us, unfurrowed as yet by a
single ship."

"A single ship!" repeated Altamont. "I think you have forgotten the Porpoise,
and yet she certainly did not get here overland,"

"Well, it would not be difficult to believe she had," replied Hatteras, "to see
on what she lies at present."

"True, enough, Hatteras," said Altamont, in a piqued tone; "but, after all, is
not that better than being blown to atoms like the Forward?"

Hatteras was about to make some sharp retort, but Clawbonny interposed.

"It is not a question of ships, my friends," he said, "but of a fresh sea."

"It is no new sea," returned Altamont; "it is in every Polar chart, and has a
name already. It is called the Arctic Ocean, and I think it would be very
inconvenient to alter its designation. Should we find out by and by, that, instead
of being an ocean it is only a strait or gulf, it will be time enough to alter it then."

"So be it," said Hatteras.

"Very well, that is an understood thing, then," said the Doctor, almost
regretting that he had started a discussion so pregnant with national rivalries.

"Let us proceed with the continent where we find ourselves at present,"
resumed Hatteras. "I am not aware that any name whatever has been affixed to it,
even in the most recent charts."

He looked at Altamont as he spoke, who met his gaze steadily, and said—

"Possibly you may be mistaken again, Hatteras."

"Mistaken! What! This unknown continent, this virgin soil

"Has already a name," replied Altamont, coolly.

Hatteras was silent, but his lip quivered.

"And what name has it, then?" asked the Doctor, rather astonished at
Altamont’s affirmation.

"My dear Clawbonny," replied the American, "it is the custom, not to say the
right, of every navigator to christen the soil on which he is the first to set foot. It
appears to me, therefore, that it is my privilege and duty on this occasion to
exercise my prerogative, and—"

"But, sir," interrupted Johnson, rather nettled at his sang froid.

"It would be a difficult matter to prove that the Porpoise did not come here,
even supposing she reached this coast by land," continued Altamont, without
noticing Johnson’s protest. "The fact is indisputable," he added looking at
Hatteras.

[Illustration: "I dispute the claim," said the Englishman, restraining himself
by a powerful effort.—P.72]


W





"T dispute the claim," said the Englishman, restraining himself by a powerful
effort. "To name a country, you must first discover it, I suppose, and that you
certainly did not do. Besides, but for us, where would you have been, sir, at this
moment, pray? Lying twenty feet deep under the snow."

"And without me, sir," retorted Altamont, hotly, "without me and my ship,
where would you all be at this moment? Dead, from cold and hunger."

"Come, come, friends," said the Doctor, "don’t get to words, all that can be
easily settled. Listen to me."

"Mr. Hatteras," said Altamont, "is welcome to name whatever territories he
may discover, should he succeed in discovering any; but this continent belongs
to me. I should not even consent to its having two names like Grinnell’s Land,
which is also called Prince Albert’s Land, because it was discovered almost
simultaneously by an Englishman and an American. This is quite another matter;
my right of priority is incontestable. No ship before mine ever touched this
shore, no foot before mine ever trod this soil. I have given it a name, and that
name it shall keep."

"And what is that name?" inquired the Doctor.

"New America," replied Altamont.

Hatteras trembled with suppressed passion, but by a violent effort restrained
himself.

"Can you prove to me," said Altamont, "that an Englishman has set foot here
before an American?"

Johnson and Bell said nothing, though quite as much offended as the captain
by Altamont’s imperious tone. They felt that reply was impossible.

For a few minutes there was an awkward silence, which the Doctor broke by
saying—

"My friends, the highest human law is justice. It includes all others. Let us be
just, then, and don’t let any bad feeling get in among us. The priority of
Altamont seems to me indisputable. We will take our revenge by and by, and
England will get her full share in our future discoveries. Let the name New
America stand for the continent itself, but I suppose Altamont has not yet
disposed of all the bays, and capes, and headlands it contains, and I imagine
there will be nothing to prevent us calling this bay Victoria Bay?"

"Nothing whatever, provided that yonder cape is called Cape Washington,"
replied Altamont.

"You might choose a name, sir," exclaimed Hatteras, almost beside himself
with passion, "that is less offensive to an Englishman."

"But not one which sounds so sweet to an American,'
proudly.


'


retorted Altamont,


"Come, come," said the Doctor, "no discussion on that subject. An American
has a perfect right to be proud of his great countryman! Let us honour genius
wherever it is met with; and since Altamont has made his choice, let us take our
turn next; let the captain 7

"Doctor!" interrupted Hatteras, "I have no wish that my name should figure
anywhere on this continent, seeing that it belongs to America."

"Is this your unalterable determination?" asked Clawbonny.

Vitis."

The Doctor did not insist further.

"Very well, we’ll have it to ourselves then," he continued, turning to Johnson
and Bell. "We’ll leave our traces behind us. I propose that the island we see out
there, about three miles away from the shore, should be called Isle Johnson, in
honour of our boatswain,”’

"Oh, Mr. Clawbonny,"” began Johnson, in no little confusion.

"And that mountain that we discovered in the west we will call Bell Mount,
if our carpenter is willing.”

"It is doing me too much honour," replied Bell.

"It is simple justice," returned the Doctor.

"Nothing could be better," said Altamont.

"Now then, all we have to do is to christen our fort," said the Doctor, "about
that there will be no discussion, I hope, for it is neither to our gracious sovereign
Queen Victoria, nor to Washington, that we owe our safety and shelter here, but
to God, who brought about our meeting, and by so doing saved us all. Let our
little fort be called Fort Providence."

"Your remarks are just," said Altamont; "no name could be more suitable."

"Fort Providence," added Johnson, "sounds well too. In our future
excursions, then, we shall go by Cape Washington to Victoria Bay, and from
thence to Fort Providence, where we shall find food and rest at Doctor’s House!"

"The business is settled then so far," resumed the Doctor. "As our discoveries
multiply we shall have other names to give; but I trust, friends, we shall have no
disputes about them, for placed as we are, we need all the help and love we can
give each other. Let us be strong by being united. Who knows what dangers yet
we may have to brave, and what sufferings to endure before we see our native
land once more. Let us be one in heart though five in number, and let us lay
aside all feelings of rivalry. Such feelings are bad enough at all times, but among
us they would be doubly wrong. You understand me, Altamont, and you,
Hatteras?"

Neither of the captains replied, but the Doctor took no notice of their silence,
and went on to speak of other things. Sundry expeditions were planned to forage





for fresh food. It would soon be spring, and hares and partridges, foxes and bears
would reappear. So it was determined that part of every day should be spent in
hunting and exploring this unknown continent of New America.

[Illustration: Clambering up the steep, rocky wall, against which the Doctor’s
House leaned, he succeeded, though with considerable difficulty, in reaching the
top.—P.77]

CHAPTER VIII.

AN EXCURSION TO THE NORTH OF VICTORIA BAY

Next morning Clawbonny was out by dawn of day. Clambering up the steep,
rocky wall, against which the Doctor’s House leaned, he succeeded, though with
considerable difficulty, in reaching the top, which he found terminated abruptly
in a sort of truncated cone. From this elevation there was an extensive view over
a vast tract of country, which was all disordered and convulsed as if it had
undergone some volcanic commotion. Sea and land, as far as it was possible to
distinguish one from the other, were covered with a sheet of ice.

A new project struck the Doctor’s mind, which was soon matured and ripe
for execution. He lost no time in going back to the snow house, and consulting
over it with his companions.

"T have got an idea," he said; "I think of constructing a lighthouse on the top
of that cone above our heads."

"A lighthouse!" they all exclaimed.

"Yes, a lighthouse. It would be a double advantage. It would be a beacon to
guide us in distant excursions, and also serve to illumine our plateau in the long
dreary winter months."

"There is no doubt," replied Altamont, "of its utility; but how would you
contrive to make it?"

"With one of the lanterns out of the Porpoise."

"All right; but how will you feed your lamp? With seal oil?"

"No, seal oil would not give nearly sufficient light. It would scarcely be
visible through the fog."

"Are you going to try to make gas out of our coal then?"

"No, not that either, for gas would not be strong enough; and, worse still, it
would waste our combustibles."

"Well," replied Altamont; "I’m at a loss to see how you—"

"Oh, I’m prepared for everything after the mercury bullet, and the ice lens,
and Fort Providence. I believe Mr. Clawbonny can do anything," exclaimed
Johnson.

"Come, Clawbonny, tell us what your light is to be, then," said Altamont.

"That’s soon told," replied Clawbonny. "I mean to have an electric light."


"An electric light?"

"Yes, why not? Haven’t you a galvanic battery on board your ship?"

"Yes."

"Well, there will be no difficulty then in producing an electric light, and that
will cost nothing, and be far brighter."

"First-rate?" said Johnson; "let us set to work at once."

"By all means. There is plenty of material. In an hour we can raise a pillar of
ice ten feet high, and that is quite enough.

Away went the Doctor, followed by his companions, and the column was
soon erected and crowned with a ship lantern. The conducting wires were
properly adjusted within it, and the pile with which they communicated fixed up
in the sitting-room, where the warmth of the stove would protect it from the
action of the frost.

As soon as it grew dark the experiment was made, and proved a complete
success. An intense brilliant light streamed from the lantern and illumined the
entire plateau and the plains beneath.

Johnson could not help clapping his hands, half beside himself with delight.

"Well, I declare, Mr. Clawbonny," he exclaimed, "you’re our sun now."

"One must be a little of everything, you know," was Clawbonny’s modest
reply.

It was too cold. however, even to stand admiring more than a minute, and the
whole party were glad enough to get indoors again, and tuck themselves up in
their warm blankets.

A regular course of life commenced now, though uncertain weather and
frequent changes of temperature made it sometimes impracticable to venture
outside the hut at all, and it was not till the Saturday after the installation, that a
day came that was favourable enough for a hunting excursion; when Bell, and
Altamont, and the Doctor determined to take advantage of it, and try to replenish
their stock of provisions.

They started very early in the moming, each armed with a double-barrelled
gun and plenty of powder and shot, a hatchet, and a snow knife.

[Illustration: ]

The weather was cloudy, but Clawbonny put the galvanic battery in action
before he left, and the bright rays of the electric light did duty for the glorious
orb of day, and in truth was no bad substitute, for the light was equal to three
thousand candles, or three hundred gas burners.

It was intensely cold, but dry, and there was little or no wind. The hunters set
off in the direction of Cape Washington, and the hard snow so favoured their
march, that in three hours they had gone fifteen miles, Duk jumping and barking


beside them all the way. They kept as close to the coast as possible, but found no
trace of human habitation and indeed scarcely a sign of animal life. A few snow
birds, however, darting to and fro announced the approach of spring and the
return of the animal creation. The sea was still entirely frozen over, but it was
evident from the open breathing holes in the ice, that the seals had been quite
recently on the surface. In one part the holes were so numerous, that the Doctor
said to his companions that he had no doubt that when summer came, they
would be seen there in hundreds, and would be easily captured, for on
unfrequented shores they were not so difficult of approach. But once frighten
them and they all vanish as if by enchantment, and never return to the spot again.
"Inexperienced hunters," he said, "have often lost a whole shoal by attacking
them, en masse, with noisy shouts instead of singly and silently."

"Is it for the oil or skin that they are mostly hunted?"

"Europeans hunt them for the skin, but the Esquimaux eat them. They live on
seals, and nothing is so delicious to them as a piece of the flesh, dipped in the
blood and oil. After all, cooking has a good deal to do with it, and I’ll bet you
something I could dress you cutlets you would not turn up your nose at, unless
for their black appearance."

"We'll set you to work on it," said Bell, "and I’ll eat as much as you like to
please you."

"My good Bell, you mean to say to please yourself, but your voracity would
never equal the Greenlanders’, for they devour from ten to fifteen pounds of
meat a day."

"Fifteen pounds!" said Bell. "What stomachs!"

"Arctic stomachs," replied the Doctor, "are prodigious; they can expand at
will, and, I may add, contract at will; so that they can endure starvation quite as
well as abundance. When an Esquimaux sits down to dinner he is quite thin, and
by the time he has finished, he is so corpulent you would hardly recognize him.
But then we must remember that one meal sometimes has to last a whole day."

"This voracity must be peculiar to the inhabitants of cold countries," said
Altamont.

"I think it is," replied the Doctor. "In the Arctic regions people must eat
enormously: it is not only one of the conditions of strength, but of existence. The
Hudson’s Bay Company always reckoned on this account 8 lbs. of meat to each
man a day, or 12 lbs. of fish, or 2 lbs. of pemmican."

"Invigorating regimen, certainly!" said Bell.

"Not so much as you imagine, my friend. An Indian who guzzles like that
can’t do a whit better day’s work than an Englishman, who has his pound of beef
and pint of beer."


"Things are best as they are, then, Mr. Clawbonny."

"No doubt of it; and yet an Esquimaux meal may well astonish us. In Sir
John Ross’s narrative, he states his surprise at the appetites of his guides. He tells
us that two of them—just two mind—devoured a quarter of a buffalo in one
morming. They cut the meat in long narrow strips, and the mode of eating was
either for the one to bite off as much as his mouth could hold, and then pass it on
to the other, or to leave the long ribbons of meat dangling from the mouth and
devour them gradually like boa-constrictors, lying at full length on the ground."

[Illustration: ]

"Faugh!" exclaimed Bell, "what disgusting brutes!"

"Every man has his own fashion of dining,” remarked the philosophical
American.

"Happily," said the Doctor.

"Well, if eating is such an imperative necessity in these latitudes, it quite
accounts for all the journals of Arctic travellers being so full of eating and
drinking."

"You are right," returned the Doctor. "I have been struck by the same fact;
but I think it arises not only from the necessity of full diet, but from the extreme
difficulty sometimes in procuring it. The thought of food is always uppermost in
the mind, and naturally finds mention in the narrative."

"And yet," said Altamont, "if my memory serves me right, in the coldest
parts of Norway the peasants do not seem to need such substantial fare. Milk diet
is their staple food, with eggs, and bread made of the bark of the birch-tree; a
little salmon occasionally, but never meat; and still they are fine hardy fellows."

"It is an affair of organization out of my power to explain," replied
Clawbonny; "but I have no doubt that if these same Norwegians were
transplanted to Greenland, they would learn to eat like the Esquimaux by the
second or third generation. Even if we ourselves were to remain in this blessed
country long, we should be as bad as the Esquimaux, even if we escaped
becoming regular gluttons."

"I declare, Mr. Clawbonny, you make me feel hungry with talking so much
about eating,” exclaimed Bell.

"Not I!" said Altamont. "It rather sickens me, and makes me loathe the sight
of a seal. But, stop, I do believe we are going to have the chance of a dinner off
one, for I am much mistaken if that’s not something alive lying on those lumps
of ice yonder!"

"Tt is a walrus!" exclaimed the Doctor. "Be quiet, and let us get up to him."

Clawbonny was right, it was a walrus of huge dimensions, disporting himself
not more than two hundred yards away. The hunters separated, going in different


directions, so as to surround the animal and cut off all retreat. They crept along
cautiously behind the hummocks, and managed to get within a few paces of him
unperceived, when they fired simultaneously.

[Illustration: ]

The walrus rolled over, but speedily got up again, and tried to make his
escape, but Altamont fell upon him with his hatchet, and cut off his dorsal fins.
He made a desperate resistance, but was overpowered by his enemies, and soon
lay dead, reddening the ice-field with his blood.

It was a fine animal, measuring more than fifteen feet in length, and would
have been worth a good deal for the oil; but the hunters contented themselves
with cutting off the most savoury parts, and left the rest to the ravens, which had
just begun to make their appearance.

Night was drawing on, and it was time to think of returning to Fort
Providence. The moon had not yet risen, but the sky was serene and cloudless,
and already glittering with stars—magnificent stars.

"Come," said the Doctor, "let us be off, for it is getting late. Our hunting has
not been very successful; but still, if a man has found something for his supper,
he need not grumble. Let us go the shortest road, however, and get quickly home
without losing our way. The stars will guide us."

They resolved to try a more direct route back by going further inland, and
avoiding the windings of the coast; but, after some hours’ walking, they found
themselves no nearer Doctor’s House, and it was evident that they must have lost
their way. The question was raised whether to construct a hut and rest till
morming, or proceed; but Clawbonny insisted on going on, as Hatteras and
Johnson would be so uneasy.

"Duk will guide us," he said; "he won’t go wrong. His instinct can dispense
with star and compass. Just let us keep close behind him."

They did well to trust to Duk, for very speedily a faint light appeared in the
horizon almost like a star glimmering through the mist, which hung low above
the ground.

"There’s our lighthouse!" exclaimed the Doctor.

"Do you think it is, Mr. Clawbonny?" said Bell.

[Illustration: Soon they were walking in a bright luminous track, leaving
their long shadows behind them on the spotless snow. —P.87]

"I’m certain of it! Come on faster." The light became stronger the nearer they
approached, and soon they were walking in a bright luminous track, leaving their
long shadows behind them on the spotless snow.

Quickening their steps, they hastened forward, and in another half hour they
were climbing the ascent to Fort Providence.


CHAPTER IX.

COLD AND HEAT.

Hatteras and Johnson had been getting somewhat uneasy at the prolonged
absence of their companions, and were delighted to see them back safe and
sound. The hunters were no less glad to find themselves once more in a warm
shelter, for the temperature had fallen considerably as night drew on, and the
thermometer outside was 73° below zero.

The poor hunters were half frozen, and so worn out that they could hardly
drag their limbs along; but the stoves were roaring and crackling cheerily, and
the big kitchen fire waiting to cook such game as might be brought in.
Clawbonny donned his official apron again, and soon had his seal cutlets dressed
and smoking on the table. By nine o’clock the whole party were enjoying a good
supper, and Bell couldn’t help exclaiming—

"Well, even at the risk of being taken for an Esquimaux, I must confess
eating is the most important business if one has to winter in these regions. A
good meal isn’t to be sneezed at."

They all had their mouths crammed too full to speak, but the Doctor signified
his agreement with Bell’s views by an approving nod.

The cutlets were pronounced first-rate, and it seemed as if they were, for
they were all eaten, to the very last morsel.

For dessert they had coffee, which the Doctor brewed himself in a French
coffee-pot over spirits-of-wine. He never allowed anybody but himself to
concoct this precious beverage; for he made a point of serving it boiling hot,
always declaring it was not fit to drink unless it burnt his tongue. This evening
he took it so scalding that Altamont exclaimed—

[Illustration: ]

"You’ ll skin your throat!"

"Not a bit of it," was the Doctor’s reply.

"Then your palate must be copper-sheathed," said Johnson.

"Not at all, friends. I advise you to copy my example. Many persons, and I
am one, can drink coffee at a temperature of 131°."

"131°?" said Altamont; "why, that is hotter than the hand could bear!"

"Of course it is, Altamont, for the hand could not bear more than 122°, but
the palate and tongue are less sensitive."

"You surprise me."

"Well, I will convince you it is fact," returned Clawbonny, and taking up a
thermometer, he plunged it into the steaming coffee. He waited till the mercury
rose as high as 131° and then withdrew it, and swallowed the liquid with evident
gusto.


Bell tried to follow his example, but burnt his mouth severely.

"You are not used to it," said the Doctor, coolly.

"Can you tell us, Clawbonny," asked Altamont, "what is the highest
temperature that the human body can bear."

"Yes, several curious experiments have been made in that respect. I
remember reading of some servant girls, in the town of Rochefoucauld, in
France, who could stay ten minutes in a baker’s large oven when the temperature
was 300°, while potatoes and meat were cooking all round them."

"What girls!" exclaimed Altamont.

"Well, there is another case, where eight of our own countrymen— Fordyce,
Banks, Solander, Blagdin, Home, Nooth, Lord Seaforth, and Captain Phillips—
went into one as hot as 200°, where eggs and beef were frizzling."

"And they were Englishmen!" said Bell, with a touch of national pride.

"Oh, the Americans could have done better than that," said Altamont.

"They would have roasted," returned the Doctor, laughing. " At all events
they have never tried it, so I shall stand up for my countrymen. There is one
more instance I recollect, and really it is so incredible, that it would be
impossible to believe it, if it were not attested by unimpeachable evidence. The
Duke of Ragusa and

[Illustration: ]

Dr. Jung, a Frenchman and an Austrian, saw a Turk plunge into a bath at
170°."

"But that is not so astonishing as those servant girls, or our own
countrymen," said Johnson.

"I beg your pardon," replied Clawbonny; "there is a great difference between
plunging into hot air and hot water. Hot air produces perspiration, which protects
the skin, but boiling water scalds. The maximum heat of baths is 107°, so that
this Turk must have been an extraordinary fellow to endure such temperature."

"What is the mean temperature, Mr. Clawbonny, of animated beings?" asked
Johnson.

"That varies with the species," replied the Doctor. "Birds have the highest,
especially the duck and the hen. The mammalia come next, and human beings.
The temperature of Englishmen averages 101°."

"Iam sure Mr. Altamont is going to claim a higher rate for his countrymen,"
said Johnson, smiling.

"Well, sure enough, we’ve some precious hot ones among us, but as I never
have put a thermometer down their throats to ascertain, I can’t give you
statistics."

"There is no sensible difference," said the Doctor, "between men of different


races when they are placed under the same conditions, whatever their food may
be. I may almost say their temperature would be the same at the Equator as the
Pole."

"Then the heat of our bodies is the same here as in England," replied
Altamont.

"Just about it. The other species of mammalia are generally hotter than
human beings. The horse, the hare, the elephant, the porpoise, and the tiger are
nearly the same; but the cat, the squirrel, the rat, the panther, the sheep, the ox,
the dog, the monkey, and the goat, are as high as 103°; and the pig is 104°."

"Rather humiliating to us," put in Altamont.

"Then come the amphibia and the fish," resumed the Doctor, " whose
temperature varies with that of the water. The serpent has a temperature of 86°,
the frog 70°, and the shark several degrees less. Insects appear to have the
temperature of air and water."


[Illustration: ]

"All this is very well," interrupted Hatteras, who had hitherto taken no part in
the conversation, "and we are obliged to the Doctor for his scientific
information; but we are really talking as if we were going to brave the heat of the
torrid zone. I think it would be far more seasonable to speak of cold, if the
Doctor could tell us what is the lowest temperature on record."

"I can enlighten you on that too," replied the Doctor. "There are a great
number of memorable winters, which appear to have come at intervals of about
forty-one years. In 1364, the Rhone was frozen over as far as Arles; in 1408, the
Danube was frozen throughout its entire extent, and the wolves crossed the
Cattigut on firm ground; in 1509, the Adriatic and the Mediterranean were
frozen at Venice and Marseilles, and the Baltic on the 10th of April; in 1608, all
the cattle died in England from the cold; in 1789, the Thames was frozen as far
as Gravesend; and the frightful winter of 1813 will long be remembered in
France. The earliest and longest ever known in the present century was in 1829.
So much for Europe."

"But here, within the Polar circle, what is the lowest degree?" asked
Altamont.

"My word!" said the Doctor. "I think we have experienced the lowest
ourselves, for one day the thermometer was 72° below zero, and, if my memory
serves me right, the lowest temperature mentioned hitherto by Arctic voyagers
has been 61° at Melville Island, 65° at Port Felix, and 70° at Fort Reliance."

"Yes," said Hatteras, "it was the unusual severity of the winter that barred our
progress, for it came on just at the worst time possible."


"You were stopped, you say?" asked Altamont, looking fixedly at the
captain.

"Yes, in our voyage west," the Doctor hastened to reply.

"Then the maximum and minimum temperatures," said Altamont, resuming
the conversation, "are about 200° apart. So you see, my friends, we may make
ourselves easy."

"But if the sun were suddenly extinguished," suggested Johnson, "would not
the earth’s temperature be far lower?"

"There is no fear of such a catastrophe; but, even should it happen, the
temperature would be scarcely any different."

[Illustration: ]

"That’s curious."

"Tt is; but Fourrier, a learned Frenchman, has proved the fact incontestably. If
it were not the case, the difference between day and night would be far greater,
as also the degree of cold at the Poles. But now I think, friends, we should be the
better of a few hours’ sleep. Who has charge of the stove?"

"It is my turn tonight," said Bell.

"Well, pray keep up a good fire, for it is a perishing night."

"Trust me for that," said Bell. "But do look out, the sky is all in a blaze."

"Ay! it is a magnificent aurora," replied the Doctor, going up to the window.
"How beautiful! I never tire gazing at it."

No more he ever did, though his companions had become so used to such
displays that they hardly noticed them now. He soon followed the example of the
others, however, and lay down on his bed beside the fire, leaving Bell to mount
guard.

CHAPTER X.


WINTER PLEASURES


It is a dreary affair to live at the Pole, for there is no going out for many long
months, and nothing to break the weary monotony.

The day after the hunting excursion was dark and snowy, and Clawbonny
could find no occupation except polishing up the ice walls of the hut as they
became damp with the heat inside, and emptying out the snow which drifted into
the long passage leading to the inner door. The "Snow-House" stood out well,
defying storm and tempest, and the snow only seemed to increase the thickness
of the walls.

The storehouses, too, did not give way the least; but though they were only a


few yards off, it was found necessary to lay in enough provisions for the day, as
very often the weather made it almost impossible to venture that short distance.

The unloading of the Porpoise turned out to have been a wise precaution, for
she was slowly but surely being crashed to pieces by the silent, irresistible
pressure around her. Still the Doctor was always hoping enough planks might be
sufficiently sound to construct a small vessel to convey them back to England,
but the right time to build had not come.

[Illustration: ]

[Illustration: ]

The five men were consequently compelled to spend the greater part of the
day in complete idleness. Hatteras lolled on his bed absorbed in thought.
Altamont smoked or dozed, and the Doctor took care not to disturb either of
them, for he was in perpetual fear of a quarrel between them.

At meal times he always led the conversation away from irritating topics and
sought, as far as possible, to instruct and interest all parties. Whenever he was
not engaged with the preparation of his notes, he gave them dissertations on
history, geography, or meteorology, handling his subject in an easy, though
philosophical manner, drawing lessons from the most trivial incidents. His
inexhaustible memory was never at a loss for fact or illustration when his good
humour and geniality made him the life and soul of the little company. He was
implicitly trusted by all, even by Hatteras, who cherished a deep affection for
him.

Yet no man felt the compulsory confinement more painfully than
Clawbonny. He longed ardently for the breaking up of the frost to resume his
excursions though he dreaded the rivalry that might ensue between the two
captains.

Yet things must come to a crisis soon or late, and meantime he resolved to
use his best endeavors to bring both parties to a better mind, but to reconcile an
American and an Englishman was no easy task. He and Johnson had many a talk
on the subject, for the old sailor’s views quite coincided with his own as to the
difficult complications which awaited them in the future.

However, the bad weather continued, and leaving Fort Providence, even for
an hour, was out of the question. Day and night they were pent up in these
glittering ice-walls, and time hung heavily on their hands, at least on all but the
Doctor’s, and he always managed to find some occupation for himself.

[Illustration: ]

"I declare," said Altamont, one evening; "life like this is not worth having.
We might as well be some of those reptiles that sleep all the winter. But I
suppose there is no help for it."


"I am afraid not," said the Doctor; "unfortunately we are too few in number
to get up any amusement."

"Then you think if there were more of us, we should find more to do?"

"Of course: when whole ships’ crews have wintered here, they have managed
to while away the time famously."

"Well, I must say I should like to know how. It would need a vast amount of
ingenuity to extract anything amusing out of our circumstances. I suppose they
did not play at charades?"

"No, but they introduced the press and the theatre."

"What? They had a newspaper?" exclaimed the American.

"They acted a comedy?" said Bell.

"That they did," said the Doctor. "When Parry wintered at Melville Island, he
started both amusements among his men, and they met with great success."

"Well, I must confess, I should like to have been there," returned Johnson;
"for it must have been rather curious work."

"Curious and amusing too, my good Johnson. Lieutenant Beechey was the
theatre manager, and Captain Sabina chief editor of the newspaper called “The
Winter Chronicle, or the Gazette of Northern Georgia.’ "

"Good titles," said Altamont.

"The newspaper appeared daily from the 1st of November, 1819, to the 20th
of March, 1820. It reported the different excursions, and hunting parties, and
accidents, and adventures, and published amusing stories. No doubt the articles
were not up to the ‘Spectator’ or the ‘Daily Telegraph,’ but the readers were
neither critical nor blasé, and found great pleasure in their perusal."

[Illustration: ]

"My word!" said Altamont. "I should like to read some of the articles."

"Would you? Well, you shall judge for yourself."

"What! can you repeat them from memory?"

"No; but you had Parry’s Voyages on board the Porpoise, and I can read you
his own narrative if you like."

This proposition was so eagerly welcomed that the Doctor fetched the book
forthwith, and soon found the passage in question.

"Here is a letter," he said, "addressed to the editor."

" “Your proposition to establish a journal has been received by us with the
greatest satisfaction. I am convinced that, under your direction, it will be a great
source of amusement, and go a long way to lighten our hundred days of
darkness.

" ‘The interest I take in the matter myself has led me to study the effect of
your announcement on my comrades, and I can testify, to use reporter’s


language, that the thing has produced an immense sensation.

" “The day after your prospectus appeared, there was an unusual and
unprecedented demand for ink among us, and our green tablecloth was deluged
with snippings and parings of quill-pens, to the injury of one of our servants,
who got a piece driven right under his nail. I know for a fact that Sergeant
Martin had no less than nine pen-knives to sharpen.

" “Tt was quite a novel sight to see all the writing-desks brought out, which
had not made their appearance for a couple of months, and judging by the reams
of paper visible, more than one visit must have been made to the depths of the
hold.

" “T must not forget to tell you, that I believe attempts will be made to slip
into your box sundry articles which are not altogether original, as they have been
published already. I can declare that, no later than last night, I saw an author
bending over his desk, holding a volume of the "Spectator" open with one hand,
and thawing the frozen ink in his pen at the lamp with the other. I need not warn
you to be on your guard against such tricks, for it would never do for us to have
articles in our "Winter Chronicle" which our great-grandfathers read over their
breakfast-tables a century ago.’ "

"Well, well," said Altamont, "there is a good deal of clever humour in that
writer. He must have been a sharp fellow."

"You’re right. Here is an amusing catalogue of Arctic tribulations: —

" “To go out in the morning for a walk, and the moment you put your foot
outside the ship, find yourself immersed in the cook’s water-hole.

" “To go out hunting, and fall in with a splendid reindeer, take aim, and find
your gun has gone off with a flash in the pan, owing to damp powder.

" To set out on a march with a good supply of soft new bread in your pocket,
and discover, when you want to eat, that it has frozen so hard that you would
break your teeth if you attempted to bite it through.

" “To rush from the table when it is reported that a wolf is in sight, and on
coming back to find the cat has eaten your dinner.

" *To be returning quietly home from a walk, absorbed in profitable
meditation, and suddenly find yourself in the embrace of a bear.’

"We might supplement this list ourselves," said the Doctor, "to almost any
amount, for there is a sort of pleasure in enumerating troubles when one has got
the better of them."

"IT declare," said Altamont, "this ‘Winter Journal’ is an amusing affair. I wish
we could subscribe to it."

"Suppose we Start one," said Johnson.

"For us five!" exclaimed Clawbonny; "we might do for editors, but there


would not be readers enough."

"No, nor spectators enough, if we tried to get up a comedy," added Altamont.

"Tell us some more about Captain Parry’s theatre," said Johnson; "did they
play new pieces?"

"Certainly. At first two volumes on board the ‘Hecla’ were gone through, but
as there was a performance once a fortnight, this repertoire was soon exhausted.
Then they had to improvise fresh plays; Parry himself composed one which had
immense success. It was called “The North-West Passage, or the End of the
Voyage.’ "

"A famous title," said Altamont; "but I must confess, if I had chosen such a
subject, I should have been at a loss for the dénouement."

"You are right,” said Bell; "who can say what the end will be?"

"What does that matter?” replied Mr. Clawbonny. "Why should we trouble
about the last act, while the first ones are going on well. Leave all that to
Providence, friends; let us each play our own role as perfectly as we can, and
since the dénouement belongs to the Great Author of all things, we will trust his
skill. He will manage our affairs for us, never fear."

"Well, we’d better go and dream about it," said Johnson, "for it’s getting late,
and it is time we went to bed," said Johnson.

"You’re in a great hurry, old fellow," replied the Doctor.

"Why would you sit up, Mr. Clawbonny? I am so comfortable in my bed, and
then I always have such good dreams. I dream invariably of hot countries, so that
I might almost say, half my life is spent in the tropics, and half at the North
Pole."

"You’re a happy man, Johnson," said Altamont, "to be blessed with such a
fortunate organization."

"Indeed I am," replied Johnson.

"Well, come, after that it would be positive cruelty to keep our good friend
pining here," said the Doctor, "his tropical sun awaits him, so let’s all go to bed."


CHAPTER XI


TRACES OF BEARS


On the 26th of April during the night there was a sudden change in the
weather. The thermometer fell several degrees, and the inmates of Doctor’s
House could hardly keep themselves warm even in their beds. Altamont had
charge of the stove, and he found it needed careful replenishing to preserve the
temperature at 50° above zero.

This increase of cold betokened the cessation of the stormy weather, and the
Doctor hailed it gladly as the harbinger of his favourite hunting and exploring
expeditions.

He rose early next morning, and climbed up to the top of the cone. The wind
had shifted north, the air was clear, and the snow firm and smooth to the tread.

Before long the five companions had left Doctor’s House, and were busily
engaged in clearing the heavy masses of snow off the roof and sides, for the
house was no longer distinguishable from the plateau, as the snow had drifted to
a depth of full fifteen feet. It took two hours to remove the frozen snow, and
restore the architectural form of the dwelling. At length the granite foundations
appeared, and the storehouses and powder magazines were once more
accessible.

[Illustration: ]

But as, in so uncertain a climate, a storm might cut off their supplies any day,
they wisely resolved to provide for any such emergency by carrying over a good
stock of provisions to the kitchen; and then Clawbonny, Altamont, and Bell
started off with their guns in search of game, for the want of fresh food began to
be urgently felt.

The three companions went across the east side of the cone, right down into
the centre of the far-stretching, snow-covered plain beneath, but they did not
need to go far, for numerous traces of animals appeared on all sides within a
circle of two miles round Fort Providence.

After gazing attentively at these traces for some minutes, the hunters looked
at each other silently, and then the Doctor exclaimed:—

"Well, these are plain enough, I think!"

"Ay, only too plain," added Bell, "bears have been here!"

"First rate game!" said Altamont. "There’s only one fault about it."

"And what is that?" asked Bell.


"What do you mean?"

"T mean this—there are distinct traces of five bears, and five bears are rather
too much for five men."

"Are you sure there are five?" said Clawbonny.

"Look and see for yourself. Here is one footprint, and there is another quite
different. These claws are far wider apart than those; and see here, again, that
paw belongs to a much smaller bear. I tell you, if you look carefully, you will see
the marks of all five different bears distinctly."

"You’re right," said Bell, after a close inspection.

"Tf that’s the case, then," said the Doctor, "we must take care what we’re
about, and not be foolhardy, for these animals are starving after the severe
winter, and they might be extremely dangerous to encounter and, since we are
sure of their number é

"And of their intentions, too," put in Altamont.

"You think they have discovered our presence here?"

"No doubt of it, unless we have got into a bear-pass, but then, why should
these footprints be in a circle round our fort? Look, these animals have come
from the south-east, and stopped at this place, and commenced to reconnoitre the
coast."

[Illustration: ]

"You’re right," said the Doctor, "and, what’s more, it is certain that they have
been here last night."

"And other nights before that," replied Altamont.

"I don’t think so," rejoined Clawbonny. "It is more likely that they waited till
the cessation of the tempest, and were on their way down to the bay, intending to
catch seals, when they scented us."

"Well, we can easily find out if they come tonight," said Altamont.

"How?"

"By effacing all the marks in a given place, and if to-morrow, we find fresh
ones, it will be evident that Fort Providence is the goal for which the bears are
bound."

[Illustration: ]

"Very good, at any rate we shall know, then, what we have to expect."

The three hunters set to work, and scraped the snow over till all the
footprints were obliterated for a considerable distance.

"Tt is singular, though," said Bell, "that bears could scent us all that way off;
we have not been burning anything fat which might have attracted them."

"Oh!" replied the Doctor, "bears are endowed with a wonderfully keen sense
of smell, and a piercing sight; and, more than that, they are extremely intelligent,





almost more so than any other animal. They have smelt something unusual; and,
besides, who can tell whether they have not even found their way as far as our
plateau during the tempest?"

"But then, why did they stop here last night?" asked Altamont.

"Well, that’s a question I can’t answer, but there is no doubt they will
continue narrowing their circles, till they reach Fort Providence."

"We shall soon see," said Altamont.

"And, meantime, we had best go on," added the Doctor, "and keep a sharp
look out."

But not a sign of anything living was visible, and after a time they returned
to the snow-house.

Hatteras and Johnson were informed how matters stood, and it was resolved
to maintain a vigilant watch. Night came, but nothing disturbed its calm
splendour—nothing was heard to indicate approaching danger.

Next morning at early dawn, Hatteras and his companions, well armed, went
out to reconnoitre the state of the snow. They found the same identical
footmarks, but somewhat nearer. Evidently the enemy was bent on the siege of
Fort Providence.

"But where can the bears be?" said Bell.

"Behind the icebergs watching us," replied the Doctor. "Don’t let us expose
ourselves imprudently."

"What about going hunting, then?" asked Altamont.

"We must put it off for a day or two, I think, and rub out the marks again, and
see if they are renewed to-morrow."

The Doctor’s advice was followed, and they entrenched themselves for the
present in the fort. The lighthouse was taken down, as it was not of actual use
meantime, and might help to attract the bears. Each took it in turn to keep watch
on the upper plateau.

The day passed without a sign of the enemy’s existence, and next morning,
when they hurried eagerly out to examine the snow, judge their astonishment to
find it wholly untouched!

"Capital!" exclaimed Altamont. "The bears are put off the scent; they have
no perseverance, and have grown tired waiting for us. They are off, and a good
riddance. Now let us start for a day’s hunting.”

"Softly, softly," said the Doctor; "I’m not so sure they have gone. I think we
had better wait one day more. It is evident the bears have not been here last
night, at least on this side; but still—"

"Well, let us go right round the plateau, and see how things stand," said the
impatient Altamont.


"All right," said Clawbonny. "Come along."

Away they went, but it was impossible to scrutinize carefully a track of two
miles, and no trace of the enemy was discoverable.

"Now, then, can’t we go hunting?” said Altamont.

"Wait till to-morrow," urged the Doctor again.

His friend was very unwilling to delay, but yielded the point at last, and
returned to the fort.

[Illustration: ]

As on the preceding night, each man took his hour’s watch on the upper
plateau. When it came to Altamont’s turn, and he had gone out to relieve Bell,
Hatteras called his old companions round him. The Doctor left his desk and
Johnson his cooking, and hastened to their captain’s side, supposing he wanted
to talk over their perilous situation; but Hatteras never gave it a thought.

"My friends," he said, "let us take advantage of the American’s absence to
speak of business. There are things which cannot concern him, and with which I
do not choose him to meddle."

Johnson and Clawbonny looked at each other, wondering what the captain
was driving at.

"I wish," he continued, "to talk with you about our plans for the future."

"All right! talk away while we are alone," said the Doctor.

"In a month, or six weeks at the outside, the time for making distant
excursions will come again. Have you thought of what we had better undertake
in summer?"

"Have you, captain?” asked Johnson.

"Have I? I may say that not an hour of my life passes without revolving in
my mind my one cherished purpose. I suppose not a man among you intends to
retrace his steps?"

No one replied, and Hatteras went on to say—

"For my own part, even if I must go alone, I will push on to the North Pole.
Never were men so near it before, for we are not more than 360 miles distant at
most, and I will not lose such an opportunity without making every attempt to
reach it, even though it be an impossibility. What are your views, Doctor?"

"Your own, Hatteras."

"And yours, Johnson?"

"Like the Doctor’s."

"And yours, Bell?"

"Captain," replied the carpenter, "it is true we have neither wives nor
children waiting us in England, but, after all, it is one’s country— one’s native
land! Have you no thoughts of returning home?"


"We can return after we have discovered the Pole quite as well as before, and
even better. Our difficulties will not increase, for as we near the Pole we get
away from the point of greatest cold. We have fuel and provisions enough. There
is nothing to stop us, and we should be culpable, in my opinion, if we allowed
ourselves to abandon the project."

"Very well, captain, I’ll go along with you."

"That’s right; I never doubted you," said Hatteras. "We shall succeed, and
England will have all the glory."

"But there is an American among us!" said Johnson.

Hatteras could not repress an impatient exclamation.

"T know it!" he said, in a stern voice.

"We cannot leave him behind," added the Doctor.

"No, we can’t," repeated Hatteras, almost mechanically.

"And he will be sure to go too."

"Yes, he will go too; but who will command?"

"You, captain."

"And if you all obey my orders, will the Yankee refuse?"

"T shouldn’t think so; but suppose he should, what can be done?"

"He and I must fight it out, then."

The three Englishmen looked at Hatteras, but said nothing. Then the Doctor
asked how they were to go.

"By the coast, as far as possible," was the reply.

"But what if we find open water, as is likely enough?"

"Well, we’ ll go across it."

"But we have no boat."

Hatteras did not answer, and looked embarrassed.

"Perhaps," suggested Bell, "we might make a ship out of some of the planks
of the Porpoise."

"Never!" exclaimed Hatteras, vehemently.

"Never!" said Johnson.

The Doctor shook his head. He understood the feeling of the captain.

"Never!" reiterated Hatteras. "A boat made out of an American ship would
be an American!"

"But, captain———" began Johnson.

The Doctor made a sign to the old boatswain not to press the subject further,
and resolved in his own mind to reserve the question for discussion at a more
opportune moment. He managed to turn the conversation to other matters, till it
abruptly terminated by the entrance of Altamont.

This ended the day, and the night passed quietly without the least


disturbance. The bears had evidently disappeared.


CHAPTER XII


IMPRISONED IN DOCTOR’S HOUSE

The first business next day was to arrange for a hunt. It was settled that
Altamont, Bell, and Hatteras should form the party, while Clawbonny should go
and explore as far as Isle Johnson, and make some hydrographic notes and
Johnson should remain behind to keep house.

The three hunters soon completed their preparations. They armed themselves
each with a double barrelled revolver and a rifle, and took plenty of powder and
shot. Each man also carried in his belt his indispensable snow knife and hatchet,
and a small supply of pemmican in case night should surprise them before their
return.

Thus equipped, they could go far, and might count on a good supply of
game.

At eight o’clock they started, accompanied by Duk, who frisked and
gambolled with delight. They went up the hill to the east, across the cone, and
down into the plain below.

The Doctor next took his departure, after agreeing with Johnson on a signal
of alarm in case of danger.

The old boatswain was left alone, but he had plenty to do. He began by
unfastening the Greenland dogs, and letting them out for a run after their long,
wearisome confinement. Then he attended to divers housekeeping matters. He
had to replenish the stock of combustibles and provisions, to arrange the
storehouses, to mend several broken utensils, to repair the rents in coverlets, and
get new shoes ready for summer excursions. There was no lack of work, and the
old sailor’s nimble clever fingers could do anything.

[Illustration: ]

While his hands were busy, his mind was occupied with the conversation of
the preceding evening. He thought with regret over the captain’s obstinacy, and
yet he felt that there was something grand and even heroic in his determination
that neither an American nor an American ship should first touch the Pole.

The hunters had been gone about an hour when Johnson suddenly heard the
report of a gun.

"Capital!" he exclaimed. "They have found something, and pretty quickly
too, for me to hear their guns so distinctly. The atmosphere must be very clear."

A second and a third shot followed.

"Bravo!" again exclaimed the boatswain; "they must have fallen in luck’s


way!"

[Illustration: Hatteras could only manage to keep off his pursuers by flinging
down one article after another—P.120]

But when three more shots came in rapid succession, the old man turned
pale, and a horrible thought crossed his mind, which made him rush out and
climb hastily to the top of the cone. He shuddered at the sight which met his
eyes. The three hunters, followed by Duk, were tearing home at full speed,
followed by the five huge bears! Their six balls had evidently taken no effect,
and the terrible monsters were close on their heels. Hatteras, who brought up the
rear, could only manage to keep off his pursuers by flinging down one article
after another—first his cap, then his hatchet, and, finally, his gun. He knew that
the inquisitive bears would stop and examine every object, sniffing all round it,
and this gave him a little time, otherwise he could not have escaped, for these
animals outstrip the fleetest horse, and one monster was so near that Hatteras had
to brandish his knife vigorously, to ward off a tremendous blow of his paw.

At last, though panting and out of breath, the three men reached Johnson
safely, and slid down the rock with him into the snow-house. The bears stopped
short on the upper plateau, and Hatteras and his companions lost no time in
barring and barricading them out.

"Here we are at last!" exclaimed Hatteras; "we can defend ourselves better
now. It is five against five."

"Four!" said Johnson in a frightened voice.

"How?"

"The Doctor!" replied Johnson, pointing to the empty sitting-room.

"Well, he is in Isle Johnson."

"A bad job for him,” said Bell.

"But we can’t leave him to his fate, in this fashion," said Altamont.

"No, let’s be off to find him at once," replied Hatteras.

[Illustration: ]

He opened the door, but soon shut it, narrowly escaping a bear’s hug.

"They are there!" he exclaimed.

"All?" asked Bell.

"The whole pack."

Altamont rushed to the windows, and began to fill up the deep embrasure
with blocks of ice, which he broke off the walls of the house.

His companions followed his example silently. Not a sound was heard but
the low, deep growl of Duk.

To tell the simple truth, however, it was not their own danger that occupied
their thoughts, but their absent friend, the Doctor’s. It was for him they trembled,


not for themselves. Poor Clawbonny, so good and devoted as he had been to
every member of the little colony! This was the first time they had been
separated from him. Extreme peril, and most likely a frightful death awaited
him, for he might return unsuspectingly to Fort Providence, and find himself in
the power of these ferocious animals.

[Illustration: ]

"And yet," said Johnson, "unless I am much mistaken, he must be on guard.
Your repeated shots cannot but have warned him. He must surely be aware that
something unusual has happened."

"But suppose he was too far away to hear them," replied Altamont, "or has
not understood the cause of them? It is ten chances to one but he’|l come quickly
back, never imagining the danger. The bears are screened from sight by the crag
completely."

"We must get rid of them before he comes," said Hatteras.

"But how?" asked Bell.

[Illustration: ]

It was difficult to reply to this, for a sortie was out of the question. They had
taken care to barricade the entrance passage, but the bears could easily find a
way in if they chose. So it was thought advisable to keep a close watch on their
movements outside, by listening attentively in each room, so as to be able to
resist all attempts at invasion. They could hear them distinctly prowling about,
growling and scraping the walls with their enormous paws.

However, some action must be taken speedily, for time was passing.
Altamont resolved to try a port-hole through which he might fire on his
assailants. He had soon scooped out a hole in the wall, but his gun was hardly
pushed through, when it was seized with irresistible force, and wrested from his
grasp before he could even fire.

"Confound it!" he exclaimed, 'we’re no match for them."

And he hastened to stop up the breach as fast as possible.

This state of things had lasted upwards of an hour, and there seemed no
prospect of a termination. The question of a sortie began now to be seriously
discussed. There was little chance of success, as the bears could not be attacked
separately, but Hatteras and his companions had grown so impatient, and it must
be confessed were also so much ashamed of being kept in prison by beasts, that
they would even have dared the risk if the captain had not suddenly thought of a
new mode of defence.

He took Johnson’s furnace-poker, and thrust it into the stove while he made
an opening in the snow wall, or rather a partial opening, for he left a thin sheet of
ice on the outer side. As soon as the poker was red hot, he said to his comrades


who stood eagerly watching him, wondering what he was going to do—

"This red-hot bar will keep off the bears when they try to get hold of it, and
we shall be able easily to fire across it without letting them snatch away our
guns."

"A good idea," said Bell, posting himself beside Altamont.

Hatteras withdrew the poker, and instantly plunged it in the wall. The
melting snow made a loud hissing noise, and two bears ran and made a snatch at
the glowing bar; but they fell back with a terrible howl, and at the same moment
four shots resounded, one after the other.

"Hit!" exclaimed Altamont.

"Hit!" echoed Bell.

"Let us repeat the dose," said Hatteras, carefully stopping up the opening
meantime.

The poker was again thrust into the fire, and in a few minutes was ready for
Hatteras to recommence operations.

Altamont and Bell reloaded their guns, and took their places; but this time
the poker would not pass through.

"Confound the beasts!" exclaimed the impetuous American.

"What’s the matter?" asked Johnson.

"What’s the matter? Why, those plaguey animals are piling up block after
block, intending to bury us alive!"

"Impossible!"

"Look for yourself; the poker can’t get through. I declare it is getting absurd
now."

It was worse than absurd, it was alarming. Things grew worse. It was evident
that the bears meant to stifle their prey, for the sagacious animals were heaping
up huge masses, which would make escape impossible.

"It is too bad," said old Johnson, with a mortified look. "One might put up
with men, but bears!"

[Illustration: ]

Two hours elapsed without bringing any relief to the prisoners; to go out was
impossible, and the thick walls excluded all sound. Altamont walked impatiently
up and down full of exasperation and excitement at finding himself worsted for
once. Hatteras could think of nothing but the Doctor, and of the serious peril
which threatened him.

[Illustration: ]

"Oh, if Mr. Clawbonny were only here!" said Johnson.

"What could he do?" asked Altamont.

"Oh, he’d manage to get us out somehow."


"How, pray?" said the American, crossly.

"If I knew that I should not need him. However, I know what his advice just
now would be."

"What?"

"To take some food; that can’t hurt us. What do you say, Mr. Altamont?"

"Oh, let’s eat, by all means, if that will please you, though we’re in a
ridiculous, not to say humiliating, plight."

"Tl bet you we’ll find a way out after dinner."

No one replied, but they seated themselves round the table.

[Illustration: ]

Johnson, trained in Clawbonny’s school, tried to be brave and unconcerned
about the danger, but he could scarcely manage it. His jokes stuck in his throat.
Moreover, the whole party began to feel uncomfortable. The atmosphere was
getting dense, for every opening was hermetically sealed. The stoves would
hardly draw, and it was evident would soon go out altogether for want of
oxygen.

Hatteras was the first to see their fresh danger, and he made no attempt to
hide it from his companions.

"If that is the case," said Altamont, "we must get out at all risks."

"Yes," replied Hatteras; "but let us wait till night. We will make a hole in the
roof, and let in a provision of air, and then one of us can fire out of it on the
bears."

"Tt is the only thing we can do, I suppose," said Altamont.

So it was agreed; but waiting was hard work, and Altamont could not refrain
from giving vent to his impatience by thundering maledictions on the bears, and
abusing the ill fate which had placed them in such an awkward and humbling
predicament. "It was beasts versus men," he said, "and certainly the men cut a
pretty figure."

CHAPTER XIII.

THE MINE.

Night drew on, and the lamp in the sitting-room already began to burn dim
for want of oxygen.

At eight o’clock the final arrangements were completed, and all that
remained to do was to make an opening in the roof.

They had been working away at this for some minutes, and Bell was showing
himself quite an adept in the business, when Johnson, who had been keeping
watch in the sleeping room, came hurriedly in to his companions, pulling such a
long face, that the captain asked immediately what was the matter?

"Nothing exactly," said the old sailor, "and yet—"


"Come, out with it!" exclaimed Altamont.

"Hush! don’t you hear a peculiar noise?"

"Where?"

"Here, on this side, on the wall of the room."

Bell stopped working, and listened attentively like the rest. Johnson was
right; a noise there certainly was on the side wall, as if some one were cutting
the ice.

"Don’t you hear it?" repeated Johnson.

"Hear it? Yes, plain enough," replied Altamont.

"Is it the bears?" asked Bell.

"Most assuredly."

"Well; they have changed their tactics," said old Johnson, "and given up the
idea of suffocating us."

"Or may be they suppose we are suffocated by now," suggested the
American, getting furious at his invisible enemies.

"They are going to attack us," said Bell.

"Well, what of it?" returned Hatteras.

"We shall have a hand-to-hand struggle, that’s all."

"And so much the better," added Altamont; "that’s far more to my taste; I
have had enough of invisible foes—let me see my antagonist, and then I can
fight him."

"Ay," said Johnson; "but not with guns. They would be useless here."

"With knife and hatchet then," returned the American.

The noise increased, and it was evident that the point of attack was the angle
of the wall formed by its junction with the cliff.

"They are hardly six feet off now," said the boatswain.

"Right, Johnson!" replied Altamont; "but we have time enough to be ready
for them."

And seizing a hatchet, he placed himself in fighting attitude, planting his
right foot firmly forward and throwing himself back.

Hatteras and the others followed his example, and Johnson took care to load
a gun in case of necessity.

Every minute the sound came nearer, till at last only a thin coating separated
them from their assailants.

Presently this gave way with a loud crack, and a huge dark mass rolled over
into the room.

Altamont had already swung his hatchet to strike, when he was arrested by a
well-known voice, exclaiming—

"For Heaven’s sake, stop!"


"The Doctor! the Doctor!" cried Johnson.

And the Doctor it actually was who had tumbled in among them in such
undignified fashion.

"How do ye do, good friends?" he said, picking himself smartly up.

His companions stood stupefied for a moment, but joy soon loosened their
tongues, and each rushed eagerly forward to welcome his old comrade with a
loving embrace. Hatteras was for once fairly overcome with emotion, and
positively hugged him like a child.


"And is it really you, Mr. Clawbonny?" said Johnson.

"Myself and nobody else, my old fellow. I assure you I have been far more
uneasy about you than you could have been about me."

"But how did you know we had been attacked by a troop of bears?" asked
Altamont. "What we were most afraid of was that you would come quickly back
to Fort Providence, never dreaming of danger."

"Oh, I saw it all. Your repeated shots gave me the alarm. When you
commenced firing I was beside the wreck of the Porpoise, but I climbed up a
hummock, and discovered five bears close on your heels. Oh, how anxious I was
for you! But when I saw you disappear down the cliff, while the bears stood
hesitating on the edge, as if uncertain what to do, I felt sure that you had
managed to get safely inside the house and barricade it. I crept cautiously nearer,
sometimes going on all-fours, sometimes slipping between great blocks of ice,
till I came at last quite close to our fort, and then I found the bears working away
like beavers. They were prowling about the snow, and dragging enormous blocks
of ice towards the house, piling them up like a wall, evidently intending to bury
you alive. It is a lucky thing they did not take it into their heads to dash down the
blocks from the summit of the cone, for you must have been crushed inevitably."

"But what danger you were in, Mr. Clawbonny," said Bell. "Any moment
they might have turned round and attacked you."

"They never thought of it even. Johnson’s Greenland dogs came in sight
several times, but they did not take the trouble to go after them. No, they
imagined themselves sure of a more savoury supper!"

"Thanks for the compliment!" said Altamont, laughing.

"Oh, there is nothing to be proud of. When I saw what the bears were up to, I
determined to get back to you by some means or other. I waited till night, but as
soon as it got dark I glided noiselessly along towards the powder-magazine. I
had my reasons for choosing that point from which to work my way hither, and I
speedily commenced operations with my snow-knife. A famous tool it is. For
three mortal hours I have been hacking and heaving away, but here I am at last


tired enough and starving, but still safe here."

"To share our fate!" said Altamont.

"No, to save you all; but, for any sake, give me a biscuit and a bit of meat,
for I feel sinking for want of food."

A substantial meal was soon before him, but the vivacious little man could
talk all the while he was eating, and was quite ready to answer any questions.

"Did you say to save us?" asked Bell.

"Most assuredly!" was the reply.

"Well, certainly, if you found your way in, we can find our way out by the
same road."

"A likely story, and leave the field clear for the whole pack to come in and
find out our stores. Pretty havoc they would make!"

"No, we must stay here," said Hatteras.

"Of course we must," replied Clawbonny, "but we’ll get rid of the bears for
all that."

"I told you so," said Johnson, rubbing his hands. "I knew nothing was
hopeless if Mr. Clawbonny was here; he has always some expedient in his wise
head."

"My poor head is very empty, I fear, but by dint of rummaging perhaps I


"Doctor," interrupted Altamont, "I suppose there is no fear of the bears
getting in by the passage you have made?"

"No, I took care to stop up the opening thoroughly, and now we can reach the
powder-magazine without letting them see us."

"All right; and now will you let us have your plan of getting rid of these
comical assailants?"

[Illustration: ]

"My plan is quite simple, and part of the work is done already."

"What do you mean?"

"You shall see. But I am forgetting that I brought a companion with me."

"What do you say?" said Johnson.

"T have a companion to introduce to you," replied the Doctor, going out again
into the passage, and bringing back a dead fox, newly killed.

"I shot it this moming," he continued, "and never did fox come more
opportunely."

"What on earth do you mean?" asked Altamont.

"T mean to blow up the bears en masse with 100 lbs of powder."

"But where is the powder?" exclaimed his friend.

"In the magazine. This passage will lead to it. I made it purposely."


"And where is the mine to be?" inquired Altamont.

"At the furthest point from the house and stores."

"And how will you manage to entice the bears there, all to one spot?"

"T’ll undertake that business; but we have talked enough, let us set to work.
We have a hundred feet more to add to our passage tonight, and that is no easy
matter, but as there are five of us, we can take turns at it. Bell will begin, and we
will lie down and sleep meantime."

"Well, really," said Johnson, "the more I think of it, the more feasible seems
the Doctor’s plan."

"Tt is a sure one, anyway," said Clawbonny.

"So sure that I can feel the bear’s fur already on my shoulder. Well, come,
let’s begin then."

Away he went into the gloomy passage, followed by Bell, and in a few
moments they had reached the powder-magazine, and stood among the well-
arranged barrels. The Doctor pointed out to his companion the exact spot where
he began excavating, and then left him to his task, at which he laboured
diligently for about an hour, when Altamont came to relieve him. All the snow
he had dug out was taken to the kitchen and melted, to prevent its taking up
room.

The captain succeeded Altamont, and was followed by Johnson. In ten hours
—that is to say, about eight in the morning—the gallery was entirely open.

[Illustration: ]

With the first streak of day, the Doctor was up to reconnoitre the position of
the enemy. The patient animals were still occupying their old position, prowling
up and down and growling. The house had already almost disappeared beneath
the piled-up blocks of ice, but even while he gazed a council of war seemed
being held, which evidently resulted in the determination to alter the plan of
action, for suddenly all the five bears began vigorously to pull down these same
heaped-up blocks.

"What are they about?" asked Hatteras, who was standing beside him.

"Well, they look to me to be bent on demolishing their own work, and getting
right down to us as fast as possible; but wait a bit, my gentlemen, we’ll demolish
you first. However, we have not a minute to lose."

Hastening away to the mine, he had the chamber where the powder was to be
lodged enlarged the whole breadth and height of the sloping rock against which
the wall leaned, till the upper part was about a foot thick, and had to be propped
up to prevent its falling in. A strong stake was fixed firmly on the granite
foundation, on the top of which the dead fox was fastened. A rope was attached
to the lower part of the stake, sufficiently long to reach the powder stores.


"This is the bait," he said, pointing to the dead fox, "and here is the mine," he
added, rolling in a keg of powder containing about 100 lbs.

"But, Doctor," said Hatteras, "won’t that blow us up too, as well as the
bears?"

"No, we shall be too far from the scene of explosion. Besides, our house is
solid, and we can soon repair the walls even if they should get a bit shaken."

"And how do you propose to manage?" asked Altamont.

"See! By hauling in this rope we lower the post which props up the roof, and
make it give way, and bring up the dead fox to light, and I think you will agree
with me that the bears are so famished with their long fasting, that they won’t
lose much time in rushing towards their unexpected meal. Well, just at that very
moment, I shall set fire to the mine, and blow up both the guests and the meal."

"Capital! Capital!" shouted Johnson, who had been listening with intense
interest.

[Illustration: ]

Hatteras said nothing, for he had such absolute confidence in his friend that
he wanted no further explanation. But Altamont must know the why and
wherefore of everything.

"But Doctor," he said, "can you reckon on your match so exactly that you
can be quite sure it will fire the mine at the right moment?"

"I don’t need to reckon at all; that’s a difficulty easily got over."

"Then you have a match a hundred feet long?"

"No."

"You are simply going to lay a train of powder."

"No, that might miss fire."

"Well, there is no way then but for one of us to devote his life to the others,
and go and light the powder himself."

"I’m ready," said Johnson, eagerly, "ready and willing."

"Quite useless my brave fellow," replied the Doctor, holding out his hand.
"All our lives are precious, and they will be all spared, thank God!"

"Well, I give it up!" said the American. "I’1] make no more guesses."

"I should like to know what is the good of learning physics," said the Doctor,
smiling, "if they can’t help a man at a pinch like this. Haven’t we an electric
battery, and long enough lines attached to it to serve our purpose? We can fire
our mine whenever we please in an instant, and without the slightest danger."

"Hurrah!" exclaimed Johnson.

"Hurrah!" echoed the others, without heeding whether the enemy heard them
or not.

The Doctor’s idea was immediately carried out, and the connecting lines


uncoiled and laid down from the house to the chamber of the mine, one end of
each remaining attached to the electric pile, and the other inserted into the keg of
powder.

By nine o’clock everything was ready. It was high time, for the bears were
furiously engaged in the work of demolition. Johnson was stationed in the
powder-magazine, in charge of the cord which held the bait.

"Now," said Clawbonny to his companions, "load your guns, in case our
assailants are not killed. Stand beside Johnson, and the moment the explosion is
over rush out."

[Illustration: ]

"All right," said Altamont.

"And now we have done all we can to help ourselves. So may Heaven help
us!"

Hatteras, Altamont, and Bell repaired to the powder-magazine, while the
Doctor remained alone beside the pile.

Soon he heard Johnson’s voice in the distance calling out "Ready."

"All right," was the reply.

Johnson pulled his rope vigorously, and then rushed to the loop-hole to see
the effect. The thin shell of ice had given way, and the body of the fox lay among
the ruins. The bears were somewhat scared at first, but the next minute had
eagerly rushed to seize the booty.

"Fire!" called out Johnson, and at once the electric spark was sent along the
lines right into the keg of powder. A formidable explosion ensued; the house was
shaken as if by an earthquake, and the walls cracked asunder. Hatteras,
Altamont, and Bell hurried out with the guns, but they might spare their shot, for
four of the bears lay dead, and the fifth, half roasted, though alive, was
scampering away in terror as fast as his legs could carry him.

"Hurrah! Three cheers for Clawbonny," they shouted and overwhelmed the
Doctor with plaudits and thanks.

CHAPTER XIV.

AN ARCTIC SPRING.

The prisoners were free, and their joy found vent in the noisiest
demonstrations. They employed the rest of the day in repairing the house, which
had suffered greatly by the explosion. They cleared away the blocks piled up by
the animals, and filled up the rents in the walls, working with might and main,
enlivened by the many songs of old Johnson.

Next morning there was a singular rise in the temperature, the thermometer
going up to 15° above zero.

This comparative heat lasted several days. In sheltered spots the glass rose as


high as 31°, and symptoms of a thaw appeared.

The ice began to crack here and there, and jets of salt water were thrown up,
like fountains in an English park. A few days later, the rain fell in torrents.

Thick vapour rose from the snow, giving promise of the speedy
disappearance of these immense masses. The sun’s pale disc became deeper in
colour, and remained longer above the horizon. The night was scarcely longer
than three hours.

[Illustration: ]

Other tokens of spring’s approach were manifest of equal significance, the
birds were returning in flocks, and the air resounded with their deafening cries.
Hares were seen on the shores of the bay, and mice in such abundance that their
burrows completely honeycombed the ground.

[Illustration: ]

The Doctor drew the attention of his companions to the fact, that almost all
these animals were beginning to lose their white winter dress, and would soon
put on summer attire, while nature was already providing mosses, and poppies,
and saxifragas, and short grass for their sustenance. A new world lay beneath
that melting snow.

But with these inoffensive animals came back their natural enemies. Foxes
and wolves arrived in search of their prey, and dismal howls broke the silence of
the short night.

Arctic wolves closely resemble dogs, and their barking would deceive the
most practised ears; even the canine race themselves have been deceived by it.
Indeed, it seems as if the wily animals employed this ruse to attract the dogs, and
make them their prey. Several navigators have mentioned the fact, and the
Doctor’s own experience confirmed it. Johnson took care not to let his
Greenlanders loose; of Duk there was little fear; nothing could take him in.

For about a fortnight hunting was the principal occupation. There was an
abundant supply of fresh meat to be had. They shot partridges, ptarmigans, and
snow ortolans, which are delicious eating. The hunters never went far from Fort
Providence, for game was so plentiful that it seemed waiting their guns, and the
whole bay presented an animated appearance.

The thaw, meanwhile, was making rapid progress. The thermometer stood
steadily at 32° above zero, and the water ran down the mountain sides in
cataracts, and dashed in torrents through the ravines.

The Doctor lost no time in clearing about an acre of ground, in which he
sowed the seeds of anti-scorbutic plants. He just had the pleasure of seeing tiny
little green leaves begin to sprout, when the cold returned in full force.

In a single night, the thermometer lost nearly 40°; it went down to 8° below


zero. Everything was frozen—birds, quadrupeds, amphibia disappeared as if by
magic; seal-holes reclosed, and the ice once more became hard as granite.

The change was most striking; it occurred on the 18th of May, during the
night. The Doctor was rather disappointed at having all his work to do again, but
Hatteras bore the grievance most unphilosophically, as it interfered with all his
plans of speedy departure.

[Illustration: ]

"Do you think we shall have a long spell of this weather, Mr. Clawbonny?"
asked Johnson.

"No, my friend, I don’t; it is a last blow from the cold. You see these are his
dominions, and he won’t be driven out without making some resistance."

"He can defend himself pretty well," said Bell, rubbing his face.

"Yes; but I ought to have waited, and not have wasted my seed like an
ignoramus; and all the more as I could, if necessary, have made them sprout by
the kitchen stoves."

"But do you mean to say," asked Altamont, "that you might have anticipated
the sudden change?"

"Of course, and without being a wizard. I ought to have put my seed under
the protection of Saint Paucratius and the other two saints, whose féte days fall
this month."

"Absurd! Pray tell me what they have to do with it? What influence can they
possibly have on the temperature?"

"An immense one, if we are to believe horticulturists, who call them the
patron saints of the frost."

"And for what reason?"

"Because generally there is a periodical frost in the month of May, and it is
coldest from the 11th to the 13th. That is the fact."

"And how is it explained?"

"In two ways. Some say that a larger number of asteroids come between the
earth and the sun at this time of year, and others that the mere melting of the
snow necessarily absorbs a large amount of heat, and accounts for the low
temperature. Both theories are plausible enough, but the fact remains whichever
we accept, and I ought to have remembered it."

The Doctor was right, for the cold lasted till the end of the month, and put an
end to all their hunting expeditions. The old monotonous life indoors
recommenced, and was unmarked by any incident except a serious illness which
suddenly attacked Bell. This was violent quinsy, but, under the Doctor’s skilful
treatment, it was soon cured. Ice was the only remedy he employed,
administered in small pieces, and in twenty-four hours Bell was himself again.


[Illustration: ]

During this compulsory leisure, Clawbonny determined to have a talk with
the captain on an important subject—the building of a sloop out of the planks of
the Porpoise.

The Doctor hardly knew how to begin, as Hatteras had declared so
vehemently that he would never consent to use a morsel of American wood; yet
it was high time he were brought to reason, as June was at hand, the only season
for distant expeditions, and they could not start without a ship.

He thought over it a long while, and at last drew the captain aside, and said
in the kindest, gentlest way—

"Hatteras, do you believe I’m your friend?"

"Most certainly I do," replied the captain, earnestly; "my best, indeed my
only friend."

"And if I give you a piece of advice without your asking, will you consider
my motive is perfectly disinterested?"

"Yes, for I know you have never been actuated by self-interest. But what are
you driving at?"

"Wait, Hatteras, I have one thing more to ask. Do you look on me as a true-
hearted Englishman like yourself, anxious for his country’s glory?"

Hatteras looked surprised, but simply said—

"T do."

"You desire to reach the North Pole," the Doctor went on; "and I understand
and share your ambition, but to achieve your object you must employ the right
means."

"Well, and have I not sacrificed everything for it?"

"No, Hatteras, you have not sacrificed your personal antipathies. Even at this
very moment I know you are in the mood to refuse the indispensable conditions
of reaching the pole."

"Ah! it is the boat you want to talk about, and that man

"Hatteras, let us discuss the question calmly, and examine the case on all
sides. The coast on which we find ourselves at present may terminate abruptly;
we have no proof that it stretches right away to the pole; indeed, if your present
information prove correct, we ought to come to an open sea during the summer
months. Well, supposing we reach this Arctic Ocean and find it free from ice and
easy to navigate, what shall we do if we have no ship?"

Hatteras made no reply.

"Tell me, now, would you like to find yourself only a few miles from the
pole and not be able to get to it?"

Hatteras still said nothing, but buried his head in his hands.


W





"Besides," continued the Doctor, "look at the question in its moral aspect.
Here is an Englishman who sacrifices his fortune, and even his life, to win fresh
glory for his country, but because the boat which bears him across an unknown
ocean, or touches the new shore, happens to be made of the planks of an
American vessel—a castaway wreck of no use to anyone—will that lessen the
honour of the discovery? If you yourself had found the hull of some wrecked
vessel lying deserted on the shore, would you have hesitated to make use of it;
and must not a sloop built by four Englishmen and manned by four Englishmen
be English from keel to gunwale?"

Hatteras was still silent.

"No," continued Clawbonny; "the real truth is, it is not the sloop you care
about: it is the man."

"Yes, Doctor, yes," replied the captain. "It is this American I detest; I hate
him with a thorough English hatred. Fate has thrown him in my path."

"To save you!"

"To ruin me. He seems to defy me, and speaks as if he were lord and master.
He thinks he has my destiny in his hands, and knows all my projects. Didn’t we
see the man in his true colours when we were giving names to the different
coasts? Has he ever avowed his object in coming so far north? You will never
get out of my head that this man is not the leader of some expedition sent out by
the American government."

"Well, Hatteras, suppose it is so, does it follow that this expedition is to
search for the North Pole? May it not be to find the North-West Passage? But
anyway, Altamont is in complete ignorance of our object, for neither Johnson,
nor Bell, nor myself, have ever breathed a word to him about it, and I am sure
you have not."

"Well, let him always remain so."

"He must be told in the end, for we can’t leave him here alone."

"Why not? Can’t he stay here in Fort Providence?"

"He would never consent to that, Hatteras; and, moreover, to leave a man in
that way, and not know whether we might find him safe when we came back,
would be worse than imprudent: it would be inhuman. Altamont will come with
us; he must come. But we need not disclose our projects; let us tell him nothing,
but simply build a sloop for the ostensible purpose of making a survey of the
coast."

Hatteras could not bring himself to consent, but said—

"And suppose the man won’t allow his ship to be cut up?"

"In that case, you must take the law in your own hands, and build a vessel in
spite of him."


"I wish to goodness he would refuse, then!"

"He must be asked before he can refuse. I’ll undertake the asking,” said
Clawbonny.

He kept his word, for that very same night, at supper, he managed to turn the
conversation towards the subject of making excursions during summer for
hydrographical purposes.

"You will join us, I suppose, Altamont," he said.

"Of course," replied the American. 'We must know how far New America
extends."

Hatteras looked fixedly at his rival, but said nothing.

"And for that purpose," continued Altamont, "we had better build a little ship
out of the remains of the Porpoise. It is the best possible use we can make of
her."

"You hear, Bell," said the Doctor, eagerly. "We’ll all set to work to-morrow
morning."

[Illustration: The carpenter began his task immediately.—P. 154]

CHAPTER XV.

THE NORTH-WEST PASSAGE.

Next morning, Altamont Bell and the Doctor repaired to the Porpoise. There
was no lack of wood, for, shattered as the old "three-master" had been by the
icebergs, she could still supply the principal parts of a new ship, and the
carpenter began his task immediately.

In the end of May, the temperature again rose, and spring returned for good
and all. Rain fell copiously, and before long the melting snow was running down
every little slope in falls and cascades.

Hatteras could not contain his delight at these signs of a general thaw among
the ice-fields, for an open sea would bring him liberty. At last he might hope to
ascertain for himself whether his predecessors were correct in their assertions
about a polar basin.

This was a frequent topic of thought and conversation with him, and one
evening when he was going over all the old familiar arguments in support of his
theory, Altamont took up the subject, and declared his opinion that the polar
basin extended west as well as east. But it was impossible for the American and
Englishman, to talk long about anything without coming to words, so intensely
national were both. Dr. Kane was the first bone of contention on this occasion,
for the jealous Englishman was unwilling to grant his rival the glory of being a
discoverer, alleging his belief that though the brave adventurer had gone far
north, it was by mere chance he had made a discovery.

[Illustration: ]


"Chance!" interrupted Altamont, hotly. "Do you mean to assert that it is not
to Kane’s energy and science that we owe his great discovery?"

"IT mean to say that Dr. Kane’s name is not worth mentioning in a country
made illustrious by such names as Parry, and Franklin, and Ross, and Belcher,
and Penny; in a country where the seas opened the North-West Passage to an
Englishman—McClure!"

"McClure!" exclaimed the American. "Well, if ever chance favoured anyone
it was that McClure. Do you pretend to deny it?"

"I do," said Hatteras, becoming quite excited. "It was his courage and
perseverance in remaining four whole winters among the ice."

"I believe that, don’t I?" said Altamont, sneeringly. "He was caught among
the bergs and could not get away; but didn’t he after all abandon his ship, the
Investigator, and try to get back home? Besides, putting the man aside, what is
the value of his discovery? I maintain that the North-West Passage is still
undiscovered, for not a single ship to this day has ever sailed from Behring’s
Straits to Baffin’s Bay!"

The fact was indisputable, but Hatteras started to his feet, and said—

"I will not permit the honour of an English captain to be attacked in my
presence any longer!"

"You will not permit!" echoed Altamont, also springing erect. "But these are
facts, and it is out of your power to destroy them!"

"Sir!" shouted Hatteras, pale with rage.

"My friends!" interposed the Doctor; "pray be calm. This is a scientific point
we are discussing.”

But Hatteras was deaf to reason now, and said angrily—

"Tl tell you the facts, sir."

"And I'll tell you," retorted the irate American.

"Gentlemen," said Clawbonny, in a firm tone; "allow me to speak, for I know
the facts of the case as well as and perhaps better than you, and I can state them
impartially."

[Illustration: ]

"Yes, yes!" cried Bell and Johnson, who had been anxiously watching the
strife.

"Well, go on," said Altamont, finding himself in the minority, while Hatteras
simply made a sign of acquiescence, and resumed his seat.

The Doctor brought a chart and spread it out on the table, that his auditors
might follow his narration intelligibly, and be able to judge the merits of
McClure for themselves.

"It was in 1848," he said, "that two vessels, the Herald and the Plover, were


sent out in search of Franklin, but their efforts proving ineffectual, two others
were despatched to assist them— the Investigator, in command of McClure, and
the Enterprise, in command of Captain Collison. The Investigator arrived first in
Behring’s Straits, and without waiting for her consort, set out with the declared
purpose to find Franklin or the North-West Passage. The gallant young officer
hoped to push north as far as Melville Sound, but just at the extremity of the
Strait, he was stopped by an insurmountable barrier of ice, and forced to winter
there. During the long, dreary months, however, he and his officers undertook a
journey over the ice-field, to make sure of its communicating with Melville
Sound."

"Yes, but he did not get through," said Altamont.

"Stop a bit," replied Clawbonny; "as soon as a thaw set in, McClure renewed
his attempt to bring his ship into Melville Sound, and had succeeded in getting
within twenty miles, when contrary winds set in, and dragged her south with
irresistible violence. This decided the captain to alter his course. He determined
to go in a westerly direction; but after a fearful struggle with icebergs, he stuck
fast in the first of the series of straits

[Illustration: ]

which end in Baffin’s Bay, and was obliged to winter in Mercy Bay. His
provisions would only hold out eighteen months longer, but he would not give
up. He set out on a sledge, and reached Melville Island, hoping to fall in with
some ship or other, but all he found in Winter Harbour was a cairn, which
contained a document, stating that Captain Austin’s lieutenant, McClintock, had
been there the preceding year. McClure replaced this document by another,
which stated his intention of returning to England by the North-West Passage he
had discovered, by Lancaster Sound and Baffin’s Bay, and that in the event of
his not being heard of, he might be looked for north or west of Melville Island.
Then he went back to Mercy Bay with undaunted courage, to pass a third winter.
By the beginning of March his stock of provisions was so reduced in
consequence of the utter scarcity of game through the severity of the season, that
McClure resolved to send half his men to England, either by Baffin’s Bay or by
McKenzie River and Hudson’s Bay. The other half would manage to work the
vessel to Europe. He kept all his best sailors, and selected for departure only
those to whom a fourth winter would have been fatal. Everything was arranged
for their leaving, and the day fixed, when McClure, who was out walking with
Lieutenant Craswell, observed a man running towards them, flinging up his arms
and gesticulating frantically, and on getting nearer recognized him as Lieutenant
Prim, officer on board the Herald, one of the ships he had parted with in
Behring’s Straits two years before.


Captain Kellett, the Commander, had reached Winter Harbour, and finding
McClure’s document in the cairn, had dispatched his lieutenant in search of him.
McClure accompanied him back, and arranged with the captain to send him his
batch of invalids. Lieutenant Craswell took charge of these and conveyed them
safely to Winter Harbour. Leaving them there he went across the ice four
hundred and seventy miles, and arrived at Isle Beechy, where, a few days
afterwards, he took passage with twelve men on board the Phoenix, and reached
London safely on the 7th of October, 1853, having traversed the whole extent
between Behring’s Straits and Cape Farewell."

"Well, if arriving on one side and leaving at the other is not going through, I
don’t know what is!" said Hatteras.

"Yes, but he went four hundred and seventy miles over ice-fields," objected
Altamont.

"What of that?"

"Everything; that is the gist of the whole argument. It was not the
Investigator that went through.”

"No," replied Clawbonny, "for, at the close of the fourth winter, McClure
was obliged to leave her among the ice."

"Well, in maritime expeditions the vessel has to get through, and not the
man; and if ever the Northwest Passage is practicable, it will be for ships and not
sledges. If a ship cannot go, a sloop must."

"A sloop!" exclaimed Hatteras, discovering a hidden meaning in the words.

"Altamont," said the Doctor, "your distinction is simply puerile, and in that
respect we all consider that you are in the wrong."

"You may easily do that," returned the American. "It is four against one, but
that will not prevent me from holding my own opinion."

"Keep it and welcome, but keep it to yourself, if you please, for the future,"
exclaimed Hatteras.

"And pray what right have you to speak to me like this, sir?" shouted
Altamont, in a fury.

"My right as captain," returned Hatteras, equally angry.

"Am I to submit to your orders, then?"

"Most assuredly, and woe to you if is

[Illustration: The Doctor did not allow him to proceed, for he really feared
the two antagonists might come to blows.—P.162]

The Doctor did not allow him to proceed, for he really feared the two
antagonists might come to blows. Bell and Johnson seconded his endeavours to
make peace, and, after a few conciliatory words, Altamont turned on his heel,
and walked carelessly away, whistling "Yankee Doodle." Hatteras went outside,





and paced up and down with rapid strides. In about an hour he came back, and
retired to bed without saying another word.
CHAPTER XVI.


ARCTIC ARCADIA


On the 29th of May, for the first time, the sun never set. His glowing disc
just touched the boundary line of the horizon, and rose again immediately. The
period was now entered when the day lasts twenty-four hours.

Next morning there was a magnificent halo; the monarch of day appeared
surrounded by a luminous circle, radiant with all the prismatic colours. This
phenomenon never lost its charm, for the Doctor, however frequently it occurred,
and he always noted carefully down all particulars respecting it.

Before long the feathered tribes began to return, filling the air with their
discordant cries. Flocks of bustards and Canadian geese from Florida or
Arkansas came flying north with marvellous rapidity, bringing spring beneath
their wings. The Doctor shot several, and among them one or two cranes and a
solitary stork.

The snow was now fast melting, and the ice-fields were covered with
"slush." All round the bay large pools had formed, between which the soil
appeared as if some product of spring.

The Doctor recommenced his sowing, for he had plenty of seed; but he was
surprised to find sorrel growing already between the half-dried stones, and even
pale sickly heaths, trying to show their delicate pink blossoms.

At last it began to be really hot weather. On the 15th of June, the
thermometer stood at 57° above zero. The Doctor scarcely believed his eyes, but
it was a positive fact, and it was soon confirmed by the changed appearance of
the country.

[Illustration: ]

An excursion was made to Isle Johnson, but it turned out to be a barren little
islet of no importance whatever, though it gave the old boatswain infinite
pleasure to know that those sea girt rocks bore his name.

There was some danger of both house and stores melting, but happily this
high temperature proved exceptional, the thermometer seldom averaging much
above freezing point.

By the middle of June, the sloop had made good progress, and already
presented a shapely appearance. As Bell and Johnson took the work of
construction entirely on themselves, the others went hunting, and succeeded in


killing several deer, in spite of its being difficult game to approach. Altamont
adopted the Indian practice of crawling on all fours, and adjusting his gun and
arms so as to simulate horns and deceive the timid animal, till he could get near
enough to take good aim.

[Illustration: ]

Their principal object of pursuit, however, was the musk-ox, which Parry had
met with in such numbers in Melville Island; but not a solitary specimen was to
be seen anywhere about Victoria Bay, and a distant excursion was, therefore,
resolved upon, which would serve the double purpose of hunting and surveying
the eastern coast.

[Illustration: ]

The three hunters, accompanied by Duk, set out on Monday, the 17th of
June, at six in the morning, each man armed with a double-barrelled gun, a
hatchet and snow-knife, and provisions for several days.

It was a fine bright morning, and by ten o’clock they had gone twelve miles;
but not a living thing had crossed their path, and the hunt threatened to turn out a
mere excursion.

However, they went on in hope, after a good breakfast and half-an- hour’s
rest.

The ground was getting gradually lower, and presented a peculiar appearance
from the snow, which lay here and there in ridges unmelted. At a distance it
looked like the sea when a strong wind is lashing up the waves, and cresting
them with a white foam.

[Illustration: ]

Before long they reached a sort of glen, at the bottom of which was a
winding river. It was almost completely thawed, and already the banks were
clothed with a species of vegetation, as if the sun had done his best to fertilise
the soil.

"T tell you what," said the Doctor, "a few enterprising colonists might make a
fine settlement here. With a little industry and perseverance wonders might be
done in this country. Ah! if I am not much mistaken, it has some four-footed
inhabitants already. Those frisky little fellows know the best spots to choose."

"Hares! I declare. That’s jolly! " said Altamont, loading his gun.

[Illustration: ]

"Stop!" cried the Doctor; "stop, you furious hunter. Let the poor little things
alone; they are not thinking of running away. Look, they are actually coming to
us, I do believe!"

He was right, for presently three or four young hares, gambolling away
among the fresh moss and tiny heaths, came running about their legs so


fearlessly and trustfully, that even Altamont was disarmed. They
[Illustration: It was a strange and touching spectacle to see the pretty
creatures—they flew on Clawbonny’s shoulders, etc.—P.169]


rubbed against the Doctor’s knees, and let him stroke them till the
kindhearted man could not help saying to Altamont—

"Why give shot to those who come for caresses? The death of these little
beasts could do us no good."

"You say what’s true, Clawbonny. Let them live!" replied Hatteras.

[Illustration: ]

"And these ptarmigans too, I suppose, and these long-legged plovers," added
Altamont, as a whole covey of birds flew down among the hunters, never
suspecting their danger. Duk could not tell what to make of it, and stood
stupefied.

It was a strange and touching spectacle to see the pretty creatures; they flew
on Clawbonny’s shoulders, and lay down at his feet as if inviting friendly
caresses, and doing their utmost to welcome the strangers. The whole glen
echoed with their joyous cries as they darted to and fro from all parts. The good
Doctor seemed some mighty enchanter.

The hunters had continued their course along the banks of the river, when a
sudden bend in the valley revealed a herd of deer, eight or ten in number,
peacefully browsing on some lichens that lay half-buried in the snow. They were
charming creatures, so graceful and gentle, male and female, both adorned with
noble antlers, wide-spreading and deeply-notched. Their skin had already lost its
winter whiteness, and began to assume the brown tint of summer. Strange to say,
they appeared not a whit more afraid than the birds or hares.

The three men were now right in the centre of the herd, but not one made the
least movement to run away. This time the worthy Doctor had far more difficulty
in restraining Altamont’s impatience, for the mere sight of such magnificent
animals roused his hunting instincts, and he became quite excited; while
Hatteras, on the contrary, seemed really touched to see the splendid creatures
rubbing their heads so affectionately and trustfully against the good Clawbonny,
the friend of every living thing.

"But, I say," exclaimed Altamont, "didn’t we come out expressly to hunt?"

"To hunt the musk-ox, and nothing else," replied Clawbonny. "Besides, we
shouldn’t know what to do with this game, even if we killed it; we have
provisions enough. Let us for once enjoy the sight of men and animals in perfect
amity."

"It proves no human beings have been here before," said Hatteras.

"True, and that proves something more, these animals are not of American
origin."

"How do you make that out?" said Altamont.

"Why, if they had been born in North America they would have known how


to treat that mammiferous biped called man, and would have fled at the first
glimpse of us. No, they are from the north, most likely from the untrodden wilds
of Asia, so Altamont, you have no right to claim them as fellow-countrymen."

[Illustration: ]

"Oh! a hunter doesn’t examine his game so closely as all that. Everything is
grist that comes to his mill."

"All right. Calm yourself, my brave Nimrod! For my own part, I would
rather never fire another shot than make one of these beautiful creatures afraid of
me. See, even Duk fraternizes with them. Believe me, it is well to be kind where
we can. Kindness is power."

"Well, well, so be it," said Altamont, not at all understanding such scruples.
"But I should like to see what you would do if you had no weapon but kindness
among a pack of bears or wolves! You wouldn’t make much of it."

"I make no pretensions to charm wild beasts. I don’t believe much in
Orpheus and his enchantments. Besides, bears and wolves would not come to us
like these hares, and partridges, and deer."

"Why not? They have never seen human beings either."

"No but they are savage by nature," said Clawbonny, "and ferocity, like
wickedness, engenders suspicion. This is true of men as well as animals."

They spent the whole day in the glen, which the Doctor christened "Arctic
Arcadia," and when evening came they lay down to rest in the hollow of a rock,
which seemed as if expressly prepared for their accommodation.

CHAPTER XVII.

ALTAMONT’S REVENGE.

Next morning, as the fine weather still continued, the hunters determined to
have another search for the musk ox. It was only fair to give Altamont a chance,
with the distinct understanding that he should have the right of firing, however
fascinating the game they might meet. Besides, the flesh of the musk ox, though
a little too highly impregnated with the smell, is savoury food, and the hunters
would gladly carry back a few pounds of it to Fort Providence.

During the first part of the day, nothing occurred worth mentioning, but they
noticed a considerable change in the aspect of the country, and appearances
seemed to indicate that they were approaching a hilly region. This New America
was evidently either a continent or an island of considerable extent.

Duk was running far ahead of his party when he stopped suddenly short, and
began sniffing the ground as if he had caught scent of game. Next minute he
rushed forward again with extreme rapidity, and was speedily out of sight. But
loud distinct barking convinced the hunters that the faithful fellow had at last
discovered the desired object.


They hurried onwards, and after an hour and a half’s quick walking, found
him standing in front of two formidable looking animals, and barking furiously.
The Doctor recognized them at once as belonging to the musk ox, or Ovibos
genus, as naturalists call it, by the very wide horns touching each other at their
base, by the absence of muzzle, by the narrow square chanfrin resembling that of
a sheep, and by the very short tail. Their hair was long and thickly matted, and
mixed with fine brown, silky wool.

[Illustration: ]

These singular-looking quadrupeds were not the least afraid of Duk, though
extremely surprised; but at the first glimpse of the hunters they took flight, and it
was no easy task to go after them, for half an hour’s swift running brought them
no nearer, and made the whole party so out of breath, that they were forced to
come to a halt.

"Confound the beasts!" said Altamont.

"Yes, Altamont, I?ll make them over to you," replied Clawbonny; "they are
true Americans, and they don’t appear to have a very favourable idea of their
fellow countrymen."

[Illustration: ]

"That proves our hunting prowess," rejoined Altamont.

Meantime the oxen finding themselves no longer pursued, had stopped short.
Further pursuit was evidently useless. If they were to be captured at all they must
be surrounded, and the plateau which they first happened to have reached, was
very favourable for the purpose. Leaving Duk to worry them, they went down by
the neighbouring ravines; and got to the one end of the plateau, where Altamont
and the Doctor hid themselves behind projecting rocks, while Hatteras went on
to the other end, intending to startle the animals by his sudden appearance, and
drive them back towards his companions.

"I suppose you have no objection this time to bestow a few bullets on these
gentry?" said Altamont.

"Oh, no, it is ‘a fair field now and no favour,’" returned Clawbonny.

The oxen had begun to shake themselves impatiently at Duk, trying to kick
him off, when Hatteras started up right in front of them, shouting and chasing
them back. This was the signal for Altamont and the Doctor to rush forward and
fire, but at the sight of two assailants, the terrified animals wheeled round and
attacked Hatteras. He met their onset with a firm, steady foot, and fired straight
at their heads. But both his balls were powerless, and only served still further to
madden the enraged beasts. They rushed upon the unfortunate man like furies,
and threw him on the ground in an instant.

"He is a dead man!" exclaimed the Doctor, in despairing accents.


A tremendous struggle was going on in Altamont’s breast at the sight of his
prostrate foe, and though his first impulse was to hasten to his help, he stopped
short, battling with himself and his prejudices. But his hesitation scarcely lasted
half a second, his better self conquered, and exclaiming,

"No, it would be cowardly!" he rushed forward with Clawbonny.

Hatteras full well understood how his rival felt, but would rather have died
than have begged his intervention. However, he had hardly time to think about it,
before Altamont was at his side.

He could not have held out much longer, for it was impossible to ward off
the blows of horns and hoofs of two such powerful antagonists, and in a few
minutes more he must have been tom to pieces. But suddenly two shots
resounded, and Hatteras felt the balls graze his head.

[Ilustration: Dealt him such a tremendous blow on the head with his hatchet,
that the skull was completely split open.—P.177]

"Courage!" shouted Altamont, flinging away his discharged weapon, and
throwing himself right in front of the raging animals. One of them, shot to the
heart, fell dead as he reached the spot, while the other dashed madly on Hatteras,
and was about to gore the unfortunate captain with his horns, when Altamont
plunged his snow knife far into the beast’s wide open jaws with one hand, with
the other dealt him such a tremendous blow on the head with his hatchet, that the
skull was completely split open.

It was done so quickly that it seemed like a flash of lightning, and all was
over. The second ox lay dead, and Clawbonny shouted "Hurrah! hurrah!"
Hatteras was saved.

He owed his life to the man he hated the most. What a storm of conflicting
passions this must have roused in his soul! But where was the emotion he could
not master?

However, his action was prompt, whatever his feeling might be. Without a
moment’s hesitancy, he went up to his rival, and said in a grave voice—

"Altamont, you have saved my life!"

"You saved mine," replied the American.

There was a moment’s silence, and then Altamont added—

"We’re quits, Hatteras."

"No, Altamont," said the captain; "when the Doctor dragged you out of your
icy tomb, I did not know who you were; but you saved me at the peril of your
own life, knowing quite well who I was."

"Why, you are a fellow-creature at any rate, and whatever faults an American
may have, he is no coward."

"No, indeed," said the Doctor. "He is a man, every inch as much as yourself,


Hatteras."

"And like me, he shall have part in the glory that awaits us."

"The glory of reaching the North Pole?" asked Altamont.

"Yes," replied Hatteras, proudly.

"IT guessed right, then," said Altamont.

"And you have actually dared to conceive such a project? Oh! it is grand; I
tell you it is sublime even to think of it?"

"But tell me," said Hatteras in a hurried manner; "you were not bound for the
Pole then yourself?"

Altamont hesitated.

"Come, speak out, man,” urged the Doctor.

"Well, to tell the truth, I was not, and the truth is better than self-love. No, I
had no such grand purpose in view. I was trying to clear the North-West Passage,
and that was all."

"Altamont," said Hatteras, holding out his hand; "be our companion to glory,
come with us and find the North Pole."

The two men clasped hands in a warm, hearty grasp, and the bond of
friendship between them was sealed.

When they turned to look for the Doctor they found him in tears.

"Ah! friends," he said, wiping his eyes; "you have made me so happy, it is
almost more than I can bear’ You have sacrificed this miserable nationality for
the sake of the common cause. You have said, ‘What does it matter if only the
Pole is discovered, whether it is by an Englishman or an American?’ Why should
we brag of being American or English, when we can boast that we are men?"

The good little man was beside himself with joy He hugged the reconciled
enemies to his bosom, and cemented their friendship by his own affection to
both.

At last he grew calm after at least a twentieth embrace, and said—

"Tt is time I went to work now. Since I am no hunter, I must use my talents in
another direction"

And he began to cut up the oxen so skilfully, that he seemed like a surgeon
making a delicate autopsy.

His two companions looked on smiling. In a few minutes the adroit operator
had cut off more than a hundred pounds of flesh. This he divided into three parts.
Each man took one, and they retraced their steps to Fort Providence.

At ten o’clock they arrived at Doctor’s House, where Johnson and Bell had a
good supper prepared for them.

But before sitting down to enjoy it, the Doctor exclaimed in a jubilant tone,
and pointing to his two companions—


"My dear old Johnson, I took out an American and an Englishman with me,
didn’t I?"

"Yes, Mr. Clawbonny."

"Well, I bring back two brothers."

This was joyous news to the sailors, and they shook hands warmly with
Altamont; while the Doctor recounted all that had passed, and how the American
captain had saved the English captain’s life. That night no five happier men
could have been found than those that lay sleeping in the little snow house.

CHAPTER XVIII.

FINAL PREPARATIONS

Next day the weather changed, the cold returned. Snow, and rain, and
tempest came in quick succession for several days.

Bell had completed the sloop, and done his work well, for the little vessel
was admirably adapted for the purpose contemplated, being high at the sides and
partly decked so as to be able to stand a heavy sea, and yet light enough to be
drawn on the sledge without overburdening the dogs.

At last a change of the greatest importance took place. The ice began to
tremble in the centre of the bay, and the highest masses became loosened at their
base ready to form icebergs, and drift away before the first gale; but Hatteras
would not wait for the icefields to break up before he started. Since the journey
must be made on land, he did not care whether the sea was open or not; and the
day of departure was fixed for the 25th of June—Johnson and Bell undertaking
the necessary repairs of the sledge.

On the 20th, finding there was space enough between the broken ice to allow
the sloop to get through, it was determined to take her a trial trip to Cape
Washington.

[Illustration: ]

The sea was not quite open but it would have been impossible to go across
on foot.

This short sail of six hours sufficiently tested the powers of the sloop, and
proved her excellent qualities. In coming back they witnessed a curious sight; it
was the chase of a seal by a gigantic bear. Mr. Bruin was too busily engaged to
notice the vessel, or he would have pursued; he was intently watching beside a
seal hole with the patience of a true hunter, or rather angler, for he was certainly
fishing just then. He watched in absolute silence, without stirring or giving the
least sign of life.

[Illustration: ]

But all of a sudden there was a slight disturbance on the surface of the water
in the hole, which announced the coming up of the amphibious animal to


breathe. Instantly the bear lay flat on his belly with his two paws stretched round
the opening.

[Illustration: The poor seal struggled desperately, but could not free himself
from the iron grasp of his enemy.—P.184]

Next minute up came the seal, but his head no sooner appeared above the
water than the bear’s paws closed about him like a vice, and dragged him right
out. The poor seal struggled desperately, but could not free himself from the iron
grasp of his enemy, who hugged him closer and closer till suffocation was
complete. Then he carried him off to his den as if the weight were nothing,
leaping lightly from pack to pack till he gained terra firma safely.

[Illustration: ]

On the 22nd of June, Hatteras began to load the sledge. They put in 200 lbs.
of salt meat, three cases of vegetables and preserved meat, besides lime-juice,
and flour, and medicines. They also took 200 lbs. of powder and a stock of fire-
arms. Including the sloop and the Halkett-boat, there was about 1500 Ibs. weight,
a heavy

[Illustration: ]

load for four dogs, and all the more as they would have to drag it every day,
instead of only four days successively, like the dogs employed by the
Esquimaux, who always keep a relay for their sledges. However, the distance to
the Pole was not 150 miles at the outside, and they did not intend to go more
than twelve miles a day, as they could do it comfortably in a month. Even if land
failed them, they could always fall back on the sloop, and finish the journey
without fatigue to men or dogs.

[Illustration: ]

All the party were in excellent health, though they had lost flesh a little; but,
by attending to the Doctor’s wise counsels, they had weathered the winter
without being attacked by any of the maladies incident to the climate.

Now, they were almost at their journey’s end, and not one doubted of
success, for a common bond of sympathy bound fast the five men, and made
them strong to persevere.

On Sunday, the 23rd, all was ready, and it was resolved to devote the entire
day to rest.

The dwellers on Fort Providence could not see the last day dawn without
some emotion. It cost them a pang to leave the snow-hut which had served them
in such good stead, and this hospitable shore where they had passed the winter.
Take it altogether, they had spent very happy hours there, and the Doctor made a
touching reference to the subject as they sat round the table at the evening meal,
and did not forget to thank God for his manifest protection.


[Illustration: ]

They retired early to rest, for they needed to be up betimes. So passed the
last night in Fort Providence.

CHAPTER XIX.

MARCH TO THE NORTH

Next day at early dawn, Hatteras gave the signal for departure. The well-fed
and well-rested dogs were harnessed to the sledge. They had been having a good
time of it all the winter, and might be expected to do good service during the
summer.

It was six in the morning when the expedition started. After following the
windings of the bay and going past Cape Washington, they struck into the direct
route for the north, and by seven o’clock had lost sight of the lighthouse and Fort
Providence.

During the first two days they made twenty miles in twelve hours, devoting
the remainder of the time to rest and meals. The tent was quite sufficient
protection during sleep.

The temperature began to rise. In many places the snow melted entirely
away, and great patches of water appeared; here and there complete ponds,
which a little stretch of imagination might easily convert into lakes. The
travellers were often up to their knees, but they only laughed over it; and,
indeed, the Doctor was rather glad of such unexpected baths.

"But for all that," he said, "the water has no business to wet us here. It is an
element which has no right to this country, except in a solid or vaporous state.
Ice or vapour is all very well, but water— never!"

[Illustration: ]

Hunting was not forgotten during the march, for fresh meat was a necessity.
Altamont and Bell kept their guns loaded, and shot ptarmigans, guillemots,
geese, and a few young hares; but, by degrees, birds and animals had been
changing from trustfulness to fear, and had become so shy and difficult to
approach, that very often, but for Duk, the hunters would have wasted their
powder.

Hatteras advised them not to go more than a mile away, as there was not a
day, nor even an hour, to lose, for three months of fine weather was the utmost
they

[Illustration: ]

could count upon. Besides, the sledge was often coming to difficult places,
when each man was needed to lend a helping hand.

On the third day they came to a lake, several acres in extent, and still entirely
frozen over. The sun’s rays had little access to it, owing to its situation, and the


ice was so strong that it must have dated from some remote winter. It was strong
enough to bear both the travellers and their sledge, and was covered with dry
snow.

[Illustration: ]

From this point the country became gradually lower, from which the Doctor
concluded that it did not extend to the Pole, but that most probably this New
America was an island.

Up to this time the expedition had been attended with no fatigue. The
travellers had only suffered from the intense glare of the sun on the snow, which
threatened them with snow-blindness. At another time of the year they might
have avoided this by walking during the night, but at present there was no night
at all. Happily the snow was beginning to melt, and the brilliancy would
diminish as the process of dissolution advanced.

[Illustration: ]

On the 28th of June the thermometer rose to 45°, and the rain fell in torrents.
Hatteras and his companions, however, marched stoically on, and even hailed the
downpour with delight, knowing that it would hasten the disappearance of the
snow.

As they went along, the Doctor often picked up stones, both round ones and
flat pebbles, as if worn away by the tide. He thought from this they must be near
the Polar Basin, and yet far as the eye could reach was one interminable plain.

There was not a trace of houses, or huts, or cairns visible. It was evident that
the Greenlanders had not pushed their way so far north, and yet the famished
tribes would have found their account in coming, for the country abounded in
game. Bears were frequently seen, and numerous herds of musk-oxen and deer.

[Illustration: Bell killed a fox and Altamont a musk-ox.—P.192]

On the 29th, Bell killed a fox and Altamont a musk-ox. These supplies of
fresh food were very acceptable, and even the Doctor surveyed, with
considerable satisfaction, the haunches of meat they managed to procure from
time to time.

"Don’t let us stint ourselves," he used to say on these occasions; "food is no
unimportant matter in expeditions like ours."

"Especially," said Johnson, "when a meal depends on a lucky shot."

"You’re right, Johnson; a man does not think so much about dinner when he
knows the soup-pot is simmering by the kitchen-fire."

On the 30th, they came to a district which seemed

[Illustration: ]

to have been upturned by some volcanic convulsion, so covered was it with
cones and sharp lofty peaks.


A strong breeze from the south-east was blowing, which soon increased to a
hurricane, sweeping over the rocks covered with snow and the huge masses, of
ice, which took the forms of icebergs and hummocks, though on dry land.

The tempest was followed by damp, warm weather, which caused a regular
thaw.

On all sides nothing could be heard but the noise of cracking ice and falling
avalanches.

The travellers had to be very careful in avoiding hills, and even in speaking
aloud, for the slightest agitation in the air might have caused a catastrophe.
Indeed, the suddenness is the peculiar feature in Arctic

[Illustration: ]

avalanches, distinguishing them from those of Switzerland and Norway.
Often the dislodgment of a block of ice is instantaneous, and not even a cannon-
ball or thunderbolt could be more rapid in its descent. The loosening, the fall,
and the crash happen almost simultaneously.

Happily, however, no accident befel any of the party, and three days
afterwards they came to smooth, level ground again.

[Illustration: ]

But here a new phenomenon met their gaze—a phenomenon which was long
a subject of patient inquiry among the learned of both hemispheres. They came
to a long chain of low hills which seemed to extend for miles, and were all
covered on the eastern side with bright red snow.

It is easy to imagine the surprise and half-terrified exclamations of the little
company at the sight of this long red curtain; but the Doctor hastened to reassure
them, or rather to instruct them, as to the nature of this peculiar snow. He told
them that this same red substance had been found in Switzerland, in the heart of
the Alps, and that the colour proceeded solely from the presence of certain
corpuscles, about the nature of which for a long time chemists could not agree.
They could not decide whether these corpuscles were of animal or vegetable
origin, but at last it was settled that they belonged to the family of fungi, being a
sort of microscopic champignon of the species Uredo.

Turning the snow over with his iron-tipped staff, the Doctor found that the
colouring matter measured nine feet deep. He pointed this out to his companions,
that they might have some idea of the enormous number of these tiny
mushrooms in a layer extending so many miles.

This phenomenon was none the less strange for being explained, for red is a
colour seldom seen in nature over any considerable area. The reflection of the
sun’s rays upon it produced the most peculiar effect, lighting up men, and
animals, and rocks with a fiery glow, as if proceeding from some flame within.


When the snow melted it looked like blood, as the red particles do not
decompose. It seemed to the travellers as if rivulets of blood were running
among their feet.

[Illustration: ]

The Doctor filled several bottles with this precious substance to examine at
leisure, as he had only had a glimpse of the Crimson Cliffs in Baffin’s Bay.

[Illustration: ]

This Field of Blood, as he called it, took three hours to get over, and then the
country resumed its usual aspect.

[Illustration: At Bell’s suggestion torches were contrived.—P.199]

CHAPTER XX.

FOOTPRINTS IN THE SNOW.

On the fourth of July there was such an exceedingly dense fog, that it was
very difficult to keep the straight course for the north. No misadventure,
however, befel the party during the darkness, except the loss of Bell’s snow-
shoes. At Bell’s suggestion, which fired the Doctor’s inventive genius, torches
were contrived, made of tow steeped in spirits-of-wine and fastened on the end
of a stick, and these served somewhat to help them on, though they made but
small progress; for, on the sixth, after the fog had cleared off, the Doctor took
their bearings, and found that they had only been marching at the rate of eight
miles a day.

Determined to make up for lost time, they rose next morning very early and
started off, Bell and Altamont as usual going ahead of the rest and acting as
scouts. Johnson and the others kept beside the sledge, and were soon nearly two
miles behind the guides; but the weather was so dry and clear that all their
movements could be distinctly observed.

"What now? " said Clawbonny, as he saw them make a sudden halt, and
stoop down as if examining the ground.

"I was just wondering what they are about, myself," replied old Johnson.

"Perhaps they have come on the tracks of animals," suggested Hatteras.

"No," said Clawbonny, "it can’t be that."

[Illustration: ]

"Why not?"

"Because Duk would bark."

"Well, it is quite evident they are examining some sort of marks."

"Let’s get on, then," said Hatteras; and, urging forward the dogs, they
rejoined their companions in about twenty minutes, and shared their surprise at
finding unmistakable fresh footprints of human beings in the snow, as plain as if
only made the preceding day.


"They are Esquimaux footprints," said Hatteras.

"Do you think so?" asked Altamont.

"There is no doubt of it."

"But what do you make of this, then?" returned Altamont, pointing to
another footmark repeated in

[Illustration: ]

several places. "Do you believe for a minute that was made by an
Esquimaux?"

It was incontestably the print of a European boot—nails, sole, and heel
clearly stamped in the snow. There was no room for doubt, and Hatteras
exclaimed in amazement—

"Europeans here!"

"Evidently," said Johnson.

"And yet it is so improbable that we must take a second look before
pronouncing an opinion,” said Clawbonny.

But the longer he looked, the more apparent became the fact. Hatteras was
chagrined beyond measure. A European here, so near the Pole!

The footprints extended for about a quarter of a mile, and then diverged to
the west. Should the travellers follow them further?

"No," said Hatteras, "let us go on."

He was interrupted by an exclamation from the Doctor, who had just picked
up an object that gave still more convincing proof of European origin. It was part
of a pocket spy-glass!

"Well, if we still had any doubts about the footmarks, this settles the case at
once, at any rate," said Clawbonny.

"Forward!" exclaimed Hatteras so energetically, that instinctively each one
obeyed, and the march was resumed forthwith.

The day wore away, but no further sign of the presence of suspected rivals
was discovered, and they prepared to encamp for the night.

The tent was pitched in a ravine for shelter, as the sky was dark and
threatening, and a violent north wind was blowing.

"I’m afraid we’ll have a bad night," said Johnson.

" A pretty noisy one, I expect," replied the Doctor, "but not cold. We had
better take every precaution, and fasten down our tent with good big stones."

"You are right, Mr. Clawbonny. If the hurricane swept away our tent, I don’t
know where we should find it again."

[Illustration: ]

The tent held fast, but sleep was impossible, for the tempest was let loose
and raged with tremendous violence.


"Tt seems to me," said the Doctor, during a brief lull in the deafening roar," as
if I could hear the sound of collisions between icebergs and icefields. If we were
near the sea, I could really believe there was a general break-up in the ice."

"I can’t explain the noises any other way," said Johnson.

"Can we have reached the coast, I wonder?" asked Hatteras.

"It is not impossible," replied Clawbonny. "Listen! Do you hear that crash?
That is certainly the sound of icebergs falling. We cannot be very far from the
ocean."

"Well, if it turn out to be so, I shall push right on over the icefields."

"Oh, they’ ll be all broken up after such a storm as this. We shall see what to-
morrow, brings; but all I can say is, if any poor fellows are wandering about in a
night like this, I pity them.

The storm lasted for ten hours, and the weary travellers anxiously watched
for the morning. About daybreak its fury seemed to have spent itself, and
Hatteras, accompanied by Bell and Altamont, ventured to leave the tent. They
climbed a hill about three hundred feet high, which commanded a wide view.
But what a metamorphosed region met their gaze! All the ice had completely
vanished, the storm had chased away the winter, and stripped the soil
everywhere of its snow covering.

[Illustration: Three hours afterwards they arrived at the coast, and shouted
simultaneously, "The sea! the sea!""—P.206]

But Hatteras scarcely bestowed a glance on surrounding objects; his eager
gaze was bent on the northern horizon, which appeared shrouded in black mist.

"That may very likely be caused by the ocean," suggested Clawbonny.

"You are right. The sea must be there,” was the reply.

"That tint is what we call the blink of open water," said Johnson.

"Come on, then, to the sledge at once, and let us get to this unknown ocean,"
exclaimed Hatteras.

Their few preparations were soon made, and the march resumed. Three hours
afterwards they arrived at the coast, and shouted simultaneously, "The sea! the
sea!"

"Ay, and open sea!" added Hatteras.

And so it was. The storm had opened wide the Polar Basin, and the loosened
packs were drifting in all directions. The icebergs had weighed anchor, and were
sailing out into the open sea.

This new ocean stretched far away out of sight, and not a single island or
continent was visible.

On the east and west the coast formed two capes or headlands, which sloped
gently down to the sea. In the centre, a projecting rock formed a small natural


bay, sheltered on three sides, into which a wide river fell, bearing in its bosom
the melted snows of winter.

After a careful survey of the coast, Hatteras determined to launch the sloop
that very day, and to unpack the sledge, and get everything on board. The tent
was soon put up, and a comfortable repast prepared. This important business
despatched, work commenced; and all hands were so expeditious and willing,
that by five

[Illustration: ]

o’clock nothing more remained to be done. The sloop lay rocking gracefully
in the little bay, and all the cargo was on board except the tent, and what was
required for the night’s encampment.

The sight of the sloop suggested to Clawbonny the propriety of giving
Altamont’s name to the little bay. His proposition to that effect met with
unanimous approval, and the port was forthwith dignified by the title of
Altamont Harbour.

According to the Doctor’s calculations the travellers were now only 9°
distant from the Pole. They had gone over two hundred miles from Victoria Bay
to Altamont Harbour, and were in latitude 87° 5’ and longitude 118° 35’.

CHAPTER XXI.

THE OPEN SEA.

Next morning by eight o’clock all the remaining effects were on board, and
the preparations for departure completed. But before starting the Doctor thought
he would like to take a last look at the country and see if any further traces of the
presence of strangers could be discovered, for the mysterious footmarks they had
met with were never out of his thoughts. He climbed to the top of a height which
commanded a view of the whole southern horizon, and took out his pocket
telescope. But what was his astonishment, to find he could see nothing through
it, not even neighbouring objects. He rubbed his eyes and looked again, but with
no better result. Then he began to examine the telescope, the object glass was
gone!

The object glass! This explained the whole mystery, footprints and all; and
with a shout of surprise he hurried down the hill to impart his discovery to the
wondering companions, who came running towards him, startled by his loud
exclamation, and full of anxiety at his precipitate descent.

"Well, what is the matter now?" said Johnson.

The Doctor could hardly speak, he was so out of breath. At last he managed
to gasp out—

"The tracks, footmarks, strangers."

"What?" said Hatteras, "strangers here?"


"No, no, the object glass; the object glass out of my telescope."

[Illustration: ]

And he held out his spy-glass for them to look at.

"Ah! I see," said Altamont; "it is wanting.”

"Yes."

"But then the footmarks?"

"They were ours, friends, just ours," exclaimed the Doctor. "We had lost
ourselves in the fog, and been wandering in a circle."

"But the boot-marks," objected Hatteras.

"Bell’s. He walked about a whole day after he had lost his snow shoes."

"So I did," said Bell.

The mistake was so evident, that they all laughed heartily, except Hatteras,
though no one was more glad than he at the discovery.

A quarter of an hour afterwards the little sloop sailed out of Altamont
Harbour, and commenced her voyage of discovery. The wind was favourable,
but there was little of it, and the weather was positively warm.

The sloop was none the worse for the sledge journey. She was in first-rate
trim, and easily managed. Johnson steered, the Doctor, Bell, and the American
leaned back against the cargo, and Hatteras stood at the prow, his fixed, eager
gaze bent steadily on that mysterious point towards which he felt drawn with
irresistible power, like the magnetic needle to the Pole. He wished to be the first
to descry any shore that might come in sight, and he had every right to the
honour.

The water of this Polar Sea presented some peculiar features worth
mentioning. In colour it was a faint ultramarine blue, and possessed such
wonderful transparency that one seemed to gaze down into fathomless depths.
These depths were lighted up, no doubt, by some electrical phenomenon, and so
many varieties of living creatures were visible that the vessel seemed to be
sailing over a vast aquarium.

Innumerable flocks of birds were flying over the surface of this marvellous
ocean, darkening the sky like thick heavy storm-clouds. Water-fowl of every
description were among them, from the albatross to the penguin, and all of
gigantic proportions. Their cries were absolutely deafening, and some of them
had such

[Illustration: ]

immense, wide-spreading wings, that they covered the sloop completely as
they flew over. The Doctor thought himself a good naturalist, but he found his
science greatly at fault, for many a species here was wholly unknown to any
ornithological society.


[Illustration: And the Doctor leaning over the side of the vessel, could see the
whales and the dolphins, and all the rest of the monsters of the deep.—P.214]

The good little man was equally nonplussed when he looked at the water, for
he saw the most wonderful meduse, some so large that they looked like little
islands floating about among Brobdignagian sea-weeds. And below the surface,
what a spectacle met the eye! Myriads of fish of every species; young manati at
play with each other; narwhals with their one strong weapon of defence, like the
hom of a unicorn, chasing the timid seals; whales of every tribe, spouting out
columns of water and mucilage, and filling the air with a peculiar whizzing
noise; dolphins, seals, and walruses; sea-dogs and sea-horses, sea-bears and sea-
elephants, quietly browsing on submarine pastures; and the Doctor could gaze at
them all as easily and clearly as if they were in glass tanks in the Zoological
Gardens.

There was a Strange supernatural purity about the atmosphere. It seemed
charged to overflowing with oxygen, and had a marvellous power of
exhilaration, producing an almost intoxicating effect on the brain.

Towards evening, Hatteras and his companions lost sight of the coast. Night
came on, though the sun remained just above the horizon; but it had the same
influence on animated nature as in temperate zones. Birds, fish, and all the
cetacea disappeared and perfect silence prevailed.

Since the departure from Altamont Harbour, the sloop had made one degree
further north. The next day brought no signs of land; there was not even a speck
on the horizon. The wind was still favourable, and the sea pretty calm. The birds
and fishes returned as numerously as on the preceding day, and the Doctor
leaning over the side of the vessel, could see the whales and the dolphins, and all
the rest of the monsters of the deep, gradually coming up from the clear depths
below. On the surface, far as the eye could reach, nothing was visible except a
solitary iceberg here and there, and a few scattered floes.

Indeed, but little ice was met with anywhere. The sloop was ten degrees
above the point of greatest cold, and consequently in the same temperature as
Baffin’s Bay and Disko. It was therefore not astonishing that the sea should be
open in these summer months.

This is a fact of great practical value, for if ever the whalers can penetrate
north as far as the Polar basin, they may be sure of an immediate cargo, as this
part of the ocean seems the general reservoir of whales and seals, and every
marine species.

The day wore on, but still nothing appeared on the horizon. Hatteras never
left the prow of the ship, but stood, glass in hand, eagerly gazing into the
distance with anxious, questioning eyes, and seeking to discover, in the colour of


the water, the shape of the waves, and the breath of the wind, indications of
approaching land.

CHAPTER XXII.

GETTING NEAR THE POLE.

Hour after hour passed away, and still Hatteras persevered in his weary
watch, though his hopes appeared doomed to disappointment.

At length, about six in the evening, a dim, hazy, shapeless sort of mist
seemed to rise far away between sea and sky. It was not a cloud, for it was
constantly vanishing, and then reappearing next minute.

Hatteras was the first to notice this peculiar phenomenon; but after an hour’s
scrutiny through his telescope, he could make nothing of it.

All at once, however, some sure indication met his eye, and stretching out his
arm to the horizon, he shouted, in a clear ringing voice—-

"Land! land!"

His words produced an electrical effect on his companions, and every man
rushed to his side.

"T see it, I see it,” said Clawbonny.

"Yes, yes, so do I! " exclaimed Johnson.

"Tt is a cloud," said Altamont.

"Land! land!" repeated Hatteras, in tones of absolute conviction.

Even while he spoke the appearance vanished, and when it returned again the
Doctor fancied he caught a gleam of light about the smoke for an instant.

[Illustration: "It is a volcano!" he exclaimed.—P.217]

"Tt is a volcano!" he exclaimed.

"A volcano?" repeated Altamont.

"Undoubtedly."

[Illustration: ]

"In so high a latitude?"

"Why not? Is not Iceland a volcanic island—indeed, almost made of
volcanoes, one might say?"

"Well, has not our famous countryman, James Ross, affirmed the existence
of two active volcanoes, the Erebus and the Terror, on the Southern Continent, in
longitude 170° and latitude 78°? Why, then, should not volcanoes be found near
the North Pole?"

"It is possible, certainly," replied Altamont.

"Ah, now I see it distinctly," exclaimed the Doctor." It is a volcano!"

"Let us make right for it then," said Hatteras.

[Illustration: ]

It was impossible longer to doubt the proximity of the coast. In twenty-four


hours, probably, the bold navigators might hope to set foot on its untrodden soil.
But strange as it was, now that they were so near the goal of their voyage, no one
showed the joy which might have been expected. Each man sat silent, absorbed
in his own thoughts, wondering what sort of place this Pole must be. The birds
seemed to shun it, for though it was evening, they were all flying towards the
south with outspread wings. Was it, then, so inhospitable, that not so much as a
sea-gull or a ptarmigan could find a shelter? The fish, too, even the large cetacea,
were hastening away through the transparent waters. What

[Illustration: ]

could cause this feeling either of repulsion or terror?

At last sleep overcame the tired men, and one after another dropped off,
leaving Hatteras to keep watch.

He took the helm, and tried his best not to close his eyes, for he grudged
losing precious time; but the slow motion of the vessel rocked him into a state of
such irresistible somnolence that, in spite of himself, he was soon, like his
companions, locked fast in deep slumber. He began to dream, and imagination
brought back all the scenes of his past life. He dreamt of his ship, the Forward,
and of the traitors that had burnt it. Again he felt all the agonies of
disappointment and failure, and forgot his actual situation. Then the scene
changed, and he saw himself at the Pole unfurling the Union Jack!

While memory and fancy were thus busied, an enormous cloud of an olive
tinge had begun to darken sea and sky. A hurricane was at hand. The first blast of
the tempest roused the captain and his companions, and they were on their feet
in an instant, ready to meet it. The sea had risen tremendously, and the ship was
tossing violently up and down on the billows. Hatteras took the helm again, and
kept a firm hold of it, while Johnson and Bell baled out the water which was
constantly dashing over the ship.

It was a difficult matter to preserve the right course, for the thick fog made it
impossible to see more than a few yards off.

This sudden tempest might well seem to such excited men, a stern
prohibition against further approach to the Pole; but it needed but a glance at
their resolute faces to know that they would neither yield to winds nor waves,
but go right on to the end.

[Illustration: ]

For a whole day the struggle lasted, death threatening them each moment;
but about six in the evening, just as the fury of the waves seemed at its highest
pitch, there came a sudden calm. The wind was stilled as if miraculously, and the
sea became smooth as glass.

Then came a most extraordinary inexplicable phenomenon.


The fog, without dispersing, became strangely luminous, and the sloop sailed
along in a zone of electric light. Mast, sail, and rigging appeared pencilled in
black against the phosphorescent sky with wondrous distinctness. The men were
bathed in light, and their faces shone with a fiery glow.

"The volcano!" exclaimed Hatteras.

"Is it possible?" said Bell.

"No, no!" replied Clawbonny. "We should be suffocated with its flames so
near."

"Perhaps it is the reflection," suggested Altamont.

"Not that much even, for then we must be near land, and in that case we
should hear the noise of the eruption."

"What is it, then?” asked the captain.

"It is a cosmical phenomenon,” replied the Doctor, "seldom met hitherto. If
we go on, we Shall soon get out of our luminous sphere and be back in the
darkness and tempest again."

"Well, let’s go on, come what may," said Hatteras.

The Doctor was right. Gradually the fog began to lose its light, and then its
transparency, and the howling wind was heard not far off. A few minutes more,
and the little vessel was caught in a violent squall, and swept back into the
cyclone.

But the hurricane had fortunately turned a point towards the south, and left
the vessel free to run before the wind straight towards the Pole. There was
imminent danger of her sinking, for she sped along at frenzied speed, and any
sudden collision with rock or iceberg must have inevitably dashed her to pieces.

But not a man on board counselled prudence. They were intoxicated with the
danger, and no speed could be quick enough to satisfy their longing impatience
to reach the unknown.

At last they began evidently to near the coast. Strange symptoms were
manifest in the air; the fog suddenly rent like a curtain torn by the wind; and for
an instant, like a flash of lightning, an immense column of flame was seen on the
horizon.

"The volcano! the volcano!" was the simultaneous exclamation.

But the words had hardly passed their lips before the fantastic vision had
vanished. The wind suddenly changed to south-east, and drove the ship back
again from the land.

"Confound it!" said Hatteras; "we weren’t three miles from the coast."

However, resistance was impossible. All that could be done was to keep
tacking; but every few minutes the little sloop would be thrown on her side,
though she righted herself again immediately obedient to the helm.


As Hatteras stood with dishevelled hair, grasping the helm as if welded to his
hand, he seemed the animating soul of the ship.

All at once, a fearful sight met his gaze.

Scarcely twenty yards in front was a great block of ice coming right towards
them, mounting and falling on the stormy billows, ready to overturn at any
moment and crush them in its descent.

But this was not the only danger that threatened the bold navigators. The
iceberg was packed with white bears, huddling close together, and evidently
beside themselves with terror.

The iceberg made frightful lurches, sometimes inclining at such a sharp
angle that the animals rolled pell-mell over each other and set up a loud
growling, which mingled with the roar of the elements and made a terrible
concert.

For a quarter of an hour, which seemed a whole century, the sloop sailed on
in this formidable company, sometimes a few yards distant and sometimes near
enough to touch. The Greenland dogs trembled for fear, but Duk was quite
imperturbable. At last the iceberg lost ground, and got driven by the wind further
and further away till it disappeared in the fog, only at intervals betraying its
presence by the ominous growls of its equipage.

[Illustration: Mast and sail were torn off, and went flying away through the
darkness like some large white bird.—P.224]

The storm now burst forth with redoubled fury. The little barque was lifted
bodily out of the water, and whirled round and round with the most frightful
rapidity. Mast and sail were torn off, and went flying away through the darkness
like some large white bird. A whirlpool began to form among the waves,
drawing down the ship gradually by its irresistible suction.

[Illustration: ]

Deeper and deeper she sank, whizzing round at such tremendous speed that
to the poor fellows on board, the water seemed motionless. All five men stood
erect, gazing at each other in speechless terror. But suddenly the ship rose
perpendicularly, her prow went above the edge of the vortex, and getting out of
the centre of attraction by her own velocity, she escaped at a tangent from the
circumference, and was thrown far beyond, swift as a ball from a cannon’s
mouth.

Altamont, the Doctor, Johnson, and Bell were pitched flat on the planks.
When they got up, Hatteras had disappeared!

It was two o’clock in the morning.

CHAPTER XXIII.

THE ENGLISH FLAG


For a few seconds they seemed stupefied, and then a cry of "Hatteras!" broke
from every lip.

On all sides, nothing was visible but the tempestuous ocean. Duk barked
desperately, and Bell could hardly keep him from leaping into the waves.

"Take the helm, Altamont," said the Doctor, "and let us try our utmost to find
our poor captain."

Johnson and Bell seized the oars, and rowed about for more than an hour; but
their search was vain— Hatteras was lost!

Lost! and so near the Pole, just as he had caught sight of the goal!

The Doctor called, and shouted, and fired signals, and Duk made piteous
lamentations; but there was no response. Clawbonny could bear up no longer; he
buried his head in his hands, and fairly wept aloud.

At such a distance from the coast, it was impossible Hatteras could reach it
alive, without an oar or even so much as a spar to help him; if ever he touched
the haven of his desire, it would be as a swollen, mutilated corpse!

Longer search was useless, and nothing remained but to resume the route
north. The tempest was dying out, and about five in the morning on the 11th of
July, the wind fell, and the sea gradually became calm. The sky recovered its
polar clearness, and less than three miles away the land appeared in all its
grandeur.

The new continent was only an island, or rather a volcano, fixed like a
lighthouse on the North Pole of the world.

[Illustration: Two men in a boat observing a volcano in the distance. |

The mountain was in full activity, pouring out a mass of burning stones and
glowing rock. At every fresh eruption there was a convulsive heaving within, as
if some mighty giant were respiring, and the masses ejected were thrown up high
into the air amidst jets of bright flame, streams of lava rolling down the sides in
impetuous torrents. In one part, serpents of fire seemed writhing and wriggling
amongst smoking rocks, and in

[Illustration: ]

another the glowing liquid fell in cascades, in the midst of purple vapour,
into a river of fire below, formed of a thousand igneous streams, which emptied
itself into the sea, the waters hissing and seething like a boiling cauldron.

Apparently there was only one crater to the volcano, out of which the
columns of fire issued, streaked with forked lightning. Electricity seemed to
have something to do with this magnificent panorama.

Above the panting flames waved an immense plume-shaped cloud of smoke,
red at its base and black at its summit. It rose with incomparable majesty, and
unrolled in thick volumes.


The sky was ash-colour to a great height, and it was evident that the darkness
that had prevailed while the tempest lasted, which had seemed quite inexplicable
to the Doctor, was owing to the columns of cinders overspreading the sun like a
thick curtain. He remembered a similar phenomenon which occurred in the
Barbadoes, where the whole island was plunged in profound obscurity by the
mass of cinders ejected from the crater of Isle St. Vincent.

This enormous ignivomous rock in the middle of the sea was six thousand
feet high, just about the altitude of Hecla.

It seemed to rise gradually out of the water as the boat got nearer. There was
no trace of vegetation, indeed there was no shore; the rock ran straight down to
the sea.

"Can we land?" said the Doctor.

"The wind is carrying us right to it," said Altamont. "But I don’t see an inch
of land to set our foot upon."

"It seems so at this distance," said Johnson; "but we shall be sure to find
some place to run in our boat at, and that is all we want."

"Let us go on, then,” said Clawbonny, dejectedly.

He had no heart now for anything. The North Pole was indeed before his
eyes, but not the man who had discovered it.

As they got nearer the island, which was not more than eight or ten miles in
circumference, the navigators noticed a tiny fiord, just large enough to harbour
their boat, and made towards it immediately. They feared their captain’s dead
body would meet their eyes on the coast, and yet it seemed difficult for a corpse
to lie on it, for there was no shore, and the sea broke on steep rocks, which were
covered with cinders above watermark.

At last the little sloop glided gently into the narrow opening between two
sandbanks just visible above the water, where she would be safe from the
violence of the breakers; but before she could be moored, Duk began howling
and barking again in the most piteous manner, as if calling on the cruel sea and
stony rocks to yield up his lost master. The Doctor tried to calm him by caresses,
but in vain. The faithful beast, as if he would represent the captain, sprang on
shore with a tremendous bound, sending a cloud of cinders after him.

"Duk! Duk!" called Clawbonny.

But Duk had already disappeared.

[Illustration: ]

After the sloop was made fast, they all got out and went after him. Altamont
was just going to climb to the top of a pile of stones, when the Doctor exclaimed,
"Listen!"

Duk was barking vehemently some distance off, but his bark seemed full of


grief rather than fury.

"Has he come on the track of some animal, do you think? " asked Johnson.

"No, no!" said Clawbonny, shuddering. "His bark is too sorrowful; it is the
dog’s tear. He has found the body of Hatteras."

They all four rushed forward, in spite of the blinding cinder-dust, and came
to the far-end of a fiord, where they discovered the dog barking round a corpse
wrapped in the British flag!

"Hatteras! Hatteras!" cried the Doctor, throwing himself on the body of his
friend. But next minute he started up with an indescribable cry, and shouted,
"Alive! alive!"

"Yes!" said a feeble voice; "yes, alive at the North Pole, on Queen’s Island."

"Hurrah for England!" shouted all with one accord.

"And for America!" added Clawbonny, holding out one hand to Hatteras and
the other to Altamont.

Duk was not behind with his hurrah, which was worth quite as much as the
others.

For a few minutes the joy of recovery of their captain filled all their hearts,
and the poor fellows could not restrain their tears.

The Doctor found, on examination, that he was not seriously hurt. The wind
threw him on the coast where landing was perilous work, but, after being driven
back more than once into the sea, the hardy sailor had managed to scramble on
to a rock, and gradually to hoist himself above the waves.

Then he must have become insensible, for he remembered nothing more
except rolling himself in his flag. He only awoke to consciousness with the loud
barking and caresses of his faithful Duk.

After a little, Hatteras was able to stand up supported by the Doctor, and tried
to get back to the sloop.

He kept exclaiming, "The Pole! the North Pole!"

"You are happy now?" said his friend.

"Yes, happy! And are not you? Isn’t it joy to find yourself here! The ground
we tread is round the Pole! The air we breathe is the air that blows round the
Pole! The sea we have crossed is the sea which washes the Pole! Oh! the North
Pole! the North Pole!"

He had become quite delirious with excitement, and fever burned in his
veins. His eyes shone with unnatural brilliancy, and his brain seemed on fire.
Perfect rest was what he most needed, for the Doctor found it impossible to quiet
him.

A place of encampment must therefore be fixed upon immediately.

[Illustration: Altamont speedily discovered a grotto composed of rocks.—


P.234]

Altamont speedily discovered a grotto composed of rocks, which had so
fallen as to form a sort of cave. Johnson and Bell carried in provisions, and gave
the dogs their liberty.

About eleven o’clock, breakfast, or rather dinner, was ready, consisting of
pemmican, salt meat, and smoking-hot tea and coffee.

But Hatteras would do nothing till the exact position of the island was
ascertained; so the Doctor and Altamont set to work with their instruments, and
found that the exact latitude of the grotto was 89° 59’ 15". The longitude was of
little importance, for all the meridians blended a few hundred feet higher.

The 90° of lat. was then only about three quarters of a mile off, or just about
the summit of the volcano.

When the result was communicated to Hatteras, he desired that a formal
document might be drawn up to attest the fact, and two copies made, one of
which should be deposited on a cairn on the island.

Clawbonny was the scribe, and indited the following document, a copy of
which is now among the archives of the Royal Geographical Society of London:

"On this 11th day of July, 1861, in North latitude 89° 59’ 15" was discovered
Queen’s Island at the North Pole, by Captain Hatteras, Commander of the brig
Forward of Liverpool, who signs this, as also all his companions.

"Whoever may find this document is requested to forward it to the
Admiralty.

"(Signed) JOHN HATTERAS, Commander

of the Forward

"DR. CLAWBONNY

"ALTAMONT, Commander of the Porpoise

"JOHNSON, Boatswain

"BELL, Carpenter."

"And now, friends, come to table," said the Doctor, merrily.

Coming to table was just squatting on the ground.

"But who," said Clawbonny, "would not give all the tables and dining-rooms
in the world to dine at 89" 59’ and 15" N. lat.?"

It was an exciting occasion this first meal at the Pole! What neither ancients
nor moderns, neither Europeans, nor Americans, nor Asiatics had been able to
accomplish was now achieved, and all past sufferings and perils were forgotten
in the glow of success.

"But, after all," said Johnson, after toasts to Hatteras and the North Pole had
been enthusiastically drunk, "what is there so very special about the North Pole?


Will you tell me, Mr. Clawbonny?"

"Just this, my good Johnson. It is the only point of the globe that is
motionless; all the other points are revolving with extreme rapidity."

"But I don’t see that we are any more motionless here than at Liverpool."

"Because in both cases you are a party concerned, both in the motion and the
rest; but the fact is certain."

Clawbonny then went on to describe the diurnal and annual motions of the
earth—the one round its own axis, the extremities of which are the poles, which
is accomplished in twenty-four hours, and the other round the sun, which takes a
whole year.

Bell and Johnson listened half incredulously, and

[Illustration: ]

couldn’t see why the earth could not have been allowed to keep still, till
Altamont informed them that they would then have had neither day nor night,
nor spring, summer, autumn, and winter.

"Ay, and worse still," said Clawbonny, "if the motion chanced to be
interrupted, we should fall right into the sun in sixty-four and a half days."

"What! take sixty-four and a half days, to fall?" exclaimed Johnson.

"Yes, we are ninety-five millions of miles off. But when I say the Pole is
motionless, it is not strictly true; it is only so in comparison with the rest of the
globe, for it has a certain movement of its own, and completes a circle in about
twenty-six thousand years. This comes from the precession of the equinoxes."

A long and learned talk was started on this subject between Altamont and the
Doctor, simplified, however, as much as possible for the benefit of Bell and
Johnson.

Hatteras took no part in it, and even when they went on to speculate about
the earth’s centre, and discussed several of the theories that had been advanced
respecting it, he seemed not to hear; it was evident his thoughts were far away.

Among other opinions put forth was one in our own days, which greatly
excited Altamont’s surprise. It was held that there was an immense opening at
the poles which led into the heart of the earth, and that it was out of the opening
that the light of the Aurora Borealis streamed. This was gravely stated, and
Captain Synness, a countryman of our own, actually proposed that Sir
Humphrey Davy, Humboldt, and Arago should undertake an expedition through
it, but they refused."

"And quite right too," said Altamont.

"So say I; but you see, my friends, what absurdities imagination has conjured
up about these regions, and how, sooner or later, the simple reality comes to
light."


CHAPTER XXIV.

MOUNT HATTERAS.

After this conversation they all made themselves as comfortable as they
could, and lay down to sleep.

All, except Hatteras; and why could this extraordinary man not sleep like the
others?

Was not the purpose of his life attained now? Had he not realized his most
daring project? Why could he not rest? Indeed, might not one have supposed
that, after the strain his nervous system had undergone, he would long for rest?

But no, he grew more and more excited, and it was not the thought of
returning that so affected him. Was he bent on going farther still? Had his
passion for travel no limits? Was the world too small for him now he had
circumnavigated it.

Whatever might be the cause, he could not sleep; yet this first night at the
Pole was clear and calm. The isle was absolutely uninhabited—not a bird was to
be seen in this buming atmosphere, not an animal on these scoriae-covered
rocks, not a fish in these seething waters. Next morning, when Altamont, and the
others awoke, Hatteras was gone. Feeling uneasy at his absence, they hurried out
of the grotto in search of him.

[Illustration: There he was standing on a rock, gazing fixedly at the top of the
mountain.—P.24? |

There he was standing on a rock, gazing fixedly at the top of the mountain.
His instruments were in his hand, and he was evidently calculating the exact
longitude and latitude.

The Doctor went towards him and spoke, but it was long before he could
rouse him from his absorbing contemplations. At last the captain seemed to
understand, and Clawbonny said, while he examined him with a keen
scrutinizing glance—

"Let us go round the island. Here we are, all ready for our last excursion."

"The last!" repeated Hatteras, as if in a dream. "Yes!, the last truly, but," he
added, with more animation, "the most wonderful."

He pressed both hands on his brow as he spoke, as if to calm the inward
tumult.

Just then Altamont and the others came up, and their appearance seemed to
dispel the hallucinations under which he was labouring.

"My friends," he said, in a voice full of emotion, "thanks for your courage,
thanks for your perseverance, thanks for your superhuman efforts, through which
we are permitted to set our feet on this soil."

"Captain," said Johnson, "we have only obeyed orders to you alone belongs


the honour."

"No, no!" exclaimed Hatteras, with a violent outburst of emotion, "to all of
you as much as to me! To Altamont as much as any of us, as much as the Doctor
himself! Oh, let my heart break in your hands, it cannot contain its joy and
gratitude any longer."

He grasped the hands of his brave companions as he spoke, and paced up and
down as if he had lost all self-control.

"We have only done our duty as Englishmen," said Bell.

"And as friends," added Clawbonny.

"Yes, but all did not do it," replied Hatteras "some gave way. However, we
must pardon them—pardon both the traitors and those who were led away by
them. Poor fellows! I forgive them. You hear me, Doctor?"

"Yes," replied Clawbonny, beginning to be seriously uneasy at his friend’s
excitement.

"I have no wish, therefore," continued the captain, "that they should lose the
little fortune they came so far to seek. No, the original agreement is to remain
unaltered, and they shall be rich—if they ever see England again."

It would have been difficult not to have been touched by the pathetic tone of
voice in which Hatteras said this.

"But, captain," interrupted Johnson, trying to joke, "one would think you
were making your will!"

"Perhaps I am," said Hatteras, gravely.

"And yet you have a long bright career of glory before you!"

"Who knows?" was the reply.

No one answered, and the Doctor did not dare to guess his meaning; but
Hatteras soon made them understand it, for presently he said, in a hurried,
agitated manner, as if he could scarcely command himself—

"Friends, listen to me. We have done much already, but much yet remains to
be done.”

His companions heard him with profound astonishment.

"Yes," he resumed, "we are close to the Pole, but we are not on it."

"How do you make that out," said Altamont.

"Yes," replied Hatteras, with vehemence, "I said an Englishman should plant
his foot on the Pole of the world! I said it, and an Englishman shall."

"What!" cried Clawbonny.

"We are still 45" from the unknown point," resumed Hatteras, with
increasing animation, "and to that point I shall go."

"But it is on the summit of the volcano," said the Doctor.

"T shall go."


"It is an inaccessible cone!"

"T shall go."

"But it is a yawning fiery crater!"

"T shall go."

The tone of absolute determination in which Hatteras pronounced these
words it is impossible to describe.

His friends were stupefied, and gazed in terror at the blazing mountain.

At last the Doctor recovered himself, and began to urge and entreat Hatteras
to renounce his project. He tried every means his heart dictated, from humble
supplications to friendly threats; but he could gain nothing—a sort of frenzy had
come over the captain, an absolute monomania about the Pole.

Nothing but violent measures would keep him back from destruction, but the
Doctor was unwilling to employ these unless driven to extremity.

He trusted, moreover, that physical impossibilities, insuperable obstacles
would bar his further progress, and meantime finding all protestations were
useless, he simply said—

"Very well, since you are bent on it, we’ll go too."

"Yes," replied Hatteras, "half-way up the mountain, but not a step beyond.
You know you have to carry back to England the duplicate of the document in
the cairn E

"Yes; but :

"It is settled," said Hatteras, in an imperious tone; "and since the prayers of a
friend will not suffice, the captain commands."

The Doctor did not insist longer, and a few minutes after the little band set
out, accompanied by Duk.

It was about eight o’clock when they commenced their difficult ascent; the
sky was splendid, and the thermometer stood at 52°.

Hatteras and his dog went first, closely followed by the others.

"T am afraid," said Johnson to the Doctor.

"No, no, there’s nothing to be afraid of; we are here."

This singular little island appeared to be of recent formation, and was
evidently the product of successive volcanic eruptions. The rocks were all lying
loose on the top of each other, and it was a marvel how they preserved their
equilibrium. Strictly speaking, the mountain was only a heap of stones thrown
down from a height, and the mass of rocks which composed the island had
evidently come out of the bowels of the earth.

The earth, indeed, may be compared to a vast cauldron of spherical form, in
which, under the influence of a central fire, immense quantities of vapours are
generated, which would explode the globe but for the safety-valves outside.








These safety-valves are volcanoes, when one closes another opens; and at the
Poles where the crust of the earth is thinner, owing to its being flattened, it is not
surprising that a volcano should be suddenly formed by the upheaving of some
part of the ocean-bed.

The Doctor, while following Hatteras, was closely following all the
peculiarities of the island, and he was further confirmed in his opinion as to its
recent formation by the absence of water. Had it existed for centuries, the
thermal springs would have flowed from its bosom.

As they got higher, the ascent became more and more difficult, for the flanks
of the mountain were almost perpendicular, and it required the utmost care to
keep them from falling. Clouds of scorie and ashes would whirl round them
repeatedly, threatening them with asphyxia, or torrents of lava would bar their
passage. In parts where these torrents ran horizontally, the outside had become
hardened; while underneath was the boiling lava, and every step the travellers
took had first to be tested with the iron-tipped staff to avoid being suddenly
plunged into the scalding liquid.

At intervals large fragments of red-hot rock were thrown up from the crater,
and burst in the air like bomb-shells, scattering the debris to enormous distances
in all directions.

Hatteras, however, climbed up the steepest ascents with surprising agility,
disdaining the help of his staff.

He arrived before long at a circular rock, a sort of plateau about ten feet
wide. A river of boiling lava surrounded it, except in one part, where it forked
away to a higher rock, leaving a narrow passage, through which Hatteras
fearlessly passed.

Here he stopped, and his companions managed to rejoin him. He seemed to
be measuring with his eye the distance he had yet to get over. Horizontally, he
was not more than two hundred yards from the top of the crater, but vertically he
had nearly three times that distance to traverse.

The ascent had occupied three hours already. Hatteras showed no signs of
fatigue, while the others were almost spent.

The summit of the volcano appeared inaccessible, and the Doctor determined
at any price to prevent Hatteras from attempting to proceed. He tried gentle
means first, but the captain’s excitement was fast becoming delirium. During
their ascent, symptoms of insanity had become more and more marked, and no
one could be surprised who knew anything of his previous history.

"Hatteras," said the Doctor, "it is enough! we cannot go further!"

"Stop, then,” he replied, in a strangely altered voice; "I am going higher."

"No, it is useless; you are at the Pole already."


"No, no! higher, higher!"

"My friend, do you know who is speaking to you? It is I, Doctor
Clawbonny."

"Higher, higher!" repeated the madman.

"Very well, we shall not allow it—that is all."

He had hardly uttered the words before Hatteras, by a superhuman effort,
sprang over the boiling lava, and was beyond the reach of his companions.

A cry of horror burst from every lip, for they thought the poor captain must
have perished in that fiery gulf; but there he was safe on the other side,
accompanied by his faithful Duk, who would not leave him.

He speedily disappeared behind a curtain of smoke, and they heard his voice
growing fainter in the distance, shouting—

"To the north! to the north! to the top of Mount Hatteras! Remember Mount
Hatteras!"

All pursuit of him was out of the question; it was impossible to leap across
the fiery torrent, and equally impossible to get round it. Altamont, indeed, was
mad enough to make an attempt, and would certainly have lost his life if the
others had not held him back by main force.

"Hatteras! Hatteras!" shouted the Doctor, but no response was heard save the
faint bark of Duk.

At intervals, however, a glimpse of him could be caught through the clouds
of smoke and showers of ashes. Sometimes his head, sometimes his arm
appeared; then he was out of sight again, and a few minutes later was seen
higher up clinging to the rocks. His size constantly decreased with the fantastic
rapidity of objects rising upwards in the air. In half-an-hour he was only half his
size.

The air was full of the deep rumbling noise of the volcano, and the mountain
shook and trembled. From time to time a loud fail was heard behind, and the
travellers would see some enormous rock rebounding from the heights to
engulph itself in the polar basin below.

[Illustration: Hatteras did not even turn once to look back, but marched
straight on, carrying his country’s flag attached to his staff—P.249]

Hatteras did not even turn once to look back, but marched straight on,
carrying his country’s flag attached to his staff. His terrified friends watched
every movement, and saw him gradually decrease to microscopic dimensions,
while Duk looked no larger than a big rat.

Then came a moment of intense anxiety, for the wind beat down on them an
immense sheet of flame, and they could see nothing but the red glare. A cry of
agony escaped the Doctor; but an instant afterwards Hatteras reappeared, waving


his flag.

For a whole hour this fearful spectacle went on—an hour of battle with
unsteady loose rocks and quagmires of ashes, where the foolhardy climber sank
up to his waist. Sometimes they saw him hoist himself up by leaning knees and
loins against the rocks in narrow, intricate winding paths, and sometimes he
would be hanging on by both hands to some sharp crag, swinging to and fro like
a withered tuft.

[Illustration: ]

At last he reached the summit of the mountain, the mouth of the crater. Here
the Doctor hoped the infatuated man would stop, at any rate, and would,
perhaps, recover his senses, and expose himself to no more danger than the
descent involved.

Once more he shouted—

"Hatteras! Hatteras!"

There was such a pathos of entreaty in his tone that Altamont felt moved to
his inmost soul.

"T’ll save him yet!" he exclaimed; and before Clawbonny could hinder him,
he had cleared with a bound the torrent of fire, and was out of sight among the
rocks.

Meantime, Hatteras had mounted a rock which overhung the crater, and
stood waving his flag amidst showers of stones which rained down on him. Duk
was by his side; but the poor beast was growing dizzy in such close proximity to
the abyss.

Hatteras balanced his staff in one hand, and with the other sought to find the
precise mathematical point where all the meridians of the globe meet, the point
on which it was his sublime purpose to plant his foot.

All at once the rock gave way, and he disappeared. A cry of horror broke
from his companions, and rang to the top of the mountain. Clawbonny thought
his friend had perished, and lay buried for ever in the depths of the volcano. A
second—only a second, though it seemed an age—elapsed, and there was
Altamont and the dog holding the ill-fated Hatteras! Man and dog had caught
him at the very moment when he disappeared in the abyss.

Hatteras was saved! Saved in spite of himself; and half-an-hour later be lay
unconscious in the arms of his despairing companions.

When he came to himself, the Doctor looked at him in speechless anguish,
for there was no glance of recognition in his eye. It was the eye of a blind man,
who gazes without seeing.

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Johnson; "he is blind!"

"No," replied Clawbonny, "no! My poor friends, we have only saved the


body of Hatteras; his soul is left behind on the top of the volcano. His reason is
gone!"

"Insane!" exclaimed Johnson and Altamont, in consternation.

"Insane!" replied the Doctor, and the big tears ran down his cheeks.

CHAPTER XXV.

RETURN SOUTH.

Three hours after this sad dénouement of the adventures of Captain Hatteras,
the whole party were back once more in the grotto.

Clawbonny was asked his opinion as to what was best to be done.

"Well, friends," he said, "we cannot stay longer in this island; the sea is open,
and we have enough provisions. We ought to start at once, and get back without
the least delay to Fort Providence, where we must winter."

"That is my opinion, too," said Altamont. "The wind is favourable, so to-
morrow we will get to sea."

The day passed in profound dejection. The insanity of the captain was a bad
omen and when they began to talk over the return voyage, their hearts failed
them for fear. They missed the intrepid spirit of their leader.

However, like brave men, they prepared to battle anew with the elements and
with themselves, if ever they felt inclined to give way.

[Illustration: ]

Next morning they made all ready to sail, and brought the tent and all its
belongings on board.

But before leaving these rocks, never to return, the Doctor carrying out the
intentions of Hatteras, had a cairn erected on the very spot where the poor fellow
had jumped ashore. It was made of great blocks placed one on the top of the
other, so as to be a landmark perfectly visible while the eruptions of the volcano
left it undisturbed. On one of the side stones, Bell chiselled the simple
inscription—

JOHN HATTERAS.

The duplicate of the document attesting the discovery of the North Pole was
enclosed in a tinned iron cylinder, and deposited in the cairn, to remain as a
silent witness among those desert rocks.

This done, the four men and the captain, a poor body without a soul, set out
on the return voyage, accompanied by the faithful Duk, who had become sad and
downcast. A new sail was manufactured out of the tent, and about ten o’clock,
the little sloop sailed out before the wind.

She made a quick passage, finding abundance of open water. It was certainly
easier to get away from the Pole than to get to it.

But Hatteras knew nothing that was passing around him. He lay full length in


the boat, perfectly silent, with lifeless eye and folded arms, and Duk lying at his
feet. Clawbonny frequently addressed him, but could elicit no reply.

On the 15th they sighted Altamont Harbour, but as the sea was open all along
the coast, they determined to go round to Victoria Bay by water, instead of
crossing New America in the sledge.

The voyage was easy and rapid. In a week they accomplished what had taken
a fortnight in the sledge, and on the 23rd they cast anchor in Victoria Bay.

As soon as the sloop was made fast, they all hastened to Fort Providence. But
what a scene of devastation met their eyes! Doctor’s House, stores, powder-
magazine, fortifications, all had melted away, and the provisions had been
ransacked by devouring animals.

The navigators had almost come to the end of their supplies, and had been
reckoning on replenishing their stores at Fort Providence. The impossibility of
wintering there now was evident, and they decided to get to Baffin’s Bay by the
shortest route.

"We have no alternative," said Clawbonny; "Baffin’s Bay is not more than
six hundred miles distant. We can sail as long as there is water enough under our
sloop, and get to Jones’ Sound, and then on to the Danish settlements."

"Yes," said Altamont; "let us collect what food remains, and be off at once."

After a thorough search, a few cases of pemmican were found scattered here
and there, and two barrels of preserved meat, altogether enough for six weeks,
and a good supply of powder. It was soon collected and brought on board, and
the remainder of the day was employed in caulking the sloop and putting her in
good trim.

Next morning they put out once more to sea. The voyage presented no great
difficulties, the drift-ice being easily avoided; but still the Doctor thought it
advisable, in case of possible delays, to limit the rations to one-half. This was no
great hardship, as there was not much work for anyone to do, and all were in
perfect health.

Besides, they found a little shooting, and brought down ducks, and geese,
and guillemots, or sea turtledoves. Water they were able to supply themselves
with in abundance, from the fresh-water icebergs they constantly fell in with as
they kept near the coast, not daring to venture out to the open sea in so frail a
barque.

At that time of the year, the thermometer was already constantly below
freezing point. The frequent rains changed to snow, and the weather became
gloomy. Each day the sun dipped lower below the horizon, and on the 30th, for a
few minutes, he was out of sight altogether.

However, the little sloop sailed steadily on without stopping an instant. They


knew what fatigues and obstacles a land journey involved, if they should be
forced to adopt it, and no time was to be lost, for soon the open water would
harden to firm ground; already the young ice had begun to form. In these high
latitudes there is neither spring nor autumn; winter follows close on the heels of
summer.

On the 31st the first stars glimmered overhead, and from that time forwards
there was continual fog, which considerably impeded navigation.

The Doctor became very uneasy at these multiplied indications of
approaching winter. He knew the difficulties Sir John Ross had to contend with
after he left his ship to try and reach Baffin’s Bay, and how, after all, he was
compelled to return and pass a fourth winter on board. It was bad enough with
shelter and food and fuel, but if any such calamity befell the survivors of the
Forward, if they were obliged to stop or return, they were lost.

[Illustration: ]

The Doctor said nothing of his anxieties to his companions, but only urged
them to get as far east as possible.

At last, after thirty days’ tolerably quick sailing, and after battling for forty-
eight hours against the increasing drift ice, and risking the frail sloop a hundred
times, the navigators saw themselves blocked in on all sides. Further progress
was impossible, for the sea was frozen in every direction, and the thermometer
was only 15° above zero.

Altamont made a reckoning with scrupulous precision, and found they were
in 77°15’ latitude, and 85° 2’ longitude.

"This is our exact position then," said the Doctor. "We are in South Lincoln,
just at Cape Eden, and are entering Jones’ Sound. With a little more good luck,
we should have found open water right to Baffin’s Bay. But we must not
grumble. If my poor Hatteras had found as navigable a sea at first, he would
have soon reached the Pole. His men would not have deserted him, and his brain
would not have given way under the pressure of terrible trial."

"I suppose, then," said Altamont, "our only course is to leave the sloop, and
get by sledge to the east coast of Lincoln."

"Yes; but I think we should go through Jones’ Sound, and get to South Devon
instead of crossing Lincoln."

"Why?"

"Because the nearer we get to Lancaster Sound, the more chance we have of
meeting whalers."

"You are right; but I question whether the ice is firm enough to make it
practicable."

"We’ ll try," replied Clawbonny.


The little vessel was unloaded, and the sledge put together again. All the
parts were in good condition, so the next day the dogs were harnessed, and they
started off along the coast to reach the icefield; but Altamont’s opinion proved
right. They could not get through Jones’ Sound, and were obliged to follow the
coast to Lincoln.

At last, on the 24th, they set foot on North Devon.

"Now," said Clawbonny, "we have only to cross this, and get to Cape
Warender at the entrance to Lancaster Sound.”

But the weather became frightful, and very cold. The snow-storms and
tempests returned with winter violence, and the travellers felt too weak to
contend with them. Their stock of provisions was almost exhausted, and rations
had to be reduced now to a third, that the dogs might have food enough to keep
them in working condition.

The nature of the ground added greatly to the fatigue. North Devon is
extremely wild and rugged, and the path across the Trauter mountains is through
difficult gorges. The whole party—men, and dogs, and sledge alike—were
frequently forced to stop, for they could not struggle on against the fury of the
elements. More than once despair crept over the brave little band, hardy as they
were, and used to Polar sufferings. Though scarcely aware of it themselves, they
were completely worn out, physically and mentally.

It was not till the 30th of August that they emerged from these wild
mountains into a plain, which seemed to have been upturned and convulsed by
volcanic action at some distant period.

Here it was absolutely necessary to take a few days’ rest, for the travellers
could not drag one foot after the other, and two of the dogs had died from
exhaustion. None of the party felt equal to put up the tent, so they took shelter
behind an iceberg.

Provisions were now so reduced, that, notwithstanding their scanty rations,
there was only enough left for one week. Starvation stared the poor fellows in
the face.

[Illustration: "Dead, frozen— —"—P.262]|

Altamont, who had displayed great unselfishness and devotion to the others,
roused his sinking energies, and determined to go out and find food for his
comrades.

He took his gun, called Duk, and went off almost unnoticed by the rest.

He had been absent about an hour, and only once during that time had they
heard the report of his gun; and now he was coming back empty-handed, but
running as if terrified.

"What is the matter?" asked the Doctor.


"Down there, under the snow!" said Altamont, speaking as if scared, and
pointing in a particular direction.

"What?"

"A whole party of men!"

"Alive?"

"Dead—frozen—and even—"

He did not finish the sentence, but a look of unspeakable horror came over
his face.

The Doctor and the others were so roused by this incident, that they managed
to get up and drag themselves after Altamont towards the place he indicated.

They soon arrived, at a narrow part at the bottom of a ravine, and what a
spectacle met their gaze! Dead bodies, already stiff, lay half-buried in a winding-
sheet of snow. A leg visible here, an arm there, and yonder shrunken hands and
rigid faces, stamped with the expression of rage and despair.

The Doctor stooped down to look at them more closely, but instantly started
back pale and agitated, while Duk barked ominously.

"Horrible, horrible!" he said.

"What is it?" asked Johnson.

"Don’t you recognize them?"

"What do you mean?"

"Look and see!"

It was evident this ravine had been but recently the scene of a fearful straggle
with cold, and despair, and starvation, for by certain horrible remains it was
manifest that the poor wretches had been feeding on human flesh, perhaps while
still warm and palpitating; and among them the Doctor recognized Shandon,
Pen, and the ill-fated crew of the Forward! Their strength had failed; provisions
had come to an end; their boat had been broken, perhaps by an avalanche or
engulphed in some abyss, and they could not take advantage of the open sea; or
perhaps they had lost their way in wandering over these unknown continents.
Moreover, men who set out under the excitement of a revolt were not likely to
remain long united. The leader of a rebellion has but a doubtful power, and no
doubt Shandon’s authority had been soon cast off.

Be that as it might, it was evident the crew had come through agonies of
suffering and despair before this last terrible catastrophe, but the secret of their
miseries is buried with them beneath the polar snows.

"Come away! come away!" said the Doctor, dragging his companions from
the scene. Horror gave them momentary strength, and they resumed their march
without stopping a minute longer.

CHAPTER XXVI.


CONCLUSION.

It would be useless to enumerate all the misfortunes which befell the
survivors of the expedition. Even the men themselves were never able to give
any detailed narrative of the events which occurred during the week subsequent
to the horrible discovery related in the last chapter. However, on the 9th of
September, by superhuman exertions, they arrived at last at Cape Horsburg, the
extreme point of North Devon.

They were absolutely starving. For forty-eight hours they had tasted nothing,
and their last meal had been off the flesh of their last Esquimaux dog. Bell could
go no further, and Johnson felt himself dying.

They were on the shore of Baffin’s Bay, now half-frozen over; that is to say,
on the road to Europe, and three miles off the waves were dashing noiselessly on
the sharp edges of the icefield.

Here they must wait their chance of a whaler appearing; and for how long?

But Heaven pitied the poor fellows, for the very next day Altamont distinctly
perceived a sail on the horizon. Every one knows the torturing suspense that
follows such an appearance, and the agonizing dread lest it should prove a false
hope. The vessel seems alternately to approach and recede, and too often just at
the very moment when the poor castaways think they are saved, the sail begins
to disappear, and is soon out of sight.

[Illustration: Two hours later, after unheard-of exertions, the survivors of the
Forward were picked up by the Hans Christian.—P.266]

The Doctor and his companions went through all these experiences. They
had succeeded in reaching the western boundary of the icefield by carrying and
pushing each other along, and they watched the ship gradually fade away from
view without observing them, in spite of their loud cries for help.

Just then a happy inspiration came to the Doctor. His fertile genius, which
had served him many a time in such good stead, supplied him with one last idea!

A floe driven by the current struck against the icefield, and Clawbonny
exclaimed, pointing to it—

"This floe!"

His companions could not understand what he meant.

"Let us embark on it! let us embark on it!"

"Oh! Mr. Clawbonny, Mr. Clawbonny," said Johnson, pressing his hand.

Bell, assisted by Altamont, hurried to the sledge, and brought back one of the
poles, which he stuck fast on the ice like a mast, and fastened it with ropes. The
tent was torn up to furnish a sail, and as soon as the frail raft was ready the poor
fellows jumped upon it, and sailed out to the open sea.

Two hours later, after unheard-of exertions, the survivors of the Forward


were picked up by the Hans Christian, a Danish whaler, on her way to Davis’
Straits. They were more like spectres than human beings, and the sight of their
sufferings was enough. It told its own tale; but the captain received them with
such hearty sympathy, and lavished on them such care and kindness, that he
succeeded in keeping them alive.

Ten days afterwards, Clawbonny, Johnson, Bell, Altamont, and Captain
Hatteras landed at Korsam, in Zealand, an island belonging to Denmark. They
took the steamer to Kiel, and from there proceeded by Altona and Hamburg to
London, where they arrived on the 13th of the same month, scarcely recovered
after their long sufferings.

The first care of Clawbonny was to request the Royal Geographical Society
to receive a communication from him. He was accordingly admitted to the next

[Illustration: —P.267]

séance, and one can imagine the astonishment of the learned assembly and
the enthusiastic applause produced by the reading of Hatteras’ document.

The English have a passion for geographical discovery, from the lord to the
cockney, from the merchant down to the dock labourer, and the news of this
grand discovery speedily flashed along the telegraph wires, throughout the
length and breadth of the kingdom. Hatteras was lauded as a martyr by all the
newspapers, and every Englishman felt proud of him.

The Doctor and his companions had the honour of being presented to the
Queen by the Lord Chancellor, and they were feted and "lionized" in all quarters.

The Government confirmed the names of "Queen’s Island," "Mount
Hatteras," and "Altamont Harbour."

Altamont would not part from his companions in misery and glory, but
followed them to Liverpool, where they were joyously welcomed back, after
being so long supposed dead and buried beneath the eternal snows.

But Dr. Clawbonny would never allow that any honour was due to himself.
He claimed all the merit of the discovery for his unfortunate captain, and in the
narrative of his voyage, published the next year under the auspices of the Royal
Geographical Society, he places John Hatteras on a level with the most
illustrious navigators, and makes him the compeer of all the brave, daring men
who have sacrificed themselves for the progress of science.

The insanity of this poor victim of a sublime passion was of a mild type, and
he lived quietly at Sten Cottage, a private asylum near Liverpool, where the
Doctor himself had placed him. He never spoke, and understood nothing that
was Said to him; reason and speech had fled together. The only tie that connected
him with the outside world was his friendship for Duk, who was allowed to
remain with him.


For a considerable time the captain had been in the habit of walking in the
garden for hours, accompanied by his faithful dog, who watched him with sad,
wistful eyes, but his promenade was always in one direction in a particular part
of the garden. When he got to the end of this path, he would stop and begin to
walk backwards. If anyone stopped him he would point with his finger towards a
certain part of the sky, but let anyone attempt to turn him round, and he became
angry, while Duk, as if sharing his master’s sentiments, would bark furiously.

The Doctor, who often visited his afflicted friend, noticed this strange
proceeding one day, and soon understood the reason of it. He saw how it was
that he paced so constantly in a given direction, as if under the influence of some
magnetic force.

This was the secret: John Hatteras invariably walked towards the North.

The End.

End of the Voyage Extraordinaire


In Search of the Castaways

or

The Children of Captain Grant
By Jules Verne


South America


CHAPTER I THE SHARK


ON the 26th of July, 1864, a magnificent yacht was steaming along the North
Channel at full speed, with a strong breeze blowing from the N. E. The Union
Jack was flying at the mizzen-mast, and a blue standard bearing the initials E.
G., embroidered in gold, and surmounted by a ducal coronet, floated from the
topgallant head of the mainmast. The name of the yacht was the DUNCAN, and
the owner was Lord Glenarvan, one of the sixteen Scotch peers who sit in the
Upper House, and the most distinguished member of the Royal Thames Yacht
Club, so famous throughout the United Kingdom.

Lord Edward Glenarvan was on board with his young wife, Lady Helena,
and one of his cousins, Major McNabbs.

The DUNCAN was newly built, and had been making a trial trip a few miles
outside the Firth of Clyde. She was returning to Glasgow, and the Isle of Arran
already loomed in the distance, when the sailor on watch caught sight of an
enormous fish sporting in the wake of the ship. Lord Edward, who was
immediately apprised of the fact, came up on the poop a few minutes after with
his cousin, and asked John Mangles, the captain, what sort of an animal he
thought it was.

"Well, since your Lordship asks my opinion," said Mangles, "I think it is a
shark, and a fine large one too."

"A shark on these shores!"

"There is nothing at all improbable in that," returned the captain. "This fish
belongs to a species that is found in all latitudes and in all seas. It is the 'balance-
fish,’ or hammer-headed shark, if I am not much mistaken. But if your Lordship
has no objections, and it would give the smallest pleasure to Lady Helena to see
a novelty in the way of fishing, we'll soon haul up the monster and find out what
it really is."

"What do you say, McNabbs? Shall we try to catch it?" asked Lord
Glenarvan.

"If you like; it's all one to me," was his cousin's cool reply.

"The more of those terrible creatures that are killed the better, at all events,"
said John Mangles, "so let's seize the chance, and it will not only give us a little
diversion, but be doing a good action."

"Very well, set to work, then," said Glenarvan.

Lady Helena soon joined her husband on deck, quite charmed at the prospect
of such exciting sport. The sea was splendid, and every movement of the shark


was distinctly visible. In obedience to the captain's orders, the sailors threw a
strong rope over the starboard side of the yacht, with a big hook at the end of it,
concealed in a thick lump of bacon. The bait took at once, though the shark was
full fifty yards distant. He began to make rapidly for the yacht, beating the waves
violently with his fins, and keeping his tail in a perfectly straight line. As he got
nearer, his great projecting eyes could be seen inflamed with greed, and his
gaping jaws with their quadruple row of teeth. His head was large, and shaped
like a double hammer at the end of a handle. John Mangles was right. This was
evidently a balance-fish-- the most voracious of all the SQUALIDAE species.

The passengers and sailors on the yacht were watching all the animal's
movements with the liveliest interest. He soon came within reach of the bait,
turned over on his back to make a good dart at it, and in a second bacon and
contents had disappeared. He had hooked himself now, as the tremendous jerk he
gave the cable proved, and the sailors began to haul in the monster by means of
tackle attached to the mainyard. He struggled desperately, but his captors were
prepared for his violence, and had a long rope ready with a slip knot, which
caught his tail and rendered him powerless at once. In a few minutes more he
was hoisted up over the side of the yacht and thrown on the deck. A man came
forward immediately, hatchet in hand, and approaching him cautiously, with one
powerful stroke cut off his tail.

This ended the business, for there was no longer any fear of the shark. But,
though the sailors' vengeance was satisfied, their curiosity was not; they knew
the brute had no very delicate appetite, and the contents of his stomach might be
worth investigation. This is the common practice on all ships when a shark is
captured, but Lady Glenarvan declined to be present at such a disgusting
exploration, and withdrew to the cabin again. The fish was still breathing; it
measured ten feet in length, and weighed more than six hundred pounds. This
was nothing extraordinary, for though the hammer-headed shark is not classed
among the most gigantic of the species, it is always reckoned among the most
formidable.

The huge brute was soon ripped up in a very unceremonious fashion. The
hook had fixed right in the stomach, which was found to be absolutely empty,
and the disappointed sailors were just going to throw the remains overboard,
when the boatswain's attention was attracted by some large object sticking fast in
one of the viscera.

"I say! what's this?" he exclaimed.

"That!" replied one of the sailors, "why, it's a piece of rock the beast
swallowed by way of ballast."

"It's just a bottle, neither more nor less, that the fellow has got in his inside,


and couldn't digest," said another of the crew.

"Hold your tongues, all of you!" said Tom Austin, the mate of the
DUNCAN. "Don't you see the animal has been such an inveterate tippler that he
has not only drunk the wine, but swallowed the bottle?"

"What!" said Lord Glenarvan. "Do you mean to say it is a bottle that the
shark has got in his stomach."

"Ay, it is a bottle, most certainly," replied the boatswain, "but not just from
the cellar."

"Well, Tom, be careful how you take it out,” said Lord Glenarvan, "for
bottles found in the sea often contain precious documents."

"Do you think this does?" said Major McNabbs, incredulously.

"It possibly may, at any rate."

"Oh! I'm not saying it doesn't. There may perhaps be some secret in it,"
returned the Major.

"That's just what we're to see," said his cousin. "Well, Tom."

"Here it is," said the mate, holding up a shapeless lump he had managed to
pull out, though with some difficulty.

"Get the filthy thing washed then, and bring it to the cabin."

Tom obeyed, and in a few minutes brought in the bottle and laid it on the
table, at which Lord Glenarvan and the Major were sitting ready with the
captain, and, of course Lady Helena, for women, they say, are always a little
curious. Everything is an event at sea. For a moment they all sat silent, gazing at
this frail relic, wondering if it told the tale of sad disaster, or brought some
trifling message from a frolic-loving sailor, who had flung it into the sea to
amuse himself when he had nothing better to do.

However, the only way to know was to examine the bottle, and Glenarvan set
to work without further delay, so carefully and minutely, that he might have been
taken for a coroner making an inquest.

He commenced by a close inspection of the outside. The neck was long and
slender, and round the thick rim there was still an end of wire hanging, though
eaten away with rust. The sides were very thick, and strong enough to bear great
pressure. It was evidently of Champagne origin, and the Major said immediately,
"That's one of our Clicquot's bottles."

Nobody contradicted him, as he was supposed to know; but Lady Helena
exclaimed, "What does it matter about the bottle, if we don't know where it
comes from?"

"We shall know that, too, presently, and we may affirm this much already-- it
comes from a long way off. Look at those petrifactions all over it, these different
substances almost turned to mineral, we might say, through the action of the salt


water! This waif had been tossing about in the ocean a long time before the
shark swallowed it."

"I quite agree with you," said McNabbs. "I dare say this frail concern has
made a long voyage, protected by this strong covering."

"But I want to know where from?" said Lady Glenarvan.

"Wait a little, dear Helena, wait; we must have patience with bottles; but if I
am not much mistaken, this one will answer all our questions,” replied her
husband, beginning to scrape away the hard substances round the neck. Soon the
cork made its appearance, but much damaged by the water.

"That's vexing," said Lord Edward, "for if papers are inside, they'll be in a
pretty state!"

"It's to be feared they will," said the Major.

"But it is a lucky thing the shark swallowed them, I must say," added
Glenarvan, "for the bottle would have sunk to the bottom before long with such a
cork as this."

"That's true enough,” replied John Mangles, "and yet it would have been
better to have fished them up in the open sea. Then we might have found out the
road they had come by taking the exact latitude and longitude, and studying the
atmospheric and submarine currents; but with such a postman as a shark, that
goes against wind and tide, there's no clew whatever to the starting-point."

"We shall see," said Glenarvan, gently taking out the cork. A strong odor of
salt water pervaded the whole saloon, and Lady Helena asked impatiently: "Well,
what is there?"

"I was right!" exclaimed Glenarvan. "I see papers inside. But I fear it will be
impossible to remove them," he added, "for they appear to have rotted with the
damp, and are sticking to the sides of the bottle."

"Break it," said the Major.

"I would rather preserve the whole if I could."

"No doubt you would," said Lady Helena; "but the contents are more
valuable than the bottle, and we had better sacrifice the one than the other."

"If your Lordship would simply break off the neck, I think we might easily
withdraw the papers," suggested John Mangles.

"Try it, Edward, try it," said Lady Helena.

Lord Glenarvan was very unwilling, but he found there was no alternative;
the precious bottle must be broken. They had to get a hammer before this could
be done, though, for the stony material had acquired the hardness of granite. A
few sharp strokes, however, soon shivered it to fragments, many of which had
pieces of paper sticking to them. These were carefully removed by Lord
Glenarvan, and separated and spread out on the table before the eager gaze of his


wife and friends.


CHAPTER I THE THREE DOCUMENTS


ALL that could be discovered, however, on these pieces of paper was a few
words here and there, the remainder of the lines being almost completely
obliterated by the action of the water. Lord Glenarvan examined them attentively
for a few minutes, turning them over on all sides, holding them up to the light,
and trying to decipher the least scrap of writing, while the others looked on with
anxious eyes. At last he said: "There are three distinct documents here,
apparently copies of the same document in three different languages. Here is one
in English, one in French, and one in German."

"But can you make any sense out of them?" asked Lady Helena.

"That's hard to say, my dear Helena, the words are quite incomplete."

"Perhaps the one may supplement the other," suggested Major McNabbs.

"Very likely they will," said the captain. "It is impossible that the very same
words should have been effaced in each document, and by putting the scraps
together we might gather some intelligible meaning out of them."

"That's what we will do," rejoined Lord Glenarvan; "but let us proceed
methodically. Here is the English document first."

All that remained of it was the following:

62 Bri gow sink stra aland skipp Gr that monit of long and ssistance lost

"There's not much to be made out of that," said the Major, looking
disappointed.

"No, but it is good English anyhow," returned the captain.

"There's no doubt of it," said Glenarvan. "The words SINK, ALAND, LOST
are entire; SKIPP is evidently part of the word SKIPPER, and that's what they
call ship captains often in England. There seems a Mr. Gr. mentioned, and that
most likely is the captain of the shipwrecked vessel."

"Well, come, we have made out a good deal already," said Lady Helena.

"Yes, but unfortunately there are whole lines wanting," said the Major, "and
we have neither the name of the ship nor the place where she was shipwrecked."

"We'll get that by and by," said Edward.

"Oh, yes; there is no doubt of it," replied the Major, who always echoed his
neighbor's opinion. "But how?"

"By comparing one document with the other."

"Let us try them,” said his wife.

The second piece of paper was even more destroyed than the first; only a few
scattered words remained here and there.


It ran as follows:

7 Juni Glas zwei atrosen graus bringt ihnen

"This is written in German," said John Mangles the moment he looked at it.

"And you understand that language, don't you?" asked Lord Glenarvan.

"Perfectly."

"Come, then, tell us the meaning of these words."

The captain examined the document carefully, and said:

"Well, here's the date of the occurrence first: 7 Juni means June 7; and if we
put that before the figures 62 we have in the other document, it gives us the
exact date, 7th of June, 1862."

"Capital!" exclaimed Lady Helena. "Go on, John!"

"On the same line," resumed the young captain, "there is the syllable GLAS
and if we add that to the GOW we found in the English paper, we get the whole
word GLASGOW at once. The documents evidently refer to some ship that
sailed out of the port of Glasgow." "That is my opinion, too," said the Major.

"The second line is completely effaced," continued the Captain; "but here are
two important words on the third. There is ZWEI, which means TWO, and
ATROSEN or MATROSEN, the German for SAILORS."

"Then I suppose it is about a captain and two sailors," said Lady Helena.

"It seems so," replied Lord Glenarvan.

"I must confess, your Lordship, that the next word puzzles me. I can make
nothing of it. Perhaps the third document may throw some light on it. The last
two words are plain enough. BRINGT IHNEN means BRING THEM; and, if
you recollect, in the English paper we had SSISTANCE, so by putting the parts
together, it reads thus, I think: 'BRING THEM ASSISTANCE."

"Yes, that must be it," replied Lord Glenarvan. "But where are the poor
fellows? We have not the slightest indication of the place, meantime, nor of
where the catastrophe happened."

"Perhaps the French copy will be more explicit," suggested Lady Helena.

"Here it is, then," said Lord Glenarvan, "and that is in a language we all
know."

The words it contained were these:

troi ats tannia gonie austral abor contin pr cruel indi jete ongit et 37 degrees
11" LAT

"There are figures!" exclaimed Lady Helena. "Look!"

"Let us go steadily to work," said Lord Glenarvan, "and begin at the
beginning. I think we can make out from the incomplete words in the first line
that a three-mast vessel is in question, and there is little doubt about the name;
we get that from the fragments of the other papers; it is the BRITANNIA. As to


the next two words, GONIE and AUSTRAL, it is only AUSTRAL that has any
meaning to us."

"But that is a valuable scrap of information," said John Mangles. "The
shipwreck occurred in the southern hemisphere."

"That's a wide world," said the Major.

"Well, we'll go on," resumed Glenarvan. "Here is the word ABOR; that is
clearly the root of the verb ABORDER. The poor men have landed somewhere;
but where? CONTIN--does that mean continent? CRUEL!"

"CRUEL!" interrupted John Mangles. "I see now what GRAUS is part of in
the second document. It is GRAUSAM, the word in German for CRUEL!"

"Let's go on," said Lord Glenarvan, becoming quite excited over his task, as
the incomplete words began to fill up and develop their meaning. "INDI,--is it
India where they have been shipwrecked? And what can this word ONGIT be
part of? Ah! I see--it is LONGITUDE; and here is the latitude, 37 degrees 11".
That is the precise indication at last, then!"

"But we haven't the longitude," objected McNabbs.

"But we can't get everything, my dear Major; and it is something at all
events, to have the exact latitude. The French document is decidedly the most
complete of the three; but it is plain enough that each is the literal translation of
the other, for they all contain exactly the same number of lines. What we have to
do now is to put together all the words we have found, and translate them into
one language, and try to ascertain their most probable and logical sense."

"Well, what language shall we choose?" asked the Major.

"I think we had better keep to the French, since that was the most complete
document of the three."

"Your Lordship is right," said John Mangles, "and besides, we're all familiar
with the language."

"Very well, then, I'll set to work."

In a few minutes he had written as follows:

7 Juin 1862 trois-mats Britannia Glasgow sombre gonie austral a terre deux
matelots capitaine Gr abor contin pr cruel indi jete ce document de longitude et
37 degrees 11" de latitude Portez-leur secours perdus.

[7th of June, 1862 three-mast BRITANNIA Glasgow] foundered gonie
southern on the coast two sailors Gr Captain landed contin pr cruel indi thrown
this document in longitude and 37 degrees 11" latitude Bring them assistance
lost

Just at that moment one of the sailors came to inform the captain that they
were about entering the Firth of Clyde, and to ask what were his orders.

"What are your Lordship's intentions?" said John Mangles, addressing Lord


Glenarvan.

"To get to Dunbarton as quickly as possible, John; and Lady Helena will
return to Malcolm Castle, while I go on to London and lay this document before
the Admiralty."

The sailor received orders accordingly, and went out to deliver them to the
mate.

"Now, friends," said Lord Glenarvan, "let us go on with our investigations,
for we are on the track of a great catastrophe, and the lives of several human
beings depend on our sagacity. We must give our whole minds to the solution of
this enigma.”

"First of all, there are three very distinct things to be considered in this
document--the things we know, the things we may conjecture, the things we do
not know."

"What are those we know? We know that on the 7th of June a three-mast
vessel, the BRITANNIA of Glasgow, foundered; that two sailors and the captain
threw this document into the sea in 37 degrees 11" latitude, and they entreat
help."

"Exactly so," said the Major.

"What are those now we may conjecture?” continued Glenarvan. "That the
shipwreck occurred in the southern seas; and here I would draw your attention at
once to the incomplete word GONIE. Doesn't the name of the country strike you
even in the mere mention of it?"

"Patagonia!" exclaimed Lady Helena.

"Undoubtedly."

"But is Patagonia crossed by the 37th parallel?" asked the Major.

"That is easily ascertained," said the captain, opening a map of South
America. "Yes, it is; Patagonia just touches the 37th parallel. It cuts through
Araucania, goes along over the Pampas to the north, and loses itself in the
Atlantic."

"Well, let us proceed then with our conjectures. The two sailors and the
captain LAND--land where? CONTIN--on a continent; on a continent, mark
you, not an island. What becomes of them? There are two letters here
providentially which give a clew to their fate--PR, that must mean prisoners, and
CRUEL INDIAN is evidently the meaning of the next two words. These
unfortunate men are captives in the hands of cruel Indians. Don't you see it?
Don't the words seem to come of themselves, and fill up the blanks? Isn't the
document quite clear now? Isn't the sense self-evident?"

Glenarvan spoke in a tone of absolute conviction, and his enthusiastic
confidence appeared contagious, for the others all exclaimed, too, "Yes, it is


evident, quite evident!"

After an instant, Lord Edward said again, "To my own mind the hypothesis is
so plausible, that I have no doubt whatever the event occurred on the coast of
Patagonia, but still I will have inquiries made in Glasgow, as to the destination of
the BRITANNIA, and we shall know if it is possible she could have been
wrecked on those shores.”

"Oh, there's no need to send so far to find out that," said John Mangles. "I
have the Mercantile and Shipping Gazette here, and we'll see the name on the
list, and all about it."

"Do look at once, then," said Lord Glenarvan.

The file of papers for the year 1862 was soon brought, and John began to
turn over the leaves rapidly, running down each page with his eye in search of
the name required. But his quest was not long, for in a few minutes he called out:
"I've got it! 'May 30, 1862, Peru-Callao, with cargo for Glasgow, the
BRITANNIA, Captain Grant."

"Grant!" exclaimed Lord Glenarvan. "That is the adventurous Scotchman
that attempted to found a new Scotland on the shores of the Pacific."

"Yes," rejoined John Mangles, "it is the very man. He sailed from Glasgow in
the BRITANNIA in 1861, and has not been heard of since."

"There isn't a doubt of it, not a shadow of doubt," repeated Lord Glenarvan.
"It is just that same Captain Grant. The BRITANNIA left Callao on the 30th of
May, and on the 7th of June, a week afterward, she is lost on the coast of
Patagonia. The few broken disjointed words we find in these documents tell us
the whole story. You see, friends, our conjectures hit the mark very well; we
know all now except one thing, and that is the longitude."

"That is not needed now, we know the country. With the latitude alone, I
would engage to go right to the place where the wreck happened."

"Then have we really all the particulars now?" asked Lady Helena.

"All, dear Helena; I can fill up every one of these blanks the sea has made in
the document as easily as if Captain Grant were dictating to me."

And he took up the pen, and dashed off the following lines immediately: "On
the 7th of June, 1862, the three-mast vessel, BRITANNIA, of Glasgow, has sunk
on the coast of Patagonia, in the southern hemisphere. Making for the shore, two
sailors and Captain Grant are about to land on the continent, where they will be
taken prisoners by cruel Indians. They have thrown this document into the sea,
in longitude and latitude 37 degrees 11". Bring them assistance, or they are lost."

"Capital! capital! dear Edward," said Lady Helena. "If those poor creatures
ever see their native land again, it is you they will have to thank for it."

"And they will see it again," returned Lord Glenarvan; "the statement is too


explicit, and clear, and certain for England to hesitate about going to the aid of
her three sons cast away on a desert coast. What she has done for Franklin and
so many others, she will do to-day for these poor shipwrecked fellows of the
BRITANNIA."

"Most likely the unfortunate men have families who mourn their loss.
Perhaps this ill-fated Captain Grant had a wife and children," suggested Lady
Helena.

"Very true, my dear, and I'll not forget to let them know that there is still
hope. But now, friends, we had better go up on deck, as the boat must be getting
near the harbor."

A carriage and post-horses waited there, in readiness to convey Lady Helena
and Major McNabbs to Malcolm Castle, and Lord Glenarvan bade adieu to his
young wife, and jumped into the express train for Glasgow.

But before starting he confided an important missive to a swifter agent than
himself, and a few minutes afterward it flashed along the electric wire to
London, to appear next day in the Times and Morning Chronicle in the following
words: "For information respecting the fate of the three-mast vessel
BRITANNIA, of Glasgow, Captain Grant, apply to Lord Glenarvan, Malcolm
Castle, Luss, Dumbartonshire, Scotland."


CHAPTER HI THE CAPTAIN'S CHILDREN


LORD GLENARVAN'S fortune was enormous, and he spent it entirely in
doing good. His kindheartedness was even greater than his generosity, for the
one knew no bounds, while the other, of necessity, had its limits. As Lord of
Luss and "laird" of Malcolm, he represented his county in the House of Lords;
but, with his Jacobite ideas, he did not care much for the favor of the House of
Hanover, and he was looked upon coldly by the State party in England, because
of the tenacity with which he clung to the traditions of his forefathers, and his
energetic resistance to the political encroachments of Southerners. And yet he
was not a man behind the times, and there was nothing little or narrow-minded
about him; but while always keeping open his ancestral county to progress, he
was a true Scotchman at heart, and it was for the honor of Scotland that he
competed in the yacht races of the Royal Thames Yacht Club.

Edward Glenarvan was thirty-two years of age. He was tall in person, and
had rather stern features; but there was an exceeding sweetness in his look, and a
stamp of Highland poetry about his whole bearing. He was known to be brave to
excess, and full of daring and chivalry-- a Fer-gus of the nineteenth century; but
his goodness excelled every other quality, and he was more charitable than St.
Martin himself, for he would have given the whole of his cloak to any of the
poor Highlanders.

He had scarcely been married three months, and his bride was Miss Helena
Tuffnell, the daughter of William Tuffnell, the great traveler, one of the many
victims of geographical science and of the passion for discovery. Miss Helena
did not belong to a noble family, but she was Scotch, and that was better than all
nobility in the eyes of Lord Glenarvan; and she was, moreover, a charming,
high-souled, religious young woman.

Lord Glenarvan did not forget that his wife was the daughter of a great
traveler, and he thought it likely that she would inherit her father's predilections.
He had the DUNCAN built expressly that he might take his bride to the most
beautiful lands in the world, and complete their honeymoon by sailing up the
Mediterranean, and through the clustering islands of the Archipelago.

However, Lord Glenarvan had gone now to London. The lives of the
shipwrecked men were at stake, and Lady Helena was too much concerned
herself about them to grudge her husband's temporary absence. A telegram next
day gave hope of his speedy return, but in the evening a letter apprised her of the
difficulties his proposition had met with, and the morning after brought another,


in which he openly expressed his dissatisfaction with the Admiralty.

Lady Helena began to get anxious as the day wore on. In the evening, when
she was sitting alone in her room, Mr. Halbert, the house steward, came in and
asked if she would see a young girl and boy that wanted to speak to Lord
Glenarvan.

"Some of the country people?" asked Lady Helena.

"No, madame," replied the steward, "I do not know them at all. They came
by rail to Balloch, and walked the rest of the way to Luss."

"Tell them to come up, Halbert."

In a few minutes a girl and boy were shown in. They were evidently brother
and sister, for the resemblance was unmistakable. The girl was about sixteen
years of age; her tired pretty face, and sorrowful eyes, and resigned but
courageous look, as well as her neat though poor attire, made a favorable
impression. The boy she held by the hand was about twelve, but his face
expressed such determination, that he appeared quite his sister's protector.

The girl seemed too shy to utter a word at first, but Lady Helena quickly
relieved her embarrassment by saying, with an encouraging smile: "You wish to
speak to me, I think?"

"No," replied the boy, in a decided tone; "not to you, but to Lord Glenarvan."

V. IV Verne

"Excuse him, ma'am," said the girl, with a look at her brother.

"Lord Glenarvan is not at the castle just now," returned Lady Helena; "but I
am his wife, and if I can do anything for you--"

"You are Lady Glenarvan?" interrupted the girl.

"Tam."

"The wife of Lord Glenarvan, of Malcolm Castle, that put an announcement
in the TIMES about the shipwreck of the BRITANNIA?"

"Yes, yes," said Lady Helena, eagerly; "and you?"

"Tam Miss Grant, ma'am, and this is my brother."

"Miss Grant, Miss Grant!" exclaimed Lady Helena, drawing the young girl
toward her, and taking both her hands and kissing the boy's rosy cheeks.

"What is it you know, ma'am, about the shipwreck? Tell me, is my father
living? Shall we ever see him again? Oh, tell me," said the girl, earnestly.

"My dear child," replied Lady Helena. "Heaven forbid that I should answer
you lightly such a question; I would not delude you with vain hopes."

"Oh, tell me all, tell me all, ma'am. I'm proof against sorrow. I can bear to
hear anything."

"My poor child, there is but a faint hope; but with the help of almighty
Heaven it is just possible you may one day see your father once more."


The girl burst into tears, and Robert seized Lady Glenarvan's hand and
covered it with kisses.

As soon as they grew calmer they asked a complete string of questions, and
Lady Helena recounted the whole story of the document, telling them that their
father had been wrecked on the coast of Patagonia, and that he and two sailors,
the sole survivors, appeared to have reached the shore, and had written an appeal
for help in three languages and committed it to the care of the waves.

During the recital, Robert Grant was devouring the speaker with his eyes,
and hanging on her lips. His childish imagination evidently retraced all the
scenes of his father's shipwreck. He saw him on the deck of the BRITANNIA,
and then struggling with the billows, then clinging to the rocks, and lying at
length exhausted on the beach.

More than once he cried out, "Oh, papa! my poor papa!" and pressed close to
his sister.

Miss Grant sat silent and motionless, with clasped hands, and all she said
when the narration ended, was: "Oh, ma'am, the paper, please!"

"T have not it now, my dear child," replied Lady Helena.

"You haven't it?”

"No. Lord Glenarvan was obliged to take it to London, for the sake of your
father; but I have told you all it contained, word for word, and how we managed
to make out the complete sense from the fragments of words left--all except the
longitude, unfortunately."

"We can do without that," said the boy.

"Yes, Mr. Robert," rejoined Lady Helena, smiling at the child's decided tone.
"And so you see, Miss Grant, you know the smallest details now just as well as I
do."

"Yes, ma'am, but I should like to have seen my father's writing."

"Well, to-morrow, perhaps, to-morrow, Lord Glenarvan will be back. My
husband determined to lay the document before the Lords of the Admiralty, to
induce them to send out a ship immediately in search of Captain Grant."

"Is it possible, ma'am," exclaimed the girl, "that you have done that for us?"

"Yes, my dear Miss Grant, and I am expecting Lord Glenarvan back every
minute now."

"Oh, ma'am! Heaven bless you and Lord Glenarvan," said the young girl,
fervently, overcome with grateful emotion."

"My dear girl, we deserve no thanks; anyone in our place would have done
the same. I only trust the hopes we are leading you to entertain may be realized,
but till my husband returns, you will remain at the Castle."

"Oh, no, ma'am. I could not abuse the sympathy you show to strangers."


"Strangers, dear child!" interrupted Lady Helena; "you and your brother are
not strangers in this house, and I should like Lord Glenarvan to be able on his
arrival to tell the children of Captain Grant himself, what is going to be done to
rescue their father."

It was impossible to refuse an invitation given with such heart, and Miss
Grant and her brother consented to stay till Lord Glenarvan returned.


CHAPTER IV LADY GLENARVAN'S PROPOSAL


LADY HELENA thought it best to say nothing to the children about the fears
Lord Glenarvan had expressed in his letters respecting the decisions of the Lords
of the Admiralty with regard to the document. Nor did she mention the probable
captivity of Captain Grant among the Indians of South America. Why sadden the
poor children, and damp their newly cherished hopes? It would not in the least
alter the actual state of the case; so not a word was said, and after answering all
Miss Grant's questions, Lady Helena began to interrogate in her turn, asking her
about her past life and her present circumstances.

It was a touching, simple story she heard in reply, and one which increased
her sympathy for the young girl.

Mary and Robert were the captain's only children. Harry Grant lost his wife
when Robert was born, and during his long voyages he left his little ones in
charge of his cousin, a good old lady. Captain Grant was a fearless sailor. He not
only thoroughly understood navigation, but commerce also--a two-fold
qualification eminently useful to skippers in the merchant service. He lived in
Dundee, in Perthshire, Scotland. His father, a minister of St. Katrine's Church,
had given him a thorough education, as he believed that could never hurt
anybody.

Harry's voyages were prosperous from the first, and a few years after Robert
was born, he found himself possessed of a considerable fortune.

It was then that he projected the grand scheme which made him popular in
Scotland. Like Glenarvan, and a few noble families in the Lowlands, he had no
heart for the union with England. In his eyes the interests of his country were not
identified with those of the Anglo-Saxons, and to give scope for personal
development, he resolved to found an immense Scotch colony on one of the
ocean continents. Possibly he might have thought that some day they would
achieve their independence, as the United States did--an example doubtless to be
followed eventually by Australia and India. But whatever might be his secret
motives, such was his dream of colonization. But, as is easily understood, the
Government opposed his plans, and put difficulties enough in his way to have
killed an ordinary man. But Harry would not be beaten. He appealed to the
patriotism of his countrymen, placed his fortune at the service of the cause, built
a ship, and manned it with a picked crew, and leaving his children to the care of
his old cousin set off to explore the great islands of the Pacific. This was in
1861, and for twelve months, or up to May, 1862, letters were regularly received


from him, but no tidings whatever had come since his departure from Callao, in
June, and the name of the BRITANNIA never appeared in the Shipping List.

Just at this juncture the old cousin died, and Harry Grant's two children were
left alone in the world.

Mary Grant was then only fourteen, but she resolved to face her situation
bravely, and to devote herself entirely to her little brother, who was still a mere
child. By dint of close economy, combined with tact and prudence, she managed
to support and educate him, working day and night, denying herself everything,
that she might give him all he needed, watching over him and caring for him like
a mother.

The two children were living in this touching manner in Dundee, struggling
patiently and courageously with their poverty. Mary thought only of her brother,
and indulged in dreams of a prosperous future for him. She had long given up all
hope of the BRITANNIA, and was fully persuaded that her father was dead.
What, then, was her emotion when she accidentally saw the notice in the
TIMES!

She never hesitated for an instant as to the course she should adopt, but
determined to go to Dumbartonshire immediately, to learn the best and worst.
Even if she were to be told that her father's lifeless body had been found on a
distant shore, or in the bottom of some abandoned ship, it would be a relief from
incessant doubt and torturing suspense.

She told her brother about the advertisement, and the two children started off
together that same day for Perth, where they took the train, and arrived in the
evening at Malcolm Castle.

Such was Mary Grant's sorrowful story, and she recounted it in so simple and
unaffected a manner, that it was evident she never thought her conduct had been
that of a heroine through those long trying years. But Lady Helena thought it for
her, and more than once she put her arms round both the children, and could not
restrain her tears.

As for Robert, he seemed to have heard these particulars for the first time.
All the while his sister was speaking, he gazed at her with wide-open eyes, only
knowing now how much she had done and suffered for him; and, as she ended,
he flung himself on her neck, and exclaimed, "Oh, mamma! My dear little
mamma!"

It was quite dark by this time, and Lady Helena made the children go to bed,
for she knew they must be tired after their journey. They were soon both sound
asleep, dreaming of happy days.

After they had retired. Lady Helena sent for Major McNabbs, and told him
the incidents of the evening.


"That Mary Grant must be a brave girl," said the Major.

"I only hope my husband will succeed, for the poor children's sake," said his
cousin. "It would be terrible for them if he did not."

"He will be sure to succeed, or the Lords of the Admiralty must have hearts
harder than Portland stone."

But, notwithstanding McNabbs's assurance, Lady Helena passed the night in
great anxiety, and could not close her eyes.

Mary Grant and her brother were up very early next morning, and were
walking about in the courtyard when they heard the sound of a carriage
approaching. It was Lord Glenarvan; and, almost immediately, Lady Helena and
the Major came out to meet him.

Lady Helena flew toward her husband the moment he alighted; but he
embraced her silently, and looked gloomy and disappointed-- indeed, even
furious.

"Well, Edward?" she said; "tell me."

"Well, Helena, dear; those people have no heart!"

"They have refused?"

"Yes. They have refused me a ship! They talked of the millions that had been
wasted in search for Franklin, and declared the document was obscure and
unintelligible. And, then, they said it was two years now since they were cast
away, and there was little chance of finding them. Besides, they would have it
that the Indians, who made them prisoners, would have dragged them into the
interior, and it was impossible, they said, to hunt all through Patagonia for three
men--three Scotchmen; that the search would be vain and perilous, and cost
more lives than it saved. In short, they assigned all the reasons that people invent
who have made up their minds to refuse. The truth is, they remembered Captain
Grant's projects, and that is the secret of the whole affair. So the poor fellow is
lost for ever."

"My father! my poor father!" cried Mary Grant, throwing herself on her
knees before Lord Glenarvan, who exclaimed in amazement:

"Your father? What? Is this Miss--"

"Yes, Edward," said Lady Helena; "this is Miss Mary Grant and her brother,
the two children condemned to orphanage by the cruel Admiralty!"

"Oh! Miss Grant," said Lord Glenarvan, raising the young girl, "if I had
known of your presence--"

He said no more, and there was a painful silence in the courtyard, broken
only by sobs. No one spoke, but the very attitude of both servants and masters
spoke their indignation at the conduct of the English Government.

At last the Major said, addressing Lord Glenarvan: "Then you have no hope


whatever?"

"None," was the reply.

"Very well, then,” exclaimed little Robert, "I'll go and speak to those people
myself, and we'll see if they--" He did not complete his sentence, for his sister
stopped him; but his clenched fists showed his intentions were the reverse of
pacific.

"No, Robert," said Mary Grant, "we will thank this noble lord and lady for
what they have done for us, and never cease to think of them with gratitude; and
then we'll both go together."

"Mary!" said Lady Helena, in a tone of surprise.

"Go where?" asked Lord Glenarvan.

"I am going to throw myself at the Queen's feet, and we shall see if she will
turn a deaf ear to the prayers of two children, who implore their father's life."

Lord Glenarvan shook his head; not that he doubted the kind heart of her
Majesty, but he knew Mary would never gain access to her. Suppliants but too
rarely reach the steps of a throne; it seems as if royal palaces had the same
inscription on their doors that the English have on their ships: Passengers are
requested not to speak to the man at the wheel.

Lady Glenarvan understood what was passing in her husband's mind, and she
felt the young girl's attempt would be useless, and only plunge the poor children
in deeper despair. Suddenly, a grand, generous purpose fired her soul, and she
called out: "Mary Grant! wait, my child, and listen to what I'm going to say."

Mary had just taken her brother by the hand, and turned to go away; but she
stepped back at Lady Helena's bidding.

The young wife went up to her husband, and said, with tears in her eyes,
though her voice was firm, and her face beamed with animation: "Edward, when
Captain Grant wrote that letter and threw it into the sea, he committed it to the
care of God. God has sent it to us--to us! Undoubtedly God intends us to
undertake the rescue of these poor men."

"What do you mean, Helena?"

"T mean this, that we ought to think ourselves fortunate if we can begin our
married life with a good action. Well, you know, Edward, that to please me you
planned a pleasure trip; but what could give us such genuine pleasure, or be so
useful, as to save those unfortunate fellows, cast off by their country?"

"Helena!" exclaimed Lord Glenarvan.

"Yes, Edward, you understand me. The DUNCAN is a good strong ship, she
can venture in the Southern Seas, or go round the world if necessary. Let us go,
Edward; let us start off and search for Captain Grant!"

Lord Glenarvan made no reply to this bold proposition, but smiled, and,


holding out his arms, drew his wife into a close, fond embrace. Mary and Robert
seized her hands, and covered them with kisses; and the servants who thronged
the courtyard, and had been witnesses of this touching scene, shouted with one
voice, "Hurrah for the Lady of Luss. Three cheers for Lord and Lady
Glenarvan!"

CHAPTER V THE DEPARTURE OF THE "DUNCAN"

WE have said already that Lady Helena was a brave, generous woman, and
what she had just done proved it in-disputably. Her husband had good reason to
be proud of such a wife, one who could understand and enter into all his views.
The idea of going to Captain Grant's rescue had occurred to him in London when
his request was refused, and he would have anticipated Lady Helena, only he
could not bear the thought of parting from her. But now that she herself proposed
to go, all hesitation was at an end. The servants of the Castle had hailed the
project with loud acclamations-- for it was to save their brothers--Scotchmen,
like themselves-- and Lord Glenarvan cordially joined his cheers with theirs, for
the Lady of Luss.

The departure once resolved upon, there was not an hour to be lost. A
telegram was dispatched to John Mangles the very same day, conveying Lord
Glenarvan's orders to take the DUNCAN immediately to Glasgow, and to make
preparations for a voyage to the Southern Seas, and possibly round the world, for
Lady Helena was right in her opinion that the yacht might safely attempt the
circumnavigation of the globe, if necessary.

The DUNCAN was a steam yacht of the finest description. She was 210 tons
burden--much larger than any of the first vessels that touched the shores of the
New World, for the largest of the four ships that sailed with Columbus was only
70 tons. She had two masts and all the sails and rigging of an ordinary clipper,
which would enable her to take advantage of every favorable wind, though her
chief reliance was on her mechanical power. The engine, which was constructed
on a new system, was a high-pressure one, of 160-horse power, and put in
motion a double screw. This gave the yacht such swiftness that during her trial
trip in the Firth of Clyde, she made seventeen miles an hour, a higher speed than
any vessel had yet attained. No alterations were consequently needed in the
DUNCAN herself; John Mangles had only to attend to her interior arrangements.

His first care was to enlarge the bunkers to carry as much coal as possible,
for it is difficult to get fresh supplies en route. He had to do the same with the
store-rooms, and managed so well that he succeeded in laying in provisions
enough for two years. There was abundance of money at his command, and
enough remained to buy a cannon, on a pivot carriage, which he mounted on the
forecastle. There was no knowing what might happen, and it is always well to be


able to send a good round bullet flying four miles off.

John Mangles understood his business. Though he was only the captain of a
pleasure yacht, he was one of the best skippers in Glasgow. He was thirty years
of age, and his countenance expressed both courage and goodness, if the features
were somewhat coarse. He had been brought up at the castle by the Glenarvan
family, and had turned out a capital sailor, having already given proof, in some
of his long voyages, of his skill and energy and sang-froid. When Lord
Glenarvan offered him the command of the DUNCAN, he accepted it with right
good will, for he loved the master of Malcolm Castle, like a brother, and had
hitherto vainly sought some opportunity of showing his devotion.

Tom Austin, the mate, was an old sailor, worthy of all confidence. The crew,
consisting of twenty-five men, including the captain and chief officer, were all
from Dumbartonshire, experienced sailors, and all belonging to the Glenarvan
estate; in fact, it was a regular clan, and they did not forget to carry with them
the traditional bagpipes. Lord Glenarvan had in them a band of trusty fellows,
skilled in their calling, devoted to himself, full of courage, and as practiced in
handling fire-arms as in the maneuvering of a ship; a valiant little troop, ready to
follow him any where, even in the most dangerous expeditions. When the crew
heard whither they were bound, they could not restrain their enthusiasm, and the
rocks of Dumbarton rang again with their joyous outbursts of cheers.

But while John Mangles made the stowage and provisioning of the yacht his
chief business, he did not forget to fit up the rooms of Lord and Lady Glenarvan
for a long voyage. He had also to get cabins ready for the children of Captain
Grant, as Lady Helena could not refuse Mary's request to accompany her.

As for young Robert, he would have smuggled himself in somewhere in the
hold of the DUNCAN rather than be left behind. He would willingly have gone
as cabin-boy, like Nelson. It was impossible to resist a little fellow like that, and,
indeed, no one tried. He would not even go as a passenger, but must serve in
some capacity, as cabin-boy, apprentice or sailor, he did not care which, so he
was put in charge of John Mangles, to be properly trained for his vocation.

"And I hope he won't spare me the 'cat-o-nine-tails' if I don't do properly,"
said Robert.

"Rest easy on that score, my boy," said Lord Glenarvan, gravely; he did not
add, that this mode of punishment was forbidden on board the DUNCAN, and
moreover, was quite unnecessary.

To complete the roll of passengers, we must name Major McNabbs. The
Major was about fifty years of age, with a calm face and regular features--a man
who did whatever he was told, of an excellent, indeed, a perfect temper; modest,
silent, peaceable, and amiable, agreeing with everybody on every subject, never


discussing, never disputing, never getting angry. He wouldn't move a step
quicker, or slower, whether he walked upstairs to bed or mounted a breach.
Nothing could excite him, nothing could disturb him, not even a cannon ball, and
no doubt he will die without ever having known even a passing feeling of
irritation.

This man was endowed in an eminent degree, not only with ordinary animal
courage, that physical bravery of the battle-field, which is solely due to muscular
energy, but he had what is far nobler-- moral courage, firmness of soul. If he had
any fault it was his being so intensely Scotch from top to toe, a Caledonian of
the Caledonians, an obstinate stickler for all the ancient customs of his country.
This was the reason he would never serve in England, and he gained his rank of
Major in the 42nd regiment, the Highland Black Watch, composed entirely of
Scotch noblemen.

As a cousin of Glenarvan, he lived in Malcolm Castle, and as a major he
went as a matter of course with the DUNCAN.

Such, then, was the PERSONNEL of this yacht, so unexpectedly called to
make one of the most wonderful voyages of modern times. From the hour she
reached the steamboat quay at Glasgow, she completely monopolized the public
attention. A considerable crowd visited her every day, and the DUNCAN was the
one topic of interest and conversation, to the great vexation of the different
captains in the port, among others of Captain Burton, in command of the
SCOTIA, a magnificent steamer lying close beside her, and bound for Calcutta.
Considering her size, the SCOTIA might justly look upon the DUNCAN as a
mere fly-boat, and yet this pleasure yacht of Lord Glenarvan was quite the center
of attraction, and the excitement about her daily increased.

The DUNCAN was to sail out with the tide at three o'clock on the morning
of the 25th of August. But before starting, a touching ceremony was witnessed
by the good people of Glasgow. At eight o'clock the night before, Lord
Glenarvan and his friends, and the entire crew, from the stokers to the captain, all
who were to take part in this self-sacrificing voyage, left the yacht and repaired
to St. Mungo's, the ancient cathedral of the city. This venerable edifice, so
marvelously described by Walter Scott, remains intact amid the ruins made by
the Reformation; and it was there, beneath its lofty arches, in the grand nave, in
the presence of an immense crowd, and surrounded by tombs as thickly set as in
a cemetery, that they all assembled to implore the blessing of Heaven on their
expedition, and to put themselves under the protection of Providence. The Rev.
Mr. Morton conducted the service, and when he had ended and pronounced the
benediction, a young girl's voice broke the solemn silence that followed. It was
Mary Grant who poured out her heart to God in prayer for her benefactors, while


grateful happy tears streamed down her cheeks, and almost choked her utterance.
The vast assembly dispersed under the influence of deep emotion, and at ten
o'clock the passengers and crew retumed on board the vessel.


CHAPTER VI AN UNEXPECTED PASSENGER


THE ladies passed the whole of the first day of the voyage in their berths, for
there was a heavy swell in the sea, and toward evening the wind blew pretty
fresh, and the DUNCAN tossed and pitched considerably.

But the morning after, the wind changed, and the captain ordered the men to
put up the foresail, and brigantine and foretopsail, which greatly lessened the
rolling of the vessel. Lady Helena and Mary Grant were able to come on deck at
daybreak, where they found Lord Glenarvan, Major McNabbs and the captain.

"And how do you stand the sea, Miss Mary?" said Lord Glenarvan.

"Pretty well, my Lord. I am not very much inconvenienced by it. Besides I
shall get used to it."

"And our young Robert!"

"Oh, as for Robert," said the captain, "whenever he is not poking about down
below in the engine-room, he is perched somewhere aloft among the rigging. A
youngster like that laughs at sea-sickness. Why, look at him this very moment!
Do you see him?"

The captain pointed toward the foremast, and sure enough there was Robert,
hanging on the yards of the topgallant mast, a hundred feet above in the air.
Mary involuntarily gave a start, but the captain said:

"Oh, don't be afraid, Miss Mary; he is all right, take my word for it; I'll have
a Capital sailor to present to Captain Grant before long, for we'll find the worthy
captain, depend upon it."

"Heaven grant it, Mr. John," replied the young girl.

"My dear child," said Lord Glenarvan, "there is something so providential in
the whole affair, that we have every reason to hope. We are not going, we are
led; we are not searching, we are guided. And then see all the brave men that
have enlisted in the service of the good cause. We shall not only succeed in our
enterprise, but there will be little difficulty in it. I promised Lady Helena a
pleasure trip, and I am much mistaken if I don't keep my word."

"Edward," said his wife, "you are the best of men."

"Not at all," was the reply; "but I have the best of crews and the best of ships.
You don't admire the DUNCAN, I suppose, Miss Mary?"

"On the contrary, my lord, I do admire her, and I'm a connoisseur in ships,"
returned the young girl.

"Indeed!"

"Yes. I have played all my life on my father's ships. He should have made me


a sailor, for I dare say, at a push, I could reef a sail or plait a gasket easily
enough."

"Do you say so, miss?" exclaimed John Mangles.

"If you talk like that you and John will be great friends, for he can't think any
calling is equal to that of a seaman; he can't fancy any other, even for a woman.
Isn't it true, John?"

"Quite so," said the captain, "and yet, your Lordship, I must confess that
Miss Grant is more in her place on the poop than reefing a topsail. But for all
that, I am quite flattered by her remarks."

"And especially when she admires the DUNCAN," replied Glenarvan.

"Well, really," said Lady Glenarvan, "you are so proud of your yacht that you
make me wish to look all over it; and I should like to go down and see how our
brave men are lodged."

"Their quarters are first-rate,
they were at home."

"And they really are at home, my dear Helena," said Lord Glenarvan. "This
yacht is a portion of our old Caledonia, a fragment of Dumbartonshire, making a
voyage by special favor, so that in a manner we are still in our own country. The
DUNCAN is Malcolm Castle, and the ocean is Loch Lomond."

"Very well, dear Edward, do the honors of the Castle then."

"At your service, madam; but let me tell Olbinett first."

The steward of the yacht was an excellent maitre d'hotel, and might have
been French for his airs of importance, but for all that he discharged his
functions with zeal and intelligence.

"Olbinett," said his master, as he appeared in answer to his summons, "we
are going to have a turn before breakfast. I hope we shall find it ready when we
come back."

He said this just as if it had been a walk to Tarbert or Loch Katrine they were
going, and the steward bowed with perfect gravity in reply.

"Are you coming with us, Major?" asked Lady Helena.

"If you command me," replied McNabbs.

"Oh!" said Lord Glenarvan; "the Major is absorbed in his cigar; "you mustn't
tear him from it. He is an inveterate smoker, Miss Mary, I can tell you. He is
always smoking, even while he sleeps."

The Major gave an assenting nod, and Lord Glenarvan and his party went
below.

McNabbs remained alone, talking to himself, as was his habit, and was soon
enveloped in still thicker clouds of smoke. He stood motionless, watching the
track of the yacht. After some minutes of this silent contemplation he turned


W


replied John, "they are as comfortable as if


round, and suddenly found himself face to face with a new comer. Certainly, if
any thing could have surprised him, this RENCONTRE would, for he had never
seen the stranger in his life before.

He was a tall, thin, withered-looking man, about forty years of age, and
resembled a long nail with a big head. His head was large and massive, his
forehead high, his chin very marked. His eyes were concealed by enormous
round spectacles, and in his look was that peculiar indecision which is common
to nyctalopes, or people who have a peculiar construction of the eye, which
makes the sight imperfect in the day and better at night. It was evident from his
physiognomy that he was a lively, intelligent man; he had not the crabbed
expression of those grave individuals who never laugh on principle, and cover
their emptiness with a mask of seriousness. He looked far from that. His
careless, good-humored air, and easy, unceremonious manners, showed plainly
that he knew how to take men and things on their bright side. But though he had
not yet opened his mouth, he gave one the impression of being a great talker, and
moreover, one of those absent folks who neither see though they are looking, nor
hear though they are listening. He wore a traveling cap, and strong, low, yellow
boots with leather gaiters. His pantaloons and jacket were of brown velvet, and
their innumerable pockets were stuffed with note-books, memorandum-books,
account-books, pocket-books, and a thousand other things equally cumbersome
and useless, not to mention a telescope in addition, which he carried in a
shoulder-belt.

The stranger's excitement was a strong contrast to the Major's placidity. He
walked round McNabbs, looking at him and questioning him with his eyes
without eliciting one remark from the imperturbable Scotchman, or awakening
his curiosity in the least, to know where he came from, and where he was going,
and how he had got on board the DUNCAN.

Finding all his efforts baffled by the Major's indifference, the mysterious
passenger seized his telescope, drew it out to its fullest extent, about four feet,
and began gazing at the horizon, standing motionless with his legs wide apart.
His examination lasted some few minutes, and then he lowered the glass, set it
up on deck, and leaned on it as if it had been a walking-stick. Of course, his
weight shut up the instrument immediately by pushing the different parts one
into the other, and so suddenly, that he fell full length on deck, and lay sprawling
at the foot of the mainmast.

Any one else but the Major would have smiled, at least, at such a ludicrous
sight; but McNabbs never moved a muscle of his face.

This was too much for the stranger, and he called out, with an unmistakably
foreign accent:


"Steward!"

He waited a minute, but nobody appeared, and he called again, still louder,
"Steward!"

Mr. Olbinett chanced to be passing that minute on his way from the galley,
and what was his astonishment at hearing himself addressed like this by a lanky
individual of whom he had no knowledge whatever.

"Where can he have come from? Who is he?" he thought to himself. "He can
not possibly be one of Lord Glenarvan's friends?"

However, he went up on the poop, and approached the unknown personage,
who accosted him with the inquiry, "Are you the steward of this vessel? "

"Yes, sir," replied Olbinett; "but I have not the honor of--"

"I am the passenger in cabin Number 6."

"Number 6!" repeated the steward.

"Certainly; and your name, what is it?"

"Olbinett."

"Well, Olbinett, my friend, we must think of breakfast, and that pretty
quickly. It is thirty-six hours since I have had anything to eat, or rather thirty-six
hours that I have been asleep-- pardonable enough in a man who came all the
way, without stopping, from Paris to Glasgow. What is the breakfast hour?"

"Nine o'clock," replied Olbinett, mechanically.

The stranger tried to pull out his watch to see the time; but it was not till he
had rummaged through the ninth pocket that he found it.

"Ah, well," he said, "it is only eight o'clock at present. Fetch me a glass of
sherry and a biscuit while I am waiting, for I am actually falling through sheer
inanition."

Olbinett heard him without understanding what he meant for the voluble
stranger kept on talking incessantly, flying from one subject to another.

"The captain? Isn't the captain up yet? And the chief officer? What is he
doing? Is he asleep still? It is fine weather, fortunately, and the wind is favorable,
and the ship goes all alone."

Just at that moment John Mangles appeared at the top of the stairs.

"Here is the captain!" said Olbinett.

"Ah! delighted, Captain Burton, delighted to make your acquaintance,"
exclaimed the unknown.

John Mangles stood stupefied, as much at seeing the stranger on board as at
hearing himself called "Captain Burton."

But the new comer went on in the most affable manner.

"Allow me to shake hands with you, sir; and if I did not do so yesterday
evening, it was only because I did not wish to be troublesome when you were


starting. But to-day, captain, it gives me great pleasure to begin my intercourse
with you."

John Mangles opened his eyes as wide as possible, and stood staring at
Olbinett and the stranger alternately.

But without waiting for a reply, the rattling fellow continued:

"Now the introduction is made, my dear captain, we are old friends. Let's
have a little talk, and tell me how you like the SCOTIA?"

"What do you mean by the SCOTIA?" put in John Mangles at last.

"By the SCOTIA? Why, the ship we're on, of course--a good ship that has
been commended to me, not only for its physical qualities, but also for the moral
qualities of its commander, the brave Captain Burton. You will be some relation
of the famous African traveler of that name. A daring man he was, sir. I offer you
my congratulations."

"Sir," interrupted John. "I am not only no relation of Burton the great
traveler, but Iam not even Captain Burton."

V. ITV Verne

"Ah, is that so? It is Mr. Burdness, the chief officer, that I am talking to at
present."

"Mr. Burdness!" repeated John Mangles, beginning to suspect how the matter
stood. Only he asked himself whether the man was mad, or some heedless rattle
pate? He was beginning to explain the case in a categorical manner, when Lord
Glenarvan and his party came up on the poop. The stranger caught sight of them
directly, and exclaimed:

"Ah! the passengers, the passengers! I hope you are going to introduce me to
them, Mr. Burdness!"

But he could not wait for any one's intervention, and going up to them with
perfect ease and grace, said, bowing to Miss Grant, "Madame;" then to Lady
Helena, with another bow, "Miss;" and to Lord Glenarvan, "Sir."

Here John Mangles interrupted him, and said, "Lord Glenarvan."

"My Lord," continued the unknown, "I beg pardon for presenting myself to
you, but at sea it is well to relax the strict rules of etiquette a little. I hope we
shall soon become acquainted with each other, and that the company of these
ladies will make our voyage in the SCOTIA appear as short as agreeable."

Lady Helena and Miss Grant were too astonished to be able to utter a single
word. The presence of this intruder on the poop of the DUNCAN was perfectly
inexplicable.

Lord Glenarvan was more collected, and said, "Sir, to whom have I the honor
of speaking?"

"To Jacques Eliacin Francois Marie Paganel, Secretary of the Geographical


Society of Paris, Corresponding Member of the Societies of Berlin, Bombay,
Darmstadt, Leipsic, London, St. Petersburg, Vienna, and New York; Honorary
Member of the Royal Geographical and Ethnographical Institute of the East
Indies; who, after having spent twenty years of his life in geographical work in
the study, wishes to see active service, and is on his way to India to gain for the
science what information he can by following up the footsteps of great
travelers."


CHAPTER VII JACQUES PAGANEL IS
UNDECEIVED


THE Secretary of the Geographical Society was evidently an amiable
personage, for all this was said in a most charming manner. Lord Glenarvan
knew quite well who he was now, for he had often heard Paganel spoken of, and
was aware of his merits. His geographical works, his papers on modern
discoveries, inserted in the reports of the Society, and his world-wide
correspondence, gave him a most distinguished place among the LITERATI of
France.

Lord Glenarvan could not but welcome such a guest, and shook hands
cordially.

"And now that our introductions are over," he added, "you will allow me,
Monsieur Paganel, to ask you a question?"

"Twenty, my Lord, " replied Paganel; "it will always be a pleasure to
converse with you."

"Was it last evening that you came on board this vessel?"

"Yes, my Lord, about 8 o'clock. I jumped into a cab at the Caledonian
Railway, and from the cab into the SCOTIA, where I had booked my cabin
before I left Paris. It was a dark night, and I saw no one on board, so I found
cabin No. 6, and went to my berth immediately, for I had heard that the best way
to prevent sea-sickness is to go to bed as soon as you Start, and not to stir for the
first few days; and, moreover, I had been traveling for thirty hours. So I tucked
myself in, and slept conscientiously, I assure you, for thirty-six hours."

Paganel's listeners understood the whole mystery, now, of his presence on the
DUNCAN. The French traveler had mistaken his vessel, and gone on board
while the crew were attending the service at St. Mungo's. All was explained. But
what would the learned geographer say, when he heard the name and destination
of the ship, in which he had taken passage?

"Then it is Calcutta, M. Paganel, that you have chosen as your point of
departure on your travels?"

"Yes, my Lord, to see India has been a cherished purpose with me all my life.
It will be the realization of my fondest dreams, to find myself in the country of
elephants and Thugs."

"Then it would be by no means a matter of indifference to you, to visit
another country instead."

"No, my Lord; indeed it would be very disagreeable, for I have letters from


Lord Somerset, the Governor-General, and also a commission to execute for the
Geographical Society."

"Ah, you have a commission."

"Yes, I have to attempt a curious and important journey, the plan of which
has been drawn up by my learned friend and colleague, M. Vivien de Saint
Martin. I am to pursue the track of the Schlaginweit Brothers; and Colonels
Waugh and Webb, and Hodgson; and Huc and Gabet, the missionaries; and
Moorecroft and M. Jules Remy, and so many celebrated travelers. I mean to try
and succeed where Krick, the missionary so unfortunately failed in 1846; in a
word, I want to follow the course of the river Yarou-Dzangbo-Tchou, which
waters Thibet for a distance of 1500 kilometres, flowing along the northern base
of the Himalayas, and to find out at last whether this river does not join itself to
the Brahmapoutre in the northeast of As-sam. The gold medal, my Lord, is
promised to the traveler who will succeed in ascertaining a fact which is one of
the greatest DESIDERATA to the geography of India."

Paganel was magnificent. He spoke with superb animation, soaring away on
the wings of imagination. It would have been as impossible to stop him as to
stop the Rhine at the Falls of Schaffhausen.

"Monsieur Jacques Paganel," said Lord Glenarvan, after a brief pause, "that
would certainly be a grand achievement, and you would confer a great boon on
science, but I should not like to allow you to be laboring under a mistake any
longer, and I must tell you, therefore, that for the present at least, you must give
up the pleasure of a visit to India."

"Give it up. And why?"

"Because you are turning your back on the Indian peninsula."

"What! Captain Burton."

"I am not Captain Burton," said John Mangles.

"But the SCOTIA."

"This vessel is not the SCOTIA."

It would be impossible to depict the astonishment of Paganel. He stared first
at one and then at another in the utmost bewilderment.

Lord Glenarvan was perfectly grave, and Lady Helena and Mary showed
their sympathy for his vexation by their looks. As for John Mangles, he could
not suppress a smile; but the Major appeared as unconcerned as usual. At last the
poor fellow shrugged his shoulders, pushed down his spectacles over his nose
and said:

"You are joking."

But just at that very moment his eye fell on the wheel of the ship, and he saw
the two words on it: Duncan. Glasgow.


"The DUNCAN! the DUNCAN!" he exclaimed, with a cry of despair, and
forthwith rushed down the stairs, and away to his cabin.

As soon as the unfortunate SAVANT had disappeared, every one, except the
Major, broke out into such peals of laughter that the sound reached the ears of
the sailors in the forecastle. To mistake a railway or to take the train to
Edinburgh when you want to go to Dumbarton might happen; but to mistake a
ship and be sailing for Chili when you meant to go to India-- that is a blunder
indeed!

"However," said Lord Glenarvan, "I am not much astonished at it in Paganel.
He is quite famous for such misadventures. One day he published a celebrated
map of America, and put Japan in it! But for all that, he is distinguished for his
learning, and he is one of the best geographers in France."

"But what shall we do with the poor gentleman?" said Lady Helena; "we
can't take him with us to Patagonia."

"Why not?" replied McNabbs, gravely. "We are not responsible for his
heedless mistakes. Suppose he were in a railway train, would they stop it for
him?"

"No, but he would get out at the first station."

"Well, that is just what he can do here, too, if he likes; he can disembark at
the first place where we touch."

While they were talking, Paganel came up again on the poop, looking very
woebegone and crestfallen. He had been making inquiry about his luggage, to
assure himself that it was all on board, and kept repeating incessantly the
unlucky words, "The DUNCAN! the DUNCAN!"

He could find no others in his vocabulary. He paced restlessly up and down;
sometimes stopping to examine the sails, or gaze inquiringly over the wide
ocean, at the far horizon. At length he accosted Lord Glenarvan once more, and
said--

"And this DUNCAN--where is she going?"

"To America, Monsieur Paganel," was the reply.

"And to what particular part?"

"To Concepcion."

"To Chili! to Chili!" cried the unfortunate geographer. "And my mission to
India. But what will M. de Quatre-fages, the President of the Central
Commission, say? And M. d' Avezac? And M. Cortanbert? And M. Vivien de
Saint Martin? How shall I show my face at the SEANCES of the Society?"

"Come, Monsieur Paganel, don't despair. It can all be managed; you will only
have to put up with a little delay, which is relatively of not much importance.
The Yarou-Dzangbo-Tchou will wait for you still in the mountains of Thibet. We


shall soon put in at Madeira, and you will get a ship there to take you back to
Europe."

"Thanks, my Lord. I suppose I must resign myself to it; but people will say it
is a most extraordinary adventure, and it is only to me such things happen. And
then, too, there is a cabin taken for me on board the SCOTIA."

"Oh, as to the SCOTIA, you'll have to give that up meantime."

"But the DUNCAN is a pleasure yacht, is it not?" began Paganel again, after
a fresh examination of the vessel.

"Yes, sir," said John Mangles, "and belongs to Lord Glenarvan."

"Who begs you will draw freely on his hospitality," said Lord Glenarvan.

"A thousand thanks, my Lord! I deeply feel your courtesy, but allow me to
make one observation: India is a fine country, and can offer many a surprising
marvel to travelers. These ladies, I suppose, have never seen it. Well now, the
man at the helm has only to give a turn at the wheel, and the DUNCAN will sail
as easily to Calcutta as to Concepcion; and since it is only a pleasure trip that
you are--"

His proposal was met by such grave, disapproving shakes of the head, that he
stopped short before the sentence was completed; and Lady Helena said:

"Monsieur Paganel, if we were only on a pleasure trip, I should reply, "Let us
all go to India together,’ and I am sure Lord Glenarvan would not object; but the
DUNCAN is going to bring back shipwrecked mariners who were cast away on
the shores of Patagonia, and we could not alter such a destination."

The Frenchman was soon put in possession of all the circumstances of the
case. He was no unmoved auditor, and when he heard of Lady Helena's generous
proposition, he could not help saying,

"Madame, permit me to express my admiration of your conduct throughout--
my unreserved admiration. Let your yacht continue her course. I should reproach
myself were I to cause a single day's delay."

"Will you join us in our search, then?" asked Lady Helena.

"It is impossible, madame. I must fulfill my mission. I shall disembark at the
first place you touch at, wherever it may be."

"That will be Madeira," said John Mangles.

"Madeira be it then. I shall only be 180 leagues from Lisbon, and I shall wait
there for some means of transport."

"Very well, Monsieur Paganel, it shall be as you wish; and, for my own part,
I am very glad to be able to offer you, meantime, a few days' hospitality. I only
hope you will not find our company too dull."


"Oh, my Lord," exclaimed Paganel, "I am but too happy to have made a
mistake which has turned out so agreeably. Still, it is a very ridiculous plight for
a man to be in, to find himself sailing to America when he set out to go to the
East Indies!"

But in spite of this melancholy reflection, the Frenchman submitted
gracefully to the compulsory delay. He made himself amiable and merry, and
even diverting, and enchanted the ladies with his good humor. Before the end of
the day he was friends with everybody. At his request, the famous document was
brought out. He studied it carefully and minutely for a long time, and finally
declared his opinion that no other interpretation of it was possible. Mary Grant
and her brother inspired him with the most lively interest. He gave them great
hope; indeed, the young girl could not help smiling at his sanguine prediction of
success, and this odd way of foreseeing future events. But for his mission he
would have made one of the search party for Captain Grant, undoubtedly.

As for Lady Helena, when he heard that she was a daughter of William
Tuffnell, there was a perfect explosion of admiring epithets. He had known her
father, and what letters had passed between them when William Tuffnell was a
corresponding member of the Society! It was he himself that had introduced him
and M. Malte Brun. What a rencontre this was, and what a pleasure to travel
with the daughter of Tuffnell.

He wound up by asking permission to kiss her, which Lady Helena granted,
though it was, perhaps, a little improper.


CHAPTER Vill THE GEOGRAPHER'S
RESOLUTION


MEANTIME the yacht, favored by the currents from the north of Africa, was
making rapid progress toward the equator. On the 30th of August they sighted
the Madeira group of islands, and Glenarvan, true to his promise, offered to put
in there, and land his new guest.

But Paganel said:

"My dear Lord, I won't stand on ceremony with you. Tell me, did you intend
to stop at Madeira before I came on board?"

"No," replied Glenarvan.

"Well, then, allow me to profit by my unlucky mistake. Madeira is an island
too well known to be of much interest now to a geographer. Every thing about
this group has been said and written already. Besides, it is completely going
down as far as wine growing is concerned. Just imagine no vines to speak of
being in Madeira! In 1813, 22,000 pipes of wine were made there, and in 1845
the number fell to 2,669. It is a grievous spectacle! If it is all the same to you, we
might go on to the Canary Isles instead."

"Certainly. It will not the least interfere with our route."

"I know it will not, my dear Lord. In the Canary Islands, you see, there are
three groups to study, besides the Peak of Teneriffe, which I always wished to
visit. This is an opportunity, and I should like to avail myself of it, and make the
ascent of the famous mountain while I am waiting for a ship to take me back to
Europe.”

"As you please, my dear Paganel," said Lord Glenarvan, though he could not
help smiling; and no wonder, for these islands are scarcely 250 miles from
Madeira, a trifling distance for such a quick sailer as the DUNCAN.

Next day, about 2 P. M., John Mangles and Paganel were walking on the
poop. The Frenchman was assailing his companion with all sorts of questions
about Chili, when all at once the captain interrupted him, and pointing toward
the southern horizon, said:

"Monsieur Paganel?"

"Yes, my dear Captain."

"Be so good as to look in this direction. Don't you see anything?"

"Nothing."

"You're not looking in the right place. It is not on the horizon, but above it in
the clouds."


"In the clouds? I might well not see."

"There, there, by the upper end of the bowsprit."

"T see nothing."

"Then you don't want to see. Anyway, though we are forty miles off, yet I tell
you the Peak of Teneriffe is quite visible yonder above the horizon."

But whether Paganel could not or would not see it then, two hours later he
was forced to yield to ocular evidence or own himself blind.

"You do see it at last, then,” said John Mangles.

"Yes, yes, distinctly," replied Paganel, adding in a disdainful tone, "and that's
what they call the Peak of Teneriffe!"

"That's the Peak."

"Tt doesn't look much of a height."

"It is 11,000 feet, though, above the level of the sea."

"That is not equal to Mont Blanc."

"Likely enough, but when you come to ascend it, probably you'll think it
high enough."

"Oh, ascend it! ascend it, my dear captain! What would be the good after
Humboldt and Bonplan? That Humboldt was a great genius. He made the ascent
of this mountain, and has given a description of it which leaves nothing unsaid.
He tells us that it comprises five different zones--the zone of the vines, the zone
of the laurels, the zone of the pines, the zone of the Alpine heaths, and, lastly, the
zone of sterility. He set his foot on the very summit, and found that there was not
even room enough to sit down. The view from the summit was very extensive,
stretching over an area equal to Spain. Then he went right down into the
volcano, and examined the extinct crater. What could I do, I should like you to
tell me, after that great man?"

"Well, certainly, there isn't much left to glean. That is vexing, too, for you
would find it dull work waiting for a vessel in the Peak of Teneriffe."

"But, I say, Mangles, my dear fellow, are there no ports in the Cape Verde
Islands that we might touch at?"

"Oh, yes, nothing would be easier than putting you off at Villa Praya."

"And then I should have one advantage, which is by no means
inconsiderable--I should find fellow-countrymen at Senegal, and that is not far
away from those islands. I am quite aware that the group is said to be devoid of
much interest, and wild, and unhealthy; but everything is curious in the eyes of a
geographer. Seeing is a science. There are people who do not know how to use
their eyes, and who travel about with as much intelligence as a shell-fish. But
that's not in my line, I assure you."

"Please yourself, Monsieur Paganel. I have no doubt geographical science


will be a gainer by your sojourn in the Cape Verde Islands. We must go in there
anyhow for coal, so your disembarkation will not occasion the least delay."

The captain gave immediate orders for the yacht to continue her route,
steering to the west of the Canary group, and leaving Teneriffe on her larboard.
She made rapid progress, and passed the Tropic of Cancer on the second of
September at 5 A. M.

The weather now began to change, and the atmosphere became damp and
heavy. It was the rainy season, "le tempo das aguas," as the Spanish call it, a
trying season to travelers, but useful to the inhabitants of the African Islands,
who lack trees and consequently water. The rough weather prevented the
passengers from going on deck, but did not make the conversation any less
animated in the saloon.

On the 3d of September Paganel began to collect his luggage to go on shore.
The DUNCAN was already steaming among the Islands. She passed Sal, a
complete tomb of sand lying barren and desolate, and went on among the vast
coral reefs and athwart the Isle of St. Jacques, with its long chain of basaltic
mountains, till she entered the port of Villa Praya and anchored in eight fathoms
of water before the town. The weather was frightful, and the surf excessively
violent, though the bay was sheltered from the sea winds. The rain fell in such
torrents that the town was scarcely visible through it. It rose on a plain in the
form of a terrace, buttressed on volcanic rocks three hundred feet high. The
appearance of the island through the thick veil of rain was mournful in the
extreme.

Lady Helena could not go on shore as she had purposed; indeed, even
coaling was a difficult business, and the passengers had to content themselves
below the poop as best they might. Naturally enough, the main topic of
conversation was the weather. Everybody had something to say about it except
the Major, who surveyed the universal deluge with the utmost indifference.
Paganel walked up and down shaking his head.

"It is clear enough, Paganel," said Lord Glenarvan, "that the elements are
against you.”

"T'll be even with them for all that," replied the Frenchman.

"You could not face rain like that, Monsieur Paganel," said Lady Helena.

"Oh, quite well, madam, as far as I myself am concerned. It is for my
luggage and instruments that I am afraid. Everything will be ruined."

"The disembarking is the worst part of the business. Once at Villa Praya you
might manage to find pretty good quarters. They wouldn't be over clean, and you
might find the monkeys and pigs not always the most agreeable companions. But
travelers are not too particular, and, moreover, in seven or eight months you


would get a ship, I dare say, to take you back to Europe."

"Seven or eight months!" exclaimed Paganel.

"At least. The Cape Verde Islands are not much frequented by ships during
the rainy season. But you can employ your time usefully. This archipelago is still
but little known."

"You can go up the large rivers," suggested Lady Helena.

"There are none, madam."

"Well, then, the small ones."

"There are none, madam."

"The running brooks, then."

"There are no brooks, either."

"You can console yourself with the forests if that's the case," put in the
Major.

"You can't make forests without trees, and there are no trees."

"A charming country!" said the Major.

"Comfort yourself, my dear Paganel, you'll have the mountains at any rate,"
said Glenarvan.

"Oh, they are neither lofty nor interesting, my Lord, and, beside, they have
been described already."

"Already!" said Lord Glenarvan.

"Yes, that is always my luck. At the Canary Islands, I saw myself anticipated
by Humboldt, and here by M. Charles Sainte-Claire Deville, a geologist."

"Impossible!"

"It is too true," replied Paganel, in a doleful voice. "Monsieur Deville was on
board the government corvette, La Decidee, when she touched at the Cape Verde
Islands, and he explored the most interesting of the group, and went to the top of
the volcano in Isle Fogo. What is left for me to do after him?"

"It is really a great pity," said Helena. "What will become of you, Monsieur
Paganel?"

Paganel remained silent.

"You would certainly have done much better to have landed at Madeira, even
though there had been no wine," said Glenarvan.

Still the learned secretary was silent.

"I should wait," said the Major, just as if he had said, "I should not wait."

Paganel spoke again at length, and said:

"My dear Glenarvan, where do you mean to touch next?"

"At Concepcion."

"Plague it! That is a long way out of the road to India."

"Not it! From the moment you pass Cape Horn, you are getting nearer to it."


"T doubt it much."

"Beside," resumed Lord Glenarvan, with perfect gravity, "when people are
going to the Indies it doesn't matter much whether it is to the East or West."

"What! it does not matter much?"

"Without taking into account the fact that the inhabitants of the Pampas in
Patagonia are as much Indians as the natives of the Punjaub."

"Well done, my Lord. That's a reason that would never have entered my
head!"

"And then, my dear Paganel, you can gain the gold medal anyway. There is
as much to be done, and sought, and investigated, and discovered in the
Cordilleras as in the mountains of Thibet."

"But the course of the Yarou-Dzangbo-Tchou--what about that?"

"Go up the Rio Colorado instead. It is a river but little known, and its course
on the map is marked out too much according to the fancy of geographers."

"I know it is, my dear Lord; they have made grave mistakes. Oh, I make no
question that the Geographical Society would have sent me to Patagonia as soon
as to India, if I had sent in a request to that effect. But I never thought of it."

"Just like you."

"Come, Monsieur Paganel, will you go with us?" asked Lady Helena, in her
most winning tone.

"Madam, my mission?"

"We shall pass through the Straits of Magellan, I must tell you," said Lord
Glenarvan.

"My Lord, you are a tempter."

"Let me add, that we shall visit Port Famine."

"Port Famine!" exclaimed the Frenchman, besieged on all sides. "That
famous port in French annals!"

"Think, too, Monsieur Paganel, that by taking part in our enterprise, you will
be linking France with Scotland."

"Undoubtedly."

"A geographer would be of much use to our expedition, and what can be
nobler than to bring science to the service of humanity?"

"That's well said, madam."

"Take my advice, then, and yield to chance, or rather providence. Follow our
example. It was providence that sent us the document, and we set out in
consequence. The same providence brought you on board the DUNCAN. Don't
leave her."

"Shall I say yes, my good friends? Come, now, tell me, you want me very
much to stay, don't you?" said Paganel.


"And you're dying to stay, now, aren't you, Paganel?" returned Glenarvan.

"That's about it," confessed the learned geographer; "but I was afraid it
would be inconsiderate."

CHAPTER IX THROUGH THE STRAITS OF MAGELLAN

THE joy on board was universal when Paganel's resolution was made
known.

Little Robert flung himself on his neck in such tumultuous delight that he
nearly threw the worthy secretary down, and made him say, "Rude petit
bonhomme. I'll teach him geography."

Robert bade fair to be an accomplished gentleman some day, for John
Mangles was to make a sailor of him, and the Major was to teach him sang-froid,
and Glenarvan and Lady Helena were to instil into him courage and goodness
and generosity, while Mary was to inspire him with gratitude toward such
instructors.

The DUNCAN soon finished taking in coal, and turned her back on the
dismal region. She fell in before long with the current from the coast of Brazil,
and on the 7th of September entered the Southern hemisphere.

So far, then, the voyage had been made without difficulty. Everybody was
full of hope, for in this search for Captain Grant, each day seemed to increase the
probability of finding him. The captain was among the most confident on board,
but his confidence mainly arose from the longing desire he had to see Miss Mary
happy. He was smitten with quite a peculiar interest for this young girl, and
managed to conceal his sentiments so well that everyone on board saw it except
himself and Mary Grant.

As for the learned geographer, he was probably the happiest man in all the
southern hemisphere. He spent the whole day in studying maps, which were
spread out on the saloon table, to the great annoyance of M. Olbinett, who could
never get the cloth laid for meals, without disputes on the subject. But all the
passengers took his part except the Major, who was perfectly indifferent about
geographical questions, especially at dinner-time. Paganel also came across a
regular cargo of old books in the chief officer's chest. They were in a very
damaged condition, but among them he raked out a few Spanish volumes, and
determined forthwith to set to work to master the language of Cer-vantes, as no
one on board understood it, and it would be helpful in their search along the
Chilian coast. Thanks to his taste for languages, he did not despair of being able
to speak the language fluently when they arrived at Concepcion. He studied it
furiously, and kept constantly muttering heterogeneous syllables.

He spent his leisure hours in teaching young Robert, and instructed him in
the history of the country they were so rapidly approaching.


On the 25th of September, the yacht arrived off the Straits of Magellan, and
entered them without delay. This route is generally preferred by steamers on
their way to the Pacific Ocean. The exact length of the straits is 372 miles. Ships
of the largest tonnage find, throughout, sufficient depth of water, even close to
the shore, and there is a good bottom everywhere, and abundance of fresh water,
and rivers abounding in fish, and forests in game, and plenty of safe and
accessible harbors; in fact a thousand things which are lacking in Strait Lemaire
and Cape Horn, with its terrible rocks, incessantly visited by hurricane and
tempest.

For the first three or four hours--that is to say, for about sixty to eighty miles,
as far as Cape Gregory--the coast on either side was low and sandy. Jacques
Paganel would not lose a single point of view, nor a single detail of the straits. It
would scarcely take thirty-six hours to go through them, and the moving
panorama on both sides, seen in all the clearness and glory of the light of a
southern sun, was well worth the trouble of looking at and admiring. On the
Terra del Fuego side, a few wretched-looking creatures were wandering about on
the rocks, but on the other side not a solitary inhabitant was visible.

Paganel was so vexed at not being able to catch a glimpse of any
Patagonians, that his companions were quite amused at him. He would insist that
Patagonia without Patagonians was not Patagonia at all.

But Glenarvan replied:

"Patience, my worthy geographer. We shall see the Patagonians yet."

"T am not sure of it."

"But there is such a people, anyhow," said Lady Helena.

"T doubt it much, madam, since I don't see them."

"But surely the very name Patagonia, which means ‘great feet’ in Spanish,
would not have been given to imaginary beings." "Oh, the name is nothing,” said
Paganel, who was arguing simply for the sake of arguing. "And besides, to speak
the truth, we are not sure if that is their name."

"What an idea!" exclaimed Glenarvan. "Did you know that, Major?"

"No," replied McNabbs, "and wouldn't give a Scotch pound-note for the
information."

"You shall hear it, however, Major Indifferent. Though Magellan called the
natives Patagonians, the Fuegians called them Tiremenen, the Chilians
Caucalhues, the colonists of Carmen Tehuelches, the Araucans Huiliches;
Bougainville gives them the name of Chauha, and Falkner that of Tehuelhets.
The name they give themselves is Inaken. Now, tell me then, how would you
recognize them? Indeed, is it likely that a people with so many names has any
actual existence?"


"That's a queer argument, certainly," said Lady Helena.

"Well, let us admit it," said her husband, "but our friend Paganel must own
that even if there are doubts about the name of the race there is none about their
size."

"Indeed, I will never own anything so outrageous as that," replied Paganel.

"They are tall," said Glenarvan.

"T don't know that."

"Are they little, then?" asked Lady Helena.

"No one can affirm that they are."

"About the average, then?" said McNabbs.

"T don't know that either."

"That's going a little too far," said Glenarvan. "Travelers who have seen them
tell us."

"Travelers who have seen them," interrupted Paganel, "don't agree at all in
their accounts. Magellan said that his head scarcely reached to their waist."

"Well, then, that proves."

"Yes, but Drake declares that the English are taller than the tallest
Patagonian?"

"Oh, the English--that may be," replied the Major, disdainfully, "but we are
talking of the Scotch."

"Cavendish assures us that they are tall and robust," continued Paganel.
"Hawkins makes out they are giants. Lemaire and Shouten declare that they are
eleven feet high."

"These are all credible witnesses," said Glenarvan.

"Yes, quite as much as Wood, Narborough, and Falkner, who say they are of
medium stature. Again, Byron, Giraudais, Bougainville, Wallis, and Carteret,
declared that the Patagonians are six feet six inches tall."

"But what is the truth, then, among all these contradictions?" asked Lady
Helena.

"Just this, madame; the Patagonians have short legs, and a large bust; or by
way of a joke we might say that these natives are six feet high when they are
sitting, and only five when they are standing."

"Bravo! my dear geographer," said Glenarvan. "That is very well put."

"Unless the race has no existence, that would reconcile all statements,"
returned Paganel. "But here is one consolation, at all events: the Straits of
Magellan are very magnificent, even without Patagonians."

Just at this moment the DUNCAN was rounding the peninsula of Brunswick
between splendid panoramas.

Seventy miles after doubling Cape Gregory, she left on her starboard the


penitentiary of Punta Arena. The church steeple and the Chilian flag gleamed for
an instant among the trees, and then the strait wound on between huge granitic
masses which had an imposing effect. Cloud-capped mountains appeared, their
heads white with eternal snows, and their feet hid in immense forests. Toward
the southwest, Mount Tarn rose 6,500 feet high. Night came

V. IV Verne on after a long lingering twilight, the light insensibly melting
away into soft shades. These brilliant constellations began to bestud the sky, and
the Southern Cross shone out. There were numerous bays along the shore, easy
of access, but the yacht did not drop anchor in any; she continued her course
fearlessly through the luminous darkness. Presently ruins came in sight,
crumbling buildings, which the night invested with grandeur, the sad remains of
a deserted settlement, whose name will be an eternal protest against these fertile
shores and forests full of game. The DUNCAN was passing Fort Famine.

It was in that very spot that Sarmiento, a Spaniard, came in 1581, with four
hundred emigrants, to establish a colony. He founded the city of St. Philip, but
the extreme severity of winter decimated the inhabitants, and those who had
struggled through the cold died subsequently of starvation. Cavendish the
Corsair discovered the last survivor dying of hunger in the ruins.

After sailing along these deserted shores, the DUNCAN went through a
series of narrow passes, between forests of beech and ash and birch, and at
length doubled Cape Froward, still bristling with the ice of the last winter. On
the other side of the strait, in Terra del Fuego, stood Mount Sarmiento, towering
to a height of 6,000 feet, an enormous accumulation of rocks, separated by bands
of cloud, forming a sort of aerial archipelago in the sky.

It is at Cape Froward that the American continent actually terminates, for
Cape Horn is nothing but a rock sunk in the sea in latitude 52 degrees. At Cape
Momax the straits widened, and she was able to get round Narborough Isles and
advance in a more southerly direction, till at length the rock of Cape Pilares, the
extreme point of Desolation Island, came in sight, thirty-six hours after entering
the straits. Before her stem lay a broad, open, sparkling ocean, which Jacques
Paganel greeted with enthusiastic gestures, feeling kindred emotions with those
which stirred the bosom of Ferdinand de Magellan himself, when the sails of his
ship, the TRINIDAD, first bent before the breeze from the great Pacific.


CHAPTER X THE COURSE DECIDED


A WEEK after they had doubled the Cape Pilares, the DUNCAN steamed
into the bay of Talcahuano, a magnificent estuary, twelve miles long and nine
broad. The weather was splendid. From November to March the sky is always
cloudless, and a constant south wind prevails, as the coast is sheltered by the
mountain range of the Andes. In obedience to Lord Glenarvan's order, John
Mangles had sailed as near the archipelago of Chiloe as possible, and examined
all the creeks and windings of the coast, hoping to discover some traces of the
shipwreck. A broken spar, or any fragment of the vessel, would have put them in
the right track; but nothing whatever was visible, and the yacht continued her
route, till she dropped anchor at the port of Talcahuano, forty-two days from the
time she had sailed out of the fogs of the Clyde.

Glenarvan had a boat lowered immediately, and went on shore, accompanied
by Paganel. The learned geographer gladly availed himself of the opportunity of
making use of the language he had been studying so conscientiously, but to his
great amazement, found he could not make himself understood by the people. "It
is the accent I've not got," he said.

"Let us go to the Custom-house," replied Glenarvan.

They were informed on arriving there, by means of a few English words,
aided by expressive gestures, that the British Consul lived at Concepcion, an
hour's ride distant. Glenarvan found no difficulty in procuring two fleet horses,
and he and Paganel were soon within the walls of the great city, due to the
enterprising genius of Valdivia, the valiant comrade of the Pizarros.

How it was shor of its ancient splendor! Often pillaged by the natives,
burned in 1819, it lay in desolation and ruins, its walls still blackened by the
flames, scarcely numbering 8,000 inhabitants, and already eclipsed by
Talcahuano. The grass was growing in the streets, beneath the lazy feet of the
citizens, and all trade and business, indeed any description of activity, was
impossible. The notes of the mandolin resounded from every balcony, and
languishing songs floated on the breeze. Concepcion, the ancient city of brave
men, had become a village of women and children. Lord Glenarvan felt no great
desire to inquire into the causes of this decay, though Paganel tried to draw him
into a discussion on the subject. He would not delay an instant, but went straight
on to the house of Mr. Bentic, her Majesty's Consul, who received them very
courteously, and, on learning their errand, undertook to make inquiries all along
the coast.


But to the question whether a three-mast vessel, called the BRITANNIA, had
gone ashore either on the Chilian or Araucanian coast, he gave a decided
negative. No report of such an event had been made to him, or any of the other
consuls. Glenarvan, however, would not allow himself to be disheartened; he
went back to Talcahuano, and spared neither pains nor expense to make a
thorough investigation of the whole seaboard. But it was all in vain. The most
minute inquiries were fruitless, and Lord Glenarvan returned to the yacht to
report his ill success. Mary Grant and her brother could not restrain their grief.
Lady Helena did her best to comfort them by loving caresses, while Jacques
Paganel took up the document and began studying it again. He had been poring
over it for more than an hour when Glenarvan interrupted him and said:

"Paganel! I appeal to your sagacity. Have we made an erroneous
interpretation of the document? Is there anything illogical about the meaning?"

Paganel was silent, absorbed in reflection.

"Have we mistaken the place where the catastrophe occurred?" continued
Glenarvan. "Does not the name Patagonia seem apparent even to the least clear-
sighted individual?"

Paganel was still silent.

"Besides," said Glenarvan, "does not the word INDIEN prove we are right?"

"Perfectly so," replied McNabbs.

"And is it not evident, then, that at the moment of writing the words, the
shipwrecked men were expecting to be made prisoners by the Indians?"

"I take exception to that, my Lord," said Paganel; "and even if your other
conclusions are right, this, at least, seemed to me irrational."

"What do you mean?" asked Lady Helena, while all eyes were fixed on the
geographer.

"I mean this," replied Paganel, "that Captain Grant is now a prisoner among
the Indians, and I further add that the document states it unmistakably."

"Explain yourself, sir," said Mary Grant.

"Nothing is plainer, dear Mary. Instead of reading the document seront
prisonniers, read sont prisonniers, and the whole thing is clear."

"But that is impossible," replied Lord Glenarvan.

"Impossible! and why, my noble friend?" asked Paganel, smiling.

"Because the bottle could only have been thrown into the sea just when the
vessel went to pieces on the rocks, and consequently the latitude and longitude
given refer to the actual place of the shipwreck."

"There is no proof of that," replied Paganel, "and I see nothing to preclude
the supposition that the poor fellows were dragged into the interior by the
Indians, and sought to make known the place of their captivity by means of this


bottle."

"Except this fact, my dear Paganel, that there was no sea, and therefore they
could not have flung the bottle into it."

"Unless they flung it into rivers which ran into the sea," returned Paganel.

This reply was so unexpected, and yet so admissible, that it made them all
completely silent for a minute, though their beaming eyes betrayed the
rekindling of hope in their hearts. Lady Helena was the first to speak.

"What an idea!" she exclaimed.

"And what a good idea," was Paganel's naive rejoinder to her exclamation.

"What would you advise, then?" said Glenarvan.

"My advice is to follow the 37th parallel from the point where it touches the
American continent to where it dips into the Atlantic, without deviating from it
half a degree, and possibly in some part of its course we shall fall in with the
shipwrecked party."

"There is a poor chance of that," said the Major.

"Poor as it is," returned Paganel, "we ought not to lose it. If I am right in my
conjecture, that the bottle has been carried into the sea on the bosom of some
river, we cannot fail to find the track of the prisoners. You can easily convince
yourselves of this by looking at this map of the country."

He unrolled a map of Chili and the Argentine provinces as he spoke, and
spread it out on the table.

"Just follow me for a moment," he said, "across the American continent. Let
us make a stride across the narrow strip of Chili, and over the Cordilleras of the
Andes, and get into the heart of the Pampas. Shall we find any lack of rivers and
streams and currents? No, for here are the Rio Negro and Rio Colorado, and
their tributaries intersected by the 37th parallel, and any of them might have
carried the bottle on its waters. Then, perhaps, in the midst of a tribe in some
Indian settlement on the shores of these almost unknown rivers, those whom I
may call my friends await some providential intervention. Ought we to
disappoint their hopes? Do you not all agree with me that it is our duty to go
along the line my finger is pointing out at this moment on the map, and if after
all we find I have been mistaken, still to keep straight on and follow the 37th
parallel till we find those we seek, if even we go right round the world?"

His generous enthusiasm so touched his auditors that, involuntarily, they rose
to their feet and grasped his hands, while Robert exclaimed as he devoured the
map with his eyes:

"Yes, my father is there!"

"And where he is," replied Glenarvan, "we'll manage to go, my boy, and find
him. Nothing can be more logical than Paganel's theory, and we must follow the


course he points out without the least hesitation. Captain Grant may have fallen
into the hands of a numerous tribe, or his captors may be but a handful. In the
latter case we shall carry him off at once, but in the event of the former, after we
have reconnoitered the situation, we must go back to the DUNCAN on the
eastern coast and get to Buenos Ayres, where we can soon organize a detachment
of men, with Major McNabbs at their head, strong enough to tackle all the
Indians in the Argentine provinces."

"That's capital, my Lord," said John Mangles, "and I may add, that there is
no danger whatever crossing the continent."

"Monsieur Paganel," asked Lady Helena, "you have no fear then that if the
poor fellows have fallen into the hands of the Indians their lives at least have
been spared."

"What a question? Why, madam, the Indians are not anthropophagi! Far from
it. One of my own countrymen, M. Guinnard, associated with me in the
Geographical Society, was three years a prisoner among the Indians in the
Pampas. He had to endure sufferings and ill-treatment, but came off victorious at
last. A European is a useful being in these countries. The Indians know his value,
and take care of him as if he were some costly animal."

"There is not the least room then for hesitation," said Lord Glenarvan. "Go
we must, and as soon as possible. What route must we take?"

"One that is both easy and agreeable," replied Paganel. "Rather mountainous
at first, and then sloping gently down the eastern side of the Andes into a smooth
plain, turfed and graveled quite like a garden."

"Let us see the map?" said the Major.

"Here it is, my dear McNabbs. We shall go through the capital of Araucania,
and cut the Cordilleras by the pass of Antuco, leaving the volcano on the south,
and gliding gently down the mountain sides, past the Neuquem and the Rio
Colorado on to the Pampas, till we reach the Sierra Tapalquen, from whence we
shall see the frontier of the province of Buenos Ayres. These we shall pass by,
and cross over the Sierra Tandil, pursuing our search to the very shores of the
Atlantic, as far as Point Medano."

Paganel went through this programme of the expedition without so much as a
glance at the map. He was so posted up in the travels of Frezier, Molina,
Humboldt, Miers, and Orbigny, that he had the geographical nomenclature at his
fingers’ ends, and could trust implicitly to his never-failing memory.

"You see then, friend," he added, "that it is a straight course. In thirty days
we Shall have gone over it, and gained the eastern side before the DUNCAN,
however little she may be delayed by the westerly winds."

"Then the DUNCAN is to cruise between Corrientes and Cape Saint


Antonie," said John Mangles.

"Just so."

"And how is the expedition to be organized?" asked Glenarvan.

"As simply as possible. All there is to be done is to reconnoiter the situation
of Captain Grant and not to come to gunshot with the Indians. I think that Lord
Glenarvan, our natural leader; the Major, who would not yield his place to
anybody; and your humble servant, Jacques Paganel."”

"And me," interrupted Robert.

"Robert, Robert!" exclaimed Mary.

"And why not?" returned Paganel. "Travels form the youthful mind. Yes,
Robert, we four and three of the sailors."

"And does your Lordship mean to pass me by?" said John Mangles,
addressing his master.

"My dear John," replied Glenarvan, "we leave passengers on board, those
dearer to us than life, and who is to watch over them but the devoted captain?"

"Then we can't accompany you?" said Lady Helena, while a shade of sadness
beclouded her eyes.

"My dear Helena, the journey will so soon be accomplished that it will be but
a brief separation, and--"

"Yes, dear, I understand, it is all right; and I do hope you may succeed."

"Besides, you can hardly call it a journey," added Paganel.

"What is it, then?"

"It is just making a flying passage across the continent, the way a good man
goes through the world, doing all the good he can. Transire beneficiendo--that is
our motto."

This ended the discussion, if a conversation can be so called, where all who
take part in it are of the same opinion. Preparations commenced the same day,
but as secretly as possible to prevent the Indians getting scent of it.

The day of departure was fixed for the 14th of October. The sailors were all
so eager to join the expedition that Glenarvan found the only way to prevent
jealousy among them was to draw lots who should go. This was accordingly
done, and fortune favored the chief officer, Tom Austin, Wilson, a strong, jovial
young fellow, and Mulrady, so good a boxer that he might have entered the lists
with Tom Sayers himself.

Glenarvan displayed the greatest activity about the preparations, for he was
anxious to be ready by the appointed day. John Mangles was equally busy in
coaling the vessel, that she might weigh anchor at the same time. There was
quite a rivalry between Glenarvan and the young captain about getting first to
the Argentine coast.


Both were ready on the 14th. The whole search party assembled in the saloon
to bid farewell to those who remained behind. The DUNCAN was just about to
get under way, and already the vibration of the screw began to agitate the limpid
waters of Talcahuano, Glenarvan, Paganel, McNabbs, Robert Grant, Tom Austin,
Wilson, and Mulrady, stood armed with carbines and Colt's revolvers. Guides
and mules awaited them at the landing stairs of the harbor.

"It is time," said Lord Glenarvan at last.

"Go then, dear Edward," said Lady Helena, restraining her emotion.

Lord Glenarvan clasped her closely to his breast for an instant, and then
turned away, while Robert flung his arms round Mary's neck.

"And now, friends," said Paganel, "let's have one good hearty shake of the
hand all round, to last us till we get to the shores of the Atlantic."

This was not much to ask, but he certainly got strong enough grips to go
some way towards satisfying his desire.

All went on deck now, and the seven explorers left the vessel. They were
soon on the quay, and as the yacht turned round to pursue her course, she came
so near where they stood, that Lady Helena could exchange farewells once more.

"God help you!" she called out.

"Heaven will help us, madam," shouted Paganel, in reply, "for you may be
sure we'll help ourselves."

"Go on," sung out the captain to his engineer.

At the same moment Lord Glenarvan gave the signal to start, and away went
the mules along the coast, while the DUNCAN steamed out at full speed toward
the broad ocean.


CHAPTER XI TRAVELING IN CHILI


THE native troops organized by Lord Glenarvan consisted of three men and
a boy. The captain of the muleteers was an Englishman, who had become
naturalized through twenty years' residence in the country. He made a livelihood
by letting out mules to travelers, and leading them over the difficult passes of the
Cordilleras, after which he gave them in charge of aBAQUEANO, or Argentine
guide, to whom the route through the Pampas was perfectly familiar. This
Englishman had not so far forgotten his mother tongue among mules and Indians
that he could not converse with his countrymen, and a lucky thing it was for
them, as Lord Glenarvan found it far easier to give orders than to see them
executed, Paganel was still unsuccessful in making himself understood.

The CATAPEZ, as he was called in Chilian, had two natives called PEONS,
and a boy about twelve years of age under him. The PEONS took care of the
baggage mules, and the boy led the MADRINA, a young mare adorned with
rattle and bells, which walked in front, followed by ten mules. The travelers rode
seven of these, and the CATAPEZ another. The remaining two carried provisions
and a few bales of goods, intended to secure the goodwill of the Caciques of the
plain. The PEONS walked, according to their usual habit.

Every arrangement had been made to insure safety and speed, for crossing
the Andes is something more than an ordinary journey. It could not be
accomplished without the help of the hardy mules of the far-famed Argentine
breed. Those reared in the country are much superior to their progenitors. They
are not particular about their food, and only drink once a day, and they can go
with ease ten leagues in eight hours.

There are no inns along this road from one ocean to another. The only viands
on which travelers can regale themselves are dried meat, rice seasoned with
pimento, and such game as may be shot en route. The torrents provide them with
water in the mountains, and the rivulets in the plains, which they improve by the
addition of a few drops of rum, and each man carries a supply of this in a
bullock's horn, called CHIFFLE. They have to be careful, however, not to
indulge too freely in alcoholic drinks, as the climate itself has a peculiarly
exhilarating effect on the nervous system. As for bedding, it is all contained in
the saddle used by the natives, called RECADO. This saddle is made of
sheepskins, tanned on one side and woolly on the other, fastened by gorgeous
embroidered straps. Wrapped in these warm coverings a traveler may sleep
soundly, and brave exposure to the damp nights.


Glenarvan, an experienced traveler, who knew how to adapt himself to the
customs of other countries, adopted the Chilian costume for himself and his
whole party. Paganel and Robert, both alike children, though of different growth,
were wild with delight as they inserted their heads in the national PONCHO, an
immense plaid with a hole in center, and their legs in high leather boots. The
mules were richly caparisoned, with the Arab bit in their mouths, and long reins
of plaited leather, which served as a whip; the headstall of the bridle was
decorated with metal ornaments, and the ALFORJAS, double sacks of gay
colored linen, containing the day's provisions. Paganel, DISTRAIT as usual, was
flung several times before he succeeded in bestriding his good steed, but once in
the saddle, his inseparable telescope on his shoulder-belt, he held on well
enough, keeping his feet fast in the stirrups, and trusting entirely to the sagacity
of his beast. As for Robert, his first attempt at mounting was successful, and
proved that he had the making in him of an excellent horseman.

The weather was splendid when they started, the sky a deep cloudless blue,
and yet the atmosphere so tempered by the sea breezes as to prevent any feeling
of oppressive heat. They marched rapidly along the winding shore of the bay of
Talcahuano, in order to gain the extremity of the parallel, thirty miles south. No
one spoke much the first day, for the smoke of the DUNCAN was still visible on
the horizon, and the pain of parting too keenly felt. Paganel talked to himself in
Spanish, asking and answering questions.

The CATAPEZ, moreover, was a taciturn man naturally, and had not been
rendered loquacious by his calling. He hardly spoke to his PEONS. They
understood their duties perfectly. If one of the mules stopped, they urged it on
with a guttural cry, and if that proved unavailing, a good-sized pebble, thrown
with unerring aim, soon cured the animal's obstinacy. If a strap got loose, or a
rein fell, a PEON came forward instantly, and throwing off his poncho, flung it
over his beast's head till the accident was repaired and the march resumed.

The custom of the muleteers is to start immediately after breakfast, about
eight o'clock, and not to stop till they camp for the night, about 4 P. M.
Glenarvan fell in with the practice, and the first halt was just as they arrived at
Arauco, situated at the very extremity of the bay. To find the extremity of the
37th degree of latitude, they would have required to proceed as far as the Bay of
Carnero, twenty miles further. But the agents of Glenarvan had already scoured
that part of the coast, and to repeat the exploration would have been useless. It
was, therefore, decided that Arauco should be the point of departure, and they
should keep on from there toward the east in a straight line.

Since the weather was so favorable, and the whole party, even Robert, were
in perfect health, and altogether the journey had commenced under such


favorable auspices, it was deemed advisable to push forward as quickly as
possible. Accordingly, the next day they marched 35 miles or more, and
encamped at nightfall on the banks of Rio Biobio. The country still presented the
same fertile aspect, and abounded in flowers, but animals of any sort only came
in sight occasionally, and there were no birds visible, except a solitary heron or
owl, and a thrush or grebe, flying from the falcon. Human beings there were
none, not a native appeared; not even one of the GUASSOS, the degenerate
offspring of Indians and Spaniards, dashed across the plain like a shadow, his
flying steed dripping with blood from the cruel thrusts inflicted by the gigantic
spurs of his master's naked feet. It was absolutely impossible to make inquiries
when there was no one to address, and Lord Glenarvan came to the conclusion
that Captain Grant must have been dragged right over the Andes into the
Pampas, and that it would be useless to search for him elsewhere. The only thing
to be done was to wait patiently and press forward with all the speed in their
power.

On the 17th they set out in the usual line of march, a line which it was hard
work for Robert to keep, his ardor constantly compelled him to get ahead of the
MADRINA, to the great despair of his mule. Nothing but a sharp recall from
Glenarvan kept the boy in proper order.

The country now became more diversified, and the rising ground indicated
their approach to a mountainous district. Rivers were more numerous, and came
rushing noisily down the slopes. Paganel consulted his maps, and when he found
any of those streams not marked, which often happened, all the fire of a
geographer burned in his veins, and he would exclaim, with a charming air of
vexation:

"A river which hasn't a name is like having no civil standing. It has no
existence in the eye of geographical law."

He christened them forthwith, without the least hesitation, and marked them
down on the map, qualifying them with the most high-sounding adjectives he
could find in the Spanish language.

"What a language!" he said. "How full and sonorous it is! It is like the metal
church bells are made of--composed of seventy-eight parts of copper and
twenty-two of tin."

"But, I say, do you make any progress in it?" asked Glenarvan.

"Most certainly, my dear Lord. Ah, if it wasn't the accent, that wretched
accent!"

And for want of better work, Paganel whiled away the time along the road by
practising the difficulties in pronunciation, repeating all the break-jaw words he
could, though still making geographical observations. Any question about the


country that Glenarvan might ask the CATAPEZ was sure to be answered by the
learned Frenchman before he could reply, to the great astonishment of the guide,
who gazed at him in bewilderment.

About two o'clock that same day they came to a cross road, and naturally
enough Glenarvan inquired the name of it.

"Tt is the route from Yumbel to Los Angeles," said Paganel.

Glenarvan looked at the CATAPEZ, who replied:

"Quite right."

And then, turning toward the geographer, he added:

"You have traveled in these parts before, sir?"

"Oh, yes," said Paganel, quite gravely.

"On a mule?"

"No, in an easy chair."

The CATAPEZ could not make him out, but shrugged his shoulders and
resumed his post at the head of the party.

At five in the evening they stopped in a gorge of no great depth, some miles
above the little town of Loja, and encamped for the night at the foot of the
Sierras, the first steppes of the great Cordilleras.


CHAPTER XII ELEVEN THOUSAND FEET
ALOFT


NOTHING of importance had occurred hitherto in the passage through Chili;
but all the obstacles and difficulties incident to a mountain journey were about to
crowd on the travelers now.

One important question had first to be settled. Which pass would take them
over the Andes, and yet not be out of their fixed route?

On questioning the CATAPEZ on the subject, he replied:

"There are only two practicable passes that I know of in this part of the
Cordilleras."

"The pass of Arica is one undoubtedly discovered by Valdivia Mendoze,"
said Paganel.

"Just so."

"And that of Villarica is the other."

"Precisely."

"Well, my good fellow, both these passes have only one fault; they take us
too far out of our route, either north or south."

"Have you no other to propose?" asked the Major.

"Certainly," replied Paganel. "There is the pass of Antuco, on the slope of the
volcano, in latitude, 37 degrees 30' , or, in other words, only half a degree out of
our way."

"That would do, but are you acquainted with this pass of Antuco,
CATAPEZ?" said Glenarvan.

"Yes, your Lordship, I have been through it, but I did not mention it, as no
one goes that way but the Indian shepherds with the herds of cattle."

"Oh, very well; if mares and sheep and oxen can go that way, we can, so let's
start at once."

The signal for departure was given immediately, and they struck into the
heart of the valley of Las Lejas, between great masses of chalk crystal. From this
point the pass began to be difficult, and even dangerous. The angles of the
declivities widened and the ledges narrowed, and frightful precipices met their
gaze. The mules went cautiously along, keeping their heads near the ground, as
if scenting the track. They marched in file. Sometimes at a sudden bend of the
road, the MADRINA would disappear, and the little caravan had to guide
themselves by the distant tinkle of her bell. Often some capricious winding
would bring the column in two parallel lines, and the CATAPEZ could speak to


his PEONS across a crevasse not two fathoms wide, though two hundred deep,
which made between them an inseparable gulf.

Glenarvan followed his guide step by step. He saw that his perplexity was
increasing as the way became more difficult, but did not dare to interrogate him,
rightly enough, perhaps, thinking that both mules and muleteers were very much
governed by instinct, and it was best to trust to them.

For about an hour longer the CATAPEZ kept wandering about almost at
haphazard, though always getting higher up the mountains. At last he was
obliged to stop short. They were in a narrow valley, one of those gorges called
by the Indians "quebrads," and on reaching the end, a wall of porphyry rose
perpendicularly before them, and barred further passage. The CATAPEZ, after
vain attempts at finding an opening, dismounted, crossed his arms, and waited.
Glenarvan went up to him and asked if he had lost his way.

"No, your Lordship," was the reply.

"But you are not in the pass of Antuco."

"We are."

"You are sure you are not mistaken?"

"IT am not mistaken. See! there are the remains of a fire left by the Indians,
and there are the marks of the mares and the sheep."

"They must have gone on then.”

"Yes, but no more will go; the last earthquake has made the route
impassable."

"To mules," said the Major, "but not to men."

"Ah, that's your concern; I have done all I could. My mules and myself are at
your service to try the other passes of the Cordilleras."

"And that would delay us?"

"Three days at least."

Glenarvan listened silently. He saw the CATAPEZ was right. His mules
could not go farther. When he talked of returning, however, Glenarvan appealed
to his companions and said:

"Will you go on in spite of all the difficulty?"

"We will follow your Lordship," replied Tom Austin.

"And even precede you," added Paganel. "What is it after all? We have only
to cross the top of the mountain chain, and once over, nothing can be easier of
descent than the slopes we shall find there. When we get below, we shall find
BAQUEANOS, Argentine shepherds, who will guide us through the Pampas,
and swift horses accustomed to gallop over the plains. Let's go forward then, I
say, and without a moment's hesitation."

"Forward!" they all exclaimed. "You will not go with us, then?" said


Glenarvan to the CATAPEZ.

"T am the muleteer," was the reply.

"As you please," said Glenarvan.

"We can do without him," said Paganel. "On the other side we shall get back
into the road to Antuco, and I'm quite sure I'll lead you to the foot of the
mountain as straight as the best guide in the Cordilleras."

Accordingly, Glenarvan settled accounts with the CATAPEZ, and bade
farewell to him and his PEONS and mules. The arms and instruments, and a
small stock of provisions were divided among the seven travelers, and it was
unanimously agreed that the ascent should recommence at once, and, if
necessary, should continue part of the night. There was a very steep winding path
on the left, which the mules never would have attempted. It was toilsome work,
but after two hours' exertion, and a great deal of roundabout climbing, the little
party found themselves once more in the pass of Antuco.

They were not far now from the highest peak of the Cordilleras, but there
was not the slightest trace of any beaten path. The entire region had been
overturned by recent shocks of earthquake, and all they could do was to keep on
climbing higher and higher. Paganel was rather disconcerted at finding no way
out to the other side of the chain, and laid his account with having to undergo
great fatigue before the topmost peaks of the Andes could be reached, for their
mean height is between eleven and twelve thousand six hundred feet.
Fortunately the weather was calm and the sky clear, in addition to the season
being favorable, but in Winter, from May to October, such an ascent would have
been impracticable. The intense cold quickly kills travelers, and those who even
manage to hold out against it fall victims to the violence of the TEMPORALES,
a sort of hurricane peculiar to those regions, which yearly fills the abysses of the
Cordilleras with dead bodies.

They went on toiling steadily upward all night, hoisting themselves up to
almost inaccessible plateaux, and leaping over broad, deep crevasses. They had
no ropes, but arms linked in arms supplied the lack, and shoulders served for
ladders. The strength of Mulrady and the dexterity of Wilson were taxed heavily
now. These two brave Scots multiplied themselves, so to speak. Many a time,
but for their devotion and courage the small band could not have gone on.
Glenarvan never lost sight of young Robert, for his age and vivacity made him
imprudent. Paganel was a true Frenchman in his impetuous ardor, and hurried
furiously along. The Major, on the contrary, only went as quick as was
necessary, neither more nor less, climbing without the least apparent exertion.
Perhaps he hardly knew, indeed, that he was climbing at all, or perhaps he
fancied he was descending.


The whole aspect of the region had now completely changed. Huge blocks of
glittering ice, of a bluish tint on some of the declivities, stood up on all sides,
reflecting the early light of morn. The ascent became very perilous. They were
obliged to reconnoiter carefully before making a single step, on account of the
crevasses. Wilson took the lead, and tried the ground with his feet. His
companions followed exactly in his footprints, lowering their voices to a
whisper, as the least sound would disturb the currents of air, and might cause the
fall of the masses of snow suspended in the air seven or eight hundred feet above
their heads.

They had come now to the region of shrubs and bushes, which, higher still,
gave place to grasses and cacti. At 11,000 feet all trace of vegetation had
disappeared. They had only stopped once, to rest and snatch a hurried meal to

V. IV Verne recruit their strength. With superhuman courage, the ascent was
then resumed amid increasing dangers and difficulties. They were forced to
bestride sharp peaks and leap over chasms so deep that they did not dare to look
down them. In many places wooden crosses marked the scene of some great
catastrophes.

About two o'clock they came to an immense barren plain, without a sign of
vegetation. The air was dry and the sky unclouded blue. At this elevation rain is
unknown, and vapors only condense into snow or hail. Here and there peaks of
porphyry or basalt pierced through the white winding-sheet like the bones of a
skeleton; and at intervals fragments of quartz or gneiss, loosened by the action of
the air, fell down with a faint, dull sound, which in a denser atmosphere would
have been almost imperceptible.

However, in spite of their courage, the strength of the little band was giving
way. Glenarvan regretted they had gone so far into the interior of the mountain
when he saw how exhausted his men had become. Young Robert held out
manfully, but he could not go much farther.

At three o'clock Glenarvan stopped and said:

"We must rest."

He knew if he did not himself propose it, no one else would.

"Rest?" rejoined Paganel; "we have no place of shelter."

"It is absolutely necessary, however, if it were only for Robert."

"No, no," said the courageous lad; "I can still walk; don't stop."

"You shall be carried, my boy; but we must get to the other side of the
Cordilleras, cost what it may. There we may perhaps find some hut to cover us.
All I ask is a two hours' longer march."

"Are you all of the same opinion?" said Glenarvan.

"Yes," was the unanimous reply: and Mulrady added, "I'll carry the boy."


The march eastward was forthwith resumed. They had a frightful height to
climb yet to gain the topmost peaks. The rarefaction of the atmosphere produced
that painful oppression known by the name of PUNA. Drops of blood stood on
the gums and lips, and respiration became hurried and difficult. However strong
the will of these brave men might be, the time came at last when their physical
powers failed, and vertigo, that terrible malady in the mountains, destroyed not
only their bodily strength but their moral energy. Falls became frequent, and
those who fell could not rise again, but dragged themselves along on their knees.

But just as exhaustion was about to make short work of any further ascent,
and Glenarvan's heart began to sink as he thought of the snow lying far as the
eye could reach, and of the intense cold, and saw the shadow of night fast
overspreading the desolate peaks, and knew they had not a roof to shelter them,
suddenly the Major stopped and said, in a calm voice, "A hut!"


CHAPTER XII A SUDDEN DESCENT


ANYONE else but McNabbs might have passed the hut a hundred times, and
gone all round it, and even over it without suspecting its existence. It was
covered with snow, and scarcely distinguishable from the surrounding rocks; but
Wilson and Mulrady succeeded in digging it out and clearing the opening after
half an hour's hard work, to the great joy of the whole party, who eagerly took
possession of it.

They found it was a CASUCHA, constructed by the Indians, made of
ADOBES, a species of bricks baked in the sun. Its form was that of a cube, 12
feet on each side, and it stood on a block of basalt. A stone stair led up to the
door, the only opening; and narrow as this door was, the hurricane, and snow,
and hail found their way in when the TEMPORALES were unchained in the
mountains.

Ten people could easily find room in it, and though the walls might be none
too water-tight in the rainy season, at this time of the year, at any rate, it was
sufficient protection against the intense cold, which, according to the
thermometer, was ten degrees below zero. Besides, there was a sort of fireplace
in it, with a chimney of bricks, badly enough put together, certainly, but still it
allowed of a fire being lighted.

"This will shelter us, at any rate," said Glenarvan, "even if it is not very
comfortable. Providence has led us to it, and we can only be thankful."

"Why, it is a perfect palace, I call it," said Paganel; "we only want flunkeys
and courtiers. We shall do capital here."

"Especially when there is a good fire blazing on the hearth, for we are quite
as cold as we are hungry. For my part, I would rather see a good faggot just now
than a slice of venison."

"Well, Tom, we'll try and get some combustible or other," said Paganel.

"Combustibles on the top of the Cordilleras!" exclaimed Mulrady, in a
dubious tone.

"Since there is a chimney in the CASUCHA," said the Major, "the
probability is that we shall find something to burn in it."

"Our friend McNabbs is right," said Glenarvan. "Get everything in readiness
for supper, and I'll go out and turn woodcutter."

"Wilson and I will go with you," said Paganel.

"Do you want me?" asked Robert, getting up.

"No, my brave boy, rest yourself. You'll be a man, when others are only


children at your age," replied Glenarvan.

On reaching the littke mound of porphyry, Glenarvan and his two
companions left the CASUCHA. In spite of the perfect calmness of the
atmosphere, the cold was stinging. Paganel consulted his barometer, and found
that the depression of the mercury corresponded to an elevation of 11,000 feet,
only 910 meters lower than Mont Blanc. But if these mountains had presented
the difficulties of the giant of the Swiss Alps, not one of the travelers could have
crossed the great chain of the New World.

On reaching a little mound of porphyry, Glenarvan and Paganel stopped to
gaze about them and scan the horizon on all sides. They were now on the summit
of the Nevadas of the Cordilleras, and could see over an area of forty miles. The
valley of the Colorado was already sunk in shadow, and night was fast drawing
her mantle over the eastern slopes of the Andes. The western side was illumined
by the rays of the setting sun, and peaks and glaciers flashed back his golden
beams with dazzling radiance. On the south the view was magnificent. Across
the wild valley of the Torbido, about two miles distant, rose the volcano of
Antuco. The mountain roared like some enormous monster, and vomited red
smoke, mingled with torrents of sooty flame. The surrounding peaks appeared
on fire. Showers of red-hot stones, clouds of reddish vapor and rockets of lava,
all combined, presented the appearance of glowing sparkling streams. The
splendor of the spectacle increased every instant as night deepened, and the
whole sky became lighted up with a dazzling reflection of the blazing crater,
while the sun, gradually becoming shorn of his sunset glories, disappeared like a
star lost in the distant darkness of the horizon.

Paganel and Glenarvan would have remained long enough gazing at the
sublime struggle between the fires of earth and heaven, if the more practical
Wilson had not reminded them of the business on hand. There was no wood to
be found, however, but fortunately the rocks were covered with a poor, dry
species of lichen. Of this they made an ample provision, as well as of a plant
called LLARETTA, the root of which burns tolerably well. This precious
combustible was carried back to the CASUCHA and heaped up on the hearth. It
was a difficult matter to kindle it, though, and still more to keep it alight. The air
was so rarefied that there was scarcely oxygen enough in it to support
combustion. At least, this was the reason assigned by the Major.

"By way of compensation, however," he added, "water will boil at less than
100 degrees heat. It will come to the point of ebullition before 99 degrees."

McNabbs was right, as the thermometer proved, for it was plunged into the
kettle when the water boiled, and the mercury only rose to 99 degrees. Coffee
was soon ready, and eagerly gulped down by everybody. The dry meat certainly


seemed poor fare, and Paganel couldn't help saying:

"I tell you what, some grilled llama wouldn't be bad with this, would it?
They say that the llama is substitute for the ox and the sheep, and I should like to
know if it is, in an alimentary respect."

"What!" replied the Major. "You're not content with your supper, most
learned Paganel."

"Enchanted with it, my brave Major; still I must confess I should not say no
to a dish of llama."

"You are a Sybarite."

"I plead guilty to the charge. But come, now, though you call me that, you
wouldn't sulk at a beefsteak yourself, would you?"

"Probably not."

"And if you were asked to lie in wait for a llama, notwithstanding the cold
and the darkness, you would do it without the least hesitation?"

"Of course; and if it will give you the slightest pleasure--"

His companions had hardly time to thank him for his obliging good nature,
when distant and prolonged howls broke on their ear, plainly not proceeding
from one or two solitary animals, but from a whole troop, and one, moreover,
that was rapidly approaching.

Providence had sent them a supper, as well as led them to a hut. This was the
geographer's conclusion; but Glenarvan damped his joy somewhat by remarking
that the quadrupeds of the Cordilleras are never met with in such a high latitude.

"Then where can these animals come from?" asked Tom Austin. "Don't you
hear them getting nearer!"

"An avalanche," suggested Mulrady.

"Impossible," returned Paganel. "That is regular howling.”

"Let us go out and see," said Glenarvan.

"Yes, and be ready for hunting," replied McNabbs, arming himself with his
carbine.

They all rushed forthwith out of the CASUCHA. Night had completely set
in, dark and starry. The moon, now in her last quarter, had not yet risen. The
peaks on the north and east had disappeared from view, and nothing was visible
save the fantastic SILHOUETTE of some towering rocks here and there. The
howls, and clearly the howls of terrified animals, were redoubled. They
proceeded from that part of the Cordilleras which lay in darkness. What could be
going on there? Suddenly a furious avalanche came down, an avalanche of living
animals mad with fear. The whole plateau seemed to tremble. There were
hundreds, perhaps thousands, of these animals, and in spite of the rarefied
atmosphere, their noise was deafening. Were they wild beasts from the Pampas,


or herds of llamas and vicunas? Glenarvan, McNabbs, Robert, Austin, and the
two sailors, had just time to throw themselves flat on the ground before they
swept past like a whirlwind, only a few paces distant. Paganel, who had
remained standing, to take advantage of his peculiar powers of sight, was
knocked down in a twinkling. At the same moment the report of firearms was
heard. The Major had fired, and it seemed to him that an animal had fallen close
by, and that the whole herd, yelling louder than ever, had rushed down and
disappeared among the declivities lighted up by the reflection of the volcano.

"Ah, I've got them," said a voice, the voice of Paganel.

"Got what?" asked Glenarvan.

"My spectacles," was the reply. "One might expect to lose that much in such
a tumult as this."

"You are not wounded, I hope?"

"No, only knocked down; but by what?"

"By this," replied the Major, holding up the animal he had killed.

They all hastened eagerly into the hut, to examine McNabbs' prize by the
light of the fire.

It was a pretty creature, like a small camel without a hump. The head was
small and the body flattened, the legs were long and slender, the skin fine, and
the hair the color of cafe au lait.

Paganel had scarcely looked at it before he exclaimed, "A guanaco!"

"What sort of an animal is that?" asked Glenarvan.

"One you can eat."

"And it is good savory meat, I assure you; a dish of Olympus! I knew we
should have fresh meat for supper, and such meat! But who is going to cut up the
beast?"

"T will," said Wilson.

"Well, I'll undertake to cook it," said Paganel.

"Can you cook, then, Monsieur Paganel?"” asked Robert.

"I should think so, my boy. I'm a Frenchman, and in every Frenchman there
is a cook."

Five minutes afterward Paganel began to grill large slices of venison on the
embers made by the use of the LLARETTAS, and in about ten minutes a dish
was ready, which he served up to his companions by the tempting name of
guanaco cutlets. No one stood on ceremony, but fell to with a hearty good will.

To the absolute stupefaction of the geographer, however, the first mouthful
was greeted with a general grimace, and such exclamations as--"Tough!" "It is
horrible." "It is not eatable."

The poor SAVANT was obliged to own that his cutlets could not be relished,


even by hungry men. They began to banter him about his "Olympian dish," and
indulge in jokes at his expense; but all he cared about was to find out how it
happened that the flesh of the guanaco, which was certainly good and eatable
food, had turned out so badly in his hands. At last light broke in on him, and he
called out:

"IT see through it now! Yes, I see through it. I have found out the secret now."

"The meat was too long kept, was it?" asked McNabbs, quietly.

"No, but the meat had walked too much. How could I have forgotten that?"

"What do you mean?" asked Tom Austin.

"I mean this: the guanaco is only good for eating when it is killed in a state
of rest. If it has been long hunted, and gone over much ground before it is
captured, it is no longer eatable. I can affirm the fact by the mere taste, that this
animal has come a great distance, and consequently the whole herd has."

"You are certain of this?" asked Glenarvan.

"Absolutely certain."

"But what could have frightened the creatures so, and driven them from their
haunts, when they ought to have been quietly sleeping?"

"That's a question, my dear Glenarvan, I could not possibly answer. Take my
advice, and let us go to sleep without troubling our heads about it. I say, Major,
shall we go to sleep?"

"Yes, we'll go to sleep, Paganel."

Each one, thereupon, wrapped himself up in his poncho, and the fire was
made up for the night.

Loud snores in every tune and key soon resounded from all sides of the hut,
the deep bass contribution of Paganel completing the harmony.

But Glenarvan could not sleep. Secret uneasiness kept him in a continual
state of wakefulness. His thoughts reverted involuntarily to those frightened
animals flying in one common direction, impelled by one common terror. They
could not be pursued by wild beasts, for at such an elevation there were almost
none to be met with, and of hunters still fewer. What terror then could have
driven them among the precipices of the Andes? Glenarvan felt a presentiment
of approaching danger.

But gradually he fell into a half-drowsy state, and his apprehensions were
lulled. Hope took the place of fear. He saw himself on the morrow on the plains
of the Andes, where the search would actually commence, and perhaps success
was close at hand. He thought of Captain Grant and his two sailors, and their
deliverance from cruel bondage. As these visions passed rapidly through his
mind, every now and then he was roused by the crackling of the fire, or sparks
flying out, or some little jet of flame would suddenly flare up and illumine the


faces of his slumbering companions.

Then his presentiments returned in greater strength than before, and he
listened anxiously to the sounds outside the hut.

At certain intervals he fancied he could hear rumbling noises in the distance,
dull and threatening like the mutter-ings of thunder before a storm. There surely
must be a storm raging down below at the foot of the mountains. He got up and
went out to see.

The moon was rising. The atmosphere was pure and calm. Not a cloud
visible either above or below. Here and there was a passing reflection from the
flames of Antuco, but neither storm nor lightning, and myriads of bright stars
studded the zenith. Still the rumbling noises continued. They seemed to meet
together and cross the chain of the Andes. Glenarvan returned to the CASUCHA
more uneasy than ever, questioning within himself as to the connection between
these sounds and the flight of the guanacos. He looked at his watch and found
the time was about two in the morning. As he had no certainty, however, of any
immediate danger, he did not wake his companions, who were sleeping soundly
after their fatigue, and after a little dozed off himself, and slumbered heavily for
some hours.

All of a sudden a violent crash made him start to his feet. A deafening noise
fell on his ear like the roar of artillery. He felt the ground giving way beneath
him, and the CASUCHA rocked to and fro, and opened.

He shouted to his companions, but they were already awake, and tumbling
pell-mell over each other. They were being rapidly dragged down a steep
declivity. Day dawned and revealed a terrible scene. The form of the mountains
changed in an instant. Cones were cut off. Tottering peaks disappeared as if
some trap had opened at their base. Owing to a peculiar phenomenon of the
Cordilleras, an enormous mass, many miles in extent, had been displaced
entirely, and was speeding down toward the plain.

"An earthquake!" exclaimed Paganel. He was not mistaken. It was one of
those cataclysms frequent in Chili, and in this very region where Copiapo had
been twice destroyed, and Santiago four times laid in ruins in fourteen years.
This region of the globe is so underlaid with volcanic fires and the volcanoes of
recent origin are such insufficient safety valves for the subterranean vapors, that
shocks are of frequent occurrence, and are called by the people TREMBLORES.

The plateau to which the seven men were clinging, holding on by tufts of
lichen, and giddy and terrified in the extreme, was rushing down the declivity
with the swiftness of an express, at the rate of fifty miles an hour. Not a cry was
possible, nor an attempt to get off or stop. They could not even have heard
themselves speak. The internal rumblings, the crash of the avalanches, the fall of


masses of granite and basalt, and the whirlwind of pulverized snow, made all
communication impossible. Sometimes they went perfectly smoothly along
without jolts or jerks, and sometimes on the contrary, the plateau would reel and
roll like a ship in a storm, coasting past abysses in which fragments of the
mountain were falling, tearing up trees by the roots, and leveling, as if with the
keen edge of an immense scythe, every projection of the declivity.

How long this indescribable descent would last, no one could calculate, nor
what it would end in ultimately. None of the party knew whether the rest were
still alive, whether one or another were not already lying in the depths of some
abyss. Almost breathless with the swift motion, frozen with the cold air, which
pierced them through, and blinded with the whirling snow, they gasped for
breath, and became exhausted and nearly inanimate, only retaining their hold of
the rocks by a powerful instinct of self-preservation. Suddenly a tremendous
shock pitched them right off, and sent them rolling to the very foot of the
mountain. The plateau had stopped.

For some minutes no one stirred. At last one of the party picked himself up,
and stood on his feet, stunned by the shock, but still firm on his legs. This was
the Major. He shook off the blinding snow and looked around him. His
companions lay in a close circle like the shots from a gun that has just been
discharged, piled one on top of another.

The Major counted them. All were there except one--that one was Robert
Grant.


CHAPTER XIV PROVIDENTIALLY RESCUED


THE eastern side of the Cordilleras of the Andes consists of a succession of
lengthened declivities, which slope down almost insensibly to the plain. The soil
is carpeted with rich herbage, and adomed with magnificent trees, among which,
in great numbers, were apple-trees, planted at the time of the conquest, and
golden with fruit. There were literally, perfect forests of these. This district was,
in fact, just a comer of fertile Normandy.

The sudden transition from a desert to an oasis, from snowy peaks to verdant
plains, from Winter to Summer, can not fail to strike the traveler's eye.

The ground, moreover, had recovered its immobility. The trembling had
ceased, though there was little doubt the forces below the surface were carrying
on their devastating work further on, for shocks of earthquake are always
occurring in some part or other of the Andes. This time the shock had been one
of extreme violence. The outline of the mountains was wholly altered, and the
Pampas guides would have sought vainly for the accustomed landmarks.

A magnificent day had dawned. The sun was just rising from his ocean bed,
and his bright rays streamed already over the Argentine plains, and ran across to
the Atlantic. It was about eight o'clock.

Lord Glenarvan and his companions were gradually restored to animation by
the Major's efforts. They had been completely stunned, but had sustained no
injury whatever. The descent of the Cordilleras was accomplished; and as Dame
Nature had conveyed them at her own expense, they could only have praised her
method of locomotion if one of their number, and that one the feeblest and
youngest, the child of the party, had not been missing at the roll call.

The brave boy was beloved by everybody. Paganel was particularly attached
to him, and so was the Major, with all his apparent coldness. As for Glenarvan,
he was in absolute despair when he heard of his disappearance, and pictured to
himself the child lying in some deep abyss, wildly crying for succor.

"We must go and look for him, and look till we find him," he exclaimed,
almost unable to keep back his tears. "We cannot leave him to his fate. Every
valley and precipice and abyss must be searched through and through. I will
have a rope fastened round my waist, and go down myself. I insist upon it; you
understand; I insist upon it. Heaven grant Robert may be still alive! If we lose
the boy, how could we ever dare to meet the father? What right have we to save
the captain at the cost of his son's life?"

Glenarvan's companions heard him in silence. He sought to read hope in


their eyes, but they did not venture to meet his gaze.

At last he said,

"Well, you hear what I say, but you make no response. Do you mean to tell
me that you have no hope--not the slightest?"

Again there was silence, till McNabbs asked:

"Which of you can recollect when Robert disappeared?"

No one could say.

"Well, then,” resumed the Major, "you know this at any rate. Who was the
child beside during our descent of the Cordilleras?"

"Beside me," replied Wilson.

"Very well. Up to what moment did you see him beside you? Try if you can
remember."

"All that I can recollect is that Robert Grant was still by my side, holding fast
by a tuft of lichen, less than two minutes before the shock which finished our
descent."

"Less than two minutes? Mind what you are saying; I dare say a minute
seemed a very long time to you. Are you sure you are not making a mistake?"

"T don't think I am. No; it was just about two minutes, as I tell you."

"Very well, then; and was Robert on your right or left?"

"On my left. I remember that his poncho brushed past my face."

"And with regard to us, how were you placed?"

"On the left also."

"Then Robert must have disappeared on this side," said the Major, turning
toward the mountain and pointing toward the right: "and I should judge," he
added, "considering the time that has elapsed, that the spot where he fell is about
two miles up. Between that height and the ground is where we must search,
dividing the different zones among us, and it is there we shall find him."

Not another word was spoken. The six men commenced their explorations,
keeping constantly to the line they had made in their descent, examining closely
every fissure, and going into the very depths of the abysses, choked up though
they partly were with fragments of the plateau; and more than one came out
again with garments torn to rags, and feet and hands bleeding. For many long
hours these brave fellows continued their search without dreaming of taking rest.
But all in vain. The child had not only met his death on the mountain, but found
a grave which some enormous rock had sealed forever.

About one o'clock, Glenarvan and his companions met again in the valley.
Glenarvan was completely crushed with grief. He scarcely spoke. The only
words that escaped his lips amid his sighs were,

"T shall not go away! I shall not go away!"


No one of the party but could enter into his feeling, and respect it.

"Let us wait," said Paganel to the Major and Tom Austin. "We will take a
little rest, and recruit our strength. We need it anyway, either to prolong our
search or continue our route."

"Yes; and, as Edward wishes it, we will rest. He has still hope, but what is it
he hopes?"

"Who knows!" said Tom Austin.

"Poor Robert!" replied Paganel, brushing away a tear.

The valley was thickly wooded, and the Major had no difficulty in finding a
suitable place of encampment. He chose a clump of tall carob trees, under which
they arranged their few belongings--few indeed, for all they had were sundry
wraps and firearms, and a little dried meat and rice. Not far off there was a RIO,
which supplied them with water, though it was still somewhat muddy after the
disturbance of the avalanche. Mulrady soon had a fire lighted on the grass, and a
warm refreshing beverage to offer his master. But Glenarvan refused to touch it,
and lay stretched on his poncho in a state of absolute prostration.

So the day passed, and night came on, calm and peaceful as the preceding
had been. While his companions were lying motionless, though wide awake,
Glenarvan betook himself once more to the slopes of the Cordilleras, listening
intently in hope that some cry for help would fall upon his ear. He ventured far
up in spite of his being alone, straining his ear with painful eagerness to catch
the faintest sound, and calling aloud in an agony of despair.

But he heard nothing save the beatings of his own heart, though he wandered
all night on the mountain. Sometimes the Major followed him, and sometimes
Paganel, ready to lend a helping hand among the slippery peaks and dangerous
precipices among which he was dragged by his rash and useless imprudence. All
his efforts were in vain, however, and to his repeated cries of "Robert, Robert!"
echo was the only response.

Day dawned, and it now became a matter of necessity to go and bring back
the poor Lord from the distant plateau, even against his will. His despair was
terrible. Who could dare to speak of quitting this fatal valley? Yet provisions
were done, and Argentine guides and horses were not far off to lead them to the
Pampas. To go back would be more difficult than to go forward. Besides, the
Atlantic Ocean was the appointed meeting place with the DUNCAN. These were
strong reasons against any long delay; indeed it was best for all parties to
continue the route as soon as possible.

McNabbs undertook the task of rousing Lord Glenarvan from his grief. For a
long time his cousin seemed not to hear him. At last he shook his head, and said,
almost in-audibly:


"Did you say we must start?”

"Yes, we must start."

"Wait one hour longer."

"Yes, we'll wait another,” replied the Major.

The hour slipped away, and again Glenarvan begged for longer grace. To
hear his imploring tones, one might have thought him a criminal begging a
respite. So the day passed on till it was almost noon. McNabbs hesitated now no
longer, but, acting on the advice of the rest, told his cousin that start they must,
for all their lives depended on prompt action.

"Yes, yes!" replied Glenarvan. "Let us start, let us start!"

But he spoke without looking at McNabbs. His gaze was fixed intently on a
certain dark speck in the heavens. Suddenly he exclaimed, extending his arm,
and keeping it motionless, as if petrified:

"There! there! Look! look!"

All eyes turned immediately in the direction indicated so imperiously. The
dark speck was increasing visibly. It was evidently some bird hovering above
them.

"A condor," said Paganel.

"Yes, a condor," replied Glenarvan. "Who knows? He is coming down-- he is
gradually getting lower! Let us wait."

Paganel was not mistaken, it was assuredly a condor. This magnificent bird is
the king of the Southern Andes, and was formerly worshiped by the Incas. It
attains an extraordinary development in those regions. Its strength is prodigious.
It has frequently driven oxen over the edge of precipices down into the depths of
abysses. It seizes sheep, and kids, and young calves, browsing on the plains, and
carries them off to inaccessible heights. It hovers in the air far beyond the utmost
limits of human sight, and its powers of vision are so great that it can discern the
smallest objects on the earth beneath.

What had this condor discovered then? Could it be the corpse of Robert
Grant? "Who knows?" repeated Glenarvan, keeping his eye immovably fixed on
the bird. The enormous creature was fast approaching, sometimes hovering for
awhile with outspread wings, and sometimes falling with the swiftness of inert
bodies in space. Presently he began to wheel round in wide circles. They could
see him distinctly. He measured more than fifteen feet, and his powerful wings
bore him along with scarcely the slightest effort, for it is the prerogative of large
birds to fly with calm majesty, while insects have to beat their wings a thousand
times a second.

The Major and Wilson had seized their carbines, but Glenarvan stopped them
by a gesture. The condor was encircling in his flight a sort of inaccessible


plateau about a quarter of a mile up the side of the mountain. He wheeled round
and round with dazzling rapidity, opening and shutting his formidable claws, and
shaking his cartilaginous carbuncle, or comb.

"Tt is there, there!" exclaimed Glenarvan.

A sudden thought flashed across his mind, and with a terrible cry, he called
out, "Fire! fire! Oh, suppose Robert were still alive! That bird."

But it was too late. The condor had dropped out of sight behind the crags.
Only a second passed, a second that seemed an age, and the enormous bird
reappeared, carrying a heavy load and flying at a slow rate.

A cry of horror rose on all sides. It was a human body the condor had in his
claws, dangling in the air, and apparently lifeless-- it was Robert Grant. The bird
had seized him by his clothes, and had him hanging already at least one hundred
and fifty feet in the air. He had caught sight of the travelers, and was flapping his
wings violently, endeavoring to escape with his heavy prey.

"Oh! would that Robert were dashed to pieces against the rocks, rather than
be a--"

He did not finish his sentence, but seizing Wilson's carbine, took aim at the
condor. His arm was too trembling, however, to keep the weapon steady.

"Let me do it," said the Major. And with a calm eye, and sure hands and
motionless body, he aimed at the bird, now three hundred feet above him in the
air.

But before he had pulled the trigger the report of a gun resounded from the
bottom of the valley. A white smoke rose from between two masses of basalt,
and the condor, shot in the head, gradually turned over and began to fall,
supported by his great wings spread out like a parachute. He had not let go his
prey, but gently sank down with it on the ground, about ten paces from the
stream.

"We've got him, we've got him," shouted Glenarvan; and without waiting to
see where the shot so providentially came from, he rushed toward the condor,
followed by his companions.

When they reached the spot the bird was dead, and the body of Robert was
quite concealed beneath his mighty wings. Glenarvan flung himself on the
corpse, and dragging it from the condor's grasp, placed it flat on the grass, and
knelt down and put his ear to the heart.

But a wilder cry of joy never broke from human lips, than Glenarvan uttered
the next moment, as he started to his feet and exclaimed:

"He is alive! He is still alive!"

The boy's clothes were stripped off in an instant, and his face bathed with
cold water. He moved slightly, opened his eyes, looked round and murmured,


"Oh, my Lord! Is it you!" he said; "my father!"
Glenarvan could not reply. He was speechless with emotion, and kneeling
down by the side of the child so miraculously saved, burst into tears.


CHAPTER XV THALCAVE


ROBERT had no sooner escaped one terrible danger than he ran the risk of
another scarcely less formidable. He was almost torn to pieces by his friends, for
the brave fellows were so overjoyed at the sight of him, that in spite of his weak
state, none of them would be satisfied without

V. IV Verne giving him a hug. However, it seemed as if good rough hugging
did not hurt sick people; at any rate it did not hurt Robert, but quite the contrary.

But the first joy of deliverance over, the next thought was who was the
deliverer? Of course it was the Major who suggested looking for him, and he
was not far off, for about fifty paces from the RIO a man of very tall stature was
seen standing motionless on the lowest crags at the foot of the mountain. A long
gun was lying at his feet.

He had broad shoulders, and long hair bound together with leather thongs.
He was over six feet in height. His bronzed face was red between the eyes and
mouth, black by the lower eyelids, and white on the forehead. He wore the
costume of the Patagonians on the frontiers, consisting of a splendid cloak,
Omamented with scarlet arabesques, made of the skins of the guanaco, sewed
together with ostrich tendons, and with the silky wool turned up on the edge.
Under this mantle was a garment of fox-skin, fastened round the waist, and
coming down to a point in front. A little bag hung from his belt, containing
colors for painting his face. His boots were pieces of ox hide, fastened round the
ankles by straps, across.

This Patagonian had a splendid face, indicating real intelligence,
notwithstanding the medley of colors by which it was disfigured. His waiting
attitude was full of dignity; indeed, to see him standing grave and motionless on
his pedestal of rocks, one might have taken him for a statue of sang-froid.

As soon as the Major perceived him, he pointed him out to Glenarvan, who
ran toward him immediately. The Patagonian came two steps forward to meet
him, and Glenarvan caught hold of his hand and pressed it in his own. It was
impossible to mistake the meaning of the action, for the noble face of the Scotch
lord so beamed with gratitude that no words were needed. The stranger bowed
slightly in return, and said a few words that neither Glenarvan nor the Major
could understand.

The Patagonian surveyed them attentively for a few minutes, and spoke
again in another language. But this second idiom was no more intelligible than
the first. Certain words, however, caught Glenarvan's ear as sounding like


Spanish, a few sentences of which he could speak.

ESPANOL?" he asked.

The Patagonian nodded in reply, a movement of the head which has an
affirmative significance among all nations.

"That's good!" said the Major. "Our friend Paganel will be the very man for
him. It is lucky for us that he took it into his head to learn Spanish."

Paganel was called forthwith. He came at once, and saluted the stranger with
all the grace of a Frenchman. But his compliments were lost on the Patagonian,
for he did not understand a single syllable.

However, on being told how things stood, he began in Spanish, and opening
his mouth as wide as he could, the better to articulate, said:

"Vos sois um homen de bem." (You are a brave man.)

The native listened, but made no reply.

"He doesn't understand," said the geographer.

"Perhaps you haven't the right accent," suggested the Major.

"That's just it! Confound the accent!"

Once more Paganel repeated his compliment, but with no better success.

"T'll change the phrase," he said; and in slow, deliberate tones he went on,
"Sam duvida um Patagao" (A Patagonian, undoubtedly).

No response still.

"DIZEIME!" said Paganel (Answer me).

But no answer came.

"Vos compriendeis?" (Do you understand?) shouted Paganel, at the very top
of his voice, as if he would burst his throat.

Evidently the Indian did not understand, for he replied in Spanish,

"No comprendo" (I do not understand).

It was Paganel's turn now to be amazed. He pushed his spectacles right down
over his nose, as if greatly irritated, and said,

"T'll be hanged if I can make out one word of his infernal patois. It is
Araucanian, that's certain!"

"Not a bit of it!" said Glenarvan. "It was Spanish he spoke."

And addressing the Patagonian, he repeated the word, "ESPANOL?"
(Spanish?).

"Si, si" (yes, yes) replied the Indian.

Paganel's surprise became absolute stupefaction. The Major and his cousin
exchanged sly glances, and McNabbs said, mischievously, with a look of fun on
his face, "Ah, ah, my worthy friend; is this another of your misadventures? You
seem to have quite a monopoly of them."

"What!" said Paganel, pricking up his ear.


"Yes, it's clear enough the man speaks Spanish."

"He!"

"Yes, he certainly speaks Spanish. Perhaps it is some other language you
have been studying all this time instead of--"

But Paganel would not allow him to proceed. He shrugged his shoulders, and
said stiffly,

"You go a little too far, Major."

"Well, how is it that you don't understand him then?"

"Why, of course, because the man speaks badly," replied the learned
geographer, getting impatient.

"He speaks badly; that is to say, because you can't understand him," returned
the Major coolly.

"Come, come, McNabbs," put in Glenarvan, "your supposition is quite
inadmissable. However DISTRAIT our friend Paganel is, it is hardly likely he
would study one language for another."

"Well, Edward--or rather you, my good Paganel--explain it then."

"I explain nothing. I give proof. Here is the book I use daily, to practice
myself in the difficulties of the Spanish language. Examine it for yourself,
Major," he said, handing him a volume in a very ragged condition, which he had
brought up, after a long rummage, from the depths of one of his numerous
pockets. "Now you can see whether I am imposing on you," he continued,
indignantly.

"And what's the name of this book?" asked the Major, as he took it from his
hand.

"The LUSIADES, an admirable epic, which--"

"The LUSIADES!" exclaimed Glenarvan.

"Yes, my friend, the LUSIADES of the great Camoens, neither more nor
less."

"Camoens!" repeated Glenarvan; "but Paganel, my unfortunate fellow,
Camoens was a Portuguese! It is Portuguese you have been learning for the last
six weeks!"

"Camoens! LUISADES! Portuguese!" Paganel could not say more. He
looked vexed, while his companions, who had all gathered round, broke out in a
furious burst of laughter.

The Indian never moved a muscle of his face. He quietly awaited the
explanation of this incomprehensible mirth.

"Fool, idiot, that I am!" at last uttered Paganel. "Is it really a fact? You are
not joking with me? It is what I have actually been doing? Why, it is a second
confusion of tongues, like Babel. Ah me! alack-a-day! my friends, what is to


become of me? To start for India and arrive at Chili! To learn Spanish and talk
Portuguese! Why, if I go on like this, some day I shall be throwing myself out of
the window instead of my cigar!"

To hear Paganel bemoan his misadventures and see his comical discomfiture,
would have upset anyone's gravity. Besides, he set the example himself, and
said:

"Laugh away, my friends, laugh as loud as you like; you can't laugh at me
half as much as I laugh at myself!"

"But, I say," said the Major, after a minute, "this doesn't alter the fact that we
have no interpreter."

"Oh, don't distress yourself about that," replied Paganel, "Portuguese and
Spanish are so much alike that I made a mistake; but this very resemblance will
be a great help toward rectifying it. In a very short time I shall be able to thank
the Patagonian in the language he speaks so well."

Paganel was right. He soon managed to exchange a few words with the
stranger, and found out even that his name was Thalcave, a word that signified in
Araucanian, "The Thunderer." This surname had, no doubt, come from his skill
in handling firearms.

But what rejoiced Glenarvan most was to learn that he was a guide by
occupation, and, moreover, a guide across the Pampas. To his mind, the meeting
with him was so providential, that he could not doubt now of the success of their
enterprise. The deliverance of Captain Grant seemed an accomplished fact.

When the party went back to Robert, the boy held out his arms to the
Patagonian, who silently laid his hand on his head, and proceeded to examine
him with the greatest care, gently feeling each of his aching limbs. Then he went
down to the RIO, and gathered a few handfuls of wild celery, which grew on the
banks, with which he rubbed the child's body all over. He handled him with the
most exquisite delicacy, and his treatment so revived the lad's strength, that it
was soon evident that a few hours' rest would set him all right.

It was accordingly decided that they should encamp for the rest of the day
and the ensuing night. Two grave questions, moreover, had to be settled: where
to get food, and means of transport. Provisions and mules were both lacking.
Happily, they had Thalcave, however, a practised guide, and one of the most
intelligent of his class. He undertook to find all that was needed, and offered to
take him to a TOLDERIA of Indians, not further than four miles off at most,
where he could get supplies of all he wanted. This proposition was partly made
by gestures, and partly by a few Spanish words which Paganel managed to make
out. His offer was accepted, and Glenarvan and his learned friend started off
with him at once.


They walked at a good pace for an hour and a half, and had to make great
strides to keep up with the giant Thalcave. The road lay through a beautiful
fertile region, abounding in rich pasturages; where a hundred thousand cattle
might have fed comfortably. Large ponds, connected by an inextricable labyrinth
of RIOS, amply watered these plains and produced their greenness. Swans with
black heads were disporting in the water, disputing possession with the
numerous intruders which gamboled over the LLANOS. The feathered tribes
were of most brilliant plumage, and of marvelous variety and deafening noise.
The isacus, a graceful sort of dove with gray feathers streaked with white, and
the yellow cardinals, were flitting about in the trees like moving flowers; while
overhead pigeons, sparrows, chingolos, bulgueros, and mongitas, were flying
swiftly along, rending the air with their piercing cries.

Paganel's admiration increased with every step, and he had nearly exhausted
his vocabulary of adjectives by his loud exclamations, to the astonishment of the
Patagonian, to whom the birds, and the swans, and the prairies were every day
things. The learned geographer was so lost in delight, that he seemed hardly to
have started before they came in sight of the Indian camp, or TOLDERIA,
situated in the heart of a valley.

About thirty nomadic Indians were living there in rude cabins made of
branches, pasturing immense herds of milch cows, sheep, oxen, and horses. They
went from one prairie to another, always finding a well-spread table for their
four-footed guests.

These nomads were a hybrid type of Araucans, Pehu-enches, and Aucas.
They were Ando-Peruvians, of an olive tint, of medium stature and massive
form, with a low forehead, almost circular face, thin lips, high cheekbones,
effeminate features, and cold expression. As a whole, they are about the least
interesting of the Indians. However, it was their herds Glenarvan wanted, not
themselves. As long as he could get beef and horses, he cared for nothing else.

Thalcave did the bargaining. It did not take long. In exchange for seven
ready saddled horses of the Argentine breed, 100 pounds of CHARQUI, or dried
meat, several measures of rice, and leather bottles for water, the Indians agreed
to take twenty ounces of gold as they could not get wine or rum, which they
would have preferred, though they were perfectly acquainted with the value of
gold. Glenarvan wished to purchase an eighth horse for the Patagonian, but he
gave him to understand that it would be useless.

They got back to the camp in less than half an hour, and were hailed with
acclamations by the whole party or rather the provisions and horses were. They
were all hungry, and ate heartily of the welcome viands. Robert took a little food
with the rest. He was fast recovering strength. The close of the day was spent in


complete repose and pleasant talk about the dear absent ones.

Paganel never quitted the Indian's side. It was not that he was so glad to see a
real Patagonian, by whom he looked a perfect pigmy-- a Patagonian who might
have almost rivaled the Emperor Maximii, and that Congo negro seen by the
learned Van der Brock, both eight feet high; but he caught up Spanish phrases
from the Indian and studied the language without a book this time, gesticulating
at a great rate all the grand sonorous words that fell on his ear.

"If I don't catch the accent," he said to the Major, "it won't be my fault; but
who would have said to me that it was a Patagonian who would teach me
Spanish one day?"

CHAPTER XVI THE NEWS OF THE LOST CAPTAIN

NEXT day, the 22d of October, at eight o'clock in the morning, Thalcave
gave the signal for departure. Between the 22d and 42d degrees the Argentine
soil slopes eastward, and all the travelers had to do was to follow the slope right
down to the sea.

Glenarvan had supposed Thalcave's refusal of a horse was that he preferred
walking, as some guides do, but he was mistaken, for just as they were ready, the
Patagonian gave a peculiar whistle, and immediately a magnificent steed of the
pure Argentine breed came bounding out of a grove close by, at his master's call.
Both in form and color the animal was of perfect beauty. The Major, who was a
thorough judge of all the good points of a horse, was loud in admiration of this
sample of the Pampas breed, and considered that, in many respects, he greatly
resembled an English hunter. This splendid creature was called "Thaouka," a
word in Patagonia which means bird, and he well deserved the name.

Thalcave was a consummate horseman, and to see him on his prancing steed
was a sight worth looking at. The saddle was adapted to the two hunting
weapons in common use on the Argentine plains--the BOLAS and the LAZO.
The BOLAS consists of three balls fastened together by a strap of leather,
attached to the front of the RECADO. The Indians fling them often at the
distance of a hundred feet from the animal or enemy of which they are in pursuit,
and with such precision that they catch round their legs and throw them down in
an instant. It is a formidable weapon in their hands, and one they handle with
surprising skill. The LAZO is always retained in the hand. It is simply a rope,
thirty feet long, made of tightly twisted leather, with a slip knot at the end, which
passes through an iron ring. This noose was thrown by the right hand, while the
left keeps fast hold of the rope, the other end of which is fastened to the saddle.
A long carbine, in the shoulder belt completed the accouterments of the
Patagonian.

He took his place at the head of the party, quite unconscious of the


admiration he was exciting, and they set off, going alternately at a gallop and
walking pace, for the "trot" seemed altogether unknown to them. Robert proved
to be a bold rider, and completely reassured Glenarvan as to his ability to keep
his seat.

The Pampas commenced at the very foot of the Cordilleras. They may be
divided into three parts. The first extends from the chain of the Andes, and
stretches over an extent of 250 miles covered with stunted trees and bushes; the
second 450 miles is clothed with magnificent herbage, and stops about 180 miles
from Buenos Ayres; from this point to the sea, the foot of the traveler treads over
immense prairies of lucerne and thistles, which constitute the third division of
the Pampas.

On issuing from the gorges of the Cordilleras, Glenarvan and his band came
first to plains of sand, called MEDANOS, lying in ridges like waves of the sea,
and so extremely fine that the least breath of wind agitated the light particles,
and sent them flying in clouds, which rose and fell like water-spouts. It was a
spectacle which caused both pleasure and pain, for nothing could be more
curious than to see the said water-spouts wandering over the plain, coming in
contact and mingling with each other, and falling and rising in wild confusion;
but, on the other hand, nothing could be more disagreeable than the dust which
was thrown off by these innumerable MEDANOS, which was so impalpable that
close one's eyes as they might, it found its way through the lids.

This phenomenon lasted the greater part of the day. The travelers made good
progress, however, and about four o'clock the Cordilleras lay full forty miles
behind them, the dark outlines being already almost lost in the evening mists.
They were all somewhat fatigued with the journey, and glad enough to halt for
the night on the banks of the Neuquem, called Ramid, or Comoe by certain
geographers, a troubled, turbulent rapid flowing between high red banks.

No incident of any importance occurred that night or the following day. They
rode well and fast, finding the ground firm, and the temperature bearable.
Toward noon, however, the sun's rays were extremely scorching, and when
evening came, a bar of clouds streaked the southwest horizon--a sure sign of a
change in the weather. The Patagonian pointed it out to the geographer, who
replied:

"Yes, I know;" and turning to his companions, added, "see, a change of
weather is coming! We are going to have a taste of PAMPERO."

And he went on to explain that this PAMPERO is very common in the
Argentine plains. It is an extremely dry wind which blows from the southwest.
Thalcave was not mistaken, for the PAMPERO blew violently all night, and was
sufficiently trying to poor fellows only sheltered by their ponchos. The horses


lay down on the ground, and the men stretched themselves beside them in a
close group. Glenarvan was afraid they would be delayed by the continuance of
the hurricane, but Paganel was able to reassure him on that score, after
consulting his barometer.

"The PAMPERO generally brings a tempest which lasts three days, and may
be always foretold by the depression of the mercury," he said. "But when the
barometer rises, on the contrary, which is the case now, all we need expect is a
few violent blasts. So you can make your mind easy, my good friend; by sunrise
the sky will be quite clear again."

"You talk like a book, Paganel,” replied Glenarvan.

"And I am one; and what's more, you are welcome to turn over my leaves
whenever you like."

The book was right. At one o'clock the wind suddenly lulled, and the weary
men fell asleep and woke at daybreak, refreshed and invigorated.

It was the 20th of October, and the tenth day since they had left Talcahuano.
They were still ninety miles from the point where the Rio Colorado crosses the
thirty-seventh parallel, that is to say, about two days' journey. Glenarvan kept a
sharp lookout for the appearance of any Indians, intending to question them,
through Thalcave, about Captain Grant, as Paganel could not speak to him well
enough for this. But the track they were following was one little frequented by
the natives, for the ordinary routes across the Pampas lie further north. If by
chance some nomadic horseman came in sight far away, he was off again like a
dart, not caring to enter into conversation with strangers. To a solitary individual,
a little troop of eight men, all mounted and well armed, wore a suspicious aspect,
so that any intercourse either with honest men or even banditti, was almost
impossible.

Glenarvan was regretting this exceedingly, when he unexpectedly met with a
singular justification of his rendering of the eventful document.

In pursuing the course the travelers had laid down for themselves, they had
several times crossed the routes over the plains in common use, but had struck
into none of them. Hitherto Thalcave had made no remark about this. He
understood quite well, however, that they were not bound for any particular
town, or village, or settlement. Every morning they set out in a straight line
toward the rising sun, and went on without the least deviation. Moreover, it must
have struck Thalcave that instead of being the guide he was guided; yet, with
true Indian reserve, he maintained absolute silence. But on reaching a particular
point, he checked his horse suddenly, and said to Paganel:

"The Carmen route."

"Yes, my good Patagonian," replied Paganel in his best Spanish; "the route


from Carmen to Mendoza."

"We are not going to take it?"

"No," replied Paganel.

"Where are we going then?"

"Always to the east."

"That's going nowhere."

"Who knows?"

Thalcave was silent, and gazed at the geographer with an air of profound
surprise. He had no suspicion that Paganel was joking, for an Indian is always
grave.

"You are not going to Carmen, then?" he added, after a moment's pause.

"No."

"Nor to Mendoza?"

"No, nor to Mendoza."

Just then Glenarvan came up to ask the reason of the stoppage, and what he
and Thalcave were discussing.

"He wanted to know whether we were going to Carmen or Mendoza, and
was very much surprised at my negative reply to both questions."

"Well, certainly, it must seem strange to him."

"T think so. He says we are going nowhere."

"Well, Paganel, I wonder if it is possible to make him understand the object
of our expedition, and what our motive is for always going east."

"That would be a difficult matter, for an Indian knows nothing about degrees,
and the finding of the document would appear to him a mere fantastic story."

"Is it the story he would not understand, or the storyteller?" said McNabbs,
quietly

"Ah, McNabbs, I see you have small faith in my Spanish yet."

"Well, try it, my good friend."

"So I will."

And turning round to the Patagonian he began his narrative, breaking down
frequently for the want of a word, and the difficulty of making certain details
intelligible to a half-civilized Indian. It was quite a sight to see the learned
geographer. He gesticulated and articulated, and so worked himself up over it,
that the big drops of sweat fell in a cascade down his forehead on to his chest.
When his tongue failed, his arms were called to aid. Paganel got down on the
ground and traced a geographical map on the sand, showing where the lines of
latitude and longitude cross and where the two oceans were, along which the
Carmen route led. Thalcave looked on composedly, without giving any
indication of comprehending or not comprehending.


The lesson had lasted half an hour, when the geographer left off, wiped his
streaming face, and waited for the Patagonian to speak.

"Does he understand?" said Glenarvan.

"That remains to be seen; but if he doesn't, I give it up," replied Paganel.

Thalcave neither stirred nor spoke. His eyes remained fixed on the lines
drawn on the sand, now becoming fast effaced by the wind.

"Well?" said Paganel to him at length.

The Patagonian seemed not to hear. Paganel fancied he could detect an
ironical smile already on the lips of the Major, and determined to carry the day,
was about to recommence his geographical illustrations, when the Indian
stopped him by a gesture, and said:

"You are in search of a prisoner?"

"Yes," replied Paganel.

"And just on this line between the setting and rising sun?" added Thalcave,
speaking in Indian fashion of the route from west to east.

"Yes, yes, that's it."

"And it's your God," continued the guide, "that has sent you the secret of this
prisoner on the waves."

"God himself."

"His will be accomplished then," replied the native almost solemnly. "We
will march east, and if it needs be, to the sun."

Paganel, triumphing in his pupil, immediately translated his replies to his
companions, and exclaimed:

"What an intelligent race! All my explanations would have been lost on
nineteen in every twenty of the peasants in my own country."

Glenarvan requested him to ask the Patagonian if he had heard of any
foreigners who had fallen into the hands of the Indians of the Pampas.

Paganel did so, and waited an answer.

"Perhaps I have."

The reply was no sooner translated than the Patagonian found himself
surrounded by the seven men questioning him with eager glances. Paganel was
so excited, he could hardly find words, and he gazed at the grave Indian as if he
could read the reply on his lips.

Each word spoken by Thalcave was instantly translated, so that the whole
party seemed to hear him speak in their mother tongue.

"And what about the prisoner?" asked Paganel.

"He was a foreigner."

"You have seen him?"

"No; but I have heard the Indian speak of him. He is brave; he has the heart


'


of a bull."

"The heart of a bull!" said Paganel. "Ah, this magnificent Patagonian
language. You understand him, my friends, he means a courageous man."

"My father!" exclaimed Robert Grant, and, turning to Paganel, he asked what
the Spanish was for, "Is it my father."

"Es mio padre," replied the geographer.

Immediately taking Thalcave's hands in his own, the boy said, in a soft tone:

"Es mio padre."

"Suo padre," replied the Patagonian, his face lighting up.

He took the child in his arms, lifted him up on his horse, and gazed at him
with peculiar sympathy. His intelligent face was full of quiet feeling.

But Paganel had not completed his interrogations. "This prisoner, who was
he? What was he doing? When had Thalcave heard of him?" All these questions
poured upon him at once.

He had not long to wait for an answer, and learned that the European was a
slave in one of the tribes that roamed the country between the Colorado and the
Rio Negro.

"But where was the last place he was in?"

"With the Cacique Calfoucoura."

"In the line we have been following?"

"Yes."

"And who is this Cacique?"

"The chief of the Poyuches Indians, a man with two tongues and two hearts."

"That's to say false in speech and false in action," said Paganel, after he had
translated this beautiful figure of the Patagonian language.

"And can we deliver our friend?" he added.

"You may if he is still in the hands of the Indians."

"And when did you last hear of him?"

"A long while ago; the sun has brought two summers since then to the
Pampas."

The joy of Glenarvan can not be described. This reply agreed perfectly with
the date of the document. But one question still remained for him to put to
Thalcave.

"You spoke of a prisoner,” he said; "but were there not three?"

"T don't know," said Thalcave.

"And you know nothing of his present situation?"

"Nothing."

This ended the conversation. It was quite possible that the three men had
become separated long ago; but still this much was certain, that the Indians had


spoken of a European that was in their power; and the date of the captivity, and
even the descriptive phrase about the captive, evidently pointed to Harry Grant.


CHAPTER XVII A SERIOUS NECESSITY


THE Argentine Pampas extend from the thirty-fourth to the fortieth degree of
southern latitude. The word PAMPA, of Araucanian origin, signifies grass plain,
and justly applies to the whole region. The mimosas growing on the western
part, and the substantial herbage on the eastern, give those plains a peculiar
appearance. The soil is composed of sand and red or yellow clay, and this is
covered by a layer of earth, in which the vegetation takes root. The geologist
would find rich treasures in the tertiary strata here, for it is full of antediluvian
remains--enormous bones, which the Indians attribute to some gigantic race that
lived in a past age.

The horses went on at a good pace through the thick PAJA-BRAVA, the
grass of the Pampas, par excellence, so high and thick that the Indians find
shelter in it from storms. At certain distances, but increasingly seldom, there
were wet, marshy spots, almost entirely under water, where the willows grew,
and a plant called the Gygnerium argenteum. Here the horses drank their fill
greedily, as if bent on quenching their thirst for past, present and future.
Thalcave went first to beat the bushes and frighten away the cholinas, a most
dangerous species of viper, the bite of which kills an ox in less than an hour.

For two days they plodded steadily across this arid and deserted plain. The
dry heat became severe. There were not only no RIOS, but even the ponds dug
out by the Indians were dried up. As the drought seemed to increase with every
mile, Paganel asked Thalcave when he expected to come to water.

"At Lake Salinas," replied the Indian.

"And when shall we get there?"

"To-morrow evening."

When the Argentines travel in the Pampas they generally dig wells, and find
water a few feet below the surface. But the travelers could not fall back on this
resource, not having the necessary implements. They were therefore obliged to
husband the small provision of water they had still left, and deal it out in rations,
so that if no one had enough to satisfy his thirst no one felt it too painful.

They halted at evening after a course of thirty miles and eagerly looked
forward to a good night's rest to compensate for the fatigue of day. But their
slumbers were invaded by a swarm of mosquitoes, which allowed them no
peace. Their presence indicated a change of wind which shifted to the north. A
south or southwest wind generally puts to flight these little pests.

Even these petty ills of life could not ruffle the Major's equanimity; but


Paganel, on the contrary, was perfectly exasperated by such trifling annoyances.
He abused the poor mosquitoes desperately, and deplored the lack of some acid
lotion which would have eased the pain of their stings. The Major did his best to
console him by reminding him of the fact that they had only to do with one
species of insect, among the 300,000 naturalists reckon. He would listen to
nothing, and got up in a very bad temper.

He was quite willing to start at daybreak, however, for they had to get to
Lake Salinas before sundown. The horses were tired out and dying for water, and
though their riders had stinted themselves for their sakes, still their ration was
very insufficient. The drought was constantly increasing, and the heat none the
less for the wind being north, this wind being the simoom of the Pampas.

There was a brief interruption this day to the monotony of the journey.
Mulrady, who was in front of the others, rode hastily back to report the approach
of a troop of Indians. The news was received with very different feelings by
Glenarvan and Thalcave. The Scotchman was glad of the chance of gleaning
some information about his shipwrecked countryman, while the Patagonian
hardly cared to encounter the nomadic Indians of the prairie, knowing their
bandit propensities. He rather sought to avoid them, and gave orders to his party
to have their arms in readiness for any trouble.

Presently the nomads came in sight, and the Patagonian was reassured at
finding they were only ten in number. They came within a hundred yards of
them, and stopped. This was near enough to observe them distinctly. They were
fine specimens of the native races, which had been almost entirely swept away in
1833 by General Rosas, tall in stature, with arched forehead and olive
complexion. They were dressed in guanaco skins, and carried lances twenty feet
long, knives, slings, bolas, and lassos, and, by their dexterity in the management
of their horses, showed themselves to be accomplished riders.

They appeared to have stopped for the purpose of holding a council with
each other, for they shouted and gesticulated at a great rate. Glenarvan
determined to go up to them; but he had no sooner moved forward than the
whole band wheeled round, and disappeared with incredible speed. It would
have been useless for the travelers to attempt to overtake them with such
wornout horses.

"The cowards!" exclaimed Paganel.

"They scampered off too quick for honest folks," said McNabbs.

"Who are these Indians, Thalcave?" asked Paganel.

"Gauchos."

"The Gauchos!" cried Paganel; and, turning to his companions, he added,
"we need not have been so much on our guard; there was nothing to fear."


"How is that?" asked McNabbs.

"Because the Gauchos are inoffensive peasants."

"You believe that, Paganel?"

"Certainly I do. They took us for robbers, and fled in terror."

"T rather think they did not dare to attack us," replied Glenarvan, much vexed
at not being able to enter into some sort of communication with those Indians,
whatever they were.

"That's my opinion too," said the Major, "for if I am not mistaken, instead of
being harmless, the Gauchos are formidable out-and-out bandits."

"The idea!" exclaimed Paganel.

And forthwith commenced a lively discussion of this ethnological thesis-- so
lively that the Major became excited, and, quite contrary to his usual suavity,
said bluntly:

"I believe you are wrong, Paganel."

"Wrong?" replied Paganel.

"Yes. Thalcave took them for robbers, and he knows what he is talking
about."

"Well, Thalcave was mistaken this time," retorted Paganel, somewhat
sharply. "The Gauchos are agricul-turists and shepherds, and nothing else, as I
have stated in a pamphlet on the natives of the Pampas, written by me, which has
attracted some notice."

V. ITV Verne

[illustration omitted] [page intentionally blank]

"Well, well, you have committed an error, that's all, Monsieur Paganel."

"What, Monsieur McNabbs! you tell me I have committed an error?"

"An inadvertence, if you like, which you can put among the ERRATA in the
next edition."

Paganel, highly incensed at his geographical knowledge being brought in
question, and even jested about, allowed his ill-humor to get the better of him,
and said:

"Know, sir, that my books have no need of such ERRATA."

"Indeed! Well, on this occasion they have, at any rate," retorted McNabbs,
quite as obstinate as his opponent.

"Sir, I think you are very annoying to-day."

"And I think you are very crabbed."

Glenarvan thought it was high time to interfere, for the discussion was
getting too hot, so he said:

"Come, now, there is no doubt one of you is very teasing and the other is
very crabbed, and I must say I am surprised at both of you."


The Patagonian, without understanding the cause, could see that the two
friends were quarreling. He began to smile, and said quietly:

"Tt's the north wind."

"The north wind," exclaimed Paganel; "what's the north wind to do with it?"

"Ah, it is just that," said Glenarvan. "It's the north wind that has put you ina
bad temper. I have heard that, in South America, the wind greatly irritates the
nervous system."

"By St. Patrick, Edward you are right," said the Major, laughing heartily.

But Paganel, in a towering rage, would not give up the contest, and turned
upon Glenarvan, whose intervention in this jesting manner he resented.

"And so, my Lord, my nervous system is irritated?" he said.

"Yes, Paganel, it is the north wind--a wind which causes many a crime in the
Pampas, as the TRAMONTANE does in the Campagna of Rome."

"Crimes!" returned the geographer. "Do I look like a man that would commit
crimes?"

"That's not exactly what I said."

"Tell me at once that I want to assassinate you?"

"Well, I am really afraid," replied Glenarvan, bursting into an uncontrollable
fit of laughter, in which all others joined.

Paganel said no more, but went off in front alone, and came back in a few
minutes quite himself, as if he had completely forgotten his grievance.

At eight o'clock in the evening, Thalcave, who was considerably in advance
of the rest, descried in the distance the much-desired lake, and in less than a
quarter of an hour they reached its banks; but a grievous disappointment awaited
them--the lake was dried up.


CHAPTER XVIIT INSEARCH OF WATER


LAKE SALINAS ends the string of lagoons connected with the Sierras
Ventana and Guamini. Numerous expeditions were formerly made there from
Buenos Ayres, to collect the salt deposited on its banks, as the waters contain
great quantities of chloride of sodium.

But when Thalcave spoke of the lake as supplying drinkable water he was
thinking of the RIOS of fresh water which run into it. Those streams, however,
were all dried up also; the burning sun had drunk up every thing liquid, and the
consternation of the travelers may be imagined at the discovery.

Some action must be taken immediately, however; for what little water still
remained was almost bad, and could not quench thirst. Hunger and fatigue were
forgotten in the face of this imperious necessity. A sort of leather tent, called a
ROUKAH, which had been left by the natives, afforded the party a temporary
resting-place, and the weary horses stretched themselves along the muddy banks,
and tried to browse on the marine plants and dry reeds they found there--
nauseous to the taste as they must have been.

As soon as the whole party were ensconced in the ROUKAH, Paganel asked
Thalcave what he thought was best to be done. A rapid conversation followed, a
few words of which were intelligible to Glenarvan. Thalcave spoke calmly, but
the lively Frenchman gesticulated enough for both. After a little, Thalcave sat
silent and folded his arms.

"What does he say?" asked Glenarvan. "I fancied he was advising us to
separate."

"Yes, into two parties. Those of us whose horses are so done out with fatigue
and thirst that they can scarcely drag one leg after the other, are to continue the
route as they best can, while the others, whose steeds are fresher, are to push on
in advance toward the river Guamini, which throws itself into Lake San Lucas
about thirty-one miles off. If there should be water enough in the river, they are
to wait on the banks till their companions reach them; but should it be dried up,
they will hasten back and spare them a useless journey."

"And what will we do then?" asked Austin.

"Then we shall have to make up our minds to go seventy-two miles south, as
far as the commencement of the Sierra Ventana, where rivers abound."

"Tt is wise counsel, and we will act upon it without loss of time. My horse is
in tolerable good trim, and I volunteer to accompany Thalcave."

"Oh, my Lord, take me," said Robert, as if it were a question of some


pleasure party.

"But would you be able for it, my boy?"

"Oh, I have a fine beast, which just wants to have a gallop. Please, my Lord,
to take me."

"Come, then, my boy," said Glenarvan, delighted not to leave Robert behind.
"If we three don't manage to find out fresh water somewhere," he added, "we
must be very stupid."

"Well, well, and what about me?" said Paganel.

"Oh, my dear Paganel, you must stay with the reserve corps," replied the
Major. "You are too well acquainted with the 37th parallel and the river Guamini
and the whole Pampas for us to let you go. Neither Mulrady, nor Wilson, nor
myself would be able to rejoin Thalcave at the given rendezvous, but we will put
ourselves under the banner of the brave Jacques Paganel with perfect
confidence."

"I resign myself," said the geographer, much flattered at having supreme
command.

"But mind, Paganel, no distractions," added the Major. "Don't you take us to
the wrong place--to the borders of the Pacific, for instance."

"Oh, you insufferable Major; it would serve you right," replied Paganel,
laughing. "But how will you manage to understand what Thalcave says,
Glenarvan?" he continued.

"I suppose," replied Glenarvan, "the Patagonian and I won't have much to
talk about; besides, I know a few Spanish words, and, at a pinch, I should not
fear either making him understand me, or my understanding him."

"Go, then, my worthy friend," said Paganel.

"We'll have supper first," rejoined Glenarvan, "and then sleep, if we can, till
it is starting time."

The supper was not very reviving without drink of any kind, and they tried to
make up for the lack of it by a good sleep. But Paganel dreamed of water all
night, of torrents and cascades, and rivers and ponds, and streams and brooks--in
fact, he had a complete nightmare.

Next morning, at six o'clock, the horses of Thalcave, Glenarvan and Robert
were got ready. Their last ration of water was given them, and drunk with more
avidity than satisfaction, for it was filthy, disgusting stuff. The three travelers
then jumped into their saddles, and set off, shouting "Au revoir!" to their
companions.

"Don't come back whatever you do," called Paganel after them.

The Desertio de las Salinas, which they had to traverse, is a dry plain,
covered with stunted trees not above ten feet high, and small mimosas, which the


'


Indians call curra-mammel; and JUMES, a bushy shrub, rich in soda. Here and
there large spaces were covered with salt, which sparkled in the sunlight with
astonishing brilliancy. These might easily have been taken for sheets of ice, had
not the intense heat forbidden the illusion; and the contrast these dazzling white
sheets presented to the dry, burned-up ground gave the desert a most peculiar
character. Eighty miles south, on the contrary, the Sierra Ventana, toward which
the travelers might possibly have to betake themselves should the Guamini
disappoint their hopes, the landscape was totally different. There the fertility is
splendid; the pasturage is incomparable. Unfortunately, to reach them would
necessitate a march of one hundred and thirty miles south; and this was why
Thalcave thought it best to go first to Guamini, as it was not only much nearer,
but also on the direct line of route.

The three horses went forward might and main, as if instinctively knowing
whither they were bound. Thaouka especially displayed a courage that neither
fatigue nor hunger could damp. He bounded like a bird over the dried-up
CANADAS and the bushes of CURRA-MAMMEL, his loud, joyous neighing
seeming to bode success to the search. The horses of Glenarvan and Robert,
though not so light-footed, felt the spur of his example, and followed him
bravely. Thalcave inspirited his companions as much as Thaouka did his four-
footed brethren. He sat motionless in the saddle, but often turned his head to
look at Robert, and ever and anon gave him a shout of encouragement and
approval, as he saw how well he rode. Certainly the boy deserved praise, for he
was fast becoming an excellent cavalier.

"Bravo! Robert," said Glenarvan. "Thalcave is evidently congratulating you,
my boy, and paying you compliments."

"What for, my Lord?"

"For your good horsemanship."

"T can hold firm on, that's all," replied Robert blushing with pleasure at such
an encomium.

"That is the principal thing, Robert; but you are too modest. I tell you that
some day you will turn out an accomplished horseman."

"What would papa say to that?" said Robert, laughing. "He wants me to be a
sailor."

"The one won't hinder the other. If all cavaliers wouldn't make good sailors,
there is no reason why all sailors should not make good horsemen. To keep one's
footing on the yards must teach a man to hold on firm; and as to managing the
reins, and making a horse go through all sorts of movements, that's easily
acquired. Indeed, it comes naturally."

"Poor father," said Robert; "how he will thank you for saving his life."


"You love him very much, Robert?"

"Yes, my Lord, dearly. He was so good to me and my sister. We were his
only thought: and whenever he came home from his voyages, we were sure of
some SOUVENIR from all the places he had been to; and, better still, of loving
words and caresses. Ah! if you knew him you would love him, too. Mary is most
like him. He has a soft voice, like hers. That's strange for a sailor, isn't it?"

"Yes, Robert, very strange."

"I see him still," the boy went on, as if speaking to himself. "Good, brave
papa. He put me to sleep on his knee, crooning an old Scotch ballad about the
lochs of our country. The time sometimes comes back to me, but very confused
like. So it does to Mary, too. Ah, my Lord, how we loved him. Well, I do think
one needs to be little to love one's father like that."

"Yes, and to be grown up, my child, to venerate him," replied Glenarvan,
deeply touched by the boy's genuine affection.

During this conversation the horses had been slackening speed, and were
only walking now.

"You will find him?" said Robert again, after a few minutes' silence.

"Yes, we'll find him," was Glenarvan's reply, "Thalcave has set us on the
track, and I have great confidence in him."

"Thalcave is a brave Indian, isn't he?" said the boy.

"That indeed he is."

"Do you know something, my Lord?"

"What is it, and then I will tell you?"

"That all the people you have with you are brave. Lady Helena, whom I love
so, and the Major, with his calm manner, and Captain Mangles, and Monsieur
Paganel, and all the sailors on the DUNCAN. How courageous and devoted they
are."

"Yes, my boy, I know that," replied Glenarvan.

"And do you know that you are the best of all."

"No, most certainly I don't know that."

"Well, it is time you did, my Lord," said the boy, seizing his lordship's hand,
and covering it with kisses.

Glenarvan shook his head, but said no more, as a gesture from Thalcave
made them spur on their horses and hurry forward.

But it was soon evident that, with the exception of Thaouka, the wearied
animals could not go quicker than a walking pace. At noon they were obliged to
let them rest for an hour. They could not go on at all, and refused to eat the
ALFAFARES, a poor, burnt-up sort of lucerne that grew there.

Glenarvan began to be uneasy. Tokens of sterility were not the least on the


decrease, and the want of water might involve serious calamities. Thalcave said
nothing, thinking probably, that it would be time enough to despair if the
Guamini should be dried up--if, indeed, the heart of an Indian can ever despair.

Spur and whip had both to be employed to induce the poor animals to resume
the route, and then they only crept along, for their strength was gone.

Thaouka, indeed, could have galloped swiftly enough, and reached the RIO
in a few hours, but Thalcave would not leave his companions behind, alone in
the midst of a desert.

It was hard work, however, to get the animal to consent to walk quietly. He
kicked, and reared, and neighed violently, and was subdued at last more by his
master's voice than hand. Thalcave positively talked to the beast, and Thaouka
understood perfectly, though unable to reply, for, after a great deal of arguing,
the noble creature yielded, though he still champed the bit.

Thalcave did not understand Thaouka, it turned out, though Thaouka
understood him. The intelligent animal felt humidity in the atmosphere and
drank it in with frenzy, moving and making a noise with his tongue, as if taking
deep draughts of some cool refreshing liquid. The Patagonian could not mistake
him now--water was not far off.

The two other horses seemed to catch their comrade's meaning, and, inspired
by his example, made a last effort, and galloped forward after the Indian.

About three o'clock a white line appeared in a dip of the road, and seemed to
tremble in the sunlight.

"Water!" exclaimed Glenarvan.

"Yes, yes! it is water!" shouted Robert.

They were right; and the horses knew it too, for there was no need now to
urge them on; they tore over the ground as if mad, and in a few minutes had
reached the river, and plunged in up to their chests.

Their masters had to go on too, whether they would or not but they were so
rejoiced at being able to quench their thirst, that this compulsory bath was no
grievance.

"Oh, how delicious this is!" exclaimed Robert, taking a deep draught.

"Drink moderately, my boy," said Glenarvan; but he did not set the example.

Thalcave drank very quietly, without hurrying himself, taking small gulps,
but "as long as a lazo," as the Patagonians say. He seemed as if he were never
going to leave off, and really there was some danger of his swallowing up the
whole river.

At last Glenarvan said:

"Well, our friends won't be disappointed this time; they will be sure of
finding clear, cool water when they get here-- that is to say, if Thalcave leaves


any for them."

"But couldn't we go to meet them? It would spare them several hours'
suffering and anxiety."

"You're right my boy; but how could we carry them this water? The leather
bottles were left with Wilson. No; it is better for us to wait for them as we
agreed. They can't be here till about the middle of the night, so the best thing we
can do is to get a good bed and a good supper ready for them."

Thalcave had not waited for Glenarvan's proposition to prepare an
encampment. He had been fortunate enough to discover on the banks of the rio a
ramada, a sort of enclosure, which had served as a fold for flocks, and was shut
in on three sides. A more suitable place could not be found for their night's
lodging, provided they had no fear of sleeping in the open air beneath the star-lit
heavens; and none of Thalcave's companions had much solicitude on that score.
Accordingly they took possession at once, and stretched themselves at full length
on the ground in the bright sunshine, to dry their dripping garments.

"Well, now we've secured a lodging, we must think of supper," said
Glenarvan. "Our friends must not have reason to complain of the couriers they
sent to precede them; and if I am not much mistaken, they will be very satisfied.
It strikes me that an hour's shooting won't be lost time. Are you ready, Robert?"

"Yes, my Lord," replied the boy, standing up, gun in hand.

Why Glenarvan proposed this was, that the banks of the Guamini seemed to
be the general rendezvous of all the game in the surrounding plains. A sort of
partridge peculiar to the Pampas, called TINAMOUS; black wood-hens; a
species of plover, called TERU-TERU; yellow rays, and waterfowl with
magnificent green plumage, rose in coveys. No quadrupeds, however, were
visible, but Thalcave pointed to the long grass and thick brushwood, and gave
his friends to understand they were lying there in concealment.

Disdaining the feathered tribes when more substantial game was at hand, the
hunters’ first shots were fired into the underwood. Instantly there rose by the
hundred roebucks and guanacos, like those that had swept over them that terrible
night on the Cordilleras, but the timid creatures were so frightened that they
were all out of gunshot in a twinkling. The hunters were obliged to content
themselves with humbler game, though in an alimentary point of view nothing
better could be wished. A dozen of red partridges and rays were speedily brought
down, and Glenarvan also managed very cleverly to kill a TAY-TETRE, or
peccary, a pachydermatous animal, the flesh of which is excellent eating.

In less than half an hour the hunters had all the game they required. Robert
had killed a curious animal belonging to the order EDENTATA, an armadillo, a
sort of tatou, covered with a hard bony shell, in movable pieces, and measuring a


foot and a half long. It was very fat and would make an excellent dish, the
Patagonian said. Robert was very proud of his success.

Thalcave did his part by capturing a NANDOU, a species of ostrich,
remarkable for its extreme swiftness.

There could be no entrapping such an animal, and the Indian did not attempt
it. He urged Thaouka to a gallop, and made a direct attack, knowing that if the
first aim missed the NANDOU would soon tire out horse and rider by involving
them in an inextricable labyrinth of windings. The moment, therefore, that
Thalcave got to a right distance, he flung his BOLAS with such a powerful hand,
and so skillfully, that he caught the bird round the legs and paralyzed his efforts
at once. In a few seconds it lay flat on the ground.

The Indian had not made his capture for the mere pleasure and glory of such
a novel chase. The flesh of the NANDOU is highly esteemed, and Thalcave felt
bound to contribute his share of the common repast.

They returned to the RAMADA, bringing back the string of partridges, the
ostrich, the peccary, and the armadillo. The ostrich and the peccary were
prepared for cooking by divesting them of their tough skins, and cutting them up
into thin slices. As to the armadillo, he carries his cooking apparatus with him,
and all that had to be done was to place him in his own shell over the glowing
embers.

The substantial dishes were reserved for the night-comers, and the three
hunters contented themselves with devouring the partridges, and washed down
their meal with clear, fresh water, which was pronounced superior to all the
porter in the world, even to the famous Highland USQUEBAUGH, or whisky.

The horses had not been overlooked. A large quantity of dry fodder was
discovered lying heaped up in the RAMADA, and this supplied them amply with
both food and bedding.

When all was ready the three companions wrapped themselves in the
ponchos, and stretched themselves on an eiderdown of ALFAFARES, the usual
bed of hunters on the Pampas.


CHAPTER XIX THE RED WOLVES


NIGHT came, but the orb of night was invisible to the inhabitants of the
earth, for she was just in her first quarter. The dim light of the stars was all that
illumined the plain. The waters of the Guamini ran silently, like a sheet of oil
over a surface of marble. Birds, quadrupeds, and reptiles were resting motionless
after the fatigues of the day, and the silence of the desert brooded over the far-
spreading Pampas.

Glenarvan, Robert, and Thalcave, had followed the common example, and
lay in profound slumber on their soft couch of lucerne. The wornout horses had
stretched themselves full length on the ground, except Thaouka, who slept
standing, true to his high blood, proud in repose as in action, and ready to start at
his master's call. Absolute silence reigned within the inclosure, over which the
dying embers of the fire shed a fitful light.

However, the Indian's sleep did not last long; for about ten o'clock he woke,
sat up, and turned his ear toward the plain, listening intently, with half-closed
eyes. An uneasy look began to depict itself on his usually impassive face. Had he
caught scent of some party of Indian marauders, or of jaguars, water tigers, and
other terrible animals that haunt the neighborhood of rivers? Apparently it was
the latter, for he threw a rapid glance on the combustible materials heaped up in
the inclosure, and the expression of anxiety on his countenance seemed to
deepen. This was not surprising, as the whole pile of ALFAFARES would soon
burn out and could only ward off the attacks of wild beasts for a brief interval.

There was nothing to be done in the circumstances but wait; and wait he did,
in a half-recumbent posture, his head leaning on his hands, and his elbows on his
knees, like a man roused suddenly from his night's sleep.

A whole hour passed, and anyone except Thalcave would have lain down
again on his couch, reassured by the silence round him. But where a stranger
would have suspected nothing, the sharpened senses of the Indian detected the
approach of danger.

As he was thus watching and listening, Thaouka gave a low neigh, and
stretched his nostrils toward the entrance of the RAMADA.

This startled the Patagonian, and made him rise to his feet at once.

"Thaouka scents an enemy," he said to himself, going toward the opening, to
make careful survey of the plains.

Silence still prevailed, but not tranquillity; for Thalcave caught a glimpse of
shadows moving noiselessly over the tufts of CURRA-MAMMEL. Here and


there luminous spots appeared, dying out and rekindling constantly, in all
directions, like fantastic lights dancing over the surface of an immense lagoon.
An inexperienced eye might have mistaken them for fireflies, which shine at
night in many parts of the Pampas; but Thalcave was not deceived; he knew the
enemies he had to deal with, and lost no time in loading his carbine and taking
up his post in front of the fence.

He did not wait long, for a strange cry--a confused sound of barking and
howling--broke over the Pampas, followed next instant by the report of the
carbine, which made the uproar a hundred times worse.

Glenarvan and Robert woke in alarm, and started to their feet instantly.

"What is it?" exclaimed Robert.

"Is it the Indians?" asked Glenarvan.

"No," replied Thalcave, "the AGUARAS."

"AGUARAS?" said Robert, looking inquiringly at Glenarvan.

"Yes," replied Glenarvan, "the red wolves of the Pampas."

They seized their weapons at once, and stationed themselves beside the
Patagonian, who pointed toward the plain from whence the yelling resounded.

Robert drew back involuntarily.

"You are not afraid of wolves, my boy?" said Glenarvan.

"No, my Lord," said the lad in a firm tone, "and moreover, beside you I am
afraid of nothing."

"So much the better. These AGUARAS are not very formidable either; and if
it were not for their number I should not give them a thought."

"Never mind; we are all well armed; let them come."

"We'll certainly give them a warm reception," rejoined Glenarvan.

His Lordship only spoke thus to reassure the child, for a secret terror filled
him at the sight of this legion of bloodthirsty animals let loose on them at
midnight.

There might possibly be some hundreds, and what could three men do, even
armed to the teeth, against such a multitude?

As soon as Thalcave said the word AGUARA, Glenarvan knew that he
meant the red wolf, for this is the name given to it by the Pampas Indians. This
voracious animal, called by naturalists the Canis jubatus, is in shape like a large
dog, and has the head of a fox. Its fur is a reddish-cinnamon color, and there is a
black mane all down the back. It is a strong, nimble animal, generally inhabiting
marshy places, and pursuing aquatic animals by swimming, prowling about by
night and sleeping during the day. Its attacks are particularly dreaded at the
ESTANCIAS, or sheep stations, as it often commits considerable ravages,
carrying off the finest of the flock. Singly, the AGUARA is not much to be


feared; but they generally go in immense packs, and one had better have to deal
with a jaguar or cougar than with them.

Both from the noise of the howling and the multitude of shadows leaping
about, Glenarvan had a pretty good idea of the number of the wolves, and he
knew they had scented a good meal of human flesh or horse flesh, and none of
them would go back to their dens without a share. It was certainly a very
alarming situation to be in.

The assailants were gradually drawing closer. The horses displayed signs of
the liveliest terror, with the exception of Thaouka, who stamped his foot, and
tried to break loose and get out. His master could only calm him by keeping up a
low, continuous whistle.

Glenarvan and Robert had posted themselves so as to defend the opening of
the RAMADA. They were just going to fire into the nearest ranks of the wolves
when Thalcave lowered their weapons.

"What does Thalcave mean?" asked Robert.

"He forbids our firing."

"And why?"

"Perhaps he thinks it is not the right time."

But this was not the Indian's reason, and so Glenarvan saw when he lifted the
powder-flask, showed him it was nearly empty.

"What's wrong?" asked Robert.

"We must husband our ammunition," was the reply. "To-day's shooting has
cost us dear, and we are short of powder and shot. We can't fire more than twenty
times."

The boy made no reply, and Glenarvan asked him if he was frightened.

"No, my Lord," he said.

"That's right," returned Glenarvan.

A fresh report resounded that instant. Thalcave had made short work of one
assailant more audacious than the rest, and the infuriated pack had retreated to
within a hundred steps of the inclosure.

On a sign from the Indian Glenarvan took his place, while Thalcave went
back into the inclosure and gathered up all the dried grass and ALFAFARES,
and, indeed, all the combustibles he could rake together, and made a pile of them
at the entrance. Into this he flung one of the still-glowing embers, and soon the
bright flames shot up into the dark night. Glenarvan could now get a good
glimpse of his antagonists, and saw that it was impossible to exaggerate their
numbers or their fury. The barrier of fire just raised by Thalcave had redoubled
their anger, though it had cut off their approach. Several of them, however, urged
on by the hindmost ranks, pushed forward into the very flames, and burned their


paws for their pains.

From time to time another shot had to be fired, notwithstanding the fire, to
keep off the howling pack, and in the course of an hour fifteen dead animals lay
stretched on the prairie.

The situation of the besieged was, relatively speaking, less dangerous now.
As long as the powder lasted and the barrier of fire burned on, there was no fear
of being overmastered. But what was to be done afterward, when both means of
defense failed at once?

Glenarvan's heart swelled as he looked at Robert. He forgot himself in
thinking of this poor child, as he saw him showing a courage so far above his
years. Robert was pale, but he kept his gun steady, and stood with firm foot
ready to meet the attacks of the infuriated wolves.

However, after Glenarvan had calmly surveyed the actual state of affairs, he
determined to bring things to a crisis.

"In an hour's time," he said, "we shall neither have powder nor fire. It will
never do to wait till then before we settle what to do."

Accordingly, he went up to Thalcave, and tried to talk to him by the help of
the few Spanish words his memory could muster, though their conversation was
often interrupted by one or the other having to fire a shot.

It was no easy task for the two men to understand each other, but, most
fortunately, Glenarvan knew a great deal of the peculiarities of the red wolf;
otherwise he could never have interpreted the Indian's words and gestures.

As it was, fully a quarter of an hour elapsed before he could get any answer
from Thalcave to tell Robert in reply to his inquiry.

"What does he say?"

"He says that at any price we must hold out till daybreak. The AGUARA
only prowls about at night, and goes back to his lair with the first streak of dawn.
It is a cowardly beast, that loves the darkness and dreads the light--an owl on
four feet."

"Very well, let us defend ourselves, then, till morning."

"Yes, my boy, and with knife-thrusts, when gun and shots fail."

Already Thalcave had set the example, for whenever a wolf came too near
the burning pile, the long arm of the Patagonian dashed through the flames and
came out again reddened with blood.

But very soon this means of defense would be at an end. About two o'clock,
Thalcave flung his last armful of combustibles into the fire, and barely enough
powder remained to load a gun five times.

Glenarvan threw a sorrowful glance round him. He thought of the lad
standing there, and of his companions and those left behind, whom he loved so


dearly.

Robert was silent. Perhaps the danger seemed less imminent to his
imagination. But Glenarvan thought for him, and pictured to himself the horrible
fate that seemed to await him inevitably. Quite overcome by his emotion, he took
the child in his arms, and straining him convulsively to his heart, pressed his lips
on his forehead, while tears he could not restrain streamed down his cheeks.

Robert looked up into his face with a smile, and said, "I am not frightened."

"No, my child, no! and you are right. In two hours daybreak will come, and
we shall be saved. Bravo, Thalcave! my brave Patagonian! Bravo!" he added as
the Indian that moment leveled two enormous beasts who endeavored to leap
across the barrier of flames.

But the fire was fast dying out, and the DENOUEMENT of the terrible
drama was approaching. The flames got lower and lower. Once more the
shadows of night fell on the prairie, and the glaring eyes of the wolves glowed
like phosphorescent balls in the darkness. A few minutes longer, and the whole
pack would be in the inclosure.

Thalcave loaded his carbine for the last time, killed one more enormous
monster, and then folded his arms. His head sank on his chest, and he appeared
buried in deep thought. Was he planning some daring, impossible, mad attempt
to repulse the infuriated horde? Glenarvan did not venture to ask.

At this very moment the wolves began to change their tactics. The deafening
howls suddenly ceased: they seemed to be going away. Gloomy silence spread
over the prairie, and made Robert exclaim:

"They're gone!"

But Thalcave, guessing his meaning, shook his head. He knew they would
never relinquish their sure prey till daybreak made them hasten back to their
dens.

Still, their plan of attack had evidently been altered. They no longer
attempted to force the entrance, but their new maneuvers only heightened the
danger.

They had gone round the RAMADA, as by common consent, and were
trying to get in on the opposite side.

The next minute they heard their claws attacking the moldering wood, and
already formidable paws and hungry, savage jaws had found their way through
the palings. The terrified horses broke loose from their halters and ran about the
inclosure, mad with fear.

Glenarvan put his arms round the young lad, and resolved to defend him as
long as his life held out. Possibly he might have made a useless attempt at flight
when his eye fell on Thalcave.


The Indian had been stalking about the RAMADA like a stag, when he
suddenly stopped short, and going up to his horse, who was trembling with
impatience, began to saddle him with the most scrupulous care, without
forgetting a single strap or buckle. He seemed no longer to disturb himself in the
least about the wolves outside, though their yells had redoubled in intensity. A
dark suspicion crossed Glenarvan's mind as he watched him.

"He is going to desert us," he exclaimed at last, as he saw him seize the reins,
as if preparing to mount.

"He! never!" replied Robert. Instead of deserting them, the truth was that the
Indian was going to try and save his friends by sacrificing himself.

Thaouka was ready, and stood champing his bit. He reared up, and his
splendid eyes flashed fire; he understood his master.

But just as the Patagonian caught hold of the horse's mane, Glenarvan seized
his arm with a convulsive grip, and said, pointing to the open prairie.

"You are going away?"

V. IV Verne

"Yes," replied the Indian, understanding his gesture. Then he said a few
words in Spanish, which meant: "Thaouka; good horse; quick; will draw all the
wolves away after him."

"Oh, Thalcave," exclaimed Glenarvan.

"Quick, quick!" replied the Indian, while Glenarvan said, in a broken,
agitated voice to Robert:

"Robert, my child, do you hear him? He wants to sacrifice himself for us. He
wants to rush away over the Pampas, and turn off the wolves from us by
attracting them to himself."

"Friend Thalcave," returned Robert, throwing himself at the feet of the
Patagonian, "friend Thalcave, don't leave us!"

"No," said Glenarvan, "he shall not leave us."

And turning toward the Indian, he said, pointing to the frightened horses,
"Let us go together."

"No," replied Thalcave, catching his meaning. "Bad beasts; frightened;
Thaouka, good horse."

"Be it so then!" returned Glenarvan. "Thalcave will not leave you, Robert.
He teaches me what I must do. It is for me to go, and for him to stay by you."

Then seizing Thaouka’'s bridle, he said, "I am going, Thalcave, not you."

"No," replied the Patagonian quietly.

"IT am," exclaimed Glenarvan, snatching the bridle out of his hands. "I,
myself! Save this boy, Thalcave! I commit him to you."

Glenarvan was so excited that he mixed up English words with his Spanish.


But what mattered the language at such a terrible moment. A gesture was
enough. The two men understood each other.

However, Thalcave would not give in, and though every instant's delay but
increased the danger, the discussion continued.

Neither Glenarvan nor Thalcave appeared inclined to yield. The Indian had
dragged his companion towards the entrance of the RAMADA, and showed him
the prairie, making him understand that now was the time when it was clear from
the wolves; but that not a moment was to be lost, for should this maneuver not
succeed, it would only render the situation of those left behind more desperate.
and that he knew his horse well enough to be able to trust his wonderful
lightness and swiftness to save them all. But Glenarvan was blind and obstinate,
and determined to sacrifice himself at all hazards, when suddenly he felt himself
violently pushed back. Thaouka pranced up, and reared himself bolt upright on
his hind legs, and made a bound over the barrier of fire, while a clear, young
voice called out:

"God save you, my lord."

But before either Thalcave or Glenarvan could get more than a glimpse of
the boy, holding on fast by Thaouka's mane, he was out of sight.

"Robert! oh you unfortunate boy," cried Glenarvan.

But even Thalcave did not catch the words, for his voice was drowned in the
frightful uproar made by the wolves, who had dashed off at a tremendous speed
on the track of the horse.

Thalcave and Glenarvan rushed out of the RAMADA. Already the plain had
recovered its tranquillity, and all that could be seen of the red wolves was a
moving line far away in the distant darkness.

Glenarvan sank prostrate on the ground, and clasped his hands despairingly.
He looked at Thalcave, who smiled with his accustomed calmness, and said:

"Thaouka, good horse. Brave boy. He will save himself!"

"And suppose he falls?" said Glenarvan.

"He'll not fall."

But notwithstanding Thalcave's assurances, poor Glenarvan spent the rest of
the night in torturing anxiety. He seemed quite insensible now to the danger they
had escaped through the departure of the wolves, and would have hastened
immediately after Robert if the Indian had not kept him back by making him
understand the impossibility of their horses overtaking Thaouka; and also that
boy and horse had outdistanced the wolves long since, and that it would be
useless going to look for them till daylight.

At four o'clock morning began to dawn. A pale glimmer appeared in the
horizon, and pearly drops of dew lay thick on the plain and on the tall grass,


already stirred by the breath of day.

The time for starting had arrived.

"Now!" cried Thalcave, "come."

Glenarvan made no reply, but took Robert's horse and sprung into the saddle.
Next minute both men were galloping at full speed toward the west, in the line in
which their companions ought to be advancing. They dashed along at a
prodigious rate for a full hour, dreading every minute to come across the
mangled corpse of Robert. Glenarvan had torn the flanks of his horse with his
spurs in his mad haste, when at last gunshots were heard in the distance at
regular intervals, as if fired as a signal.

"There they are!" exclaimed Glenarvan; and both he and the Indian urged on
their steeds to a still quicker pace, till in a few minutes more they came up to the
little detachment conducted by Paganel. A cry broke from Glenarvan's lips, for
Robert was there, alive and well, still mounted on the superb Thaouka, who
neighed loudly with delight at the sight of his master.

"Oh, my child, my child!" cried Glenarvan, with indescribable tenderness in
his tone.

Both he and Robert leaped to the ground, and flung themselves into each
other's arms. Then the Indian hugged the brave boy in his arms.

"He is alive, he is alive," repeated Glenarvan again and again.

"Yes," replied Robert; "and thanks to Thaouka."

This great recognition of his favorite's services was wholly unexpected by
the Indian, who was talking to him that minute, caressing and speaking to him,
as if human blood flowed in the veins of the proud creature. Then tumming to
Paganel, he pointed to Robert, and said, "A brave!" and employing the Indian
metaphor, he added, "his spurs did not tremble!"

But Glenarvan put his arms round the boy and said, "Why wouldn't you let
me or Thalcave run the risk of this last chance of deliverance, my son?"

"My lord," replied the boy in tones of gratitude, "wasn't it my place to do it?
Thalcave has saved my life already, and you-- you are going to save my father."


CHAPTER XX STRANGE SIGNS


AFTER the first joy of the meeting was over, Paganel and his party, except
perhaps the Major, were only conscious of one feeling-- they were dying of
thirst. Most fortunately for them, the Guamini ran not far off, and about seven in
the morning the little troop reached the inclosure on its banks. The precincts
were strewed with the dead wolves, and judging from their numbers, it was
evident how violent the attack must have been, and how desperate the resistance.

As soon as the travelers had drunk their fill, they began to demolish the
breakfast prepared in the RAMADA, and did ample justice to the extraordinary
viands. The NANDOU fillets were pronounced first-rate, and the armadillo was
delicious.

"To eat moderately," said Paganel, "would be positive ingratitude to
Providence. We must eat immoderately."

And so they did, but were none the worse for it. The water of the Guamini
greatly aided digestion apparently.

Glenarvan, however, was not going to imitate Hannibal at Capua, and at ten
o'clock next morning gave the signal for starting. The leathern bottles were filled
with water, and the day's march commenced. The horses were so well rested that
they were quite fresh again, and kept up a canter almost constantly. The country
was not so parched up now, and consequently less sterile, but still a desert. No
incident occurred of any importance during the 2d and 3d of November, and in
the evening they reached the boundary of the Pampas, and camped for the night
on the frontiers of the province of Buenos Ayres. Two-thirds of their journey was
now accomplished. It was twenty-two days since they left the Bay of
Talcahuano, and they had gone 450 miles.

Next morning they crossed the conventional line which separates the
Argentine plains from the region of the Pampas. It was here that Thalcave hoped
to meet the Caciques, in whose hands, he had no doubt, Harry Grant and his men
were prisoners.

From the time of leaving the Guamini, there was marked change in the
temperature, to the great relief of the travelers. It was much cooler, thanks to the
violent and cold winds from Patagonia, which constantly agitate the atmospheric
waves. Horses and men were glad enough of this, after what they had suffered
from the heat and drought, and they felt animated with fresh ardor and
confidence. But contrary to what Thalcave had said, the whole district appeared
uninhabited, or rather abandoned.


Their route often led past or went right through small lagoons, sometimes of
fresh water, sometimes of brackish. On the banks and bushes about these, king-
wrens were hopping about and larks singing joyously in concert with the
tangaras, the rivals in color of the brilliant humming birds. On the thorny bushes
the nests of the ANNUBIS swung to and fro in the breeze like an Indian
hammock; and on the shore magnificent flamingos stalked in regular order like
soldiers marching, and spread out their flaming red wings. Their nests were seen
in groups of thousands, forming a complete town, about a foot high, and
resembling a truncated cone in shape. The flamingos did not disturb themselves
in the least at the approach of the travelers, but this did not suit Paganel.

"IT have been very desirous a long time," he said to the Major, "to see a
flamingo flying."

"All right," replied McNabbs.

"Now while I have the opportunity, I should like to make the most of it,"
continued Paganel.

"Very well; do it, Paganel."

"Come with me, then, Major, and you too Robert. I want witnesses."

And all three went off towards the flamingos, leaving the others to go on in
advance.

As soon as they were near enough, Paganel fired, only loading his gun,
however, with powder, for he would not shed even the blood of a bird uselessly.
The shot made the whole assemblage fly away en masse, while Paganel watched
them attentively through his spectacles.

"Well, did you see them fly?" he asked the Major.

"Certainly I did," was the reply. "I could not help seeing them, unless I had
been blind."

"Well and did you think they resembled feathered arrows when they were
flying?"

"Not in the least."

"Not a bit," added Robert.

"I was sure of it," said the geographer, with a satisfied air; "and yet the very
proudest of modest men, my illustrious countryman, Chateaubriand, made the
inaccurate comparison. Oh, Robert, comparison is the most dangerous figure in
rhetoric that I know. Mind you avoid it all your life, and only employ it in a last
extremity."

"Are you Satisfied with your experiment?" asked McNabbs.

"Delighted."

"And so am I. But we had better push on now, for your illustrious
Chateaubriand has put us more than a mile behind."


On rejoining their companions, they found Glenarvan busily engaged in
conversation with the Indian, though apparently unable to make him understand.
Thalcave's gaze was fixed intently on the horizon, and his face wore a puzzled
expression.

The moment Paganel came in sight, Glenarvan called out:

"Come along, friend Paganel. Thalcave and I can't understand each other at
all."

After a few minute's talk with the Patagonian, the interpreter turned to
Glenarvan and said:

"Thalcave is quite astonished at the fact, and certainly it is very strange that
there are no Indians, nor even traces of any to be seen in these plains, for they
are generally thick with companies of them, either driving along cattle stolen
from the ESTANCIAS, or going to the Andes to sell their zorillo cloths and
plaited leather whips."

"And what does Thalcave think is the reason?"

"He does not know; he is amazed and that's all."

"But what description of Indians did he reckon on meeting in this part of the
Pampas?"

"Just the very ones who had the foreign prisoners in their hands, the natives
under the rule of the Caciques Calfoucoura, Catriel, or Yanchetruz."

"Who are these Caciques?"

"Chiefs that were all powerful thirty years ago, before they were driven
beyond the sierras. Since then they have been reduced to subjection as much as
Indians can be, and they scour the plains of the Pampas and the province of
Buenos Ayres. I quite share Thalcave's surprise at not discovering any traces of
them in regions which they usually infest as SALTEADORES, or bandits."

"And what must we do then?"

"T'll go and ask him," replied Paganel.

After a brief colloquy he returned and said:

"This is his advice, and very sensible it is, I think. He says we had better
continue our route to the east as far as Fort Independence, and if we don't get
news of Captain Grant there we shall hear, at any rate, what has become of the
Indians of the Argentine plains."

"Is Fort Independence far away?" asked Glenarvan.

"No, it is in the Sierra Tandil, a distance of about sixty miles."

"And when shall we arrive?"

"The day after to-morrow, in the evening."

Glenarvan was considerably disconcerted by this circumstance. Not to find
an Indian where in general there were only too many, was so unusual that there


must be some grave cause for it; but worse still if Harry Grant were a prisoner in
the hands of any of those tribes, had be been dragged away with them to the
north or south? Glenarvan felt that, cost what it might, they must not lose his
track, and therefore decided to follow the advice of Thalcave, and go to the
village of Tandil. They would find some one there to speak to, at all events.

About four o'clock in the evening a hill, which seemed a mountain in so flat
a country, was sighted in the distance. This was Sierra Tapalquem, at the foot of
which the travelers camped that night.

The passage in the morning over this sierra, was accomplished without the
slightest difficulty; after having crossed the Cordillera of the Andes, it was easy
work to ascend the gentle heights of such a sierra as this. The horses scarcely
slackened their speed. At noon they passed the deserted fort of Tapalquem, the
first of the chain of forts which defend the southern frontiers from Indian
marauders. But to the increasing surprise of Thalcave, they did not come across
even the shadow of an Indian. About the middle of the day, however, three flying
horsemen, well mounted and well armed came in sight, gazed at them for an
instant, and then sped away with inconceivable rapidity. Glenarvan was furious.

"Gauchos," said the Patagonian, designating them by the name which had
caused such a fiery discussion between the Major and Paganel.

"Ah! the Gauchos," replied McNabbs. "Well, Paganel, the north wind is not
blowing to-day. What do you think of those fellows yonder?"

"T think they look like regular bandits."

"And how far is it from looking to being, my good geographer?"

"Only just a step, my dear Major."

Paganel's admission was received with a general laugh, which did not in the
least disconcert him. He went on talking about the Indians however, and made
this curious observation:

"I have read somewhere," he said, "that about the Arabs there is a peculiar
expression of ferocity in the mouth, while the eyes have a kindly look. Now, in
these American savages it is quite the reverse, for the eye has a particularly
villainous aspect."

No physiognomist by profession could have better characterized the Indian
race.

But desolate as the country appeared, Thalcave was on his guard against
surprises, and gave orders to his party to form themselves in a close platoon. It
was a useless precaution, however; for that same evening, they camped for the
night in an immense TOLDERIA, which they not only found perfectly empty,
but which the Patagonian declared, after he had examined it all round, must have
been uninhabited for a long time.


Next day, the first ESTANCIAS of the Sierra Tandil came in sight. The
ESTANCIAS are large cattle stations for breeding cattle; but Thalcave resolved
not to stop at any of them, but to go straight on to Fort Independence. They
passed several farms fortified by battlements and surrounded by a deep moat, the
principal building being encircled by a terrace, from which the inhabitants could
fire down on the marauders in the plain. Glenarvan might, perhaps, have got
some information at these houses, but it was the surest plan to go straight on to
the village of Tandil. Accordingly they went on without stopping, fording the
RIO of Los Huasos and also the Chapaleofu, a few miles further on. Soon they
were treading the grassy slopes of the first ridges of the Sierra Tandil, and an
hour afterward the village appeared in the depths of a narrow gorge, and above it
towered the lofty battlements of Fort Independence.


CHAPTER XXI A FALSE TRAIL


THE Sierra Tandil rises a thousand feet above the level of the sea. It is a
primordial chain--that is to say, anterior to all organic and metamorphic creation.
It is formed of a semi-circular ridge of gneiss hills, covered with fine short grass.
The district of Tandil, to which it has given its name, includes all the south of the
Province of Buenos Ayres, and terminates in a river which conveys north all the
RIOS that take their rise on its slopes.

After making a short ascent up the sierra, they reached the postern gate, so
carelessly guarded by an Argentine sentinel, that they passed through without
difficulty, a circumstance which betokened extreme negligence or extreme
security.

A few minutes afterward the Commandant appeared in person. He was a
vigorous man about fifty years of age, of military aspect, with grayish hair, and
an imperious eye, as far as one could see through the clouds of tobacco smoke
which escaped from his short pipe. His walk reminded Paganel instantly of the
old subalterns in his own country.

Thalcave was spokesman, and addressing the officer, presented Lord
Glenarvan and his companions. While he was speaking, the Commandant kept
staring fixedly at Paganel in rather an embarrassing manner. The geographer
could not understand what he meant by it, and was just about to interrogate him,
when the Commandant came forward, and seizing both his hands in the most
free-and-easy fashion, said in a joyous voice, in the mother tongue of the
geographer:

"A Frenchman!"

"Yes, a Frenchman," replied Paganel.

"Ah! delightful! Welcome, welcome. I am a Frenchman too," he added,
shaking Paganel's hand with such vigor as to be almost alarming.

"Is he a friend of yours, Paganel?" asked the Major.

"Yes," said Paganel, somewhat proudly. "One has friends in every division of
the globe."

After he had succeeded in disengaging his hand, though not without
difficulty, from the living vise in which it was held, a lively conversation ensued.
Glenarvan would fain have put in a word about the business on hand, but the
Commandant related his entire history, and was not in a mood to stop till he had
done. It was evident that the worthy man must have left his native country many
years back, for his mother tongue had grown unfamiliar, and if he had not


forgotten the words he certainly did not remember how to put them together. He
spoke more like a negro belonging to a French colony.

The fact was that the Governor of Fort Independence was a French sergeant,
an old comrade of Parachapee. He had never left the fort since it had been built
in 1828; and, strange to say, he commanded it with the consent of the Argentine
Government. He was a man about fifty years of age, a Basque by birth, and his
name was Manuel Ipharaguerre, so that he was almost a Spaniard. A year after
his arrival in the country he was naturalized, took service in the Argentine army,
and married an Indian girl, who was then nursing twin babies six months old--
two boys, be it understood, for the good wife of the Commandant would have
never thought of presenting her husband with girls. Manuel could not conceive
of any state but a military one, and he hoped in due time, with the help of God,
to offer the republic a whole company of young soldiers.

"You saw them. Charming! good soldiers are Jose, Juan, and Miquele! Pepe,
seven year old; Pepe can handle a gun."

Pepe, hearing himself complimented, brought his two little feet together, and
presented arms with perfect grace.

"He'll get on!" added the sergeant. "He'll be colonel-major or brigadier-
general some day."

Sergeant Manuel seemed so enchanted that it would have been useless to
express a contrary opinion, either to the profession of arms or the probable future
of his children. He was happy, and as Goethe says, "Nothing that makes us
happy is an illusion."

All this talk took up a quarter of an hour, to the great astonishment of
Thalcave. The Indian could not understand how so many words could come out
of one throat. No one interrupted the Sergeant, but all things come to an end, and
at last he was silent, but not till he had made his guests enter his dwelling, and be
presented to Madame Ipharaguerre. Then, and not till then, did he ask his guests
what had procured him the honor of their visit. Now or never was the moment to
explain, and Paganel, seizing the chance at once, began an account of their
journey across the Pampas, and ended by inquiring the reason of the Indians
having deserted the country.

"Ah! there was no one!" replied the Sergeant, shrugging his shoulders--
"really no one, and us, too, our arms crossed! Nothing to do!"

"But why?"

"War."

"War?"

"Yes, civil war between the Paraguayans and Buenos Ayriens," replied the
Sergeant.


"Well?"

"Well, Indians all in the north, in the rear of General Flores. Indian pillagers
find pillage there."

"But where are the Caciques?"

"Caciques are with them."

"What! Catriel?"

"There is no Catriel."

"And Calfoucoura?"

"There is no Calfoucoura."

"And is there no Yanchetruz?"

"No; no Yanchetruz."

The reply was interpreted by Thalcave, who shook his head and gave an
approving look. The Patagonian was either unaware of, or had forgotten that
civil war was decimating the two parts of the republic--a war which ultimately
required the intervention of Brazil. The Indians have everything to gain by these
intestine strifes, and can not lose such fine opportunities of plunder. There was
no doubt the Sergeant was right in assigning war then as the cause of the
forsaken appearance of the plains.

But this circumstance upset all Glenarvan's projects, for if Harry Grant was a
prisoner in the hands of the Caciques, he must have been dragged north with
them. How and where should they ever find him if that were the case? Should
they attempt a perilous and almost useless journey to the northern border of the
Pampas? It was a serious question which would need to be well talked over.

However, there was one inquiry more to make to the Sergeant; and it was the
Major who thought of it, for all the others looked at each other in silence.

"Had the Sergeant heard whether any Europeans were prisoners in the hands
of the Caciques?"

Manuel looked thoughtful for a few minutes, like a man trying to ransack his
memory. At last he said:

"Yes."

"Ah!" said Glenarvan, catching at the fresh hope.

They all eagerly crowded round the Sergeant, exclaiming,

"Tell us, tell us."

"It was some years ago," replied Manuel. "Yes; all I heard was that some
Europeans were prisoners, but I never saw them."

"You are making a mistake," said Glenarvan. "It can't be some years ago; the
date of the shipwreck is explicitly given. The BRITANNIA was wrecked in June,
1862. It is scarcely two years ago."

"Oh, more than that, my Lord."


"Impossible!" said Paganel.

"Oh, but it must be. It was when Pepe was born. There were two prisoners."

"No, three!" said Glenarvan.

"Two!" replied the Sergeant, in a positive tone.

"Two?" echoed Glenarvan, much surprised. "Two Englishmen?"

"No, no. Who is talking of Englishmen? No; a Frenchman and an Italian."

"An Italian who was massacred by the Poyuches?" exclaimed Paganel.

"Yes; and I heard afterward that the Frenchman was saved."

"Saved!" exclaimed young Robert, his very life hanging on the lips of the
Sergeant.


Yes; delivered out of the hands of the Indians."

Paganel struck his forehead with an air of desperation, and said at last,

"Ah! I understand. It is all clear now; everything is explained."

"But what is it?" asked Glenarvan, with as much impatience.

"My friends," replied Paganel, taking both Robert's hands in his own, "we
must resign ourselves to a sad disaster. We have been on a wrong track. The
prisoner mentioned is not the captain at all, but one of my own countrymen; and
his companion, who was assassinated by the Poyuches, was Marco Vazello. The
Frenchman was dragged along by the cruel Indians several times as far as the
shores of the Colorado, but managed at length to make his escape, and return to
Colorado. Instead of following the track of Harry Grant, we have fallen on that
of young Guinnard."

This announcement was heard with profound silence. The mistake was
palpable. The details given by the Sergeant, the nationality of the prisoner, the
murder of his companions, his escape from the hands of the Indians, all
evidenced the fact. Glenarvan looked at Thalcave with a crestfallen face, and the
Indian, turing to the Sergeant, asked whether he had never heard of three
English captives.

"Never," replied Manuel. "They would have known of them at Tandil, I am
sure. No, it cannot be."

After this, there was nothing further to do at Fort Independence but to shake
hands with the Commandant, and thank him and take leave.

Glenarvan was in despair at this complete overthrow of his hopes, and
Robert walked silently beside him, with his eyes full of tears. Glenarvan could
not find a word of comfort to say to him. Paganel gesticulated and talked away
to himself. The Major never opened his mouth, nor Thalcave, whose amour
propre, as an Indian, seemed quite wounded by having allowed himself to go on
a wrong scent. No one, however, would have thought of reproaching him for an
error so pardonable.

They went back to the FONDA, and had supper; but it was a gloomy party
that surrounded the table. It was not that any one of them regretted the fatigue
they had so heedlessly endured or the dangers they had run, but they felt their
hope of success was gone, for there was no chance of coming across Captain
Grant between the Sierra Tandil and the sea, as Sergeant Manuel must have
heard if any prisoners had fallen into the hands of the Indians on the coast of the
Atlantic. Any event of this nature would have attracted the notice of the Indian
traders who traffic between Tandil and Carmen, at the mouth of the Rio Negro.
The best thing to do now was to get to the DUNCAN as quick as possible at the
appointed rendezvous.


Paganel asked Glenarvan, however, to let him have the document again, on
the faith of which they had set out on so bootless a search. He read it over and
over, as if trying to extract some new meaning out of it.

"Yet nothing can be clearer," said Glenarvan; "it gives the date of the
shipwreck, and the manner, and the place of the captivity in the most categorical
manner."

"That it does not--no, it does not!" exclaimed Paganel, striking the table with
his fist. "Since Harry Grant is not in the Pampas, he is not in America; but where
he is the document must say, and it shall say, my friends, or my name is not
Jacques Paganel any longer."


CHAPTER XXII THE FLOOD


A DISTANCE of 150 miles separates Fort Independence from the shores of
the Atlantic. Unless unexpected and certainly improbable delays should occur, in
four days Glenarvan would rejoin the DUNCAN. But to return on board without
Captain Grant, and after having so completely failed in his search, was what he
could not bring himself to do. Consequently, when next day came, he gave no
orders for departure; the Major took it upon himself to have the horses saddled,
and make all preparations. Thanks to his activity, next morning at eight o'clock
the little troop was descending the grassy slopes of the Sierra.

Glenarvan, with Robert at his side, galloped along without saying a word.
His bold, determined nature made it impossible to take failure quietly. His heart
throbbed as if it would burst, and his head was burning. Paganel, excited by the
difficulty, was turning over and over the words of the document, and trying to
discover some new meaning. Thalcave was perfectly silent, and left Thaouka to
lead the way. The Major, always confident, remained firm at his post, like a man
on whom discouragement takes no hold. Tom Austin and his two sailors shared
the dejection of their master. A timid rabbit happened to run across their path,
and the superstitious men looked at each other in dismay.

"A bad omen," said Wilson.

"Yes, in the Highlands," repeated Mulrady.

"What's bad in the Highlands is not better here," returned Wilson
sententiously.

Toward noon they had crossed the Sierra, and descended into the undulating
plains which extend to the sea. Limpid RIOS intersected these plains, and lost
themselves among the tall grasses. The ground had once more become a dead
level, the last mountains of the Pampas were passed, and a long carpet of verdure
unrolled itself over the monotonous prairie beneath the horses' tread.

Hitherto the weather had been fine, but to-day the sky presented anything but
a reassuring appearance. The heavy vapors, generated by the high temperature of
the preceding days, hung in thick clouds, which ere long would empty
themselves in torrents of rain. Moreover, the vicinity of the Atlantic, and the
prevailing west wind, made the climate of this district particularly damp. This
was evident by the fertility and abundance of the pasture and its dark color.
However, the clouds remained unbroken for the present, and in the evening, after
a brisk gallop of forty miles, the horses stopped on the brink of deep
CANADAS, immense natural trenches filled with water. No shelter was near,


and ponchos had to serve both for tents and coverlets as each man lay down and
fell asleep beneath the threatening sky.

Next day the presence of water became still more sensibly felt; it seemed to
exude from every pore of the ground. Soon large ponds, some just beginning to
form, and some already deep, lay across the route to the east. As long as they
had only to deal with lagoons, circumscribed pieces of water unencumbered with
aquatic plants, the horses could get through well enough, but when they
encountered moving sloughs called PENTANOS, it was harder work. Tall grass
blocked them up, and they were involved in the peril before they were aware.

These bogs had already proved fatal to more than one living thing, for
Robert, who had got a good bit ahead of the party, came rushing back at full
gallop, calling out:

"Monsieur Paganel, Monsieur Paganel, a forest of horns."

"What!" exclaimed the geographer; "you have found a forest of horns?"

"Yes, yes, or at any rate a coppice."

"A coppice!" replied Paganel, shrugging his shoulders. "My boy, you are
dreaming."

"I am not dreaming, and you will see for yourself. Well, this is a strange
country. They sow horns, and they sprout up like wheat. I wish I could get some
of the seed."

"The boy is really speaking seriously," said the Major.

"Yes, Mr. Major, and you will soon see I am right."

The boy had not been mistaken, for presently they found themselves in front
of an immense field of horns, regularly planted and stretching far out of sight. It
was a complete copse, low and close packed, but a strange sort.

"Well," said Robert.

"This is peculiar certainly," said Paganel, and he turned round to question
Thalcave on the subject.

"The horns come out of the ground," replied the Indian, "but the oxen are
down below."

"What!" exclaimed Paganel; "do you mean to say that a whole herd was
caught in that mud and buried alive?"

"Yes," said the Patagonian.

And so it was. An immense herd had been suffocated side by side in this
enormous bog, and this was not the first occurrence of the kind which had taken
place in the Argentine plains.

An hour afterward and the field of horns lay two miles behind.

Thalcave was somewhat anxiously observing a state of things which
appeared to him unusual. He frequently stopped and raised himself on his


stirrups and looked

V. IV Verne around. His great height gave him a commanding view of the
whole horizon; but after a keen rapid survey, he quickly resumed his seat and
went on. About a mile further he stopped again, and leaving the straight route,
made a circuit of some miles north and south, and then returned and fell back in
his place at the head of the troop, without saying a syllable as to what he hoped
or feared. This strange behavior, several times repeated, made Glenarvan very
uneasy, and quite puzzled Paganel. At last, at Glenarvan's request, he asked the
Indian about it.

Thalcave replied that he was astonished to see the plains so saturated with
water. Never, to his knowledge, since he had followed the calling of guide, had
he found the ground in this soaking condition. Even in the rainy season, the
Argentine plains had always been passable.

"But what is the cause of this increasing humidity?" said Paganel.

"T do not know, and what if I did?"

"Could it be owing to the RIOS of the Sierra being swollen to overflowing
by the heavy rains?"

"Sometimes they are."

"And is it the case now?"

"Perhaps."

Paganel was obliged to be content with this unsatisfactory reply, and went
back to Glenarvan to report the result of his conversation.

"And what does Thalcave advise us to do?" said Glenarvan.

Paganel went back to the guide and asked him.

"Go on fast," was the reply.

This was easier said than done. The horses soon tired of treading over ground
that gave way at every step. It sank each moment more and more, till it seemed
half under water.

They quickened their pace, but could not go fast enough to escape the water,
which rolled in great sheets at their feet. Before two hours the cataracts of the
sky opened and deluged the plain in true tropical torrents of rain. Never was
there a finer occasion for displaying philosophic equanimity. There was no
shelter, and nothing for it but to bear it stolidly. The ponchos were streaming like
the overflowing gutter-spouts on the roof of a house, and the unfortunate
horsemen had to submit to a double bath, for their horses dashed up the water to
their waists at every step.

In this drenching, shivering state, and worn out with fatigue, they came
toward evening to a miserable RANCHO, which could only have been called a
shelter by people not very fastidious, and certainly only travelers in extremity


would even have entered it; but Glenarvan and his companions had no choice,
and were glad enough to burrow in this wretched hovel, though it would have
been despised by even a poor Indian of the Pampas. A miserable fire of grass
was kindled, which gave out more smoke than heat, and was very difficult to
keep alight, as the torrents of rain which dashed against the ruined cabin outside
found their way within and fell down in large drops from the roof. Twenty times
over the fire would have been extinguished if Mulrady and Wilson had not kept
off the water.

The supper was a dull meal, and neither appetizing nor reviving. Only the
Major seemed to eat with any relish. The impassive McNabbs was superior to all
circumstances. Paganel, Frenchman as he was, tried to joke, but the attempt was
a failure.

"My jests are damp," he said, "they miss fire."

The only consolation in such circumstances was to sleep, and accordingly
each one lay down and endeavored to find in slumber a temporary forgetfulness
of his discomforts and his fatigues. The night was stormy, and the planks of the
rancho cracked before the blast as if every instant they would give way. The poor
horses outside, exposed to all the inclemency of the weather, were making
piteous moans, and their masters were suffering quite as much inside the ruined
RANCHO. However, sleep overpowered them at length. Robert was the first to
close his eyes and lean his head against Glenarvan's shoulder, and soon all the
rest were soundly sleeping too under the guardian eye of Heaven.

The night passed safely, and no one stirred till Thaouka woke them by
tapping vigorously against the RANCHO with his hoof. He knew it was time to
start, and at a push could give the signal as well as his master. They owed the
faithful creature too much to disobey him, and set off immediately.

The rain had abated, but floods of water still covered the ground. Paganel, on
consulting his map, came to the conclusion that the RIOS Grande and Vivarota,
into which the water from the plains generally runs, must have been united in
one large bed several miles in extent.

Extreme haste was imperative, for all their lives depended on it. Should the
inundation increase, where could they find refuge? Not a single elevated point
was visible on the whole circle of the horizon, and on such level plains water
would sweep along with fearful rapidity.

The horses were spurred on to the utmost, and Thaouka led the way,
bounding over the water as if it had been his natural element. Certainly he might
justly have been called a sea-horse-- better than many of the amphibious animals
who bear that name.

All of a sudden, about ten in the morning, Thaouka betrayed symptoms of


violent agitation. He kept turning round toward the south, neighing continually,
and snorting with wide open nostrils. He reared violently, and Thalcave had
some difficulty in keeping his seat. The foam from his mouth was tinged with
blood from the action of the bit, pulled tightly by his master's strong hand, and
yet the fiery animal would not be still. Had he been free, his master knew he
would have fled away to the north as fast as his legs would have carried him.

"What is the matter with Thaouka?" asked Paganel. "Is he bitten by the
leeches? They are very voracious in the Argentine streams."

"No," replied the Indian.

"Is he frightened at something, then?"

"Yes, he scents danger."

"What danger?"

"T don't know."

But, though no danger was apparent to the eye, the ear could catch the sound
of a murmuring noise beyond the limits of the horizon, like the coming in of the
tide. Soon a confused sound was heard of bellowing and neighing and bleating,
and about a mile to the south immense flocks appeared, rushing and tumbling
over each other in the greatest disorder, as they hurried pell-mell along with
inconceivable rapidity. They raised such a whirlwind of water in their course that
it was impossible to distinguish them clearly. A hundred whales of the largest
size could hardly have dashed up the ocean waves more violently.

"Anda, anda!" (quick, quick), shouted Thalcave, in a voice like thunder.

"What is it, then?” asked Paganel.

"The rising," replied Thalcave.

"He means an inundation," exclaimed Paganel, flying with the others after
Thalcave, who had spurred on his horse toward the north.

It was high time, for about five miles south an immense towering wave was
seen advancing over the plain, and changing the whole country into an ocean.
The tall grass disappeared before it as if cut down by a scythe, and clumps of
mimosas were torn up and drifted about like floating islands.

The wave was speeding on with the rapidity of a racehorse, and the travelers
fled before it like a cloud before a storm-wind. They looked in vain for some
harbor of refuge, and the terrified horses galloped so wildly along that the riders
could hardly keep their saddles.

"Anda, anda!" shouted Thalcave, and again they spurred on the poor animals
till the blood ran from their lacerated sides. They stumbled every now and then
over great cracks in the ground, or got entangled in the hidden grass below the
water. They fell, and were pulled up only to fall again and again, and be pulled
up again and again. The level of the waters was sensibly rising, and less than two


miles off the gigantic wave reared its crested head.

For a quarter of an hour this supreme struggle with the most terrible of
elements lasted. The fugitives could not tell how far they had gone, but, judging
by the speed, the distance must have been considerable. The poor horses,
however, were breast-high in water now, and could only advance with extreme
difficulty. Glenarvan and Paganel, and, indeed, the whole party, gave themselves
up for lost, as the horses were fast getting out of their depth, and six feet of water
would be enough to drown them.

It would be impossible to tell the anguish of mind these eight men endured;
they felt their own impotence in the presence of these cataclysms of nature so far
beyond all human power. Their salvation did not lie in their own hands.

Five minutes afterward, and the horses were swimming; the current alone
carried them along with tremendous force, and with a swiftness equal to their
fastest gallop; they must have gone fully twenty miles an hour.

All hope of delivery seemed impossible, when the Major suddenly called
out:

"A tree!"

"A tree?" exclaimed Glenarvan.

"Yes, there, there!" replied Thalcave, pointing with his finger to a species of
gigantic walnut-tree, which raised its solitary head above the waters.

His companions needed no urging forward now; this tree, so opportunely
discovered, they must reach at all hazards. The horses very likely might not be
able to get to it, but, at all events, the men would, the current bearing them right
down to it.

Just at that moment Tom Austin's horse gave a smothered neigh and
disappeared. His master, freeing his feet from the stirrups, began to swim
vigorously.

"Hang on to my saddle," called Glenarvan.

"Thanks, your honor, but I have good stout arms."

"Robert, how is your horse going?" asked his Lordship, turning to young
Grant.

"Famously, my Lord, he swims like a fish."

"Lookout!" shouted the Major, in a stentorian voice.

The warning was scarcely spoken before the enormous billow, a monstrous
wave forty feet high, broke over the fugitives with a fearful noise. Men and
animals all disappeared in a whirl of foam; a liquid mass, weighing several
millions of tons, engulfed them in its seething waters.

When it had rolled on, the men reappeared on the surface, and counted each
other rapidly; but all the horses, except Thaouka, who still bore his master, had


gone down forever.

"Courage, courage," repeated Glenarvan, supporting Paganel with one arm,
and swimming with the other.

"I can manage, I can manage," said the worthy savant. "I am even not sorry--

But no one ever knew what he was not sorry about, for the poor man was
obliged to swallow down the rest of his sentence with half a pint of muddy
water. The Major advanced quietly, making regular strokes, worthy of a master
swimmer. The sailors took to the water like porpoises, while Robert clung to
Thaouka's mane, and was carried along with him. The noble animal swam
superbly, instinctively making for the tree in a straight line.

The tree was only twenty fathoms off, and in a few minutes was safely
reached by the whole party; but for this refuge they must all have perished in the
flood.

The water had risen to the top of the trunk, just to where the parent branches
fork out. It was consequently, quite easy to clamber up to it. Thalcave climbed
up first, and got off his horse to hoist up Robert and help the others. His
powerful arms had soon placed all the exhausted swimmers in a place of
security.

But, meantime, Thaouka was being rapidly carried away by the current. He
turned his intelligent face toward his master, and, shaking his long mane,
neighed as if to summon him to his rescue.

"Are you going to forsake him, Thalcave?" asked Paganel.

"I!" replied the Indian, and forthwith he plunged down into the tumultuous
waters, and came up again ten fathoms off. A few instants afterward his arms
were round Thaouka's neck, and master and steed were drifting together toward
the misty horizon of the north.


CHAPTER XXIIT A SINGULAR ABODE


THE tree on which Glenarvan and his companions had just found refuge,
resembled a walnut-tree, having the same glossy foliage and rounded form. In
reality, however, it was the OMBU, which grows solitarily on the Argentine
plains. The enormous and twisted trunk of this tree is planted firmly in the soil,
not only by its great roots, but still more by its vigorous shoots, which fasten it
down in the most tenacious manner. This was how it stood proof against the
shock of the mighty billow.

This OMBU measured in height a hundred feet, and covered with its shadow
a circumference of one hundred and twenty yards. All this scaffolding rested on
three great boughs which sprang from the trunk. Two of these rose almost
perpendicularly, and supported the immense parasol of foliage, the branches of
which were so crossed and intertwined and entangled, as if by the hand of a
basket-maker, that they formed an impenetrable shade. The third arm, on the
contrary, stretched right out in a horizontal position above the roaring waters,
into which the lower leaves dipped. There was no want of room in the interior of
this gigantic tree, for there were great gaps in the foliage, perfect glades, with air
in abundance, and freshness everywhere. To see the innumerable branches rising
to the clouds, and the creepers running from bough to bough, and attaching them
together while the sunlight glinted here and there among the leaves, one might
have called it a complete forest instead of a solitary tree sheltering them all.

On the arrival of the fugitives a myriad of the feathered tribes fled away into
the topmost branches, protesting by their outcries against this flagrant usurpation
of their domicile. These birds, who themselves had taken refuge in the solitary
OMBU, were in hundreds, comprising blackbirds, starlings, isacas,
HILGUEROS, and especially the pica-flor, humming-birds of most resplendent
colors. When they flew away it seemed as though a gust of wind had blown all
the flowers off the tree.

Such was the asylum offered to the little band of Glenarvan. Young Grant
and the agile Wilson were scarcely perched on the tree before they had climbed
to the upper branches and put their heads through the leafy dome to get a view of
the vast horizon. The ocean made by the inundation surrounded them on all
sides, and, far as the eye could reach, seemed to have no limits. Not a single tree
was Visible on the liquid plain; the OMBU stood alone amid the rolling waters,
and trembled before them. In the distance, drifting from south to north, carried
along by the impetuous torrent, they saw trees torn up by the roots, twisted


branches, roofs torn off, destroyed RANCHOS, planks of sheds stolen by the
deluge from ESTANCIAS, carcasses of drowned animals, blood-stained skins,
and on a shaky tree a complete family of jaguars, howling and clutching hold of
their frail raft. Still farther away, a black spot almost invisible, already caught
Wilson's eye. It was Thalcave and his faithful Thaouka.

"Thalcave, Thalcave!" shouted Robert, stretching out his hands toward the
courageous Patagonian.

"He will save himself, Mr. Robert," replied Wilson; "we must go down to his
Lordship."

Next minute they had descended the three stages of boughs, and landed
safely on the top of the trunk, where they found Glenarvan, Paganel, the Major,
Austin, and Mulrady, sitting either astride or in some position they found more
comfortable. Wilson gave an account of their investigations aloft, and all shared
his opinion with respect to Thalcave. The only question was whether it was
Thalcave who would save Thaouka, or Thaouka save Thalcave.

Their own situation meantime was much more alarming than his. No doubt
the tree would be able to resist the current, but the waters might rise higher and
higher, till the topmost branches were covered, for the depression of the soil
made this part of the plain a deep reservoir. Glenarvan's first care, consequently,
was to make notches by which to ascertain the progress of the inundation. For
the present it was stationary, having apparently reached its height. This was
reassuring.

"And now what are we going to do?" said Glenarvan.

"Make our nest, of course!" replied Paganel

"Make our nest!" exclaimed Robert.

"Certainly, my boy, and live the life of birds, since we can't that of fishes."

"All very well, but who will fill our bills for us?" said Glenarvan.

"T will," said the Major.

All eyes turned toward him immediately, and there he sat in a natural arm-
chair, formed of two elastic boughs, holding out his ALFORJAS damp, but still
intact.

"Oh, McNabbs, that's just like you," exclaimed Glenarvan, "you think of
everything even under circumstances which would drive all out of your head."

"Since it was settled we were not going to be drowned, I had no intention of
starving of hunger."

"I should have thought of it, too," said Paganel, "but I am so DISTRAIT."

"And what is in the ALFORJAS?" asked Tom Austin.

"Food enough to last seven men for two days," replied McNabbs.

"And I hope the inundation will have gone down in twenty-four hours," said


Glenarvan.

"Or that we shall have found some way of regaining terra firma," added
Paganel.

"Our first business, then, now is to breakfast," said Glenarvan.

"I suppose you mean after we have made ourselves dry," observed the Major.

"And where's the fire?” asked Wilson.

"We must make it," returned Paganel.

"Where?"

"On the top of the trunk, of course."

"And what with?"

"With the dead wood we cut off the tree."

"But how will you kindle it?" asked Glenarvan. "Our tinder is just like wet
sponge."

"We can dispense with it," replied Paganel. "We only want a little dry moss
and a ray of sunshine, and the lens of my telescope, and you'll see what a fire I'll
get to dry myself by. Who will go and cut wood in the forest?"

"T will," said Robert.

And off he scampered like a young cat into the depths of the foliage,
followed by his friend Wilson. Paganel set to work to find dry moss, and had
soon gathered sufficient. This he laid on a bed of damp leaves, just where the
large branches began to fork out, forming a natural hearth, where there was little
fear of conflagration.

Robert and Wilson speedily reappeared, each with an armful of dry wood,
which they threw on the moss. By the help of the lens it was easily kindled, for
the sun was blazing overhead. In order to ensure a proper draught, Paganel stood
over the hearth with his long legs straddled out in the Arab manner. Then
stooping down and raising himself with a rapid motion, he made a violent
current of air with his poncho, which made the wood take fire, and soon a bright
flame roared in the improvised brasier. After drying themselves, each in his own
fashion, and hanging their ponchos on the tree, where they were swung to and
fro in the breeze, they breakfasted, carefully however rationing out the
provisions, for the morrow had to be thought of; the immense basin might not
empty so soon as Glenarvan expected, and, anyway, the supply was very limited.
The OMBU produced no fruit, though fortunately, it would likely abound in
fresh eggs, thanks to the numerous nests stowed away among the leaves, not to
speak of their feathered proprietors. These resources were by no means to be
despised.

The next business was to install themselves as comfortably as they could, in
prospect of a long stay.


"As the kitchen and dining-room are on the ground floor," said Paganel, "we
must sleep on the first floor. The house is large, and as the rent is not dear, we
must not cramp ourselves for room. I can see up yonder natural cradles, in which
once safely tucked up we shall sleep as if we were in the best beds in the world.
We have nothing to fear. Besides, we will watch, and we are numerous enough to
repulse a fleet of Indians and other wild animals."

"We only want firearms."

"I have my revolvers," said Glenarvan.

"And I have mine," replied Robert.

"But what's the good of them?" said Tom Austin, "unless Monsieur Paganel
can find out some way of making powder."

"We don't need it," replied McNabbs, exhibiting a powder flask in a perfect
State of preservation.

"Where did you get it from, Major," asked Paganel.

"From Thalcave. He thought it might be useful to us, and gave it to me
before he plunged into the water to save Thaouka."

"Generous, brave Indian!" exclaimed Glenarvan.

"Yes," replied Tom Austin, "if all the Patagonians are cut after the same
pattern, I must compliment Patagonia."

"T protest against leaving out the horse," said Paganel. "He is part and parcel
of the Patagonian, and I'm much mistaken if we don't see them again, the one on
the other's back."

"What distance are we from the Atlantic?" asked the Major.

"About forty miles at the outside," replied Paganel; "and now, friends, since
this is Liberty Hall, I beg to take leave of you. I am going to choose an
observatory for myself up there, and by the help of my telescope, let you know
how things are going on in the world."

Forthwith the geographer set off, hoisting himself up very cleverly from
bough to bough, till he disappeared beyond the thick foliage. His companions
began to arrange the night quarters, and prepare their beds. But this was neither a
long nor difficult task, and very soon they resumed their seats round the fire to
have a talk.

As usual their theme was Captain Grant. In three days, should the water
subside, they would be on board the DUNCAN once more. But Harry Grant and
his two sailors, those poor shipwrecked fellows, would not be with them. Indeed,
it even seemed after this ill success and this useless journey across America, that
all chance of finding them was gone forever. Where could they commence a
fresh quest? What grief Lady Helena and Mary Grant would feel on hearing
there was no further hope.


"Poor sister!" said Robert. "It is all up with us."

For the first time Glenarvan could not find any comfort to give him. What
could he say to the lad?

Had they not searched exactly where the document stated?

"And yet," he said, "this thirty-seventh degree of latitude is not a mere figure,
and that it applies to the shipwreck or captivity of Harry Grant, is no mere guess
or supposition. We read it with our own eyes."

"All very true, your Honor," replied Tom Austin, "and yet our search has
been unsuccessful."

"It is both a provoking and hopeless business," replied Glenarvan.

"Provoking enough, certainly," said the Major, "but not hopeless. It is
precisely because we have an uncontestable figure, provided for us, that we
should follow it up to the end."

"What do you mean?" asked Glenarvan. "What more can we do?"

"A very logical and simple thing, my dear Edward. When we go on board the
DUNCAN, turn her beak head to the east, and go right along the thirty-seventh
parallel till we come back to our starting point if necessary."

"Do you suppose that I have not thought of that, Mr. McNabbs?" replied
Glenarvan. "Yes, a hundred times. But what chance is there of success? To leave
the American continent, wouldn't it be to go away from the very spot indicated
by Harry Grant, from this very Patagonia so distinctly named in the document."

"And would you recommence your search in the Pampas, when you have the
certainty that the shipwreck of the BRITANNIA neither occurred on the coasts
of the Pacific nor the Atlantic?"

Glenarvan was silent.

"And however small the chance of finding Harry Grant by following up the
given parallel, ought we not to try?”

"IT don't say no," replied Glenarvan.

"And are you not of my opinion, good friends," added the Major, addressing
the sailors.

"Entirely," said Tom Austin, while Mulrady and Wilson gave an assenting
nod.

"Listen to me, friends," said Glenarvan after a few minutes’ reflection; "and
remember, Robert, this is a grave discussion. I will do my utmost to find Captain
Grant; I am pledged to it, and will devote my whole life to the task if needs be.
All Scotland would unite with me to save so devoted a son as he has been to her.
I too quite think with you that we must follow the thirty-seventh parallel round
the globe if necessary, however slight our chance of finding him. But that is not
the question we have to settle. There is one much more important than that is--


should we from this time, and all together, give up our search on the American
continent?"

No one made any reply. Each one seemed afraid to pronounce the word.

"Well?" resumed Glenarvan, addressing himself especially to the Major.

"My dear Edward," replied McNabbs, "it would be incurring too great a
responsibility for me to reply hic et nunc. It is a question which requires
reflection. I must know first, through which countries the thirty-seventh parallel
of southern latitude passes?"

"That's Paganel's business; he will tell you that," said Glenarvan.

"Let's ask him, then," replied the Major.

But the learned geographer was nowhere to be seen. He was hidden among
the thick leafage of the OMBU, and they must call out if they wanted him.

"Paganel, Paganel!" shouted Glenarvan.

"Here," replied a voice that seemed to come from the clouds.

"Where are you?"

"In my tower."

"What are you doing there?"

"Examining the wide horizon."

"Could you come down for a minute?"

"Do you want me?"

"Yes."

"What for?"

"To know what countries the thirty-seventh parallel passes through."

"That's easily said. I need not disturb myself to come down for that."

"Very well, tell us now."

"Listen, then. After leaving America the thirty-seventh parallel crosses the
Atlantic Ocean."

"And then?"

"Tt encounters Isle Tristan d'Acunha."

"Yes."

"Tt goes on two degrees below the Cape of Good Hope."

"And afterwards?"

"Runs across the Indian Ocean, and just touches Isle St. Pierre, in the
Amsterdam group."

"Go on."

"It cuts Australia by the province of Victoria."

"And then."

"After leaving Australia in--"

This last sentence was not completed. Was the geographer hesitating, or


didn't he know what to say?

No; but a terrible cry resounded from the top of the tree. Glenarvan and his
friends turned pale and looked at each other. What fresh catastrophe had
happened now? Had the unfortunate Paganel slipped his footing?

Already Wilson and Mulrady had rushed to his rescue when his long body
appeared tumbling down from branch to branch.

But was he living or dead, for his hands made no attempt to seize anything to
stop himself. A few minutes more, and he would have fallen into the roaring
waters had not the Major's strong arm barred his passage.

"Much obliged, McNabbs," said Paganel.

"How's this? What is the matter with you? What came over you? Another of
your absent fits."

"Yes, yes," replied Paganel, in a voice almost inarticulate with emotion.
"Yes, but this was something extraordinary."

"What was it?"

"I said we had made a mistake. We are making it still, and have been all
along."

"Explain yourself."

"Glenarvan, Major, Robert, my friends," exclaimed Paganel, "all you that
hear me, we are looking for Captain Grant where he is not to be found."

"What do you say?” exclaimed Glenarvan.

"Not only where he is not now, but where he has never been."


CHAPTER XXIV PAGANEL'S DISCLOSURE


PROFOUND astonishment greeted these unexpected words of the learned
geographer. What could he mean? Had he lost his sense? He spoke with such
conviction, however, that all eyes turned toward Glenarvan, for Paganel's
affirmation was a direct answer to his question, but Glenarvan shook his head,
and said nothing, though evidently he was not inclined to favor his friend's
views.

"Yes," began Paganel again, as soon as he had recovered himself a little;
"yes, we have gone a wrong track, and read on the document what was never
there."

"Explain yourself, Paganel," said the Major, "and more calmly if you can."

"The thing is very simple, Major. Like you, I was in error; like you, I had
rushed at a false interpretation, until about an instant ago, on the top of the tree,
when I was answering your questions, just as I pronounced the word ‘Australia,’
a sudden flash came across my mind, and the document became clear as day."

"What!" exclaimed Glenarvan, "you mean to say that Harry Grant--"

"I mean to say," replied Paganel, "that the word AUSTRAL that occurs in the
document is not a complete word, as we have supposed up till now, but just the
root of the word AUSTRALIE."

"Well, that would be strange,” said the Major.

"Strange!" repeated Glenarvan, shrugging his shoulders; "it is simply
impossible."

"Impossible?" returned Paganel. "That is a word we don't allow in France."

"What!" continued Glenarvan, in a tone of the most profound incredulity,
"you dare to contend, with the document in your hand, that the shipwreck of the
BRITANNIA happened on the shores of Australia."

"I am sure of it," replied Paganel.

"My conscience,” exclaimed Glenarvan, "I must say I am surprised at such a
declaration from the Secretary of a Geographical Society!"

"And why so?" said Paganel, touched in his weak point.

"Because, if you allow the word AUSTRALIE! you must also allow the
word INDIENS, and Indians are never seen there."

Paganel was not the least surprised at this rejoinder. Doubtless he expected it,
for he began to smile, and said:

"My dear Glenarvan, don't triumph over me too fast. I am going to floor you
completely, and never was an Englishman more thoroughly defeated than you


will be. It will be the revenge for Cressy and Agincourt."

"IT wish nothing better. Take your revenge, Paganel."”

"Listen, then. In the text of the document, there is neither mention of the
Indians nor of Patagonia! The incomplete word INDI does not mean INDIENS,
but of course, INDIGENES, aborigines! Now, do you admit that there are
aborigines in Australia?"

"Bravo, Paganel!" said the Major.

"Well, do you agree to my interpretation, my dear Lord?" asked the
geographer again.

"Yes," replied Glenarvan, "if you will prove to me that the fragment of a
word GONIE, does not refer to the country of the Patagonians."

"Certainly it does not. It has nothing to do with Patagonia," said Paganel.
"Read it any way you please except that."

"How?"

"Cosmogonie, theogonie, agonie."

"AGONIE," said the Major.

"T don't care which," returned Paganel. "The word is quite unimportant; I will
not even try to find out its meaning. The main point is that AUSTRAL means
AUSTRALIE, and we must have gone blindly on a wrong track not to have
discovered the explanation at the very beginning, it was so evident. If I had
found the document myself, and my judgment had not been misled by your
interpretation, I should never have read it differently."

A burst of hurrahs, and congratulations, and compliments followed Paganel's
words. Austin and the sailors, and the Major and Robert, most all overjoyed at
this fresh hope, applauded him heartily; while even Glenarvan, whose eyes were
gradually getting open, was almost prepared to give in.

"I only want to know one thing more, my dear Paganel,” he said, "and then I
must bow to your perspicacity."

"What is it?"

"How will you group the words together according to your new
interpretation? How will the document read?"

"Easily enough answered. Here is the document," replied Paganel, taking out
the precious paper he had been studying so conscientiously for the last few days.

For a few minutes there was complete silence, while the worthy SAVANT
took time to collect his thoughts before complying with his lordship's request.
Then putting his finger on the words, and emphasizing some of them, he began
as follows:

"Le 7 juin 1862 le trois-mats Britannia de Glasgow a sombre apres,'-- put, if
you please, ‘deux jours, trois jours,’ or 'une longue agonie,' it doesn't signify, it is


quite a matter of indifference,--'sur les cotes de l'Australie. Se dirigeant a terre,
deux matelots et le Capitaine Grant vont essayer d'aborder,' or ‘ont aborde le
continent ou ils seront,' or, 'sont prisonniers de cruels indigenes. Ils ont jete ce
documents, ' etc. Is that clear?"

"Clear enough," replied Glenarvan, "if the word continent can be applied to
Australia, which is only an island."

"Make yourself easy about that, my dear Glenarvan; the best geographers
have agreed to call the island the Australian Continent."

V. IV Verne

"Then all I have now to say is, my friends," said Glenarvan, "away to
Australia, and may Heaven help us!"

"To Australia!" echoed his companions, with one voice.

"I tell you what, Paganel," added Glenarvan, "your being on board the
DUNCAN is a perfect providence."

"All right. Look on me as a messenger of providence, and let us drop the
subject."

So the conversation ended--a conversation which great results were to
follow; it completely changed the moral condition of the travelers; it gave the
clew of the labyrinth in which they had thought themselves hopelessly
entangled, and, amid their ruined projects, inspired them with fresh hope. They
could now quit the American Continent without the least hesitation, and already
their thoughts had flown to the Australias. In going on board the DUNCAN
again they would not bring despair with them, and Lady Helena and Mary Grant
would not have to mourn the irrevocable loss of Captain Grant. This thought so
filled them with joy that they forgot all the dangers of their actual situation, and
only regretted that they could not start immediately.

It was about four o'clock in the afternoon, and they determined to have
supper at six. Paganel wished to get up a splendid spread in honor of the
occasion, but as the materials were very scanty, he proposed to Robert to go and
hunt in the neighboring forest. Robert clapped his hands at the idea, so they took
Thalcave's powder flask, cleaned the revolvers and loaded them with small shot,
and set off.

"Don't go too far," said the Major, gravely, to the two hunters.

After their departure, Glenarvan and McNabbs went down to examine the
state of the water by looking at the notches they had made on the tree, and
Wilson and Mulrady replenished the fire.

No sign of decrease appeared on the surface of the immense lake, yet the
flood seemed to have reached its maximum height; but the violence with which
it rushed from the south to north proved that the equilibrium of the Argentine


rivers was not restored. Before getting lower the liquid mass must remain
Stationary, as in the case with the ocean before the ebb tide commences.

While Glenarvan and his cousin were making these observations, the report
of firearms resounded frequently above their heads, and the jubilant outcries of
the two sportsmen--for Paganel was every whit as much a child as Robert. They
were having a fine time of it among the thick leaves, judging by the peals of
laughter which rang out in the boy's clear treble voice and Paganel's deep bass.
The chase was evidently successful, and wonders in culinary art might be
expected. Wilson had a good idea to begin with, which he had skilfully carried
out; for when Glenarvan came back to the brasier, he found that the brave fellow
had actually managed to catch, with only a pin and a piece of string, several
dozen small fish, as delicate as smelts, called MOJARRAS, which were all
jumping about in a fold of his poncho, ready to be converted into an exquisite
dish.

At the same moment the hunters reappeared. Paganel was carefully carrying
some black swallows' eggs, and a string of sparrows, which he meant to serve up
later under the name of field larks. Robert had been clever enough to bring down
several brace of HILGUEROS, small green and yellow birds, which are
excellent eating, and greatly in demand in the Montevideo market. Paganel, who
knew fifty ways of dressing eggs, was obliged for this once to be content with
simply hardening them on the hot embers. But notwithstanding this, the viands at
the meal were both dainty and varied. The dried beef, hard eggs, grilled
MOJARRAS, sparrows, and roast HILGUEROS, made one of those gala feasts
the memory of which is imperishable.

The conversation was very animated. Many compliments were paid Paganel
on his twofold talents as hunter and cook, which the SAVANT accepted with the
modesty which characterizes true merit. Then he turned the conversation on the
peculiarities of the OMBU, under whose canopy they had found shelter, and
whose depths he declared were immense.

"Robert and I," he added, jestingly, "thought ourselves hunting in the open
forest. I was afraid, for the minute, we should lose ourselves, for I could not find
the road. The sun was sinking below the horizon; I sought vainly for footmarks;
I began to feel the sharp pangs of hunger, and the gloomy depths of the forest
resounded already with the roar of wild beasts. No, not that; there are no wild
beasts here, I am sorry to say."

"What!" exclaimed Glenarvan, "you are sorry there are no wild beasts?"

"Certainly I am."

"And yet we should have every reason to dread their ferocity."

"Their ferocity is non-existent, scientifically speaking," replied the learned


geographer.

"Now come, Paganel," said the Major, "you'll never make me admit the
utility of wild beasts. What good are they?"

"Why, Major," exclaimed Paganel, "for purposes of classification into orders,
and families, and species, and sub-species."

"A mighty advantage, certainly!" replied McNabbs, "I could dispense with
all that. If I had been one of Noah's companions at the time of the deluge, I
should most assuredly have hindered the imprudent patriarch from putting in
pairs of lions, and tigers, and panthers, and bears, and such animals, for they are
as malevolent as they are useless."

"You would have done that?" asked Paganel.

"Yes, I would."

"Well, you would have done wrong in a zoological point of view," returned
Paganel.

"But not in a humanitarian one," rejoined the Major.

"It is shocking!" replied Paganel. "Why, for my part, on the contrary, I should
have taken special care to preserve megatheriums and pterodactyles, and all the
antediluvian species of which we are unfortunately deprived by his neglect."

"And I say," returned McNabbs, "that Noah did a very good thing when he
abandoned them to their fate--that is, if they lived in his day."

"And I say he did a very bad thing," retorted Paganel, "and he has justly
merited the malediction of SAVANTS to the end of time!"

The rest of the party could not help laughing at hearing the two friends
disputing over old Noah. Contrary to all his principles, the Major, who all his life
had never disputed with anyone, was always sparring with Paganel. The
geographer seemed to have a peculiarly exciting effect on him.

Glenarvan, as usual, always the peacemaker, interfered in the debate, and
said:

"Whether the loss of ferocious animals is to be regretted or not, in a scientific
point of view, there is no help for it now; we must be content to do without them.
Paganel can hardly expect to meet with wild beasts in this aerial forest."

"Why not?" asked the geographer.

"Wild beasts on a tree!" exclaimed Tom Austin.

"Yes, undoubtedly. The American tiger, the jaguar, takes refuge in the trees,
when the chase gets too hot for him. It is quite possible that one of these animals,
surprised by the inundation, might have climbed up into this OMBU, and be
hiding now among its thick foliage."

"You haven't met any of them, at any rate, I suppose?" said the Major.

"No," replied Paganel, "though we hunted all through the wood. It is vexing,


for it would have been a splendid chase. A jaguar is a bloodthirsty, ferocious
creature. He can twist the neck of a horse with a single stroke of his paw. When
he has once tasted human flesh he scents it greedily. He likes to eat an Indian
best, and next to him a negro, then a mulatto, and last of all a white man."

"I am delighted to hear we come number four," said McNabbs.

"That only proves you are insipid," retorted Paganel, with an air of disdain.

"I am delighted to be insipid," was the Major's reply.

"Well, it is humiliating enough,” said the intractable Paganel. "The white
man proclaimed himself chief of the human race; but Mr. Jaguar is of a different
opinion it seems."

"Be that as it may, my brave Paganel, seeing there are neither Indians, nor
negroes, nor mulattoes among us, I am quite rejoiced at the absence of your
beloved jaguars. Our situation is not so particularly agreeable."

"What! not agreeable!" exclaimed Paganel, jumping at the word as likely to
give a new tum to the conversation. "You are complaining of your lot,
Glenarvan."

"I should think so, indeed," replied Glenarvan. "Do you find these
uncomfortable hard branches very luxurious?"

"IT have never been more comfortable, even in my study. We live like the
birds, we sing and fly about. I begin to believe men were intended to live on
trees."

"But they want wings,” suggested the Major.

"They'll make them some day."

"And till then,” put in Glenarvan, "with your leave, I prefer the gravel of a
park, or the floor of a house, or the deck of a ship, to this aerial dwelling."

"We must take things as they come, Glenarvan," returned Paganel. "If good,
so much the better; if bad, never mind. Ah, I see you are wishing you had all the
comforts of Malcolm Castle."

"No, but--"

"I am quite certain Robert is perfectly happy," interrupted Paganel, eager to
insure one partisan at least.

"Yes, that I am!" exclaimed Robert, in a joyous tone.

"At his age it is quite natural," replied Glenarvan.

"And at mine, too," returned the geographer. "The fewer one's comforts, the
fewer one's needs; and the fewer one's needs, the greater one's happiness."

"Now, now,” said the Major, "here is Paganel running a tilt against riches and
gilt ceilings.”

"No, McNabbs," replied the SAVANT, "I'm not; but if you like, I'll tell you a
little Arabian story that comes into my mind, very APROPOS this minute."


"Oh, do, do," said Robert.

"And what is your story to prove, Paganel?" inquired the Major.

"Much what all stories prove, my brave comrade."

"Not much then,” rejoined McNabbs. "But go on, Scheherazade, and tell us
the story."

"There was once," said Paganel, "a son of the great Haroun-al-Raschid, who
was unhappy, and went to consult an old Dervish. The old sage told him that
happiness was a difficult thing to find in this world. 'However,' he added, 'I know
an infallible means of procuring your happiness.’ "What is it?’ asked the young
Prince. ‘It is to put the shirt of a happy man on your shoulders.’ Whereupon the
Prince embraced the old man, and set out at once to search for his talisman. He
visited all the capital cities in the world. He tried on the shirts of kings, and
emperors, and princes and nobles; but all in vain: he could not find a man among
them that was happy. Then he put on the shirts of artists, and warriors, and
merchants; but these were no better. By this time he had traveled a long way,
without finding what he sought. At last he began to despair of success, and
began sorrowfully to retrace his steps back to his father's palace, when one day
he heard an honest peasant singing so merrily as he drove the plow, that he
thought, ‘Surely this man is happy, if there is such a thing as happiness on earth.
Forthwith he accosted him, and said, 'Are you happy?’ 'Yes,' was the reply.
‘There is nothing you desire?’ 'Nothing.’ "You would not change your lot for that
of a king?’ 'Never!' "Well, then, sell me your shirt.’ "My shirt! I haven't one!""


CHAPTER XXV BETWEEN FIRE AND WATER


BEFORE turning into "their nest," as Paganel had called it, he, and Robert,
and Glenarvan climbed up into the observatory to have one more inspection of
the liquid plain. It was about nine o'clock; the sun had just sunk behind the
glowing mists of the western horizon.

The eastern horizon was gradually assuming a most stormy aspect. A thick
dark bar of cloud was rising higher and higher, and by degrees extinguishing the
stars. Before long half the sky was overspread. Evidently motive power lay in
the cloud itself, for there was not a breath of wind. Absolute calm reigned in the
atmosphere; not a leaf stirred on the tree, not a ripple disturbed the surface of the
water. There seemed to be scarcely any air even, as though some vast pneumatic
machine had rarefied it. The entire atmosphere was charged to the utmost with
electricity, the presence of which sent a thrill through the whole nervous system
of all animated beings.

"We are going to have a storm," said Paganel.

"You're not afraid of thunder, are you, Robert?" asked Glenarvan.

"No, my Lord!" exclaimed Robert. "Well, my boy, so much the better, for a
storm is not far off."

"And a violent one, too," added Paganel, "if I may judge by the look of
things."

"Tt is not the storm I care about," said Glenarvan, "so much as the torrents of
rain that will accompany it. We shall be soaked to the skin. Whatever you may
say, Paganel, a nest won't do for a man, and you will learn that soon, to your
cost."

"With the help of philosophy, it will," replied Paganel.

"Philosophy! that won't keep you from getting drenched."

"No, but it will warm you."

"Well," said Glenarvan, "we had better go down to our friends, and advise
them to wrap themselves up in their philosophy and their ponchos as tightly as
possible, and above all, to lay in a stock of patience, for we shall need it before
very long."

Glenarvan gave a last glance at the angry sky. The clouds now covered it
entirely; only a dim streak of light shone faintly in the west. A dark shadow lay
on the water, and it could hardly be distinguished from the thick vapors above it.
There was no sensation of light or sound. All was darkness and silence around.

"Let us go down," said Glenarvan; "the thunder will soon burst over us."


On returning to the bottom of the tree, they found themselves, to their great
surprise, in a sort of dim twilight, produced by myriads of luminous specks
which appeared buzzing confusedly over the surface of the water.

"It is phosphorescence, I suppose," said Glenarvan.

"No, but phosphorescent insects, positive glow-worms, living diamonds,
which the ladies of Buenos Ayres convert into magnificent ornaments."

"What!" exclaimed Robert, "those sparks flying about are insects!"

"Yes, my boy."

Robert caught one in his hand, and found Paganel was right. It was a kind of
large drone, an inch long, and the Indians call it "tuco-tuco." This curious
specimen of the COLEOPTERA sheds its radiance from two spots in the front of
its breast-plate, and the light is sufficient to read by. Holding his watch close to
the insect, Paganel saw distinctly that the time was 10 P. M.

On rejoining the Major and his three sailors, Glenarvan warmed them of the
approaching storm, and advised them to secure themselves in their beds of
branches as firmly as possible, for there was no doubt that after the first clap of
thunder the wind would become unchained, and the OMBU would be violently
shaken. Though they could not defend themselves from the waters above, they
might at least keep out of the rushing current beneath.

They wished one another "good-night," though hardly daring to hope for it,
and then each one rolled himself in his poncho and lay down to sleep.

But the approach of the great phenomena of nature excites vague uneasiness
in the heart of every sentient being, even in the most strong-minded. The whole
party in the OMBU felt agitated and oppressed, and not one of them could close
his eyes. The first peal of thunder found them wide awake. It occurred about 11
P. M., and sounded like a distant rolling. Glenarvan ventured to creep out of the
sheltering foliage, and made his way to the extremity of the horizontal branch to
take a look round.

The deep blackness of the night was already scarified with sharp bright lines,
which were reflected back by the water with unerring exactness. The clouds had
rent in many parts, but noiselessly, like some soft cotton material. After
attentively observing both the zenith and horizon, Glenarvan went back to the
center of the trunk.

"Well, Glenarvan, what's your report?" asked Paganel.

"I say it is beginning in good earnest, and if it goes on so we shall have a
terrible storm."

"So much the better," replied the enthusiastic Paganel; "I should like a grand
exhibition, since we can't run away."

"That's another of your theories," said the Major.


"And one of my best, McNabbs. I am of Glenarvan's opinion, that the storm
will be superb. Just a minute ago, when I was trying to sleep, several facts
occurred to my memory, that make me hope it will, for we are in the region of
great electrical tempests. For instance, I have read somewhere, that in 1793, in
this very province of Buenos Ayres, lightning struck thirty-seven times during
one single storm. My colleague, M. Martin de Moussy, counted fifty-five
minutes of uninterrupted rolling.”

"Watch in hand?" asked the Major.

"Watch in hand. Only one thing makes me uneasy," added Paganel, "if it is
any use to be uneasy, and that is, that the culminating point of this plain, is just
this very OMBU where we are. A lightning conductor would be very serviceable
to us at present. For it is this tree especially, among all that grow in the Pampas,
that the thunder has a particular affection for. Besides, I need not tell you, friend,
that learned men tell us never to take refuge under trees during a storm."

"Most seasonable advice, certainly, in our circumstances," said the Major.

"I must confess, Paganel," replied Glenarvan, "that you might have chosen a
better time for this reassuring information."

"Bah!" replied Paganel, "all times are good for getting information. Ha! now
it's beginning.”

Louder peals of thunder interrupted this inopportune conversation, the
violence increasing with the noise till the whole atmosphere seemed to vibrate
with rapid oscillations.

The incessant flashes of lightning took various forms. Some darted down
perpendicularly from the sky five or six times in the same place in succession.
Others would have excited the interest of a SAVANT to the highest degree, for
though Arago, in his curious statistics, only cites two examples of forked
lightning, it was visible here hundreds of times. Some of the flashes branched
out in a thousand different directions, making coralliform zigzags, and threw out
wonderful jets of arborescent light.

Soon the whole sky from east to north seemed supported by a phosphoric
band of intense brilliancy. This kept increasing by degrees till it overspread the
entire horizon, kindling the clouds which were faithfully mirrored in the waters
as if they were masses of combustible material, beneath, and presented the
appearance of an immense globe of fire, the center of which was the OMBU.

Glenarvan and his companions gazed silently at this terrifying spectacle.
They could not make their voices heard, but the sheets of white light which
enwrapped them every now and then, revealed the face of one and another,
sometimes the calm features of the Major, sometimes the eager, curious glance
of Paganel, or the energetic face of Glenarvan, and at others, the scared eyes of


the terrified Robert, and the careless looks of the sailors, investing them with a
weird, spectral aspect.

However, as yet, no rain had fallen, and the wind had not risen in the least.
But this state of things was of short duration; before long the cataracts of the sky
burst forth, and came down in vertical streams. As the large drops fell splashing
into the lake, fiery sparks seemed to fly out from the illuminated surface.

Was the rain the FINALE of the storm? If so, Glenarvan and his companions
would escape scot free, except for a few vigorous douche baths. No. At the very
height of this struggle of the electric forces of the atmosphere, a large ball of fire
appeared suddenly at the extremity of the horizontal parent branch, as thick as a
man's wrist, and surrounded with black smoke. This ball, after turning round and
round for a few seconds, burst like a bombshell, and with so much noise that the
explosion was distinctly audible above the general FRACAS. A sulphurous
smoke filled the air, and complete silence reigned till the voice of Tom Austin
was heard shouting:

"The tree is on fire."

Tom was right. In a moment, as if some fireworks were being ignited, the
flame ran along the west side of the OMBU; the dead wood and nests of dried
grass, and the whole sap, which was of a spongy texture, supplied food for its
devouring activity.

The wind had risen now and fanned the flame. It was time to flee, and
Glenarvan and his party hurried away to the eastern side of their refuge, which
was meantime untouched by the fire. They were all silent, troubled, and terrified,
as they watched branch after branch shrivel, and crack, and writhe in the flame
like living serpents, and then drop into the swollen torrent, still red and
gleaming, as it was bore swiftly along on the rapid current. The flames
sometimes rose to a prodigious height, and seemed almost lost in the
atmosphere, and sometimes, beaten down by the hurricane, closely enveloped
the OMBU like a robe of Nessus. Terror seized the entire group. They were
almost suffocated with smoke, and scorched with the unbearable heat, for the
conflagration had already reached the lower branches on their side of the
OMBU. To extinguish it or check its progress was impossible; and they saw
themselves irrevocably condemned to a torturing death, like the victims of
Hindoo divinities.

At last, their situation was absolutely intolerable. Of the two deaths staring
them in the face, they had better choose the less cruel.

"To the water!" exclaimed Glenarvan.

Wilson, who was nearest the flames, had already plunged into the lake, but
next minute he screamed out in the most violent terror:


"Help! Help!"

Austin rushed toward him, and with the assistance of the Major, dragged him
up again on the tree.

"What's the matter?" they asked.

"Alligators! alligators!" replied Wilson.

The whole foot of the tree appeared to be surrounded by these formidable
animals of the Saurian order. By the glare of the flames, they were immediately
recognized by Paganel, as the ferocious species peculiar to America, called
CAIMANS in the Spanish territories. About ten of them were there, lashing the
water with their powerful tails, and attacking the OMBU with the long teeth of
their lower jaw.

At this sight the unfortunate men gave themselves up to be lost. A frightful
death was in store for them, since they must either be devoured by the fire or by
the caimans. Even the Major said, in a calm voice:

"This is the beginning of the end, now."

There are circumstances in which men are powerless, when the unchained
elements can only be combated by other elements. Glenarvan gazed with
haggard looks at the fire and water leagued against him, hardly knowing what
deliverance to implore from Heaven.

The violence of the storm had abated, but it had developed in the atmosphere
a considerable quantity of vapors, to which electricity was about to communicate
immense force. An enormous waterspout was gradually forming in the south-- a
cone of thick mists, but with the point at the bottom, and base at the top, linking
together the turbulent water and the angry clouds. This meteor soon began to
move forward, turning over and over on itself with dizzy rapidity, and sweeping
up into its center a column of water from the lake, while its gyratory motions
made all the surrounding currents of air rush toward it.

A few seconds more, and the gigantic waterspout threw itself on the OMBU,
and caught it up in its whirl. The tree shook to its roots. Glenarvan could fancy
the caimans' teeth were tearing it up from the soil; for as he and his companions
held on, each clinging firmly to the other, they felt the towering OMBU give
way, and the next minute it fell right over with a terrible hissing noise, as the
flaming branches touched the foaming water.

It was the work of an instant. Already the waterspout had passed, to carry on
its destructive work elsewhere. It seemed to empty the lake in its passage, by
continually drawing up the water into itself.

The OMBU now began to drift rapidly along, impelled by wind and current.
All the caimans had taken their departure, except one that was crawling over the
upturned roots, and coming toward the poor refugees with wide open jaws. But


Mulrady, seizing hold of a branch that was half-burned off, struck the monster
such a tremendous blow, that it fell back into the torrent and disappeared, lashing
the water with its formidable tail.

Glenarvan and his companions being thus delivered from the voracious
SAURIANS, stationed themselves on the branches windward of _ the
conflagration, while the OMBU sailed along like a blazing fire-ship through the
dark night, the flames spreading themselves round like sails before the breath of
the hurricane.


CHAPTER XXVI THE RETURN ON BOARD


FOR two hours the OMBU navigated the immense lake without reaching
terra firma. The flames which were devouring it had gradually died out. The
chief danger of their frightful passage was thus removed, and the Major went the
length of saying, that he should not be surprised if they were saved after all.

The direction of the current remained unchanged, always running from
southwest to northeast. Profound darkness had again set in, only illumined here
and there by a parting flash of lightning. The storm was nearly over. The rain
had given place to light mists, which a breath of wind dispersed, and the heavy
masses of cloud had separated, and now streaked the sky in long bands.

The OMBU was borne onward so rapidly by the impetuous torrent, that
anyone might have supposed some powerful locomotive engine was hidden in its
trunk. It seemed likely enough they might continue drifting in this way for days.
About three o'clock in the morning, however, the Major noticed that the roots
were beginning to graze the ground occasionally, and by sounding the depth of
the water with a long branch, Tom Austin found that they were getting on rising
ground. Twenty minutes afterward, the OMBU stopped short with a violent jolt.

"Land! land!" shouted Paganel, in a ringing tone.

The extremity of the calcined bough had struck some hillock, and never were
sailors more glad; the rock to them was the port.

Already Robert and Wilson had leaped on to the solid plateau with a loud,
joyful hurrah! when a well-known whistle was heard. The gallop of a horse
resounded over the plain, and the tall form of Thalcave emerged from the
darkness.

"Thalcave! Thalcave!" they all cried with one voice.

"Amigos!" replied the Patagonian, who had been waiting for the travelers
here in the same place where the current had landed himself.

As he spoke he lifted up Robert in his arms, and hugged him to his breast,
never imagining that Paganel was hanging on to him. A general and hearty hand-
shaking followed, and everyone rejoiced at seeing their faithful guide again.
Then the Patagonian led the way into the HANGAR of a deserted ESTANCIA,
where there was a good, blazing fire to warm them, and a substantial meal of
fine, juicy slices of venison soon broiling, of which they did not leave a crumb.
When their minds had calmed down a little, and they were able to reflect on the
dangers they had come through from flood, and fire, and alligators, they could
scarcely believe they had escaped.


Thalcave, in a few words, gave Paganel an account of himself since they
parted, entirely ascribing his deliverance to his intrepid horse. Then Paganel
tried to make him understand their new interpretation of the document, and the
consequent hopes they were indulging. Whether the Indian actually understood
his ingenious hypothesis was a question; but he saw that they were glad and
confident, and that was enough for him.

As can easily be imagined, after their compulsory rest on the OMBU, the
travelers were up betimes and ready to start. At eight o'clock they set off. No
means of transport being procurable so far south, they were compelled to walk.
However, it was not more than forty miles now that they had to go, and Thaouka
would not refuse to give a lift occasionally to a tired pedestrian, or even to a
couple at a pinch. In thirty-six hours they might reach the shores of the Atlantic.

The low-lying tract of marshy ground, still under water, soon lay behind
them, as Thalcave led them upward to the higher plains. Here the Argentine
territory resumed its monotonous aspect. A few clumps of trees, planted by
European hands, might chance to be visible among the pasturage, but quite as
rarely as in Tandil and Tapalquem Sierras. The native trees are only found on the
edge of long prairies and about Cape Corrientes.

Next day, though still fifteen miles distant, the proximity of the ocean was
sensibly felt. The VIRAZON, a peculiar wind, which blows regularly half of the
day and night, bent down the heads of the tall grasses. Thinly planted woods rose
to view, and small tree-like mimosas, bushes of acacia, and tufts of CURRA-
MANTEL. Here and there, shining like pieces of broken glass, were salinous
lagoons, which increased the difficulty of the journey as the travelers had to
wind round them to get past. They pushed on as quickly as possible, hoping to
reach Lake Salado, on the shores of the ocean, the same day; and at 8 P. M.,
when they found themselves in front of the sand hills two hundred feet high,
which skirt the coast, they were all tolerably tired. But when the long murmur of
the distant ocean fell on their ears, the exhausted men forgot their fatigue, and
ran up the sandhills with surprising agility. But it was getting quite dark already,
and their eager gaze could discover no traces of the DUNCAN on the gloomy
expanse of water that met their sight.

"But she is there, for all that," exclaimed Glenarvan, "waiting for us, and
running alongside."

"We shall see her to-morrow," replied McNabbs.

Tom Austin hailed the invisible yacht, but there was no response. The wind
was very high and the sea rough. The clouds were scudding along from the west,
and the spray of the waves dashed up even to the sandhills. It was little wonder,
then, if the man on the look-out could neither hear nor make himself heard,


supposing the DUNCAN were there. There was no shelter on the coast for her,
neither bay nor cove, nor port; not so much as a creek. The shore was composed
of sandbanks which ran out into the sea, and were more dangerous to approach
than rocky shoals. The sandbanks irritate the waves, and make the sea so
particularly rough, that in heavy weather vessels that run aground there are
invariably dashed to pieces.

Though, then, the DUNCAN would keep far away from such a coast, John
Mangles is a prudent captain to get near. Tom Austin, however, was of the
opinion that she would be able to keep five miles out.

The Major advised his impatient relative to restrain himself to circumstances.
Since there was no means of dissipating the darkness, what was the use of
straining his eyes by vainly endeavoring to pierce through it.

He set to work immediately to prepare the night's encampment beneath the
shelter of the sandhills; the last provisions supplied the last meal, and afterward,
each, following the Major's example, scooped out a hole in the sand, which made
a comfortable enough bed, and then covered himself with the soft material up to
his chin, and fell into a heavy sleep.

But Glenarvan kept watch. There was still a stiff breeze of wind, and the
ocean had not recovered its equilibrium after the recent storm. The waves, at all
times tumultuous, now broke over the sandbanks with a noise like thunder.
Glenarvan could not rest, knowing the DUNCAN was so near him. As to
supposing she had not arrived at the appointed rendezvous, that was out of the
question. Glenarvan had left the Bay of Talcahuano on the 14th of October, and
arrived on the shores of the Atlantic on the 12th of November. He had taken
thirty days to cross Chili, the Cordilleras, the Pampas, and the Argentine plains,
giving the DUNCAN ample time to double Cape Horn, and arrive on the
opposite side. For such a fast runner there were no impediments. Certainly the
storm had been very violent, and its fury must have been terrible on such a vast
battlefield as the Atlantic, but the yacht was a good ship, and the captain was a
good sailor. He was bound to be there, and he would be there.

These reflections, however, did not calm Glenarvan. When the heart and the
reason are struggling, it is generally the heart that wins the mastery. The laird of
Malcolm Castle felt the presence of loved ones about him in the darkness as he
wandered up and down the lonely strand. He gazed, and listened, and even
fancied he caught occasional glimpses of a faint light.

"I am not mistaken," he said to himself; "I saw a ship's light, one of the lights
on the DUNCAN! Oh! why can't I see in the dark?"

All at once the thought rushed across him that Paganel said he was a
nyctalope, and could see at night. He must go and wake him.


The learned geographer was sleeping as sound as a mole. A strong arm
pulled him up out of the sand and made him call out:

"Who goes there?"

"Tt is I, Paganel."

"Who?"

"Glenarvan. Come, I need your eyes."

"My eyes," replied Paganel, rubbing them vigorously.

"Yes, I need your eyes to make out the DUNCAN in this darkness, so come."

"Confound the nyctalopia!" said Paganel, inwardly, though delighted to be of
any service to his friend.

He got up and shook his stiffened limbs, and stretching and yawning as most
people do when roused from sleep, followed Glenarvan to the beach.

Glenarvan begged him to examine the distant horizon across the sea, which
he did most conscientiously for some minutes.

"Well, do you see nothing?" asked Glenarvan.

"Not a thing. Even a cat couldn't see two steps before her."

V. IV Verne

"Look for a red light or a green one--her larboard or starboard light."

"I see neither a red nor a green light, all is pitch dark," replied Paganel, his
eyes involuntarily beginning to close.

For half an hour he followed his impatient friend, mechanically letting his
head frequently drop on his chest, and raising it again with a start. At last he
neither answered nor spoke, and he reeled about like a drunken man. Glenarvan
looked at him, and found he was sound asleep!

Without attempting to wake him, he took his arm, led him back to his hole,
and buried him again comfortably.

At dawn next morning, all the slumberers started to their feet and rushed to
the shore, shouting "Hurrah, hurrah!" as Lord Glenarvan's loud cry, "The
DUNCAN, the DUNCAN!" broke upon his ear.

There she was, five miles out, her courses carefully reefed, and her steam
half up. Her smoke was lost in the morning mist. The sea was so violent that a
vessel of her tonnage could not have ventured safely nearer the sandbanks.

Glenarvan, by the aid of Paganel's telescope, closely observed the
movements of the yacht. It was evident that John Mangles had not perceived his
passengers, for he continued his course as before.

But at this very moment Thalcave fired his carbine in the direction of the
yacht. They listened and looked, but no signal of recognition was returned. A
second and a third time the Indian fired, awakening the echoes among the
sandhills.


At last a white smoke was seen issuing from the side of the yacht.

"They see us!" exclaimed Glenarvan. "That's the cannon of the DUNCAN."

A few seconds, and the heavy boom of the cannon came across the water and
died away on the shore. The sails were instantly altered, and the steam got up, so
as to get as near the coast as possible.

Presently, through the glass, they saw a boat lowered.

"Lady Helena will not be able to come," said Tom Austin. "It is too rough."

"Nor John Mangles," added McNabbs; "he cannot leave the ship."

"My sister, my sister!" cried Robert, stretching out his arms toward the yacht,
which was now rolling violently.

"Oh, how I wish I could get on board!" said Glenarvan.

"Patience, Edward! you will be there in a couple of hours," replied the Major.

Two hours! But it was impossible for a boat--a six-oared one-- to come and
go in a shorter space of time.

Glenarvan went back to Thalcave, who stood beside Thaouka, with his arms
crossed, looking quietly at the troubled waves.

Glenarvan took his hand, and pointing to the yacht, said: "Come!"

The Indian gently shook his head.

"Come, friend," repeated Glenarvan.

"No," said Thalcave, gently. "Here is Thaouka, and there-- the Pampas," he
added, embracing with a passionate gesture the wide-stretching prairies.

Glenarvan understood his refusal. He knew that the Indian would never
forsake the prairie, where the bones of his fathers were whitening, and he knew
the religious attachment of these sons of the desert for their native land. He did
not urge Thalcave longer, therefore, but simply pressed his hand. Nor could he
find it in his heart to insist, when the Indian, smiling as usual, would not accept
the price of his services, pushing back the money, and saying:

"For the sake of friendship."

Glenarvan could not reply; but he wished at least, to leave the brave fellow
some souvenir of his European friends. What was there to give, however? Arms,
horses, everything had been destroyed in the unfortunate inundation, and his
friends were no richer than himself.

He was quite at a loss how to show his recognition of the disinterestedness of
this noble guide, when a happy thought struck him. He had an exquisite portrait
of Lady Helena in his pocket, a CHEF-D'OEUVRE of Lawrence. This he drew
out, and offered to Thalcave, simply saying:

"My wife.”

The Indian gazed at it with a softened eye, and said:

"Good and beautiful."


Then Robert, and Paganel, and the Major, and the rest, exchanged touching
farewells with the faithful Patagonian. Thalcave embraced them each, and
pressed them to his broad chest. Paganel made him accept a map of South
America and the two oceans, which he had often seen the Indian looking at with
interest. It was the most precious thing the geographer possessed. As for Robert,
he had only caresses to bestow, and these he lavished on his friend, not
forgetting to give a share to Thaouka.

The boat from the DUNCAN was now fast approaching, and in another
minute had glided into a narrow channel between the sandbanks, and run ashore.

"My wife?" were Glenarvan's first words.

"My sister?" said Robert.

"Lady Helena and Miss Grant are waiting for you on board," replied the
coxswain; "but lose no time your honor, we have not a minute, for the tide is
beginning to ebb already."

The last kindly adieux were spoken, and Thalcave accompanied his friends
to the boat, which had been pushed back into the water. Just as Robert was going
to step in, the Indian took him in his arms, and gazed tenderly into his face. Then
he said:

"Now go. You are a man."

"Good-by, good-by, friend!" said Glenarvan, once more.

"Shall we never see each other again?" Paganel called out.

"Quien sabe?" (Who knows?) replied Thalcave, lifting his arms toward
heaven.

These were the Indian's last words, dying away on the breeze, as the boat
receded gradually from the shore. For a long time, his dark, motionless
SILHOUETTE stood out against the sky, through the white, dashing spray of the
waves. Then by degrees his tall form began to diminish in size, till at last his
friends of a day lost sight of him altogether.

An hour afterward Robert was the first to leap on board the DUNCAN. He
flung his arms round Mary's neck, amid the loud, joyous hurrahs of the crew on
the yacht.

Thus the journey across South America was accomplished, the given line of
march being scrupulously adhered to throughout.

Neither mountains nor rivers had made the travelers change their course; and
though they had not had to encounter any ill-will from men, their generous
intrepidity had been often enough roughly put to the proof by the fury of the
unchained elements.

END OF BOOK ONE


In Search of the Castaways or The Children of Captain Grant
Australia

[page intentionally blank]

In Search of the Castaways

Australia


CHAPTER I A NEW DESTINATION


FOR the first few moments the joy of reunion completely filled the hearts.
Lord Glenarvan had taken care that the ill-success of their expedition should not
throw a gloom over the pleasure of meeting, his very first words being:

"Cheer up, friends, cheer up! Captain Grant is not with us, but we have a
certainty of finding him!"

Only such an assurance as this would have restored hope to those on board
the DUNCAN. Lady Helena and Mary Grant had been sorely tried by the
suspense, as they stood on the poop waiting for the arrival of the boat, and trying
to count the number of its passengers. Alternate hope and fear agitated the
bosom of poor Mary. Sometimes she fancied she could see her father, Harry
Grant, and sometimes she gave way to despair. Her heart throbbed violently; she
could not speak, and indeed could scarcely stand. Lady Helena put her arm
round her waist to support her, but the captain, John Mangles, who stood close
beside them spoke no encouraging word, for his practiced eye saw plainly that
the captain was not there.

"He is there! He is coming! Oh, father!" exclaimed the young girl. But as the
boat came nearer, her illusion was dispelled; all hope forsook her, and she would
have sunk in despair, but for the reassuring voice of Glenarvan.

After their mutual embraces were over, Lady Helena, and Mary Grant, and
John Mangles, were informed of the principal incidents of the expedition, and
especially of the new interpretation of the document, due to the sagacity of
Jacques Paganel. His Lordship also spoke in the most eulogistic terms of Robert,
of whom Mary might well be proud. His courage and devotion, and the dangers
he had run, were all shown up in strong relief by his patron, till the modest boy
did not know which way to look, and was obliged to hide his burning cheeks in
his sister's arms.

"No need to blush, Robert," said John Mangles. "Your conduct has been
worthy of your name." And he leaned over the boy and pressed his lips on his
cheek, still wet with Mary's tears.

The Major and Paganel, it need hardly be said, came in for their due share of
welcome, and Lady Helena only regretted she could not shake hands with the
brave and generous Thalcave. McNabbs soon slipped away to his cabin, and
began to shave himself as coolly and composedly as possible; while Paganel
flew here and there, like a bee sipping the sweets of compliments and smiles. He
wanted to embrace everyone on board the yacht, and beginning with Lady


Helena and Mary Grant, wound up with M. Olbinett, the steward, who could
only acknowledge so polite an attention by announcing that breakfast was ready.

"Breakfast!" exclaimed Paganel.

"Yes, Monsieur Paganel."”

"A real breakfast, on a real table, with a cloth and napkins?"

"Certainly, Monsieur Paganel."

"And we shall neither have CHARQUI, nor hard eggs, nor fillets of ostrich?"

"Oh, Monsieur," said Olbinett in an aggrieved tone.

"I don't want to hurt your feelings, my friend," said the geographer smiling.
"But for a month that has been our usual bill of fare, and when we dined we
stretched ourselves full length on the ground, unless we sat astride on the trees.
Consequently, the meal you have just announced seemed to me like a dream, or
fiction, or chimera."

"Well, Monsieur Paganel, come along and let us prove its reality," said Lady
Helena, who could not help laughing.

"Take my arm," replied the gallant geographer.

"Has his Lordship any orders to give me about the DUNCAN?" asked John
Mangles.

"After breakfast, John," replied Glenarvan, "we'll discuss the program of our
new expedition en famille."

M. Olbinett's breakfast seemed quite a FETE to the hungry guests. It was
pronounced excellent, and even superior to the festivities of the Pampas. Paganel
was helped twice to each dish, through "absence of mind," he said.

This unlucky word reminded Lady Helena of the amiable Frenchman's
propensity, and made her ask if he had ever fallen into his old habits while they
were away. The Major and Glenarvan exchanged smiling glances, and Paganel
burst out laughing, and protested on his honor that he would never be caught
tripping again once more during the whole voyage. After this prelude, he gave
an amusing recital of his disastrous mistake in learning Spanish, and his
profound study of Camoens. "After all," he added, "it's an ill wind that blows
nobody good, and I don't regret the mistake."

"Why not, my worthy friend?" asked the Major.

"Because I not only know Spanish, but Portuguese. I can speak two
languages instead of one."

"Upon my word, I never thought of that," said McNabbs. "My compliments,
Paganel--my sincere compliments."

But Paganel was too busily engaged with his knife and fork to lose a single
mouthful, though he did his best to eat and talk at the same time. He was so
much taken up with his plate, however, that one little fact quite escaped his


observation, though Glenarvan noticed it at once. This was, that John Mangles
had grown particularly attentive to Mary Grant. A significant glance from Lady
Helena told him, moreover, how affairs stood, and inspired him with affectionate
sympathy for the young lovers; but nothing of this was apparent in his manner to
John, for his next question was what sort of a voyage he had made.

"We could not have had a better; but I must apprise your Lordship that I did
not go through the Straits of Magellan again."

"What! you doubled Cape Horn, and I was not there!" exclaimed Paganel.

"Hang yourself!" said the Major.

"Selfish fellow! you advise me to do that because you want my rope,"
retorted the geographer.

"Well, you see, my dear Paganel, unless you have the gift of ubiquity you
can't be in two places at once. While you were scouring the pampas you could
not be doubling Cape Horn."

"That doesn't prevent my regretting it,” replied Paganel.

Here the subject dropped, and John continued his account of his voyage. On
arriving at Cape Pilares he had found the winds dead against him, and therefore
made for the south, coasting along the Desolation Isle, and after going as far as
the sixty-seventh degree southern latitude, had doubled Cape Horn, passed by
Terra del Fuego and the Straits of Lemaire, keeping close to the Patagonian
shore. At Cape Corrientes they encountered the terrible storm which had handled
the travelers across the pampas so roughly, but the yacht had borne it bravely,
and for the last three days had stood right out to sea, till the welcome signal-gun
of the expedition was heard announcing the arrival of the anxiously-looked-for
party. "It was only justice," the captain added, "that he should mention the
intrepid bearing of Lady Helena and Mary Grant throughout the whole
hurricane. They had not shown the least fear, unless for their friends, who might
possibly be exposed to the fury of the tempest."

After John Mangles had finished his narrative, Glenarvan turned to Mary and
said; "My dear Miss Mary, the captain has been doing homage to your noble
qualities, and I am glad to think you are not unhappy on board his ship."

"How could I be?" replied Mary naively, looking at Lady Helena, and at the
young captain too, likely enough.

"Oh, my sister is very fond of you, Mr. John, and so am J," exclaimed
Robert.

"And so am I of you, my dear boy," returned the captain, a little abashed by
Robert's innocent avowal, which had kindled a faint blush on Mary's cheek.
Then he managed to turn the conversation to safer topics by saying: "And now
that your Lordship has heard all about the doings of the DUNCAN, perhaps you


will give us some details of your own journey, and tell us more about the
exploits of our young hero."

Nothing could be more agreeable than such a recital to Lady Helena and
Mary Grant; and accordingly Lord Glenarvan hastened to satisfy their curiosity--
going over incident by incident, the entire march from one ocean to another, the
pass of the Andes, the earthquake, the disappearance of Robert, his capture by
the condor, Thalcave's providential shot, the episode of the red wolves, the
devotion of the young lad, Sergeant Manuel, the inundations, the caimans, the
waterspout, the night on the Atlantic shore-- all these details, amusing or terrible,
excited by turns laughter and horror in the listeners. Often and often Robert
came in for caresses from his sister and Lady Helena. Never was a boy so much
embraced, or by such enthusiastic friends.

"And now, friends," added Lord Glenarvan, when he had finished his
narrative, "we must think of the present. The past is gone, but the future is ours.
Let us come back to Captain Harry Grant."

As soon as breakfast was over they all went into Lord Glenarvan's private
cabin and seated themselves round a table covered with charts and plans, to talk
over the matter fully.

"My dear Helena," said Lord Glenarvan, "I told you, when we came on board
a little while ago, that though we had not brought back Captain Grant, our hope
of finding him was stronger than ever. The result of our journey across America
is this: We have reached the conviction, or rather absolute certainty, that the
shipwreck never occurred on the shores of the Atlantic nor Pacific. The natural
inference is that, as far as regards Patagonia, our interpretation of the document
was erroneous. Most fortunately, our friend Paganel, in a happy moment of
inspiration, discovered the mistake. He has proved clearly that we have been on
the wrong track, and so explained the document that all doubt whatever is
removed from our minds. However, as the document is in French, I will ask
Paganel to go over it for your benefit."

The learned geographer, thus called upon, executed his task in the most
convincing manner, descanting on the syllables GONIE and INDI, and extracting
AUSTRALIA out of AUSTRAL. He pointed out that Captain Grant, on leaving
the coast of Peru to return to Europe, might have been carried away with his
disabled ship by the southern currents of the Pacific right to the shores of
Australia, and his hypotheses were so ingenious and his deductions so subtle that
even the matter-of-fact John Mangles, a difficult judge, and most unlikely to be
led away by any flights of imagination, was completely satisfied.

At the conclusion of Paganel's dissertation, Glenarvan announced that the
DUNCAN would sail immediately for Australia.


But before the decisive orders were given, McNabbs asked for a few
minutes’ hearing.

"Say away, McNabbs," replied Glenarvan.

"T have no intention of weakening the arguments of my friend Paganel, and
still less of refuting them. I consider them wise and weighty, and deserving our
attention, and think them justly entitled to form the basis of our future
researches. But still I should like them to be submitted to a final examination, in
order to make their worth incontestable and uncontested."

"Go on, Major," said Paganel; "I am ready to answer all your questions."

"They are simple enough, as you will see. Five months ago, when we left the
Clyde, we had studied these same documents, and their interpretation then
appeared quite plain. No other coast but the western coast of Patagonia could
possibly, we thought, have been the scene of the shipwreck. We had not even the
shadow of a doubt on the subject."

"That's true," replied Glenarvan.

"A little later," continued the Major, "when a providential fit of absence of
mind came over Paganel, and brought him on board the yacht, the documents
were submitted to him and he approved our plan of search most unreservedly."

"I do not deny it,” said Paganel.

"And yet we were mistaken," resumed the Major.

"Yes, we were mistaken," returned Paganel; "but it is only human to make a
mistake, while to persist in it, aman must be a fool."

"Stop, Paganel, don't excite yourself; I don't mean to say that we should
prolong our search in America."

"What is it, then, that you want?" asked Glenarvan.

"A confession, nothing more. A confession that Australia now as evidently
appears to be the theater of the shipwreck of the BRITANNIA as America did
before."

"We confess it willingly," replied Paganel.

"Very well, then, since that is the case, my advice is not to let your
imagination rely on successive and contradictory evidence. Who knows whether
after Australia some other country may not appear with equal certainty to be the
place, and we may have to recommence our search?"

Glenarvan and Paganel looked at each other silently, struck by the justice of
these remarks.

"I should like you, therefore," continued the Major, "before we actually start
for Australia, to make one more examination of the documents. Here they are,
and here are the charts. Let us take up each point in succession through which
the 37th parallel passes, and see if we come across any other country which


would agree with the precise indications of the document."

"Nothing can be more easily and quickly done," replied Paganel; "for
countries are not very numerous in this latitude, happily."

"Well, look," said the Major, displaying an English planisphere on the plan of
Mercator's Chart, and presenting the appearance of a terrestrial globe.

He placed it before Lady Helena, and then they all stood round, so as to be
able to follow the argument of Paganel.

"As I have said already," resumed the learned geographer, "after having
crossed South America, the 37th degree of latitude cuts the islands of Tristan
d'Acunha. Now I maintain that none of the words of the document could relate to
these islands."

The documents were examined with the most minute care, and the
conclusion unanimously reached was that these islands were entirely out of the
question.

"Let us go on then," resumed Paganel. "After leaving the Atlantic, we pass
two degrees below the Cape of Good Hope, and into the Indian Ocean. Only one
group of islands is found on this route, the Amsterdam Isles. Now, then, we must
examine these as we did the Tristan d'Acunha group."

After a close survey, the Amsterdam Isles were rejected in their turn. Not a
single word, or part of a word, French, English or German, could apply to this
group in the Indian Ocean.

"Now we come to Australia," continued Paganel.

"The 37th parallel touches this continent at Cape Bernouilli, and leaves it at
Twofold Bay. You will agree with me that, without straining the text, the English
word STRA and the French one AUSTRAL may relate to Australia. The thing is
too plain to need proof."

The conclusion of Paganel met with unanimous approval; every probability
was in his favor.

"And where is the next point?" asked McNabbs.

"That is easily answered. After leaving Twofold Bay, we cross an arm of the
sea which extends to New Zealand. Here I must call your attention to the fact
that the French word CONTIN means a continent, irrefragably. Captain Grant
could not, then, have found refuge in New Zealand, which is only an island.
However that may be though, examine and compare, and go over and over each
word, and see if, by any possibility, they can be made to fit this new country."

"In no way whatever," replied John Mangles, after a minute investigation of
the documents and the planisphere.

"No," chimed in all the rest, and even the Major himself, "it cannot apply to
New Zealand."


"Now," went on Paganel, "in all this immense space between this large island
and the American coast, there is only one solitary barren little island crossed by
the 37th parallel."

"And what is its name," asked the Major.

"Here it is, marked in the map. It is Maria Theresa--a name of which there is
not a single trace in either of the three documents."

"Not the slightest," said Glenarvan.

"I leave you, then, my friends, to decide whether all these probabilities, not
to say certainties, are not in favor of the Australian continent."

"Evidently," replied the captain and all the others.

"Well, then, John," said Glenarvan, "the next question is, have you
provisions and coal enough?"

"Yes, your honor, I took in an ample store at Talcahuano, and, besides, we
can easily replenish our stock of coal at Cape Town."

"Well, then, give orders."

"Let me make one more observation," interrupted McNabbs.

"Go on then."

"Whatever likelihood of success Australia may offer us, wouldn't it be
advisable to stop a day or two at the Tristan d'Acunha Isles and the Amsterdam?
They lie in our route, and would not take us the least out of the way. Then we
should be able to ascertain if the BRITANNIA had left any traces of her
shipwreck there?"

"Incredulous Major!" exclaimed Paganel, "he still sticks to his idea."

"I stick to this any way, that I don't want to have to retrace our steps,
supposing that Australia should disappoint our sanguine hopes."

"Tt seems to me a good precaution," replied Glenarvan.

"And I'm not the one to dissuade you from it," returned Paganel; "quite the
contrary."

"Steer straight for Tristan d'Acunha."

"Immediately, your Honor," replied the captain, going on deck, while Robert
and Mary Grant overwhelmed Lord Glenarvan with their grateful thanks.

Shortly after, the DUNCAN had left the American coast, and was running
eastward, her sharp keel rapidly cutting her way through the waves of the
Atlantic Ocean.

CHAPTER IT TRISTAN D'ACUNHA AND THE ISLE OF AMSTERDAM

IF the yacht had followed the line of the equator, the 196 degrees which
separate Australia from America, or, more correctly, Cape Bernouilli from Cape
Corrientes, would have been equal to 11,760 geographical miles; but along the
37th parallel these same degrees, owing to the form of the earth, only represent


9,480 miles. From the American coast to Tristan d'Acunha is reckoned 2,100
miles-- a distance which John Mangles hoped to clear in ten days, if east winds
did not retard the motion of the yacht. But he was not long uneasy on that score,
for toward evening the breeze sensibly lulled and then changed altogether, giving
the DUNCAN a fair field on a calm sea for displaying her incomparable
qualities as a sailor.

The passengers had fallen back into their ordinary ship life, and it hardly
seemed as if they really could have been absent a whole month. Instead of the
Pacific, the Atlantic stretched itself out before them, and there was scarcely a
shade of difference in the waves of the two oceans. The elements, after having
handled them so roughly, seemed now disposed to favor them to the utmost. The
sea was tranquil, and the wind kept in the right quarter, so that the yacht could
spread all her canvas, and lend its aid, if needed to the indefatigable steam stored
up in the boiler.

Under such conditions, the voyage was safely and rapidly accomplished.
Their confidence increased as they found themselves nearer the Australian coast.
They began to talk of Captain Grant as if the yacht were going to take him on
board at a given port. His cabin was got ready, and berths for the men. This cabin
was next to the famous number six, which Paganel had taken possession of
instead of the one he had booked on the SCOTIA. It had been till now occupied
by M. Olbinett, who vacated it for the expected guest. Mary took great delight in
arranging it with her own hands, and adorning it for the reception of the loved
inmate.

The learned geographer kept himself closely shut up. He was working away
from morning till night at a work entitled "Sublime Impressions of a Geographer
in the Argentine Pampas," and they could hear him repeating elegant periods
aloud before committing them to the white pages of his day-book; and more than
once, unfaithful to Clio, the muse of history, he invoked in his transports the
divine Calliope, the muse of epic poetry.

Paganel made no secret of it either. The chaste daughters of Apollo willingly
left the slopes of Helicon and Parnassus at his call. Lady Helena paid him
sincere compliments on his mythological visitants, and so did the Major, though
he could not forbear adding:

"But mind no fits of absence of mind, my dear Paganel; and if you take a
fancy to learn Australian, don't go and study it in a Chinese grammar."

Things went on perfectly smoothly on board. Lady Helena and Lord
Glenarvan found leisure to watch John Mangles' growing attachment to Mary
Grant. There was nothing to be said against it, and, indeed, since John remained
silent, it was best to take no notice of it.


V. IV Verne

"What will Captain Grant think?" Lord Glenarvan asked his wife one day.

"He'll think John is worthy of Mary, my dear Edward, and he'll think right."

Meanwhile, the yacht was making rapid progress. Five days after losing sight
of Cape Corrientes, on the 16th of November, they fell in with fine westerly
breezes, and the DUNCAN might almost have dispensed with her screw
altogether, for she flew over the water like a bird, spreading all her sails to catch
the breeze, as if she were running a race with the Royal Thames Club yachts.

Next day, the ocean appeared covered with immense seaweeds, looking like
a great pond choked up with the DEBRIS of trees and plants torn off the
neighboring continents. Commander Murray had specially pointed them out to
the attention of navigators. The DUNCAN appeared to glide over a long prairie,
which Paganel justly compared to the Pampas, and her speed slackened a little.

Twenty-four hours after, at break of day, the man on the look-out was heard
calling out, "Land ahead!"

"In what direction?" asked Tom Austin, who was on watch.

"Leeward!" was the reply.

This exciting cry brought everyone speedily on deck. Soon a telescope made
its appearance, followed by Jacques Paganel. The learned geographer pointed the
instrument in the direction indicated, but could see nothing that resembled land.

"Look in the clouds," said John Mangles.

"Ah, now I do see a sort of peak, but very indistinctly."

"It is Tristan d'Acunha," replied John Mangles.

"Then, if my memory serves me right, we must be eighty miles from it, for
the peak of Tristan, seven thousand feet high, is visible at that distance."

"That's it, precisely."

Some hours later, the sharp, lofty crags of the group of islands stood out
clearly on the horizon. The conical peak of Tristan looked black against the
bright sky, which seemed all ablaze with the splendor of the rising sun. Soon the
principal island stood out from the rocky mass, at the summit of a triangle
inclining toward the northeast.

Tristan d'Acunha is situated in 37 degrees 8' of southern latitude, and 10
degrees 44' of longitude west of the meridian at Greenwich. Inaccessible Island
is eighteen miles to the southwest and Nightingale Island is ten miles to the
southeast, and this completes the little solitary group of islets in the Atlantic
Ocean. Toward noon, the two principal landmarks, by which the group is
recognized were sighted, and at 3 P. M. the DUNCAN entered Falmouth Bay in
Tristan d'Acunha.

Several whaling vessels were lying quietly at anchor there, for the coast


abounds in seals and other marine animals.

John Mangle's first care was to find good anchorage, and then all the
passengers, both ladies and gentlemen, got into the long boat and were rowed
ashore. They stepped out on a beach covered with fine black sand, the
impalpable DEBRIS of the calcined rocks of the island.

Tristan d'Acunha is the capital of the group, and consists of a little village,
lying in the heart of the bay, and watered by a noisy, rapid stream. It contained
about fifty houses, tolerably clean, and disposed with geometrical regularity.
Behind this miniature town there lay 1,500 hectares of meadow land, bounded
by an embankment of lava. Above this embankment, the conical peak rose 7,000
feet high.

Lord Glenarvan was received by a govemor supplied from the English
colony at the Cape. He inquired at once respecting Harry Grant and the
BRITANNIA, and found the names entirely unknown. The Tristan d'Acunha
Isles are out of the route of ships, and consequently little frequented. Since the
wreck of the Blendon Hall in 1821, on the rocks of Inaccessible Island, two
vessels have stranded on the chief island--the PRIMANGUET in 1845, and the
three-mast American, PHILADELPHIA, in 1857. These three events comprise
the whole catalogue of maritime disasters in the annals of the Acunhas.

Lord Glenarvan did not expect to glean any information, and only asked by
the way of duty. He even sent the boats to make the circuit of the island, the
entire extent of which was not more than seventeen miles at most.

In the interim the passengers walked about the village. The population does
not exceed 150 inhabitants, and consists of English and Americans, married to
negroes and Cape Hottentots, who might bear away the palm for ugliness. The
children of these heterogeneous households are very disagreeable compounds of
Saxon stiffness and African blackness.

It was nearly nightfall before the party returned to the yacht, chattering and
admiring the natural riches displayed on all sides, for even close to the streets of
the capital, fields of wheat and maize were waving, and crops of vegetables,
imported forty years before; and in the environs of the village, herds of cattle
and sheep were feeding.

The boats returned to the DUNCAN about the same time as Lord Glenarvan.
They had made the circuit of the entire island in a few hours, but without coming
across the least trace of the BRITANNIA. The only result of this voyage of
circumnavigation was to strike out the name of Isle Tristan from the program of
search.

CHAPTER HI CAPE TOWN AND M. VIOT

As John Mangles intended to put in at the Cape of Good Hope for coals, he


was obliged to deviate a little from the 37th parallel, and go two degrees north.
In less than six days he cleared the thirteen hundred miles which separate the
point of Africa from Tristan d'Acunha, and on the 24th of November, at 3 P. M.
the Table Mountain was sighted. At eight o'clock they entered the bay, and cast
anchor in the port of Cape Town. They sailed away next morning at daybreak.

Between the Cape and Amsterdam Island there is a distance of 2,900 miles,
but with a good sea and favoring breeze, this was only a ten day's voyage. The
elements were now no longer at war with the travelers, as on their journey across
the Pampas-- air and water seemed in league to help them forward.

"Ah! the sea! the sea!" exclaimed Paganel, "it is the field par excellence for
the exercise of human energies, and the ship is the true vehicle of civilization.
Think, my friends, if the globe had been only an immense continent, the
thousandth part of it would still be unknown to us, even in this nineteenth
century. See how it is in the interior of great countries. In the steppes of Siberia,
in the plains of Central Asia, in the deserts of Africa, in the prairies of America,
in the immense wilds of Australia, in the icy solitudes of the Poles, man scarcely
dares to venture; the most daring shrinks back, the most courageous succumbs.
They cannot penetrate them; the means of transport are insufficient, and the heat
and disease, and savage disposition of the natives, are impassable obstacles.
Twenty miles of desert separate men more than five hundred miles of ocean."

Paganel spoke with such warmth that even the Major had nothing to say
against this panegyric of the ocean. Indeed, if the finding of Harry Grant had
involved following a parallel across continents instead of oceans, the enterprise
could not have been attempted; but the sea was there ready to carry the travelers
from one country to another, and on the 6th of December, at the first streak of
day, they saw a fresh mountain apparently emerging from the bosom of the
waves.

This was Amsterdam Island, situated in 37 degrees 47 minutes latitude and
77 degrees 24 minutes longitude, the high cone of which in clear weather is
visible fifty miles off. At eight o'clock, its form, indistinct though it still was,
seemed almost a reproduction of Teneriffe.

"And consequently it must resemble Tristan d'Acunha," observed Glenarvan.

"A very wise conclusion," said Paganel, "according to the geometrographic
axiom that two islands resembling a third must have a common likeness. I will
only add that, like Tristan d'Acunha, Amsterdam Island is equally rich in seals
and Robinsons."

"There are Robinsons everywhere, then?" said Lady Helena.

"Indeed, Madam," replied Paganel, "I know few islands without some tale of
the kind appertaining to them, and the romance of your immortal countryman,


Daniel Defoe, has been often enough realized before his day."

"Monsieur Paganel," said Mary, "may I ask you a question?"

"Two if you like, my dear young lady, and I promise to answer them."

"Well, then, I want to know if you would be very much frightened at the idea
of being cast away alone on a desert island."

"T?" exclaimed Paganel.

"Come now, my good fellow," said the Major, "don't go and tell us that it is
your most cherished desire."

"I don't pretend it is that, but still, after all, such an adventure would not be
very unpleasant to me. I should begin a new life; I should hunt and fish; I should
choose a grotto for my domicile in Winter and a tree in Summer. I should make
storehouses for my harvests: in one word, I should colonize my island."

"All by yourself?"

"All by myself if I was obliged. Besides, are we ever obliged? Cannot one
find friends among the animals, and choose some tame kid or eloquent parrot or
amiable monkey? And if a lucky chance should send one a companion like the
faithful Friday, what more is needed? Two friends on a rock, there is happiness.
Suppose now, the Major and I--"

"Thank you," replied the Major, interrupting him; "I have no inclination in
that line, and should make a very poor Robinson Crusoe."

"My dear Monsieur Paganel," said Lady Helena, "you are letting your
imagination run away with you, as usual. But the dream is very different from
the reality. You are thinking of an imaginary Robinson's life, thrown on a picked
island and treated like a spoiled child by nature. You only see the sunny side."

"What, madam! You don't believe a man could be happy on a desert island?"

"I do not. Man is made for society and not for solitude, and solitude can only
engender despair. It is a question of time. At the outset it is quite possible that
material wants and the very necessities of existence may engross the poor
shipwrecked fellow, just snatched from the waves; but afterward, when he feels
himself alone, far from his fellow men, without any hope of seeing country and
friends again, what must he think, what must he suffer? His little island is all his
world. The whole human race is shut up in himself, and when death comes,
which utter loneliness will make terrible, he will be like the last man on the last
day of the world. Believe me, Monsieur Paganel, such a man is not to be
envied."

Paganel gave in, though regretfully, to the arguments of Lady Helena, and
still kept up a discussion on the advantages and disadvantages of Isolation, till
the very moment the DUNCAN dropped anchor about a mile off Amsterdam
Island.


This lonely group in the Indian Ocean consists of two distinct islands, thirty-
three miles apart, and situated exactly on the meridian of the Indian peninsula.
To the north is Amsterdam Island, and to the south St. Paul; but they have been
often confounded by geographers and navigators.

At the time of the DUNCAN'S visit to the island, the population consisted of
three people, a Frenchman and two mulattoes, all three employed by the
merchant proprietor. Paganel was delighted to shake hands with a countryman in
the person of good old Monsieur Viot. He was far advanced in years, but did the
honors of the place with much politeness. It was a happy day for him when these
kindly strangers touched at his island, for St. Peter's was only frequented by seal-
fishers, and now and then a whaler, the crews of which are usually rough, coarse
men.

M. Viot presented his subjects, the two mulattoes. They composed the whole
living population of the island, except a few wild boars in the interior and
myriads of penguins. The little house where the three solitary men lived was in
the heart of a natural bay on the southeast, formed by the crumbling away of a
portion of the mountain.

Twice over in the early part of the century, Amsterdam Island became the
country of deserted sailors, providentially saved from misery and death; but
since these events no vessel had been lost on its coast. Had any shipwreck
occurred, some fragments must have been thrown on the sandy shore, and any
poor sufferers from it would have found their way to M. Viot's fishing-huts. The
old man had been long on the island, and had never been called upon to exercise
such hospitality. Of the BRITANNIA and Captain Grant he knew nothing, but he
was certain that the disaster had not happened on Amsterdam Island, nor on the
islet called St. Paul, for whalers and fishing-vessels went there constantly, and
must have heard of it.

Glenarvan was neither surprised nor vexed at the reply; indeed, his object in
asking was rather to establish the fact that Captain Grant had not been there than
that he had. This done, they were ready to proceed on their voyage next day.

They rambled about the island till evening, as its appearance was very
inviting. Its FAUNA and FLORA, however, were poor in the extreme. The only
specimens of quadrupeds, birds, fish and cetacea were a few wild boars, stormy
petrels, albatrosses, perch and seals. Here and there thermal springs and
chalybeate waters escaped from the black lava, and thin dark vapors rose above
the volcanic soil. Some of these springs were very hot. John Mangles held his
thermometer in one of them, and found the temperature was 176 degrees
Fahrenheit. Fish caught in the sea a few yards off, cooked in five minutes in
these all but boiling waters, a fact which made Paganel resolve not to attempt to


bathe in them.

Toward evening, after a long promenade, Glenarvan and his party bade adieu
to the good old M. Viot, and returned to the yacht, wishing him all the happiness
possible on his desert island, and receiving in return the old man's blessing on
their expedition.

CHAPTER IV A WAGER AND HOW DECIDED

ON the 7th of December, at three A. M., the DUNCAN lay puffing out her
smoke in the little harbor ready to start, and a few minutes afterward the anchor
was lifted, and the screw set in motion. By eight o'clock, when the passengers
came on deck, the Amsterdam Island had almost disappeared from view behind
the mists of the horizon. This was the last halting-place on the route, and nothing
now was between them and the Australian coast but three thousand miles'
distance. Should the west wind continue but a dozen days longer, and the sea
remain favorable, the yacht would have reached the end of her voyage.

Mary Grant and her brother could not gaze without emotion at the waves
through which the DUNCAN was speeding her course, when they thought that
these very same waves must have dashed against the prow of the BRITANNIA
but a few days before her shipwreck. Here, perhaps, Captain Grant, with a
disabled ship and diminished crew, had struggled against the tremendous
hurricanes of the Indian Ocean, and felt himself driven toward the coast with
irresistible force. The Captain pointed out to Mary the different currents on the
ship's chart, and explained to her their constant direction. Among others there
was one running straight to the Australian continent, and its action is equally felt
in the Atlantic and Pacific. It was doubtless against this that the BRITANNIA,
dismasted and rudderless, had been unable to contend, and consequently been
dashed against the coast, and broken in pieces.

A difficulty about this, however, presented itself. The last intelligence of
Captain Grant was from Callao on the 30th of May, 1862, as appeared in the
Mercantile and Shipping Gazette. "How then was it possible that on the 7th of
June, only eight days after leaving the shores of Peru, that the BRITANNIA
could have found herself in the Indian Ocean? But to this, Paganel, who was
consulted on the subject, found a very plausible solution.

It was one evening, about six days after their leaving Amsterdam Island,
when they were all chatting together on the poop, that the above-named
difficulty was stated by Glenarvan. Paganel made no reply, but went and fetched
the document. After perusing it, he still remained silent, simply shrugging his
shoulders, as if ashamed of troubling himself about such a trifle.

"Come, my good friend," said Glenarvan, "at least give us an answer."

"No," replied Paganel, "I'll merely ask a question for Captain John to


answer."

"And what is it, Monsieur Paganel?" said John Mangles.

"Could a quick ship make the distance in a month over that part of the
Pacific Ocean which lies between America and Australia?"

"Yes, by making two hundred miles in twenty-four hours."

"Would that be an extraordinary rate of speed?"

"Not at all; sailing clippers often go faster."

"Well, then, instead of '7 June' on this document, suppose that one figure has
been destroyed by the sea-water, and read '17 June’ or '27 June,’ and all is
explained."

"That's to say," replied Lady Helena, "that between the 31st of May and the
27th of June--"

"Captain Grant could have crossed the Pacific and found himself in the
Indian Ocean."

Paganel's theory met with universal acceptance.

"That's one more point cleared up," said Glenarvan. "Thanks to our friend,
all that remains to be done now is to get to Australia, and look out for traces of
the wreck on the western coast."

"Or the eastern?" said John Mangles.

"Indeed, John, you may be right, for there is nothing in the document to
indicate which shore was the scene of the catastrophe, and both points of the
continent crossed by the 37th parallel, must, therefore, be explored."

"Then, my Lord, it is doubtful, after all," said Mary.

"Oh no, Miss Mary," John Mangles hastened to reply, seeing the young girl's
apprehension. "His Lordship will please to consider that if Captain Grant had
gained the shore on the east of Australia, he would almost immediately have
found refuge and assistance. The whole of that coast is English, we might say,
peopled with colonists. The crew of the BRITANNIA could not have gone ten
miles without meeting a fellow-countryman."

"IT am quite of your opinion, Captain John," said Paganel. "On the eastern
coast Harry Grant would not only have found an English colony easily, but he
would certainly have met with some means of transport back to Europe."

"And he would not have found the same resources on the side we are making
for?" asked Lady Helena.

"No, madam," replied Paganel; "it is a desert coast, with no communication
between it and Melbourne or Adelaide. If the BRITANNIA was wrecked on
those rocky shores, she was as much cut off from all chance of help as if she had
been lost on the inhospitable shores of Africa."

"But what has become of my father there, then, all these two years?" asked


Mary Grant.

"My dear Mary," replied Paganel, "you have not the least doubt, have you,
that Captain Grant reached the Australian continent after his shipwreck?"

"No, Monsieur Paganel."

"Well, granting that, what became of him? The suppositions we might make
are not numerous. They are confined to three. Either Harry Grant and his
companions have found their way to the English colonies, or they have fallen
into the hands of the natives, or they are lost in the immense wilds of Australia."

"Go on, Paganel,” said Lord Glenarvan, as the learned Frenchman made a
pause.

"The first hypothesis I reject, then, to begin with, for Harry Grant could not
have reached the English colonies, or long ago he would have been back with his
children in the good town of Dundee."

"Poor father," murmured Mary, "away from us for two whole years."

"Hush, Mary," said Robert, "Monsieur Paganel will tell us."

"Alas! my boy, I cannot. All that I affirm is, that Captain Grant is in the
hands of the natives."

"But these natives," said Lady Helena, hastily, "are they--"

"Reassure yourself, madam," said Paganel, divining her thoughts. "The
aborigines of Australia are low enough in the scale of human intelligence, and
most degraded and uncivilized, but they are mild and gentle in disposition, and
not sanguinary like their New Zealand neighbors. Though they may be prisoners,
their lives have never been threatened, you may be sure. All travelers are
unanimous in declaring that the Australian natives abhor shedding blood, and
many a time they have found in them faithful allies in repelling the attacks of
evil-disposed convicts far more cruelly inclined."

"You hear what Monsieur Paganel tells us, Mary," said Lady Helena turning
to the young girl. "If your father is in the hands of the natives, which seems
probable from the document, we shall find him."

"And what if he is lost in that immense country?" asked Mary.

"Well, we'll find him still," exclaimed Paganel, in a confident tone. "Won't
we, friends?"

"Most certainly," replied Glenarvan; and anxious to give a less gloomy turn
to the conversation, he added--

"But I won't admit the supposition of his being lost, not for an instant."

"Neither will I," said Paganel.

"Is Australia a big place?" inquired Robert.

"Australia, my boy, is about as large as four-fifths of Europe. It has
somewhere about 775,000 HECTARES."


"So much as that?" said the Major.

"Yes, McNabbs, almost to a yard's breadth. Don't you think now it has a right
to be called a continent?"

"T do, certainly."

"IT may add," continued the SAVANT, "that there are but few accounts of
travelers being lost in this immense country. Indeed, I believe Leichardt is the
only one of whose fate we are ignorant, and some time before my departure I
learned from the Geographical Society that Mcintyre had strong hopes of having
discovered traces of him."

"The whole of Australia, then, is not yet explored?" asked Lady Helena.

"No, madam, but very little of it. This continent is not much better known
than the interior of Africa, and yet it is from no lack of enterprising travelers.
From 1606 to 1862, more than fifty have been engaged in exploring along the
coast and in the interior."

"Oh, fifty!" exclaimed McNabbs incredulously.

"No, no," objected the Major; "that is going too far."

"And I might go farther, McNabbs," replied the geographer, impatient of
contradiction.

"Yes, McNabbs, quite that number."

"Farther still, Paganel."

"If you doubt me, I can give you the names."

"Oh, oh," said the Major, coolly. "That's just like you SAVANTS. You stick
at nothing.”

"Major, will you bet your Purdy-Moore rifle against my telescope?"

"Why not, Paganel, if it would give you any pleasure."

"Done, Major!" exclaimed Paganel. "You may say good-by to your rifle, for
it will never shoot another chamois or fox unless I lend it to you, which I shall
always be happy to do, by the by."

"And whenever you require the use of your telescope, Paganel, I shall be
equally obliging,” replied the Major, gravely.

"Let us begin, then; and ladies and gentlemen, you shall be our jury. Robert,
you must keep count."

This was agreed upon, and Paganel forthwith commenced.

"Mnemosyne! Goddess of Memory, chaste mother of the Muses!" he
exclaimed, "inspire thy faithful servant and fervent worshiper! Two hundred and
fifty-eight years ago, my friends, Australia was unknown. Strong suspicions
were entertained of the existence of a great southern continent. In the library of
your British Museum, Glenarvan, there are two charts, the date of which is 1550,
which mention a country south of Asia, called by the Portuguese Great Java. But


these charts are not sufficiently authentic. In the seventeenth century, in 1606,
Quiros, a Spanish navigator, discovered a country which he named Australia de
Espiritu Santo. Some authors imagine that this was the New Hebrides group, and
not Australia. I am not going to discuss the question, however. Count Quiros,
Robert, and let us pass on to another."

"ONE," said Robert.

"In that same year, Louis Vas de Torres, the second in command of the fleet
of Quiros, pushed further south. But it is to Theodore Hertoge, a Dutchman, that
the honor of the great discovery belongs. He touched the western coast of
Australia in 25 degrees latitude, and called it Eendracht, after his vessel. From
this time navigators increased. In 1618, Zeachen discovered the northern parts of
the coast, and called them Arnheim and Diemen. In 1618, Jan Edels went along
the western coast, and christened it by his own name. In 1622, Leuwin went
down as far as the cape which became his namesake." And so Paganel continued
with name after name until his hearers cried for mercy.

"Stop, Paganel," said Glenarvan, laughing heartily, "don't quite crush poor
McNabbs. Be generous; he owns he is vanquished."

"And what about the rifle?" asked the geographer, triumphantly.

"It is yours, Paganel," replied the Major, "and I am very sorry for it; but your
memory might gain an armory by such feats."

"It is certainly impossible to be better acquainted with Australia; not the least
name, not even the most trifling fact--"

"As to the most trifling fact, I don't know about that," said the Major, shaking
his head.

"What do you mean, McNabbs?" exclaimed Paganel.

"Simply that perhaps all the incidents connected with the discovery of
Australia may not be known to you."

"Just fancy," retorted Paganel, throwing back his head proudly.

"Come now. If I name one fact you don't know, will you give me back my
rifle?" said McNabbs.

"On the spot, Major."

"Very well, it's a bargain, then."

"Yes, a bargain; that's settled."

"All right. Well now, Paganel, do you know how it is that Australia does not
belong to France?"

"But it Seems to me--"

"Or, at any rate, do you know what's the reason the English give?" asked the
Major.

"No," replied Paganel, with an air of vexation.


"Just because Captain Baudin, who was by no means a timid man, was so
afraid in 1802, of the croaking of the Australian frogs, that he raised his anchor
with all possible speed, and quitted the coast, never to return."

"What!" exclaimed Paganel. "Do they actually give that version of it in
England? But it is just a bad joke."

"Bad enough, certainly, but still it is history in the United Kingdom."

"It's an insult!" exclaimed the patriotic geographer; "and they relate that
gravely?"

"I must own it is the case," replied Glenarvan, amidst a general outburst of
laughter. "Do you mean to say you have never heard of it before?"

"Never! But I protest against it. Besides, the English call us 'frog-eaters.'
Now, in general, people are not afraid of what they eat."

"It is said, though, for all that," replied McNabbs. So the Major kept his
famous rifle after all.

CHAPTER V THE STORM ON THE INDIAN OCEAN

Two days after this conversation, John Mangles announced that the
DUNCAN was in longitude 113 degrees 37 minutes, and the passengers found
on consulting the chart that consequently Cape Bernouilli could not be more than
five degrees off. They must be sailing then in that part of the Indian Ocean
which washed the Australian continent, and in four days might hope to see Cape
Bernouilli appear on the horizon.

Hitherto the yacht had been favored by a strong westerly breeze, but now
there were evident signs that a calm was impending, and on the 13th of
December the wind fell entirely; as the sailors say, there was not enough to fill a
cap.

There was no saying how long this state of the atmosphere might last. But
for the powerful propeller the yacht would have been obliged to lie motionless as
a log. The young captain was very much annoyed, however, at the prospect of
emptying his coal-bunkers, for he had covered his ship with canvas, intending to
take advantage of the slightest breeze.

"After all, though," said Glenarvan, with whom he was talking over the
subject, "it is better to have no wind than a contrary one."

"Your Lordship is right," replied John Mangles; "but the fact is these sudden
calms bring change of weather, and this is why I dread them. We are close on the
trade winds, and if we get them ever so little in our teeth, it will delay us
greatly."

"Well, John, what if it does? It will only make our voyage a little longer."

"Yes, if it does not bring a storm with it.”

"Do you mean to say you think we are going to have bad weather?" replied


Glenarvan, examining the sky, which from horizon to zenith seemed absolutely
cloudless.

"I do," returned the captain. "I may say so to your Lordship, but I should not
like to alarm Lady Glenarvan or Miss Grant."

"You are acting wisely; but what makes you uneasy?"

"Sure indications of a storm. Don't trust, my Lord, to the appearance of the
sky. Nothing is more deceitful. For the last two days the barometer has been
falling in a most ominous manner, and is now at 27 degrees. This is a warning I
dare not neglect, for there is nothing I dread more than storms in the Southern
Seas; I have had a taste of them already. The vapors which become condensed in
the immense glaciers at the South Pole produce a current of air of extreme
violence. This causes a struggle between the polar and equatorial winds, which
results in cyclones, tornadoes, and all those multiplied varieties of tempest
against which a ship is no match."

"Well, John," said Glenarvan, "the DUNCAN is a good ship, and her captain
is a brave sailor. Let the storm come, we'll meet it!"

John Mangles remained on deck the whole night, for though as yet the sky
was still unclouded, he had such faith in his weather-glass, that he took every
precaution that prudence could suggest. About 11 P. M. the sky began to darken
in the south, and the crew were called up, and all the sails hauled in, except the
foresail, brigantine, topsail, and jib-boom. At midnight the wind freshened, and
before long the cracking of the masts, and the rattling of the cordage, and
groaning of the timbers, awakened the passengers, who speedily made their
appearance on deck-- at least Paganel, Glenarvan, the Major and Robert.

"Is it the hurricane?" asked Glenarvan quietly.

"Not yet," replied the captain; "but it is close at hand."

And he went on giving his orders to the men, and doing his best to make
ready for the storm, standing, like an officer commanding a breach, with his face
to the wind, and his gaze fixed on the troubled sky. The glass had fallen to 26
degrees, and the hand pointed to tempest.

It was one o'clock in the morning when Lady Helena and Miss Grant
ventured upstairs on deck. But they no sooner made their appearance than the
captain hurried toward them, and begged them to go below again immediately.
The waves were already beginning to dash over the side of the ship, and the sea
might any moment sweep right over her from stem to stern. The noise of the
warring elements was so great that his words were scarcely audible, but Lady
Helena took advantage of a sudden lull to ask if there was any danger.

"None whatever," replied John Mangles; "but you cannot remain on deck,
madam, no more can Miss Mary."


The ladies could not disobey an order that seemed almost an entreaty, and
they returned to their cabin. At the same moment the wind redoubled its fury,
making the masts bend beneath the weight of the sails, and completely lifting up
the yacht.

"Haul up the foresail!" shouted the captain. "Lower the topsail and jib-
boom!"

Glenarvan and his companions stood silently gazing at the struggle between
their good ship and the waves, lost in wondering and half-terrified admiration at
the spectacle.

Just then, a dull hissing was heard above the noise of the elements. The
steam was escaping violently, not by the funnel, but from the safety-valves of the
boiler; the alarm whistle sounded unnaturally loud, and the yacht made a
frightful pitch, overturning Wilson, who was at the wheel, by an unexpected
blow from the tiller. The DUNCAN no longer obeyed the helm.

"What is the matter?" cried the captain, rushing on the bridge.

"The ship is heeling over on her side," replied Wilson.

"The engine! the engine!" shouted the engineer.

Away rushed John to the engine-room. A cloud of steam filled the room. The
pistons were motionless in their cylinders, and they were apparently powerless,
and the engine-driver, fearing for his boilers, was letting off the steam.

"What's wrong?" asked the captain.

"The propeller is bent or entangled," was the reply. "It's not acting at all."

"Can't you extricate it?"

"It is impossible."

An accident like this could not be remedied, and John's only resource was to
fall back on his sails, and seek to make an auxiliary of his most powerful enemy,
the wind. He went up again on deck, and after explaining in a few words to Lord
Glenarvan how things stood, begged him to retire to his cabin, with the rest of
the passengers. But Glenarvan wished to remain above.

"No, your Lordship," said the captain in a firm tone, "I must be alone with
my men. Go into the saloon. The vessel will have a hard fight with the waves,
and they would sweep you over without mercy."

V. IV Verne

"But we might be a help."

"Go in, my Lord, go in. I must indeed insist on it. There are times when I
must be master on board, and retire you must."

Their situation must indeed be desperate for John Mangles to speak in such
authoritative language. Glenarvan was wise enough to understand this, and felt
he must set an example in obedience. He therefore quitted the deck immediately


with his three companions, and rejoined the ladies, who were anxiously
watching the DENOUEMENT of this war with the elements.

"He's an energetic fellow, this brave John of mine!" said Lord Glenarvan, as
he entered the saloon.

"That he is," replied Paganel. "He reminds me of your great Shakespeare's
boatswain in the "Tempest,' who says to the king on board: 'Hence! What care
these roarers for the name of king? To cabin! Silence! Trouble us not."

However, John Mangles did not lose a second in extricating his ship from the
peril in which she was placed by the condition of her screw propeller. He
resolved to rely on the mainsail for keeping in the right route as far as possible,
and to brace the yards obliquely, so as not to present a direct front to the storm.
The yacht turned about like a swift horse that feels the spur, and presented a
broadside to the billows. The only question was, how long would she hold out
with so little sail, and what sail could resist such violence for any length of time.
The great advantage of keeping up the mainsail was that it presented to the
waves only the most solid portions of the yacht, and kept her in the right course.
Still it involved some peril, for the vessel might get engulfed between the waves,
and not be able to raise herself. But Mangles felt there was no alternative, and all
he could do was to keep the crew ready to alter the sail at any moment, and stay
in the shrouds himself watching the tempest.

The remainder of the night was spent in this manner, and it was hoped that
morning would bring a calm. But this was a delusive hope. At 8 A. M. the wind
had increased to a hurricane.

John said nothing, but he trembled for his ship, and those on board. The
DUNCAN made a frightful plunge forward, and for an instant the men thought
she would never rise again. Already they had seized their hatchets to cut away
the shrouds from the mainmast, but the next minute the sails were torn away by
the tempest, and had flown off like gigantic albatrosses.

The yacht had risen once more, but she found herself at the mercy of the
waves entirely now, with nothing to steady or direct her, and was so fearfully
pitched and tossed about that every moment the captain expected the masts
would break short off. John had no resource but to put up a forestaysail, and run
before the gale. But this was no easy task. Twenty times over he had all his work
to begin again, and it was 3 P. M. before his attempt succeeded. A mere shred of
canvas though it was, it was enough to drive the DUNCAN forward with
inconceivable rapidity to the northeast, of course in the same direction as the
hurricane. Swiftness was their only chance of safety. Sometimes she would get
in advance of the waves which carried her along, and cutting through them with
her sharp prow, bury herself in their depths. At others, she would keep pace with


them, and make such enormous leaps that there was imminent danger of her
being pitched over on her side, and then again, every now and then the storm-
driven sea would out-distance the yacht, and the angry billows would sweep
over the deck from stem to stern with tremendous violence.

In this alarming situation and amid dreadful alternations of hope and despair,
the 12th of December passed away, and the ensuing night, John Mangles never
left his post, not even to take food. Though his impassive face betrayed no
symptoms of fear, he was tortured with anxiety, and his steady gaze was fixed on
the north, as if trying to pierce through the thick mists that enshrouded it.

There was, indeed, great cause for fear. The DUNCAN was out of her
course, and rushing toward the Australian coast with a speed which nothing
could lessen. To John Mangles it seemed as if a thunderbolt were driving them
along. Every instant he expected the yacht would dash against some rock, for he
reckoned the coast could not be more than twelve miles off, and better far be in
mid ocean exposed to all its fury than too near land.

John Mangles went to find Glenarvan, and had a private talk with him about
their situation, telling him frankly the true state of affairs, stating the case with
all the coolness of a sailor prepared for anything and everything and he wound
up by saying he might, perhaps, be obliged to cast the yacht on shore.

"To save the lives of those on board, my Lord," he added.

"Do it then, John," replied Lord Glenarvan.

"And Lady Helena, Miss Grant?"

"IT will tell them at the last moment when all hope of keeping out at sea is
over. You will let me know?"

"T will, my Lord."

Glenarvan rejoined his companions, who felt they were in imminent danger,
though no word was spoken on the subject. Both ladies displayed great courage,
fully equal to any of the party. Paganel descanted in the most inopportune
manner about the direction of atmospheric currents, making interesting
comparisons, between tornadoes, cyclones, and rectilinear tempests. The Major
calmly awaited the end with the fatalism of a Mussulman.

About eleven o'clock, the hurricane appeared to decrease slightly. The damp
mist began to clear away, and a sudden gleam of light revealed a low-lying shore
about six miles distant. They were driving right down on it. Enormous breakers
fifty feet high were dashing over it, and the fact of their height showed John
there must be solid ground before they could make such a rebound.

"Those are sandbanks," he said to Austin.

"T think they are," replied the mate.

"We are in God's hands," said John. "If we cannot find any opening for the


yacht, and if she doesn't find the way in herself, we are lost."

"The tide is high at present, it is just possible we may ride over those
sandbanks.”

"But just see those breakers. What ship could stand them. Let us invoke
divine aid, Austin!"

Meanwhile the DUNCAN was speeding on at a frightful rate. Soon she was
within two miles of the sandbanks, which were still veiled from time to time in
thick mist. But John fancied he could see beyond the breakers a quiet basin,
where the DUNCAN would be in comparative safety. But how could she reach
it?

All the passengers were summoned on deck, for now that the hour of
shipwreck was at hand, the captain did not wish anyone to be shut up in his
cabin.

"John!" said Glenarvan in a low voice to the captain, "I will try to save my
wife or perish with her. I put Miss Grant in your charge."

"Yes, my Lord," replied John Mangles, raising Glenarvan's hand to his
moistened eyes.

The yacht was only a few cables' lengths from the sandbanks. The tide was
high, and no doubt there was abundance of water to float the ship over the
dangerous bar; but these terrific breakers alternately lifting her up and then
leaving her almost dry, would infallibly make her graze the sandbanks.

Was there no means of calming this angry sea? A last expedient struck the
captain. "The oil, my lads!" he exclaimed. "Bring the oil here!"

The crew caught at the idea immediately; this was a plan that had been
successfully tried already. The fury of the waves had been allayed before this
time by covering them with a sheet of oil. Its effect is immediate, but very
temporary. The moment after a ship has passed over the smooth surface, the sea
redoubles its violence, and woe to the bark that follows. The casks of seal-oil
were forthwith hauled up, for danger seemed to have given the men double
strength. A few hatchet blows soon knocked in the heads, and they were then
hung over the larboard and starboard.

"Be ready!" shouted John, looking out for a favorable moment.

In twenty seconds the yacht reached the bar. Now was the time. "Pour out!"
cried the captain, "and God prosper it!"

The barrels were turned upside down, and instantly a sheet of oil covered the
whole surface of the water. The billows fell as if by magic, the whole foaming
sea seemed leveled, and the DUNCAN flew over its tranquil bosom into a quiet
basin beyond the formidable bar; but almost the same minute the ocean burst
forth again with all its fury, and the towering breakers dashed over the bar with


increased violence.


CHAPTER VI A HOSPITABLE COLONIST


THE captain's first care was to anchor his vessel securely. He found excellent
moorage in five fathoms' depth of water, with a solid bottom of hard granite,
which afforded a firm hold. There was no danger now of either being driven
away or stranded at low water. After so many hours of danger, the DUNCAN
found herself in a sort of creek, sheltered by a high circular point from the winds
outside in the open sea.

Lord Glenarvan grasped John Mangles' hand, and simply said: "Thank you,
John."

This was all, but John felt it ample recompense. Glenarvan kept to himself
the secret of his anxiety, and neither Lady Helena, nor Mary, nor Robert
suspected the grave perils they had just escaped.

One important fact had to be ascertained. On what part of the coast had the
tempest thrown them? How far must they go to regain the parallel. At what
distance S. W. was Cape Bernouilli? This was soon determined by taking the
position of the ship, and it was found that she had scarcely deviated two degrees
from the route. They were in longitude 36 degrees 12 minutes, and latitude 32
degrees 67 minutes, at Cape Catastrophe, three hundred miles from Cape
Bernouilli. The nearest port was Adelaide, the Capital of Southern Australia.

Could the DUNCAN be repaired there? This was the question. The extent of
the injuries must first be ascertained, and in order to do this he ordered some of
the men to dive down below the stern. Their report was that one of the branches
of the screw was bent, and had got jammed against the stern post, which of
course prevented all possibility of rotation. This was a serious damage, so
serious as to require more skilful workmen than could be found in Adelaide.

After mature reflection, Lord Glenarvan and John Mangles came to the
determination to sail round the Australian coast, stopping at Cape Bernouilli, and
continuing their route south as far as Melbourne, where the DUNCAN could
speedily be put right. This effected, they would proceed to cruise along the
eastern coast to complete their search for the BRITANNIA.

This decision was unanimously approved, and it was agreed that they should
start with the first fair wind. They had not to wait long for the same night the
hurricane had ceased entirely, and there was only a manageable breeze from the
S. W. Preparations for sailing were instantly commenced, and at four o'clock in
the morning the crew lifted the anchors, and got under way with fresh canvas
outspread, and a wind blowing right for the Australian shores.


Two hours afterward Cape Catastrophe was out of sight. In the evening they
doubled Cape Borda, and came alongside Kangaroo Island. This is the largest of
the Australian islands, and a great hiding place for runaway convicts. Its
appearance was enchanting. The stratified rocks on the shore were richly
carpeted with verdure, and innumerable kangaroos were jumping over the woods
and plains, just as at the time of its discovery in 1802. Next day, boats were sent
ashore to examine the coast minutely, as they were now on the 36th parallel, and
between that and the 38th Glenarvan wished to leave no part unexplored.

The boats had hard, rough work of it now, but the men never complained.
Glenarvan and his inseparable companion, Paganel, and young Robert generally
accompanied them. But all this painstaking exploration came to nothing. Not a
trace of the shipwreck could be seen anywhere. The Australian shores revealed
no more than the Patagonian. However, it was not time yet to lose hope
altogether, for they had not reached the exact point indicated by the document.

On the 20th of December, they arrived off Cape Bernouilli, which terminates
Lacepede Bay, and yet not a vestige of the BRITANNIA had been discovered.
Still this was not surprising, as it was two years since the occurrence of the
catastrophe, and the sea might, and indeed must, have scattered and destroyed
whatever fragments of the brig had remained. Besides, the natives who scent a
wreck as the vultures do a dead body, would have pounced upon it and carried
off the smaller DEBRIS. There was no doubt whatever Harry Grant and his
companions had been made prisoners the moment the waves threw them on the
shore, and been dragged away into the interior of the continent.

But if so, what becomes of Paganel's ingenious hypothesis about the
document? viz., that it had been thrown into a river and carried by a current into
the sea. That was a plausible enough theory in Patagonia, but not in the part of
Australia intersected by the 37th parallel. Besides the Patagonian rivers, the Rio
Colorado and the Rio Negro, flow into the sea along deserted solitudes,
uninhabited and uninhabitable; while, on the contrary, the principal rivers of
Australia--the Murray, the Yarrow, the Torrens, the Darling--all connected with
each other, throw themselves into the ocean by well-frequented routes, and their
mouths are ports of great activity. What likelihood, consequently, would there be
that a fragile bottle would ever find its way along such busy thoroughfares right
out into the Indian Ocean?

Paganel himself saw the impossibility of it, and confessed to the Major, who
raised a discussion on the subject, that his hypothesis would be altogether
illogical in Australia. It was evident that the degrees given related to the place
where the BRITANNIA was actually shipwrecked and not the place of captivity,
and that the bottle therefore had been thrown into the sea on the western coast of


the continent.

However, as Glenarvan justly remarked, this did not alter the fact of Captain
Grant's captivity in the least degree, though there was no reason now for
prosecuting the search for him along the 37th parallel, more than any other. It
followed, consequently, that if no traces of the BRITANNIA were discovered at
Cape Bernouilli, the only thing to be done was to return to Europe. Lord
Glenarvan would have been unsuccessful, but he would have done his duty
courageously and conscientiously.

But the young Grants did not feel disheartened. They had long since said to
themselves that the question of their father's deliverance was about to be finally
settled. Irrevocably, indeed, they might consider it, for as Paganel had
judiciously demonstrated, if the wreck had occurred on the eastern side, the
survivors would have found their way back to their own country long since.

"Hope on! Hope on, Mary!" said Lady Helena to the young girl, as they
neared the shore; "God's hand will still lead us."

"Yes, Miss Mary," said Captain John. "Man's extremity is God's opportunity.
When one way is hedged up another is sure to open."

"God grant it," replied Mary.

Land was quite close now. The cape ran out two miles into the sea, and
terminated in a gentle slope, and the boat glided easily into a sort of natural
creek between coral banks in a state of formation, which in course of time would
be a belt of coral reefs round the southern point of the Australian coast. Even
now they were quite sufficiently formidable to destroy the keel of a ship, and the
BRITANNIA might likely enough have been dashed to pieces on them.

The passengers landed without the least difficulty on an absolutely desert
shore. Cliffs composed of beds of strata made a coast line sixty to eighty feet
high, which it would have been difficult to scale without ladders or cramp-irons.
John Mangles happened to discover a natural breach about half a mile south. Part
of the cliff had been partially beaten down, no doubt, by the sea in some
equinoctial gale. Through this opening the whole party passed and reached the
top of the cliff by a pretty steep path. Robert climbed like a young cat, and was
the first on the summit, to the despair of Paganel, who was quite ashamed to see
his long legs, forty years old, out-distanced by a young urchin of twelve.
However, he was far ahead of the Major, who gave himself no concern on the
subject.

They were all soon assembled on the lofty crags, and from this elevation
could command a view of the whole plain below. It appeared entirely
uncultivated, and covered with shrubs and bushes. Glenarvan thought it
resembled some glens in the lowlands of Scotland, and Paganel fancied it like


some barren parts of Britanny. But along the coast the country appeared to be
inhabited, and significant signs of industry revealed the presence of civilized
men, not savages.

"A mill!" exclaimed Robert.

And, sure enough, in the distance the long sails of a mill appeared,
apparently about three miles off.

"It certainly is a windmill," said Paganel, after examining the object in
question through his telescope.

"Let us go to it, then,” said Glenarvan.

Away they started, and, after walking about half an hour, the country began
to assume a new aspect, suddenly changing its sterility for cultivation. Instead of
bushes, quick-set hedges met the eye, inclosing recent clearings. Several
bullocks and about half a dozen horses were feeding in meadows, surrounded by
acacias supplied from the vast plantations of Kangaroo Island. Gradually fields
covered with cereals came in sight, whole acres covered with bristling ears of
com, hay-ricks in the shape of large bee-hives, blooming orchards, a fine garden
worthy of Horace, in which the useful and agreeable were blended; then came
sheds; commons wisely distributed, and last of all, a plain comfortable dwelling-
house, crowned by a joyous-sounding mill, and fanned and shaded by its long
sails as they kept constantly moving round.

Just at that moment a pleasant-faced man, about fifty years of age, came out
of the house, warned, by the loud barking of four dogs, of the arrival of
strangers. He was followed by five handsome strapping lads, his sons, and their
mother, a fine tall woman. There was no mistaking the little group. This was a
perfect type of the Irish colonist--a man who, weary of the miseries of his
country, had come, with his family, to seek fortune and happiness beyond the
seas.

Before Glenarvan and his party had time to reach the house and present
themselves in due form, they heard the cordial words: "Strangers! welcome to
the house of Paddy O'Moore!"

"You are Irish," said Glenarvan, "if I am not mistaken," warmly grasping the
outstretched hand of the colonist.

"IT was," replied Paddy O'Moore, "but now I am Australian. Come in,
gentlemen, whoever you may be, this house is yours."

It was impossible not to accept an invitation given with such grace. Lady
Helena and Mary Grant were led in by Mrs. O'Moore, while the gentlemen were
assisted by his sturdy sons to disencumber themselves of their firearms.

An immense hall, light and airy, occupied the ground floor of the house,
which was built of strong planks laid horizontally. A few wooden benches


fastened against the gaily-colored walls, about ten stools, two oak chests on tin
mugs, a large long table where twenty guests could sit comfortably, composed
the furniture, which looked in perfect keeping with the solid house and robust
inmates.

The noonday meal was spread; the soup tureen was smoking between roast
beef and a leg of mutton, surrounded by large plates of olives, grapes, and
oranges. The necessary was there and there was no lack of the superfluous. The
host and hostess were so pleasant, and the big table, with its abundant fare,
looked so inviting, that it would have been ungracious not to have seated
themselves. The farm servants, on equal footing with their master, were already
in their places to take their share of the meal. Paddy O'Moore pointed to the seats
reserved for the strangers, and said to Glenarvan:

"I was waiting for you."

"Waiting for us!" replied Glenarvan in a tone of surprise.

"I am always waiting for those who come," said the Irishman; and then, in a
solemn voice, while the family and domestics reverently stood, he repeated the
BENEDICITE.

Dinner followed immediately, during which an animated conversation was
kept up on all sides. From Scotch to Irish is but a handsbreadth. The Tweed,
several fathoms wide, digs a deeper trench between Scotland and England than
the twenty leagues of Irish Channel, which separates Old Caledonia from the
Emerald Isle. Paddy O'Moore related his history. It was that of all emigrants
driven by misfortune from their own country. Many come to seek fortunes who
only find trouble and sorrow, and then they throw the blame on chance, and
forget the true cause is their own idleness and vice and want of commonsense.
Whoever is sober and industrious, honest and economical, gets on.

Such a one had been and was Paddy O'Moore. He left Dundalk, where he
was Starving, and came with his family to Australia, landed at Adelaide, where,
refusing employment as a miner, he got engaged on a farm, and two months
afterward commenced clearing ground on his own account.

The whole territory of South Australia is divided into lots, each containing
eighty acres, and these are granted to colonists by the government. Any
industrious man, by proper cultivation, can not only get a living out of his lot,
but lay by pounds 80 a year.

Paddy O'Moore knew this. He profited by his own former experience, and
laid by every penny he could till he had saved enough to purchase new lots. His
family prospered, and his farm also. The Irish peasant became a landed
proprietor, and though his little estate had only been under cultivation for two
years, he had five hundred acres cleared by his own hands, and five hundred


head of cattle. He was his own master, after having been a serf in Europe, and as
independent as one can be in the freest country in the world.

His guests congratulated him heartily as he ended his narration; and Paddy
O'Moore no doubt expected confidence for confidence, but he waited in vain.
However, he was one of those discreet people who can say, "I tell you who I am,
but I don't ask who you are." Glenarvan's great object was to get information
about the BRITANNIA, and like a man who goes right to the point, he began at
once to interrogate O'Moore as to whether he had heard of the shipwreck.

The reply of the Irishman was not favorable; he had never heard the vessel
mentioned. For two years, at least, no ship had been wrecked on that coast,
neither above nor below the Cape. Now, the date of the catastrophe was within
two years. He could, therefore, declare positively that the survivors of the wreck
had not been thrown on that part of the western shore. Now, my Lord," he added,
"may I ask what interest you have in making the inquiry?"

This pointed question elicited in reply the whole history of the expedition.
Glenarvan related the discovery of the document, and the various attempts that
had been made to follow up the precise indications given of the whereabouts of
the unfortunate captives; and he concluded his account by expressing his doubt
whether they should ever find the Captain after all.

His dispirited tone made a painful impression on the minds of his auditors.
Robert and Mary could not keep back their tears, and Paganel had not a word of
hope or comfort to give them. John Mangles was grieved to the heart, though he,
too, was beginning to yield to the feeling of hopelessness which had crept over
the rest, when suddenly the whole party were electrified by hearing a voice
exclaim: "My Lord, praise and thank God! if Captain Grant is alive, he is on this
Australian continent."

CHAPTER VII THE QUARTERMASTER OF THE "BRITANNIA"

THE surprise caused by these words cannot be described. Glenarvan sprang
to his feet, and pushing back his seat, exclaimed: "Who spoke?"

"T did," said one of the servants, at the far end of the table.

"You, Ayrton!" replied his master, not less bewildered than Glenarvan.

"Yes, it was I," rejoined Ayrton in a firm tone, though somewhat agitated
voice. "A Scotchman like yourself, my Lord, and one of the shipwrecked crew of
the BRITANNIA."

The effect of such a declaration may be imagined. Mary Grant fell back,
half-fainting, in Lady Helena's arms, overcome by joyful emotion, and Robert,
and Mangles, and Paganel started up and toward the man that Paddy O'Moore
had addressed as AYRTON. He was a coarse-looking fellow, about forty-five
years of age, with very bright eyes, though half-hidden beneath thick,


overhanging brows. In spite of extreme leanness there was an air of unusual
strength about him. He seemed all bone and nerves, or, to use a Scotch
expression, as if he had not wasted time in making fat. He was broad-shouldered
and of middle height, and though his features were coarse, his face was so full of
intelligence and energy and decision, that he gave one a favorable impression.
The interest he excited was still further heightened by the marks of recent
suffering imprinted on his countenance. It was evident that he had endured long
and severe hardships, and that he had borne them bravely and come off victor.

"You are one of the shipwrecked sailors of the BRITANNIA?" was
Glenarvan's first question.

"Yes, my Lord; Captain Grant's quartermaster."

"And saved with him after the shipwreck?"

"No, my Lord, no. I was separated from him at that terrible moment, for I
was swept off the deck as the ship struck."

"Then you are not one of the two sailors mentioned in the document?"

"No; I was not aware of the existence of the document. The captain must
have thrown it into the sea when I was no longer on board."

"But the captain? What about the captain?"

"I believed he had perished; gone down with all his crew. I imagined myself
the sole survivor."

"But you said just now, Captain Grant was living."

"No, I said, 'if the captain is living."

"And you added, 'he is on the Australian continent.

"And, indeed, he cannot be anywhere else."

"Then you don't know where he is?"

"No, my Lord. I say again, I supposed he was buried beneath the waves, or
dashed to pieces against the rocks. It was from you I learned that he was still
alive."

"What then do you know?"

"Simply this--if Captain Grant is alive, he is in Australia."

"Where did the shipwreck occur?" asked Major McNabbs.

This should have been the first question, but in the excitement caused by the
unexpected incident, Glenarvan cared more to know where the captain was, than
where the BRITANNIA had been lost. After the Major's inquiry, however,
Glenarvan's examination proceeded more logically, and before long all the
details of the event stood out clearly before the minds of the company.

To the question put by the Major, Ayrton replied:

"When I was swept off the forecastle, when I was hauling in the jib-boom,
the BRITANNIA was running right on the Australian coast. She was not more


Wl


than two cables' length from it and consequently she must have struck just
there."

"In latitude 37 degrees?" asked John Mangles.

"Yes, in latitude 37 degrees."

"On the west coast?"

"No, on the east coast," was the prompt reply.

"And at what date?”

"Tt was on the night of the 27th of June, 1862."

"Exactly, just exactly," exclaimed Glenarvan.

"You see, then, my Lord," continued Ayrton, "I might justly say, If Captain
Grant is alive, he is on the Australian continent, and it is useless looking for him
anywhere else."

"And we will look for him there, and find him too, and save him," exclaimed
Paganel. "Ah, precious document," he added, with perfect NAIVETE, "you must
own you have fallen into the hands of uncommonly shrewd people."

But, doubtless, nobody heard his flattering words, for Glenarvan and Lady
Helena, and Mary Grant, and Robert, were too much engrossed with Ayrton to
listen to anyone else. They pressed round him and grasped his hands. It seemed
as if this man's presence was the sure pledge of Harry Grant's deliverance. If this
sailor had escaped the perils of the shipwreck, why should not the captain?
Ayrton was quite sanguine as to his existence; but on what part of the continent
he was to be found, that he could not say. The replies the man gave to the
thousand questions that assailed him on all sides were remarkably intelligent and
exact. All the while he spake, Mary held one of his hands in hers. This sailor was
a companion of her father's, one of the crew of the BRITANNIA. He had lived
with Harry Grant, crossed the seas with him and shared his dangers. Mary could
not keep her eyes off his face, rough and homely though it was, and she wept for
joy.

Up to this time no one had ever thought of doubting either the veracity or
identity of the quartermaster; but the Major, and perhaps John Mangles, now
began to ask themselves if this Ayrton's word was to be absolutely believed.
There was something suspicious about this unexpected meeting. Certainly the
man had mentioned facts and dates which corresponded, and the minuteness of
his details was most striking. Still exactness of details was no positive proof.
Indeed, it has been noticed that a falsehood has sometimes gained ground by
being exceedingly particular in minutiae. McNabbs, therefore, prudently
refrained from committing himself by expressing any opinion.

John Mangles, however, was soon convinced when he heard Ayrton speak to
the young girl about her father. He knew Mary and Robert quite well. He had


seen them in Glasgow when the ship sailed. He remembered them at the farewell
breakfast given on board the BRITANNIA to the captain's friends, at which
Sheriff Mcintyre was present. Robert, then a boy of ten years old, had been given
into his charge, and he ran away and tried to climb the rigging.

"Yes, that I did, it is quite right," said Robert.

He went on to mention several other trifling incidents, without attaching the
importance to them that John Mangles did, and when he stopped Mary Grant
said, in her soft voice: "Oh, go on, Mr. Ayrton, tell us more about our father."

The quartermaster did his best to satisfy the poor girl, and Glenarvan did not
interrupt him, though a score of questions far more important crowded into his
mind. Lady Helena made him look at Mary's beaming face, and the words he
was about to utter remained unspoken.

Ayrton gave an account of the BRITANNIA'S voyage across the Pacific.
Mary knew most of it before, as news of the ship had come regularly up to the
month of May, 1862. In the course of the year Harry Grant had touched at all the
principal ports. He had been to the Hebrides, to New Guinea, New Zealand, and
New Caledonia, and had succeeded in finding an important point on the western
coast of Papua, where the establishment of a Scotch colony seemed to him easy,
and its prosperity certain. A good port on the Molucca and Philippine route must
attract ships, especially when the opening of the Suez Canal would have
supplanted the Cape route. Harry Grant was one of those who appreciated the
great work of M. De Lesseps, and would not allow political rivalries to interfere
with international interests.

After reconnoitering Papua, the BRITANNIA went to provision herself at
Callao, and left that port on the 30th of May, 1862, to return to Europe by the
Indian Ocean and the Cape. Three weeks afterward, his vessel was disabled by a
fearful storm in which they were caught, and obliged to cut away the masts. A
leak sprang in the hold, and could not be stopped. The crew were too exhausted
to work the pumps, and for eight days the BRITANNIA was tossed about in the
hurricane like a shuttlecock. She had six feet of water in her hold, and was
gradually sinking. The boats had been all carried away by the tempest; death
stared them in the face, when, on the night of the 22d of June, as Paganel had
rightly supposed, they came in sight of the eastern coast of Australia.

The ship soon neared the shore, and presently dashed violently against it.
Ayrton was swept off by a wave, and thrown among the breakers, where he lost
consciousness. When he recovered, he found himself in the hands of natives,
who dragged him away into the interior of the country. Since that time he had
never heard the BRITANNIA's name mentioned, and reasonably enough came to
the conclusion that she had gone down with all hands off the dangerous reefs of


Twofold Bay.

This ended Ayrton's recital, and more than once sorrowful exclamations were
evoked by the story. The Major could not, in common justice, doubt its
authenticity. The sailor was then asked to narrate his own personal history, which
was short and simple enough. He had been carried by a tribe of natives four
hundred miles north of the 37th parallel. He spent a miserable existence there--
not that he was ill-treated, but the natives themselves lived miserably. He passed
two long years of painful slavery among them, but always cherished in his heart
the hope of one day regaining his freedom, and watching for the slightest
opportunity that might turn up, though he knew that his flight would be attended
with innumerable dangers.

At length one night in October, 1864, he managed to escape the vigilance of
the natives, and took refuge in the depths of immense forests. For a whole month
he subsisted on roots, edible ferns and mimosa gums, wandering through vast
solitudes, guiding himself by the sun during the day and by the stars at night. He
went on, though often almost despairingly, through bogs and rivers, and across
mountains, till he had traversed the whole of the uninhabited part of the
continent, where only a few bold travelers have ventured; and at last, in an
exhausted and all but dying condition, he reached the hospitable dwelling of
Paddy O'Moore, where he said he had found a happy home in exchange for his
labor.

"And if Ayrton speaks well of me," said the Irish settler, when the narrative
ended, "I have nothing but good to say of him. He is an honest, intelligent fellow
and a good

V. IV Verne worker; and as long as he pleases, Paddy O'Moore's house shall
be his."

Ayrton thanked him by a gesture, and waited silently for any fresh question
that might be put to him, though he thought to himself that he surely must have
satisfied all legitimate curiosity. What could remain to be said that he had not
said a hundred times already. Glenarvan was just about to open a discussion
about their future plan of action, profiting by this rencontre with Ayrton, and by
the information he had given them, when Major McNabbs, addressing the sailor
said, "You were quartermaster, you say, on the BRITANNIA?"

"Yes," replied Ayrton, without the least hesitation.

But as if conscious that a certain feeling of mistrust, however slight, had
prompted the inquiry, he added, "I have my shipping papers with me; I saved
them from the wreck."

He left the room immediately to fetch his official document, and, though
hardly absent a minute, Paddy O'Moore managed to say, "My Lord, you may


trust Ayrton; I vouch for his being an honest man. He has been two months now
in my service, and I have never had once to find fault with him. I knew all this
story of his shipwreck and his captivity. He is a true man, worthy of your entire
confidence."

Glenarvan was on the point of replying that he had never doubted his good
faith, when the man came in and brought his engagement written out in due
form. It was a paper signed by the shipowners and Captain Grant. Mary
recognized her father's writing at once. It was to certify that "Tom Ayrton, able-
bodied seaman, was engaged as quartermaster on board the three-mast vessel,
the BRITANNIA, Glasgow."

There could not possibly be the least doubt now of Ayrton's identity, for it
would have been difficult to account for his possession of the document if he
were not the man named in it.

"Now then," said Glenarvan, "I wish to ask everyone's opinion as to what is
best to be done. Your advice, Ayrton, will be particularly valuable, and I shall be
much obliged if you would let us have it."

After a few minutes' thought, Ayrton replied--"I thank you, my Lord, for the
confidence you show towards me, and I hope to prove worthy of it. I have some
knowledge of the country, and the habits of the natives, and if I can be of any
service to you--"

"Most certainly you can," interrupted Glenarvan.

"T think with you," resumed Ayrton, "that the captain and his two sailors have
escaped alive from the wreck, but since they have not found their way to the
English settlement, nor been seen any where, I have no doubt that their fate has
been similar to my own, and that they are prisoners in the hands of some of the
native tribes."

"That's exactly what I have always argued," said Paganel. "The shipwrecked
men were taken prisoners, as they feared. But must we conclude without
question that, like yourself, they have been dragged away north of the 37th
parallel?"

"I should suppose so, sir; for hostile tribes would hardly remain anywhere
near the districts under the British rule."

"That will complicate our search," said Glenarvan, somewhat disconcerted.
"How can we possibly find traces of the captives in the heart of so vast a
continent?"

No one replied, though Lady Helena's questioning glances at her companions
seemed to press for an answer. Paganel even was silent. His ingenuity for once
was at fault. John Mangles paced the cabin with great strides, as if he fancied
himself on the deck of his ship, evidently quite nonplussed.


"And you, Mr. Ayrton," said Lady Helena at last, "what would you do?"

"Madam," replied Ayrton, readily enough, "I should re-embark in the
DUNCAN, and go right to the scene of the catastrophe. There I should be guided
by circumstances, and by any chance indications we might discover."

"Very good," returned Glenarvan; "but we must wait till the DUNCAN is
repaired."

"Ah, she has been injured then?" said Ayrton.

"Yes," replied Mangles.

"To any serious extent?"

"No; but such injuries as require more skilful workmanship than we have on
board. One of the branches of the screw is twisted, and we cannot get it repaired
nearer than Melbourne.”

"Well, let the ship go to Melbourne then," said Paganel, "and we will go
without her to Twofold Bay."

"And how?" asked Mangles.

"By crossing Australia as we crossed America, keeping along the 37th
parallel."

"But the DUNCAN?" repeated Ayrton, as if particularly anxious on that
score.

"The DUNCAN can rejoin us, or we can rejoin her, as the case may be.
Should we discover Captain Grant in the course of our journey, we can all return
together to Melbourne. If we have to go on to the coast, on the contrary, then the
DUNCAN can come to us there. Who has any objection to make? Have you,
Major?"

"No, not if there is a practicable route across Australia."

"So practicable, that I propose Lady Helena and Miss Grant should
accompany us."

"Are you speaking seriously?" asked Glenarvan.

"Perfectly so, my Lord. It is a journey of 350 miles, not more. If we go
twelve miles a day it will barely take us a month, just long enough to put the
vessel in trim. If we had to cross the continent in a lower latitude, at its wildest
part, and traverse immense deserts, where there is no water and where the heat is
tropical, and go where the most adventurous travelers have never yet ventured,
that would be a different matter. But the 37th parallel cuts only through the
province of Victoria, quite an English country, with roads and railways, and well
populated almost everywhere. It is a journey you might make, almost, in a
chaise, though a wagon would be better. It is a mere trip from London to
Edinburgh, nothing more."

"What about wild beasts, though?" asked Glenarvan, anxious to go into all


the difficulties of the proposal.

"There are no wild beasts in Australia."

"And how about the savages?"

"There are no savages in this latitude, and if there were, they are not cruel,
like the New Zealanders."

"And the convicts?"

"There are no convicts in the southern provinces, only in the eastern
colonies. The province of Victoria not only refused to admit them, but passed a
law to prevent any ticket-of-leave men from other provinces from entering her
territories. This very year the Government threatened to withdraw its subsidy
from the Peninsular Company if their vessels continued to take in coal in those
western parts of Australia where convicts are admitted. What! Don't you know
that, and you an Englishman?"

"In the first place, I beg leave to say I am not an Englishman," replied
Glenarvan.

"What M. Paganel says is perfectly correct," said Paddy O'Moore. "Not only
the province of Victoria, but also Southern Australia, Queensland, and even
Tasmania, have agreed to expel convicts from their territories. Ever since I have
been on this farm, I have never heard of one in this Province."

"And I can speak for myself. I have never come across one."

"You see then, friends," went on Jacques Paganel, "there are few if any
savages, no ferocious animals, no convicts, and there are not many countries of
Europe for which you can say as much. Well, will you go?"

"What do you think, Helena?" asked Glenarvan.

"What we all think, dear Edward," replied Lady Helena, turning toward her
companions; "let us be off at once."


CHAPTER VII PREPARATION FOR THE
JOURNEY


GLENARVAN never lost much time between adopting an idea and carrying
it out. As soon as he consented to Paganel's proposition, he gave immediate
orders to make arrangements for the journey with as little delay as possible. The
time of starting was fixed for the 22d of December, the next day but one.

What results might not come out of this journey. The presence of Harry
Grant had become an indisputable fact, and the chances of finding him had
increased. Not that anyone expected to discover the captain exactly on the 37th
parallel, which they intended strictly to follow, but they might come upon his
track, and at all events, they were going to the actual spot where the wreck had
occurred. That was the principal point.

Besides, if Ayrton consented to join them and act as their guide through the
forests of the province of Victoria and right to the eastern coast, they would have
a fresh chance of success. Glenarvan was sensible of this, and asked his host
whether he would have any great objection to his asking Ayrton to accompany
them, for he felt particularly desirous of securing the assistance of Harry Grant's
old companion.

Paddy O'Moore consented, though he would regret the loss of his excellent
servant.

"Well, then, Ayrton, will you come with us in our search expedition?"

Ayrton did not reply immediately. He even showed signs of hesitation; but at
last, after due reflection, said, "Yes, my Lord, I will go with you, and if I can not
take you to Captain Grant, I can at least take you to the very place where his ship
struck."

"Thanks, Ayrton."

"One question, my Lord."

"Well?"

"Where will you meet the DUNCAN again?"

"At Melbourne, unless we traverse the whole continent from coast to coast."

"But the captain?"

"The captain will await my instructions in the port of Melbourne."

"You may depend on me then, my Lord."

"T will, Ayrton."

The quartermaster was warmly thanked by the passengers of the DUNCAN,
and the children loaded him with caresses. Everyone rejoiced in his decision


except the Irishman, who lost in him an intelligent and faithful helper. But Paddy
understood the importance Glenarvan attached to the presence of the man, and
submitted. The whole party then returned to the ship, after arranging a
rendezvous with Ayrton, and ordering him to procure the necessary means of
conveyance across the country.

When John Mangles supported the proposition of Paganel, he took for
granted that he should accompany the expedition. He began to speak to
Glenarvan at once about it, and adduced all sorts of arguments to advance his
cause--his devotion to Lady Helena and his Lordship, how useful could he be in
organizing the party, and how useless on board the DUNCAN; everything, in
fact, but the main reason, and that he had no need to bring forward.

"T'll only ask you one question, John," said Glenarvan. "Have you entire
confidence in your chief officer?"

"Absolute," replied Mangles, "Tom Austin is a good sailor. He will take the
ship to her destination, see that the repairs are skilfully executed, and bring her
back on the appointed day. Tom is a slave to duty and discipline. Never would he
take it upon himself to alter or retard the execution of an order. Your Lordship
may rely on him as on myself."

"Very well then, John," replied Glenarvan. "You shall go with us, for it
would be advisable," he added, smiling, "that you should be there when we find
Mary Grant's father."

"Oh! your Lordship," murmured John, turning pale. He could say no more,
but grasped Lord Glenarvan's hand.

Next day, John Mangles and the ship's carpenter, accompanied by sailors
carrying provisions, went back to Paddy O'Moore's house to consult the
Irishman about the best method of transport. All the family met him, ready to
give their best help. Ayrton was there, and gave the benefit of his experience.

On one point both he and Paddy agreed, that the journey should be made in a
bullock-wagon by the ladies, and that the gentlemen should ride on horseback.
Paddy could furnish both bullocks and vehicle. The vehicle was a cart twenty
feet long, covered over by a tilt, and resting on four large wheels without spokes
or felloes, or iron tires-- in a word, plain wooden discs. The front and hinder part
were connected by means of a rude mechanical contrivance, which did not allow
of the vehicle turning quickly. There was a pole in front thirty-five feet long, to
which the bullocks were to be yoked in couples. These animals were able to
draw both with head and neck, as their yoke was fastened on the nape of the
neck, and to this a collar was attached by an iron peg. It required great skill to
drive such a long, narrow, shaky concern, and to guide such a team by a goad;
but Ayrton had served his apprenticeship to it on the Irishman's farm, and Paddy


could answer for his com-petency. The role of conductor was therefore assigned
to him.

There were no springs to the wagon, and, consequently, it was not likely to
be very comfortable; but, such as it was, they had to take it. But if the rough
construction could not be altered, John Mangles resolved that the interior should
be made as easy as possible. His first care was to divide it into two
compartments by a wooden partition. The back one was intended for the
provisions and luggage, and M. Olbinett's portable kitchen. The front was set
apart especially for the ladies, and, under the carpenter's hands, was to be
speedily converted into a comfortable room, covered with a thick carpet, and
fitted up with a toilet table and two couches. Thick leather curtains shut in this
apartment, and protected the occupants from the chilliness of the nights. In case
of necessity, the gentlemen might shelter themselves here, when the violent rains
came on, but a tent was to be their usual resting-place when the caravan camped
for the night. John Mangles exercised all his ingenuity in furnishing the small
space with everything that the two ladies could possibly require, and he
succeeded so well, that neither Lady Helena nor Mary had much reason to regret
leaving their cosy cabins on board the DUNCAN.

For the rest of the party, the preparations were soon made, for they needed
much less. Strong horses were provided for Lord Glenarvan, Paganel, Robert
Grant, McNabbs, and John Mangles; also for the two sailors, Wilson and
Mulrady, who were to accompany their captain. Ayrton's place was, of course, to
be in front of the wagon, and M. Olbinett, who did not much care for equitation,
was to make room for himself among the baggage. Horses and bullocks were
grazing in the Irishman's meadows, ready to fetch at a moment's notice.

After all arrangements were made, and the carpenter set to work, John
Mangles escorted the Irishman and his family back to the vessel, for Paddy
wished to return the visit of Lord Glenarvan. Ayrton thought proper to go too,
and about four o'clock the party came over the side of the DUNCAN.

They were received with open arms. Glenarvan would not be outstripped in
politeness, and invited his visitors to stop and dine. His hospitality was willingly
accepted. Paddy was quite amazed at the splendor of the saloon, and was loud in
admiration of the fitting up of the cabins, and the carpets and hangings, as well
as of the polished maple-wood of the upper deck. Ayrton's approbation was
much less hearty, for he considered it mere costly superfluity.

But when he examined the yacht with a sailor's eye, the quartermaster of the
BRITANNIA was as enthusiastic about it as Paddy. He went down into the hold,
inspected the screw department and the engine-room, examining the engine
thoroughly, and inquired about its power and consumption. He explored the


coal-bunkers, the store-room, the powder-store, and armory, in which last he
seemed to be particularly attracted by a cannon mounted on the forecastle.
Glenarvan saw he had to do with a man who understood such matters, as was
evident from his questions. Ayrton concluded his investigations by a survey of
the masts and rigging.

"You have a fine vessel, my Lord," he said after his curiosity was satisfied.

"A good one, and that is best," replied Glenarvan.

"And what is her tonnage?"

"Two hundred and ten tons."

"T don't think I am far out," continued Ayrton, "in judging her speed at fifteen
knots. I should say she could do that easily."

"Say seventeen,” put in John Mangles, "and you've hit the mark."

"Seventeen!" exclaimed the quartermaster. "Why, not a man-of-war-- not the
best among them, I mean--could chase her!"

"Not one," replied Mangles. "The DUNCAN is a regular racing yacht, and
would never let herself be beaten."

"Even at sailing?” asked Ayrton.

"Even at sailing.”

"Well, my Lord, and you too, captain," returned Ayrton, "allow a sailor who
knows what a ship is worth, to compliment you on yours."

"Stay on board of her, then, Ayrton," said Glenarvan; "it rests with yourself
to call it yours."

"T will think of it, my Lord," was all Ayrton's reply.

Just then M. Olbinett came to announce dinner, and his Lordship repaired
with his guests to the saloon.

"That Ayrton is an intelligent man," said Paganel to the Major.

"Too intelligent!" muttered McNabbs, who, without any apparent reason, had
taken a great dislike to the face and manners of the quartermaster.

During the dinner, Ayrton gave some interesting details about the Australian
continent, which he knew perfectly. He asked how many sailors were going to
accompany the expedition, and seemed astonished to hear that only two were
going. He advised Glenarvan to take all his best men, and even urged him to do
it, which advice, by the way, ought to have removed the Major's suspicion.

"But," said Glenarvan, "our journey is not dangerous, is it?"

"Not at all," replied Ayrton, quickly.

"Well then, we'll have all the men we can on board. Hands will be wanted to
work the ship, and to help in the repairs. Besides, it is of the utmost importance
that she should meet us to the very day, at whatever place may be ultimately
selected. Consequently, we must not lessen her crew."


Ayrton said nothing more, as if convinced his Lordship was right.

When evening came, Scotch and Irish separated. Ayrton and Paddy O'Moore
and family returned home. Horses and wagons were to be ready the next day,
and eight o'clock in the morning was fixed for starting.

Lady Helena and Mary Grant soon made their preparations. They had less to
do than Jacques Paganel, for he spent half the night in arranging, and wiping,
and rubbing up the lenses of his telescope. Of course, next morning he slept on
till the Major's stentorian voice roused him.

The luggage was already conveyed to the farm, thanks to John Mangles, and
a boat was waiting to take the passengers. They were soon seated, and the young
captain gave his final orders to Tom Austin, his chief officer. He impressed upon
him that he was to wait at Melbourne for Lord Glenarvan's commands, and to
obey them scrupulously, whatever they might be.

The old sailor told John he might rely on him, and, in the name of the men,
begged to offer his Lordship their best wishes for the success of this new
expedition.

A storm of hurrahs burst forth from the yacht as the boat rowed off. In ten
minutes the shore was reached, and a quarter of an hour afterward the Irishman's
farm. All was ready. Lady Helena was enchanted with her installation. The huge
chariot, with its primitive wheels and massive planks, pleased her particularly.
The six bullocks, yoked in pairs, had a patriarchal air about them which took her
fancy. Ayrton, goad in hand, stood waiting the orders of this new master.

"My word," said Paganel, "this is a famous vehicle; it beats all the mail-
coaches in the world. I don't know a better fashion of traveling than in a
mountebank's caravan-- a movable house, which goes or stops wherever you
please. What can one wish better? The Samaratians understood that, and never
traveled in any other way."

"Monsieur Paganel," said Lady Helena, "I hope I shall have the pleasure of
seeing you in my SALONS."

"Assuredly, madam, I should count it an honor. Have you fixed the day?"

"I shall be at home every day to my friends," replied Lady Helena; "and you
are--"

"The most devoted among them all," interrupted Paganel, gaily.

These mutual compliments were interrupted by the arrival of the seven
horses, saddled and ready. They were brought by Paddy's sons, and Lord
Glenarvan paid the sum stipulated for his various purchases, adding his cordial
thanks, which the worthy Irishman valued at least as much as his golden guineas.

The signal was given to start, and Lady Helena and Mary took their places in
the reserved compartment. Ayrton seated himself in front, and Olbinett


scrambled in among the luggage. The rest of the party, well armed with carbines
and revolvers, mounted their horses. Ayrton gave a peculiar cry, and his team set
off. The wagon shook and the planks creaked, and the axles grated in the naves
of the wheels; and before long the hospitable farm of the Irishman was out of
sight.


CHAPTER IX A COUNTRY OF PARADOXES


IT was the 23d of December, 1864, a dull, damp, dreary month in the
northern hemisphere; but on the Australian continent it might be called June.
The hottest season of the year had already commenced, and the sun's rays were
almost tropical, when Lord Glenarvan started on his new expedition.

Most fortunately the 37th parallel did not cross the immense deserts,
inaccessible regions, which have cost many martyrs to science already.
Glenarvan could never have encountered them. He had only to do with the
southern part of Australia--viz., with a narrow portion of the province of
Adelaide, with the whole of Victoria, and with the top of the reversed triangle
which forms New South Wales.

It is scarcely sixty-two miles from Cape Bernouilli to the frontiers of
Victoria. It was not above a two days' march, and Ayrton reckoned on their
sleeping next night at Apsley, the most westerly town of Victoria.

The commencement of a journey is always marked by ardor, both in the
horses and the horsemen. This is well enough in the horsemen, but if the horses
are to go far, their speed must be moderated and their strength husbanded. It was,
therefore, fixed that the average journey every day should not be more than from
twenty-five to thirty miles.

Besides, the pace of the horses must be regulated by the slower pace of the
bullocks, truly mechanical engines which lose in time what they gain in power.
The wagon, with its passengers and provisions, was the very center of the
caravan, the moving fortress. The horsemen might act as scouts, but must never
be far away from it.

As no special marching order had been agreed upon, everybody was at
liberty to follow his inclinations within certain limits. The hunters could scour
the plain, amiable folks could talk to the fair occupants of the wagon, and
philosophers could philosophize. Paganel, who was all three combined, had to be
and was everywhere at once.

The march across Adelaide presented nothing of any particular interest. A
succession of low hills rich in dust, a long stretch of what they call in Australia
"bush," several prairies covered with a small prickly bush, considered a great
dainty by the ovine tribe, embraced many miles. Here and there they noticed a
species of sheep peculiar to New Holland-- sheep with pig's heads, feeding
between the posts of the telegraph line recently made between Adelaide and the
coast.


Up to this time there had been a singular resemblance in the country to the
monotonous plains of the Argentine Pampas. There was the same grassy flat soil,
the same sharply-defined horizon against the sky. McNabbs declared they had
never changed countries; but Paganel told him to wait, and he would soon see a
difference. And on the faith of this assurance marvelous things were expected by
the whole party.

In this fashion, after a march of sixty miles in two days, the caravan reached
the parish of Apsley, the first town in the Province of Victoria in the Wimerra
district.


The wagon was put up at the Crown Inn. Supper was soon smoking on the
table. It consisted solely of mutton served up in various ways.

They all ate heartily, but talked more than they ate, eagerly asking Paganel
questions about the wonders of the country they were just beginning to traverse.
The amiable geographer needed no pressing, and told them first that this part of
it was called Australia Felix.

"Wrongly named!" he continued. "It had better have been called rich, for it is
true of countries, as individuals, that riches do not make happiness. Thanks to
her gold mines, Australia has been abandoned to wild devastating adventurers.
You will come across them when we reach the gold fields."

"Is not the colony of Victoria of but a recent origin?" asked Lady Glenarvan.

"Yes, madam, it only numbers thirty years of existence. It was on the 6th of
June, 1835, on a Tuesday--"

"At a quarter past seven in the evening,” put in the Major, who delighted in
teasing the Frenchman about his precise dates.

"No, at ten minutes past seven," replied the geographer, gravely, "that
Batman and Falckner first began a settlement at Port Phillip, the bay on which
the large city of Melbourne now stands. For fifteen years the colony was part of
New South Wales, and recognized Sydney as the capital; but in 1851, she was
declared independent, and took the name of Victoria."

"And has greatly increased in prosperity since then, I believe," said
Glenarvan.

"Judge for yourself, my noble friend," replied Paganel. "Here are the
numbers given by the last statistics; and let McNabbs say as he likes, I know
nothing more eloquent than statistics."

"Go on," said the Major.

"Well, then, in 1836, the colony of Port Phillip had 224 inhabitants. To-day
the province of Victoria numbers 550,000. Seven millions of vines produce
annually 121,- 000 gallons of wine. There are 103,000 horses spreading over the
plains, and 675,272 horned cattle graze in her wide-stretching pastures."

"Is there not also a certain number of pigs?" inquired McNabbs.

"Yes, Major, 79,625."

"And how many sheep?"

"7,115,943, McNabbs."

"Including the one we are eating at this moment."

"No, without counting that, since it is three parts devoured."

"Bravo, Monsieur Paganel,” exclaimed Lady Helena, laughing heartily. "It
must be owned you are posted up in geographical questions, and my cousin
McNabbs need not try and find you tripping."


"It is my calling, Madam, to know this sort of thing, and to give you the
benefit of my information when you please. You may therefore believe me when
I tell you that wonderful things are in store for you in this strange country."

"It does not look like it at present," said McNabbs, on purpose to tease
Paganel.

"Just wait, impatient Major," was his rejoinder. "You have hardly put your
foot on the frontier, when you turn round and abuse it. Well, I say and say again,
and will always maintain that this is the most curious country on the earth. Its
formation, and nature, and products, and climate, and even its future
disappearance have amazed, and are now amazing, and will amaze, all the
SAVANTS in the world. Think, my friends, of a continent, the margin of which,
instead of the center, rose out of the waves originally like a gigantic ring, which
encloses, perhaps, in its center, a sea partly evaporated, the waves of which are
drying up daily; where humidity does not exist either in the air or in the soil;
where the trees lose their bark every year, instead of their leaves; where the
leaves present their sides to the sun and not their face, and consequently give no
shade; where the wood is often incombustible, where good-sized stones are
dissolved by the rain; where the forests are low and the grasses gigantic; where
the animals are strange; where quadrupeds have beaks, like the echidna, or
omithorhynchus, and naturalists have been obliged to create a special order for
them, called monotremes; where the kangaroos leap on unequal legs, and sheep
have pigs' heads; where foxes fly about from tree to tree; where the swans are
black; where rats make nests; where the bower-bird opens her reception-rooms
to receive visits from her feathered friends; where the birds astonish the
imagination by the variety of their notes and their aptness; where one bird serves
for a clock, and another makes a sound like a postilion cracking of a whip, and a
third imitates a knife-grinder, and a fourth the motion of a pendulum; where one
laughs when the sun rises, and another cries when the sun sets! Oh, strange,
illogical country, land of paradoxes and anomalies, if ever there was one on
earth--the learned botanist Grimard was right when he said, "There is that
Australia, a sort of parody, or rather a defiance of universal laws in the face of
the rest of the world."

Paganel's tirade was poured forth in the most impetuous manner, and seemed
as if it were never coming to an end. The eloquent secretary of the Geographical
Society was no longer master of himself. He went on and on, gesticulating
furiously, and brandishing his fork to the imminent danger of his neighbors. But
at last his voice was drowned in a thunder of applause, and he managed to stop.

Certainly after such an enumeration of Australian peculiarities, he might
have been left in peace but the Major said in the coolest tone possible: "And is


that all, Paganel?"

"No, indeed not," rejoined the Frenchman, with renewed vehemence.

"What!" exclaimed Lady Helena; "there are more wonders still in Australia?"

"Yes, Madam, its climate. It is even stranger than its productions."

"Is it possible?" they all said.

"I am not speaking of the hygienic qualities of the climate," continued
Paganel, "rich as it is in oxygen and poor in azote. There are no damp winds,
because the trade winds blow regularly on the coasts, and most diseases are
unknown, from typhus to measles, and chronic affections."

"Still, that is no small advantage," said Glenarvan.

"No doubt; but I am not referring to that, but to one quality it has which is
incomparable."

"And what is that?"

"You will never believe me."

"Yes, we will," exclaimed his auditors, their curiosity aroused by this
preamble.

"Well, it is--"

"It is what?"

"It is a moral regeneration."

"A moral regeneration?"

"Yes," replied the SAVANT, in a tone of conviction. "Here metals do not get
rust on them by exposure to the air, nor men. Here the pure, dry atmosphere
whitens everything rapidly, both linen and souls. The virtue of the climate must
have been well known in England when they determined to send their criminals
here to be reformed."

"What! do you mean to say the climate has really any such influence?" said
Lady Helena.

"Yes, Madam, both on animals and men."

"You are not joking, Monsieur Paganel?"

"I am not, Madam. The horses and the cattle here are of incomparable
docility. You see it?"

"It is impossible!"

"But it is a fact. And the convicts transported into this reviving, salubrious
air, become regenerated in a few years. Philanthropists know this. In Australia
all natures grow better."

"But what is to become of you then, Monsieur Paganel, in this privileged
country--you who are so good already?" said Lady Helena. "What will you turn
out?"

"Excellent, Madam, just excellent, and that's all."


CHAPTER X AN ACCIDENT


THE next day, the 24th of December, they started at daybreak. The heat was
already considerable, but not unbearable, and the road was smooth and good,
and allowed the cavalcade to make speedy progress. In the evening they camped
on the banks of the White Lake, the waters of which are brackish and
undrinkable.

Jacques Paganel was obliged to own that the name of this lake was a
complete misnomer, for the waters were no more white than the Black Sea is
black, or the Red Sea red, or the Yellow River yellow, or the Blue Mountains
blue. However, he argued and disputed the point with all the amour propre of a
geographer, but his reasoning made no impression.

M. Olbinett prepared the evening meal with his accustomed punctuality, and
after this was dispatched, the travelers disposed themselves for the night in the
wagon and in the tent, and were soon sleeping soundly, notwithstanding the
melancholy howling of the "dingoes," the jackals of Australia.

A magnificent plain, thickly covered with chrysanthemums, stretched out
beyond the lake, and Glenarvan and his friends would gladly have explored its
beauties when they awoke next morning, but they had to start. As far as the eye
could reach, nothing was visible but one stretch of prairie, enameled with flower,
in all the freshness and abundance of spring. The blue flowers of the slender-
leaved flax, combined with the bright hues of the scarlet acanthus, a flower
peculiar to the country.

A few cassowaries were bounding over the plain, but it was impossible to get
near them. The Major was fortunate enough, however, to hit one very rare
animal with a ball in the leg. This was the jabiru, a species which is fast
disappearing, the gigantic crane of the English colonies. This winged creature
was five feet high, and his wide, conical, extremely pointed beak, measured
eighteen inches in length. The violet and purple tints of his head contrasted
vividly with the glossy green of his neck, and the dazzling whiteness of his
throat, and the bright red of his long legs. Nature seems to have exhausted in its
favor all the primitive colors on her palette.

V. IV Verne

Great admiration was bestowed on this bird, and the Major's spoil would
have borne the honors of the day, had not Robert come across an animal a few
miles further on, and bravely killed it. It was a shapeless creature, half
porcupine, half ant-eater, a sort of unfinished animal belonging to the first stage


of creation. A long glutinous extensible tongue hung out of his jaws in search of
the ants, which formed its principal food.

"Tt is an echidna," said Paganel. "Have you ever seen such a creature?"

"Tt is horrible," replied Glenarvan.

"Horrible enough, but curious, and, what's more, peculiar to Australia. One
might search for it in vain in any other part of the world."

Naturally enough, the geographer wished to preserve this interesting
specimen of monotremata, and wanted to stow it away in the luggage; but M.
Olbinett resented the idea so indignantly, that the SAVANT was obliged to
abandon his project.

About four o'clock in the afternoon, John Mangles descried an enormous
column of smoke about three miles off, gradually overspreading the whole
horizon. What could be the cause of this phenomenon? Paganel was inclined to
think it was some description of meteor, and his lively imagination was already
in search of an explanation, when Ayrton cut short all his conjectures summarily,
by announcing that the cloud of dust was caused by a drove of cattle on the road.

The quartermaster proved right, for as the cloud came nearer, quite a chorus
of bleatings and neighings, and bellowings escaped from it, mingled with the
loud tones of a human voice, in the shape of cries, and whistles, and vo-
ciferations.

Presently a man came out of the cloud. This was the leader-in-chief of the
four-footed army. Glenarvan advanced toward him, and friendly relations were
speedily established between them. The leader, or to give him his proper
designation, the stock-keeper, was part owner of the drove. His name was Sam
Machell, and he was on his way from the eastern provinces to Portland Bay.

The drove numbered 12,075 head in all, or 1,000 bullocks, 11,000 sheep, and
75 horses. All these had been bought in the Blue Mountains in a poor, lean
condition, and were going to be fatted up on the rich pasture lands of Southern
Australia, and sold again at a great profit. Sam Machell expected to get pounds 2
on each bullock, and 10s. on every sheep, which would bring him in pounds
3,750. This was doing good business; but what patience and energy were
required to conduct such a restive, stubborn lot to their destination, and what
fatigues must have to be endured. Truly the gain was hardly earned.

Sam Machell told his history in a few words, while the drove continued their
march among the groves of mimosas. Lady Helena and Mary and the rest of the
party seated themselves under the shade of a wide-spreading gum-tree, and
listened to his recital.

It was seven months since Sam Machell had started. He had gone at the rate
of ten miles a day, and his interminable journey would last three months longer.


His assistants in the laborious task comprised twenty dogs and thirty men, five of
whom were blacks, and very serviceable in tracking up any strayed beasts. Six
wagons made the rear-guard. All the men were armed with stockwhips, the
handles of which are eighteen inches long, and the lash nine feet, and they move
about among the ranks, bringing refractory animals back into order, while the
dogs, the light cavalry of the regiment, preserved discipline in the wings.

The travelers were struck with the admirable arrangement of the drove. The
different stock were kept apart, for wild sheep and bullocks would not have got
on together at all. The bullocks would never have grazed where the sheep had
passed along, and consequently they had to go first, divided into two battalions.
Five regiments of sheep followed, in charge of twenty men, and last of all came
the horses.

Sam Machell drew the attention of his auditors to the fact that the real guides
of the drove were neither the men nor the dogs, but the oxen themselves, beasts
of superior intelligence, recognized as leaders by their congenitors. They
advanced in front with perfect gravity, choosing the best route by instinct, and
fully alive to their claim to respect. Indeed, they were obliged to be studied and
humored in everything, for the whole drove obeyed them implicitly. If they took
it into their heads to stop, it was a matter of necessity to yield to their good
pleasure, for not a single animal would move a step till these leaders gave the
signal to set off.

Sundry details, added by the stock-keeper, completed the history of this
expedition, worthy of being written, if not commended by Xenophon himself. As
long as the troop marched over the plains it was well enough, there was little
difficulty or fatigue. The animals fed as they went along, and slaked their thirst
at the numerous creeks that watered the plains, sleeping at night and making
good progress in the day, always obedient and tractable to the dogs. But when
they had to go through great forests and groves of eucalyptus and mimosas, the
difficulties increased. Platoons, battalions and regiments got all mixed together
or scattered, and it was a work of time to collect them again. Should a "leader"
unfortunately go astray, he had to be found, cost what it might, on pain of a
general disbandment, and the blacks were often long days in quest of him, before
their search was successful. During the heavy rains the lazy beasts refused to stir,
and when violent storms chanced to occur, the creatures became almost mad
with terror, and were seized with a wild, disorderly panic.

However, by dint of energy and ambition, the stock-keeper triumphed over
these difficulties, incessantly renewed though they were. He kept steadily on;
mile after mile of plains and woods, and mountains, lay behind. But in addition
to all his other qualities, there was one higher than all that he specially needed


when they came to rivers. This was patience--patience that could stand any trial,
and not only could hold out for hours and days, but for weeks. The stock-keeper
would be himself forced to wait on the banks of a stream that might have been
crossed at once. There was nothing to hinder but the obstinacy of the herd. The
bullocks would taste the water and turn back. The sheep fled in all directions,
afraid to brave the liquid element. The stock-keeper hoped when night came he
might manage them better, but they still refused to go forward. The rams were
dragged in by force, but the sheep would not follow. They tried what thirst
would do, by keeping them without drink for several days, but when they were
brought to the river again, they simply quenched their thirst, and declined a more
intimate acquaintance with the water. The next expedient employed was to carry
all the lambs over, hoping the mothers would be drawn after them, moved by
their cries. But the lambs might bleat as pitifully as they liked, the mothers never
stirred. Sometimes this state of affairs would last a whole month, and the stock-
keeper would be driven to his wits' end by his bleating, bellowing, neighing
army. Then all of a sudden, one fine day, without rhyme or reason, a detachment
would take it into their heads to make a start across, and the only difficulty now
was to keep the whole herd from rushing helter-skelter after them. The wildest
confusion set in among the ranks, and numbers of the animals were drowned in
the passage.

Such was the narrative of Sam Machell. During its recital, a considerable
part of the troop had filed past in good order. It was time for him to return to his
place at their head, that he might be able to choose the best pasturage. Taking
leave of Lord Glenarvan, he sprang on a capital horse of the native breed, that
one of his men held waiting for him, and after shaking hands cordially with
everybody all round, took his departure. A few minutes later, nothing was visible
of the stock-keeper and his troop but a cloud of dust.

The wagon resumed its course in the opposite direction, and did not stop
again till they halted for the night at the foot of Mount Talbot.

Paganel made the judicious observation that it was the 25th of December, the
Christmas Day so dear to English hearts. But the steward had not forgotten it,
and an appetizing meal was soon ready under the tent, for which he deserved and
received warm compliments from the guests. Indeed, M. Olbinett had quite
excelled himself on this occasion. He produced from his stores such an array of
European dishes as is seldom seen in the Australian desert. Reindeer hams, slices
of salt beef, smoked salmon, oat cakes, and barley meal scones; tea ad libitum,
and whisky in abundance, and several bottles of port, composed this astonishing
meal. The little party might have thought themselves in the grand dining-hall of
Malcolm Castle, in the heart of the Highlands of Scotland.


The next day, at 11 A. M., the wagon reached the banks of the Wimerra on
the 143d meridian.

The river, half a mile in width, wound its limpid course between tall rows of
gum-trees and acacias. Magnificent specimens of the MYRTACEA, among
others, the metroside-ros speciosa, fifteen feet high, with long drooping
branches, adorned with red flowers. Thousands of birds, the lories, and
greenfinches, and gold-winged pigeons, not to speak of the noisy paroquets, flew
about in the green branches. Below, on the bosom of the water, were a couple of
shy and unapproachable black swans. This rara avis of the Australian rivers
soon disappeared among the windings of the Wimerra, which water the charming
landscape in the most capricious manner.

The wagon stopped on a grassy bank, the long fringes of which dipped in the
rapid current. There was neither raft nor bridge, but cross over they must. Ayrton
looked about for a practicable ford. About a quarter of a mile up the water
seemed shallower, and it was here they determined to try to pass over. The
soundings in different parts showed a depth of three feet only, so that the wagon
might safely enough venture.

"I suppose there is no other way of fording the river?" said Glenarvan to the
quartermaster.

"No, my Lord; but the passage does not seem dangerous. We shall manage
ik.

"Shall Lady Glenarvan and Miss Grant get out of the wagon?"

"Not at all. My bullocks are surefooted, and you may rely on me for keeping
them straight."

"Very well, Ayrton; I can trust you."

The horsemen surrounded the ponderous vehicle, and all stepped boldly into
the current. Generally, when wagons have to ford rivers, they have empty casks
slung all round them, to keep them floating on the water; but they had no such
swimming belt with them on this occasion, and they could only depend on the
sagacity of the animals and the prudence of Ayrton, who directed the team. The
Major and the two sailors were some feet in advance. Glenarvan and John
Mangles went at the sides of the wagon, ready to lend any assistance the fair
travelers might require, and Paganel and Robert brought up the rear.

All went well till they reached the middle of the Wimerra, but then the
hollow deepened, and the water rose to the middle of the wheels. The bullocks
were in danger of losing their footing, and dragging with them the oscillating
vehicle. Ayrton devoted himself to his task courageously. He jumped into the
water, and hanging on by the bullocks' horns, dragged them back into the right
course.


Suddenly the wagon made a jolt that it was impossible to prevent; a crack
was heard, and the vehicle began to lean over in a most precarious manner. The
water now rose to the ladies' feet; the whole concern began to float, though John
Mangles and Lord Glenarvan hung on to the side. It was an anxious moment.

Fortunately a vigorous effort drove the wagon toward the opposite shore, and
the bank began to slope upward, so that the horses and bullocks were able to
regain their footing, and soon the whole party found themselves on the other
side, glad enough, though wet enough too.

The fore part of the wagon, however, was broken by the jolt, and Glenarvan's
horse had lost a shoe.

This was an accident that needed to be promptly repaired. They looked at
each other hardly knowing what to do, till Ayrton proposed he should go to
Black Point Station, twenty miles further north, and bring back a blacksmith
with him.

"Yes, go, my good fellow," said Glenarvan. "How long will it take you to get
there and back?"

"About fifteen hours," replied Ayrton, "but not longer."

"Start at once, then, and we will camp here, on the banks of the Wimerra, till
you return."


CHAPTER XI CRIME OR CALAMITY


IT was not without apprehension that the Major saw Ayrton quit the Wimerra
camp to go and look for a blacksmith at the Black Point Station. But he did not
breathe a word of his private misgivings, and contented himself with watching
the neighborhood of the river; nothing disturbed the repose of those tranquil
glades, and after a short night the sun reappeared on the horizon.

As to Glenarvan, his only fear was lest Ayrton should return alone. If they
fail to find a workman, the wagon could not resume the journey. This might end
in a delay of many days, and Glenarvan, impatient to succeed, could brook no
delay, in his eagerness to attain his object.

Ayrton luckily had lost neither his time nor his trouble. He appeared next
morning at daybreak, accompanied by a man who gave himself out as the
blacksmith from BlackPoint Station. He was a powerful fellow, and tall, but his
features were of a low, brutal type, which did not prepossess anyone in his favor.
But that was nothing, provided he knew his business. He scarcely spoke, and
certainly he did not waste his breath in useless words.

"Is he a good workman?" said John Mangles to the quartermaster.

"I know no more about him than you do, captain," said Ayrton. "But we shall
see."

The blacksmith set to work. Evidently that was his trade, as they could
plainly see from the way he set about repairing the forepart of the wagon. He
worked skilfully and with uncommon energy. The Major observed that the flesh
of his wrists was deeply furrowed, showing a ring of extravasated blood. It was
the mark of a recent injury, which the sleeve of an old woolen shirt could not
conceal. McNabbs questioned the blacksmith about those sores which looked so
painful. The man continued his work without answering. Two hours more and
the damage the carriage had sustained was made good. As to Glenarvan's horse,
it was soon disposed of. The blacksmith had had the forethought to bring the
shoes with him. These shoes had a peculiarity which did not escape the Major; it
was a trefoil clumsily cut on the back part. McNabbs pointed it out to Ayrton.

"It is the BlackPoint brand," said the quartermaster. "That enables them to
track any horses that may stray from the station, and prevents their being mixed
with other herds."

The horse was soon shod. The blacksmith claimed his wage, and went off
without uttering four words.

Half an hour later, the travelers were on the road. Beyond the grove of


mimosas was a stretch of sparsely timbered country, which quite deserved its
name of "open plain." Some fragments of quartz and ferruginous rock lay among
the scrub and the tall grass, where numerous flocks were feeding. Some miles
farther the wheels of the wagon plowed deep into the alluvial soil, where
irregular creeks murmured in their beds, half hidden among giant reeds. By-and-
by they skirted vast salt lakes, rapidly evaporating. The journey was
accomplished without trouble, and, indeed, without fatigue.

Lady Helena invited the horsemen of the party to pay her a visit in turns, as
her reception-room was but small, and in pleasant converse with this amiable
woman they forgot the fatigue of their day's ride.

Lady Helena, seconded by Miss Mary, did the honors of their ambulatory
house with perfect grace. John Mangles was not forgotten in these daily
invitations, and his somewhat serious conversation was not unpleasing.

The party crossed, in a diagonal direction, the mail-coach road from
Crowland to Horsham, which was a very dusty one, and little used by
pedestrians.

The spurs of some low hills were skirted at the boundary of Talbot County,
and in the evening the travelers reached a point about three miles from
Maryborough. The fine rain was falling, which, in any other country, would have
soaked the ground; but here the air absorbed the moisture so wonderfully that the
camp did not suffer in the least.

Next day, the 29th of December, the march was delayed somewhat by a
succession of little hills, resembling a miniature Switzerland. It was a constant
repetition of up and down hill, and many a jolt besides, all of which were
scarcely pleasant. The travelers walked part of the way, and thought it no
hardship.

At eleven o'clock they arrived at Carisbrook, rather an important
municipality. Ayrton was for passing outside the town without going through it,
in order, he said, to save time. Glenarvan concurred with him, but Paganel,
always eager for novelties, was for visiting Carisbrook. They gave him his way,
and the wagon went on slowly.

Paganel, as was his custom, took Robert with him. His visit to the town was
very short, but it sufficed to give him an exact idea of Australian towns. There
was a bank, a court-house, a market, a church, and a hundred or so of brick
houses, all exactly alike. The whole town was laid out in squares, crossed with
parallel streets in the English fashion. Nothing could be more simple, nothing
less attractive. As the town grows, they lengthen the streets as we lengthen the
trousers of a growing child, and thus the original symmetry is undisturbed.

Carisbrook was full of activity, a remarkable feature in these towns of


yesterday. It seems in Australia as if towns shot up like trees, owing to the heat
of the sun. Men of business were hurrying along the streets; gold buyers were
hastening to meet the incoming escort; the precious metal, guarded by the local
police, was coming from the mines at Bendigo and Mount Alexander. All the
little world was so absorbed in its own interests, that the strangers passed
unobserved amid the laborious inhabitants.

After an hour devoted to visiting Carisbrook, the two visitors rejoined their
companions, and crossed a highly cultivated district. Long stretches of prairie,
known as the "Low Level Plains," next met their gaze, dotted with countless
sheep, and shepherds’ huts. And then came a sandy tract, without any transition,
but with the abruptness of change so characteristic of Australian scenery. Mount
Simpson and Mount Terrengower marked the southern point where the boundary
of the Loddon district cuts the 144th meridian.

As yet they had not met with any of the aboriginal tribes living in the savage
state. Glenarvan wondered if the Australians were wanting in Australia, as the
Indians had been wanting in the Pampas of the Argentine district; but Paganel
told him that, in that latitude, the natives frequented chiefly the Murray Plains,
about one hundred miles to the eastward.

"We are now approaching the gold district," said he, "in a day or two we
shall cross the rich region of Mount Alexander. It was here that the swarm of
diggers alighted in 1852; the natives had to fly to the interior. We are in civilized
districts without seeing any sign of it; but our road will, before the day is over,
cross the railway which connects the Murray with the sea. Well, I must confess,
a railway in Australia does seem to me an astonishing thing!"

"And pray, why, Paganel?" said Glenarvan.

"Why? because it jars on one's ideas. Oh! I know you English are so used to
colonizing distant possessions. You, who have electric telegraphs and universal
exhibitions in New Zealand, you think it is all quite natural. But it dumb-
founders the mind of a Frenchman like myself, and confuses all one's notions of
Australia!"

"Because you look at the past, and not at the present," said John Mangles.

A loud whistle interrupted the discussion. The party were within a mile of the
railway. Quite a number of persons were hastening toward the railway bridge.
The people from the neighboring stations left their houses, and the shepherds
their flocks, and crowded the approaches to the railway. Every now and then
there was a shout, "The railway! the railway!"

Something serious must have occurred to produce such an agitation. Perhaps
some terrible accident.

Glenarvan, followed by the rest, urged on his horse. In a few minutes he


arrived at Camden Bridge and then he became aware of the cause of such an
excitement.

A fearful accident had occurred; not a collision, but a train had gone off the
line, and then there had been a fall. The affair recalled the worst disasters of
American railways. The river crossed by the railway was full of broken carriages
and the engine. Whether the weight of the train had been too much for the
bridge, or whether the train had gone off the rails, the fact remained that five
carriages out of six fell into the bed of the Loddon, dragged down by the
locomotive. The sixth carriage, miraculously preserved by the breaking of the
coupling chain, remained on the rails, six feet from the abyss. Below nothing
was discernible but a melancholy heap of twisted and blackened axles, shattered
wagons, bent rails, charred sleepers; the boiler, burst by the shock, had scattered
its plates to enormous distances. From this shapeless mass of ruins flames and
black smoke still rose. After the fearful fall came fire, more fearful still! Great
tracks of blood, scattered limbs, charred trunks of bodies, showed here and there;
none could guess how many victims lay dead and mangled under those ruins.

Glenarvan, Paganel, the Major, Mangles, mixing with the crowd, heard the
current talk. Everyone tried to account for the accident, while doing his utmost
to save what could be saved.

"The bridge must have broken," said one.

"Not a bit of it. The bridge is whole enough; they must have forgotten to
close it to let the train pass. That is all."

It was, in fact, a swing bridge, which opened for the convenience of the
boats. Had the guard, by an unpardonable oversight, omitted to close it for the
passage of the train, so that the train, coming on at full speed, was precipitated
into the Loddon? This hypothesis seemed very admissible; for although one-half
of the bridge lay beneath the ruins of the train, the other half, drawn up to the
opposite shore, hung, still unharmed, by its chains. No one could doubt that an
oversight on the part of the guard had caused the catastrophe.

The accident had occurred in the night, to the express train which left
Melbourne at 11:45 in the evening. About a quarter past three in the morning,
twenty-five minutes after leaving Castlemaine, it arrived at Camden Bridge,
where the terrible disaster befell. The passengers and guards of the last and only
remaining carriage at once tried to obtain help. But the telegraph, whose posts
were lying on the ground, could not be worked. It was three hours before the
authorities from Castlemaine reached the scene of the accident, and it was six
o'clock in the morning when the salvage party was organized, under the direction
of Mr. Mitchell, the surveyor-general of the colony, and a detachment of police,
commanded by an inspector. The squatters and their "hands" lent their aid, and


directed their efforts first to extinguishing the fire which raged in the ruined heap
with unconquerable violence. A few unrecognizable bodies lay on the slope of
the embankment, but from that blazing mass no living thing could be saved. The
fire had done its work too speedily. Of the passengers ten only survived--those in
the last carriage. The railway authorities sent a locomotive to bring them back to
Castlemaine.

Lord Glenarvan, having introduced himself to the surveyor-general, entered
into conversation with him and the inspector of police. The latter was a tall, thin
man, im-perturbably cool, and, whatever he may have felt, allowed no trace of it
to appear on his features. He contemplated this calamity as a mathematician does
a problem; he was seeking to solve it, and to find the unknown; and when
Glenarvan observed, "This is a great misfortune," he quietly replied, "Better than
that, my Lord."

"Better than that?" cried Glenarvan. "I do not understand you."

"It is better than a misfortune, it is a crime!" he replied, in the same quiet
tone.

Glenarvan looked inquiringly at Mr. Mitchell for a solution. "Yes, my Lord,"
replied the surveyor-general, "our inquiries have resulted in the conclusion that
the catastrophe is the result of a crime. The last luggage-van has been robbed.
The surviving passengers were attacked by a gang of five or six villains. The
bridge was intentionally opened, and not left open by the negligence of the
guard; and connecting with this fact the guard's disappearance, we may conclude
that the wretched fellow was an accomplice of these ruffians."

The police-officer shook his head at this inference.

"You do not agree with me?" said Mr. Mitchell.

"No, not as to the complicity of the guard."

"Well, but granting that complicity, we may attribute the crime to the natives
who haunt the Murray. Without him the blacks could never have opened a
swing-bridge; they know nothing of its mechanism."

"Exactly so," said the police-inspector.

"Well," added Mr. Mitchell, "we have the evidence of a boatman whose boat
passed Camden Bridge at 10:40 P. M., that the bridge was properly shut after he
passed."

"True."

"Well, after that I cannot see any doubt as to the complicity of the guard."

The police-officer shook his head gently, but continuously.

"Then you don't attribute the crime to the natives?"

"Not at all.”

"To whom then?"


Just at this moment a noise was heard from about half a mile up the river. A
crowd had gathered, and quickly increased. They soon reached the station, and
in their midst were two men carrying a corpse. It was the body of the guard,
quite cold, stabbed to the heart. The murderers had no doubt hoped, by dragging
their victim to a distance, that the police would be put on a wrong scent in their
first inquiries. This discovery, at any rate, justified the doubts of the police-
inspector. The poor blacks had had no hand in the matter.

"Those who dealt that blow," said he, "were already well used to this little
instrument"; and so saying he produced a pair of "darbies," a kind of handcuff
made of a double ring of iron secured by a lock. "I shall soon have the pleasure
of presenting them with these bracelets as a New Year's gift."

"Then you suspect--"

"Some folks who came out free in Her Majesty's ships."

"What! convicts?" cried Paganel, who recognized the formula employed in
the Australian colonies.

"I thought," said Glenarvan, "convicts had no right in the province of
Victoria."

"Bah!" said the inspector, "if they have no right, they take it! They escape
sometimes, and, if I am not greatly mistaken, this lot have come straight from
Perth, and, take my word for it, they will soon be there again."

Mr. Mitchell nodded acquiescence in the words of the police-inspector. At
this moment the wagon arrived at the level crossing of the railway. Glenarvan
wished to spare the ladies the horrible spectacle at Camden Bridge. He took
courteous leave of the surveyor-general, and made a sign to the rest to follow
him. "There is no reason," said he, "for delaying our journey."

When they reached the wagon, Glenarvan merely mentioned to Lady Helena
that there had been a railway accident, without a hint of the crime that had
played so great a part in it; neither did he make mention of the presence of a
band of convicts in the neighborhood, reserving that piece of information solely
for Ayrton's ear. The little procession now crossed the railway some two hundred
yards below the bridge, and then resumed their eastward course.


CHAPTER XII TOLINE OF THE LACHLAN


ABOUT two miles from the railway, the plain terminated in a range of low
hills, and it was not long before the wagon entered a succession of narrow gorges
and capricious windings, out of which it emerged into a most charming region,
where grand trees, not closely planted, but in scattered groups, were growing
with absolutely tropical luxuriance. As the party drove on they stumbled upon a
little native boy lying fast asleep beneath the shade of a magnificent banksia. He
was dressed in European garb, and seemed about eight years of age. There was
no mistaking the characteristic features of his race; the crisped hair, the nearly
black skin, the flattened nose, the thick lips, the unusual length of the arms,
immediately classed him among the aborigines of the interior. But a degree of
intelligence appeared in his face that showed some educational influences must
have been at work on his savage, untamed nature.

Lady Helena, whose interest was greatly excited by this spectacle, got out of
the wagon, followed by Mary, and presently the whole company surrounded the
peaceful little sleeper. "Poor child!" said Mary Grant. "Is he lost, I wonder, in
this desert?"

"I suppose," said Lady Helena, "he has come a long way to visit this part. No
doubt some he loves are here."

"But he can't be left here," added Robert. 'We must--"

His compassionate sentence remained unfinished, for, just at that moment the
child turned over in his sleep, and, to the extreme surprise of everybody, there
was a large label on his shoulders, on which the following was written:

TOLINE. To be conducted to Echuca. Care of Jeffries Smith, Railway Porter.
Prepaid.

"That's the English all over!" exclaimed Paganel. "They send off a child just
as they would luggage, and book him like a parcel. I heard it was done, certainly;
but I could not believe it before."

"Poor child!" said Lady Helena. "Could he have been in the train that got off
the line at Camden Bridge? Perhaps his parents are killed, and he is left alone in
the world!"

"I don't think so, madam," replied John Mangles. "That card rather goes to
prove he was traveling alone."

"He is waking up!" said Mary.

And so he was. His eyes slowly opened and then closed again, pained by the
glare of light. But Lady Helena took his hand, and he jumped up at once and


looked about him in bewilderment at the sight of so many strangers. He seemed
half frightened at first, but the presence of Lady Helena reassured him. "Do you
understand English, my little man?" asked the young lady.

"I understand it and speak it," replied the child in fluent enough English, but
with a marked accent. His pronunciation was like a Frenchman's.

"What is your name?" asked Lady Helena.

"Toline," replied the little native.

"Toline!" exclaimed Paganel. "Ah! I think that means ‘bark of a tree’ in
Australian."

Toline nodded, and looked again at the travelers.

"Where do you come from?" inquired Lady Helena.

"From Melbourne, by the railway from Sandhurst."

"Were you in the accident at Camden Bridge?" said Glenarvan.

"Yes, sir," was Toline's reply; "but the God of the Bible protected me."

"Are you traveling alone?”

"Yes, alone; the Reverend Paxton put me in charge of Jeffries Smith; but
unfortunately the poor man was killed."

"And you did not know any one else on the train?"

"No one, madam; but God watches over children and never forsakes them."

Toline said this in soft, quiet tones, which went to the heart. When he
mentioned the name of God his voice was grave and his eyes beamed with all
the fervor that animated his young soul.

This religious enthusiasm at so tender an age was easily explained. The child
was one of the aborigines baptized by the English missionaries, and trained by
them in all the rigid principles of the Methodist Church. His calm replies, proper
behavior, and even his somber garb made him look like a little reverend already.

But where was he going all alone in these solitudes and why had he left
Camden Bridge? Lady Helena asked him about this.

"I was returning to my tribe in the Lachlan," he replied. "I wished to see my
family again."

"Are they Australians?" inquired John Mangles.

"Yes, Australians of the Lachlan," replied Toline.

"Have you a father and mother?" said Robert Grant.

"Yes, my brother," replied Toline, holding out his hand to little Grant. Robert
was so touched by the word brother that he kissed the black child, and they were
friends forthwith.

The whole party were so interested in these replies of the little Australian
savage that they all sat round him in a listening group. But the sun had meantime
sunk behind the tall trees, and as a few miles would not greatly retard their


progress, and the spot they were in would be suitable for a halt, Glenarvan gave
orders to prepare their camp for the night at once. Ayrton unfastened the bullocks
and turned them out to feed at will. The tent was pitched, and Olbinett got the
supper ready. Toline consented, after some difficulty, to share it, though he was
hungry enough. He took his seat beside Robert, who chose out all the titbits for
his new friend. Toline accepted them with a shy grace that was very charming.

The conversation with him, however, was still kept up, for everyone felt an
interest in the child, and wanted to talk to him and hear his history. It was simple
enough. He was one of the poor native children confided to the care of charitable
societies by the neighboring tribes. The Australian aborigines are gentle and
inoffensive, never exhibiting the fierce hatred toward their conquerors which
characterizes the New Zealanders, and possibly a few of the races of Northern
Australia. They often go to the large towns, such as Adelaide, Sydney and
Melbourne, and walk about in very primitive costume. They go to barter their
few articles of industry, hunting and fishing implements, weapons, etc., and
some of the chiefs, from pecuniary motives, no doubt, willingly leave their
children to profit by the advantages of a gratuitous education in English.

V. IV Verne

This was how Toline's parents had acted. They were true Australian savages
living in the Lachlan, a vast region lying beyond the Murray. The child had been
in Melbourne five years, and during that time had never once seen any of his
own people. And yet the imperishable feeling of kindred was still so strong in
his heart that he had dared to brave this journey over the wilds to visit his tribe
once more, scattered though perchance it might be, and his family, even should
he find it decimated.

"And after you have kissed your parents, are you coming back to
Melbourne?" asked Lady Glenarvan.

"Yes, Madam," replied Toline, looking at the lady with a loving expression.

"And what are you going to be some day?" she continued.

"I am going to snatch my brothers from misery and ignorance. I am going to
teach them, to bring them to know and love God. I am going to be a missionary."

Words like those, spoken with such animation from a child of only eight
years, might have provoked a smile in light, scoffing auditors, but they were
understood and appreciated by the grave Scotch, who admired the courage of
this young disciple, already armed for the battle. Even Paganel was stirred to the
depths of his heart, and felt his warmer sympathy awakened for the poor child.

To speak the truth, up to that moment he did not care much for a savage in
European attire. He had not come to Australia to see Australians in coats and
trousers. He preferred them simply tattooed, and this conventional dress jarred


on his preconceived notions. But the child's genuine religious fervor won him
over completely. Indeed, the wind-up of the conversation converted the worthy
geographer into his best friend.

It was in reply to a question Lady Helena had asked, that Toline said he was
studying at the Normal School in Melbourne, and that the principal was the
Reverend Mr. Paxton.

"And what do they teach you?" she went on to say.

"They teach me the Bible, and mathematics, and geography."

Paganel pricked up his ears at this, and said, "Indeed, geography!"

"Yes, sir," said Toline; "and I had the first prize for geography before the
Christmas holidays."

"You had the first prize for geography, my boy?"

"Yes, sir. Here it is," returned Toline, pulling a book out of his pocket.

It was a bible, 32mo size, and well bound. On the first page was written the
words: "Normal School, Melbourne. First Prize for Geography. Toline of the
Lachlan."

Paganel was beside himself. An Australian well versed in geography. This
was marvelous, and he could not help kissing Toline on both cheeks, just as if he
had been the Reverend Mr. Paxton himself, on the day of the distribution of
prizes. Paganel need not have been so amazed at this circumstance, however, for
it is frequent enough in Australian schools. The little savages are very quick in
learning geography. They learn it eagerly, and on the other hand, are perfectly
averse to the science of arithmetic.

Toline could not understand this outburst of affection on the part of the
Frenchman, and looked so puzzled that Lady Helena thought she had better
inform him that Paganel was a celebrated geographer and a distinguished
professor on occasion.

"A professor of geography!" cried Toline. "Oh, sir, do question me!"

"Question you? Well, I'd like nothing better. Indeed, I was going to do it
without your leave. I should very much like to see how they teach geography in
the Normal School of Melbourne."

"And suppose Toline trips you up, Paganel!" said McNabbs.

"What a likely idea!" exclaimed the geographer. "Trip up the Secretary of the
Geographical Society of France."

Their examination then commenced, after Paganel had settled his spectacles
firmly on his nose, drawn himself up to his full height, and put on a solemn
voice becoming to a professor.

"Pupil Toline, stand up."

As Toline was already standing, he could not get any higher, but he waited


modestly for the geographer's questions.

"Pupil Toline, what are the five divisions of the globe?"

"Oceanica, Asia, Africa, America, and Europe."

"Perfectly so. Now we'll take Oceanica first; where are we at this moment?
What are the principal divisions?"

"Australia, belonging to the English; New Zealand, belonging to the English;
Tasmania, belonging to the English. The islands of Chatham, Auckland,
Macquarie, Kermadec, Makin, Maraki, are also belonging to the English."

"Very good, and New Caledonia, the Sandwich Islands, the Mendana, the
Pomotou?"

"They are islands under the Protectorate of Great Britain."

"What!" cried Paganel, "under the Protectorate of Great Britain. I rather
think on the contrary, that France--"

"France," said the child, with an astonished look.

"Well, well," said Paganel; "is that what they teach you in the Melbourne
Normal School?"

"Yes, sir. Isn't it right?"

"Oh, yes, yes, perfectly right. All Oceanica belongs to the English. That's an
understood thing. Go on."

Paganel's face betrayed both surprise and annoyance, to the great delight of
the Major.

"Let us go on to Asia," said the geographer.

"Asia," replied Toline, "is an immense country. Capital--Calcutta. Chief
Towns--Bombay, Madras, Calicut, Aden, Malacca, Singapore, Pegu, Colombo.
The Lacca-dive Islands, the Maldives, the Chagos, etc., belonging to the
English."

"Very good, pupil Toline. And now for Africa."

"Africa comprises two chief colonies--the Cape on the south, capital
Capetown; and on the west the English settlements, chief city, Sierra Leone."

"Capital!" said Paganel, beginning to enter into this perfectly taught but
Anglo-colored fanciful geography. "As to Algeria, Morocco, Egypt--they are all
struck out of the Britannic cities."

"Let us pass on, pray, to America."

"It is divided," said Toline, promptly, "into North and South America. The
former belongs to the English in Canada, New Brunswick, New Scotland, and
the United States, under the government of President Johnson."

"President Johnson," cried Paganel, "the successor of the great and good
Lincoln, assassinated by a mad fanatic of the slave party. Capital; nothing could
be better. And as to South America, with its Guiana, its archipelago of South


Shetland, its Georgia, Jamaica, Trinidad, etc., that belongs to the English, too!
Well, I'll not be the one to dispute that point! But, Toline, I should like to know
your opinion of Europe, or rather your professor's."

"Europe?" said Toline not at all understanding Paganel's excitement.

"Yes, Europe! Who does Europe belong to?"

"Why, to the English," replied Toline, as if the fact was quite settled.

"IT much doubt it," returned Paganel. "But how's that, Toline, for I want to
know that?"

"England, Ireland, Scotland, Malta, Jersey and Guern-sey, the Ionian Islands,
the Hebrides, the Shetlands, and the Orkneys."

"Yes, yes, my lad; but there are other states you forgot to mention."

"What are they?" replied the child, not the least disconcerted.

"Spain, Russia, Austria, Prussia, France," answered Paganel.

"They are provinces, not states," said Toline.

"Well, that beats all!" exclaimed Paganel, tearing off his spectacles.

"Yes," continued the child. "Spain--capital, Gibraltar."

"Admirable! perfect! sublime! And France, for I am French, and I should like
to know to whom I belong."

"France," said Toline, quietly, "is an English province; chief city, Calais."

"Calais!" cried Paganel. "So you think Calais still belongs to the English?"

"Certainly."

"And that it is the capital of France?"

"Yes, sir; and it is there that the Governor, Lord Napo-leon, lives."

This was too much for Paganel's risible faculties. He burst out laughing.
Toline did not know what to make of him. He had done his best to answer every
question put to him. But the singularity of the answers were not his blame;
indeed, he never imagined anything singular about them. However, he took it all
quietly, and waited for the professor to recover himself. These peals of laughter
were quite incomprehensible to him.

"You see," said Major McNabbs, laughing, "I was right. The pupil could
enlighten you after all."

"Most assuredly, friend Major," replied the geographer. "So that's the way
they teach geography in Melbourne! They do it well, these professors in the
Normal School! Europe, Asia, Africa, America, Oceanica, the whole world
belongs to the English. My conscience! with such an ingenious education it is no
wonder the natives submit. Ah, well, Toline, my boy, does the moon belong to
England, too?"

"She will, some day," replied the young savage, gravely.

This was the climax. Paganel could not stand any more. He was obliged to


go away and take his laugh out, for he was actually exploding with mirth, and he
went fully a quarter of a mile from the encampment before his equilibrium was
restored.

Meanwhile, Glenarvan looked up a geography they had brought among their
books. It was "Richardson's Compendium," a work in great repute in England,
and more in agreement with modern science than the manual in use in the
Normal School in Melbourne.

"Here, my child," he said to Toline, "take this book and keep it. You have a
few wrong ideas about geography, which it would be well for you to rectify. I
will give you this as a keepsake from me."

Toline took the book silently; but, after examining it attentively, he shook his
head with an air of incredulity, and could not even make up his mind to put it in
his pocket.

By this time night had closed in; it was 10 P. M. and time to think of rest, if
they were to start betimes next day. Robert offered his friend Toline half his bed,
and the little fellow accepted it. Lady Helena and Mary Grant withdrew to the
wagon, and the others lay down in the tent, Paganel's merry peals still mingling
with the low, sweet song of the wild magpie.

But in the morning at six o'clock, when the sunshine wakened the sleepers,
they looked in vain for the little Australian. Toline had disappeared. Was he in
haste to get to the Lachlan district? or was he hurt by Paganel's laughter? No one
could say.

But when Lady Helena opened her eyes she discovered a fresh branch of
mimosa leaves lying across her, and Paganel found a book in his vest pocket,
which turned out to be "Richardson's Geography."


CHAPTER XIII A WARNING


ON the 2d of January, at sunrise, the travelers forded the Colban and the
Caupespe rivers. The half of their journey was now accomplished. In fifteen
days more, should their journey continue to be prosperous, the little party would
reach Twofold Bay.

They were all in good health. All that Paganel said of the hygienic qualities
of the climate was realized. There was little or no humidity, and the heat was
quite bearable. Neither horses nor bullocks could complain of it any more than
human beings. The order of the march had been changed in one respect since the
affair of Camden Bridge. That criminal catastrophe on the railway made Ayrton
take sundry precautions, which had hitherto been unnecessary. The hunters never
lost sight of the wagon, and whenever they camped, one was always placed on
watch. Morning and evening the firearms were primed afresh. It was certain that
a gang of ruffians was prowling about the country, and though there was no
cause for actual fear, it was well to be ready for whatever might happen.

It need hardly be said these precautions were adopted without the knowledge
of Lady Helena and Mary Grant, as Lord Glenarvan did not wish to alarm them.

They were by no means unnecessary, however, for any imprudence or
carelessness might have cost the travelers dear. Others beside Glenarvan were on
their guard. In lonely settlements and on stations, the inhabitants and the
squatters prepared carefully against any attack or surprise. Houses are closed at
nightfall; the dogs let loose inside the fences, barked at the slightest sound. Not a
single shepherd on horseback gathered his numerous flocks together at close of
day, without having a carbine slung from his saddle.

The outrage at Camden Bridge was the reason for all this, and many a
colonist fastened himself in with bolts and bars now at dusk, who used to sleep
with open doors and windows.

The Government itself displayed zeal and prudence, especially in the Post-
office department. On this very day, just as Glenarvan and his party were on
their way from Kilmore to Heathcote, the mail dashed by at full speed; but
though the horses were at a gallop, Glenarvan caught sight of the glittering
weapons of the mounted police that rode by its side, as they swept past in a
cloud of dust. The travelers might have fancied themselves back in those lawless
times when the discovery of the first gold-fields deluged the Australian continent
with the scum of Europe.

A mile beyond the road to Kilmore, the wagon, for the first time since


leaving Cape Bernouilli, struck into one of those forests of gigantic trees which
extend over a super-fices of several degrees. A cry of admiration escaped the
travelers at the sight of the eucalyptus trees, two hundred feet high, with tough
bark five inches thick. The trunks, measuring twenty feet round, and furrowed
with foamy streaks of an odorous resin, rose one hundred and fifty feet above the
soil. Not a branch, not a twig, not a stray shoot, not even a knot, spoilt the
regularity of their outline. They could not have come out smoother from the
hands of a turner. They stood like pillars all molded exactly alike, and could be
counted by hundreds. At an enormous height they spread out in chaplets of
branches, rounded and adorned at their extremity with alternate leaves. At the
axle of these leaves solitary flowers drooped down, the calyx of which resembles
an inverted urn.

Under this leafy dome, which never lost its greenness, the air circulated
freely, and dried up the dampness of the ground. Horses, cattle, and wagon could
easily pass between the trees, for they were standing in wide rows, and parceled
out like a wood that was being felled. This was neither like the densely-packed
woods choked up with brambles, nor the virgin forest barricaded with the trunks
of fallen trees, and overgrown with inextricable tangles of creepers, where only
iron and fire could open up a track. A grassy carpet at the foot of the trees, anda
canopy of verdure above, long perspectives of bold colors, little shade, little
freshness at all, a peculiar light, as if the rays came through a thin veil, dappled
lights and shades sharply reflected on the ground, made up a whole, and
constituted a peculiar spectacle rich in novel effects. The forests of the Oceanic
continent do not in the least resemble the forests of the New World; and the
Eucalyptus, the "Tara" of the aborigines, belonging to the family of
MYRTACEA, the different varieties of which can hardly be enumerated, is the
tree par excellence of the Australian flora.

The reason of the shade not being deep, nor the darkness profound, under
these domes of verdure, was that these trees presented a curious anomaly in the
disposition of the leaves. Instead of presenting their broad surface to the
sunlight, only the side is turned. Only the profile of the leaves is seen in this
singular foliage. Consequently the sun's rays slant down them to the earth, as if
through the open slants of a Venetian blind.

Glenarvan expressed his surprise at this circumstance, and wondered what
could be the cause of it. Paganel, who was never at a loss for an answer,
immediately replied:

"What astonishes me is not the caprice of nature. She knows what she is
about, but botanists don't always know what they are saying. Nature made no
mistake in giving this peculiar foliage to the tree, but men have erred in calling


them EUCALYPTUS."

"What does the word mean?" asked Mary Grant.

"It comes from a Greek word, meaning I cover well. They took care to
commit the mistake in Greek, that it might not be so self-evident, for anyone can
see that the ecualyptus covers badly."

"I agree with you there," said Glenarvan; "but now tell us, Paganel, how it is
that the leaves grow in this fashion?"

"From a purely physical cause, friends," said Paganel, "and one that you will
easily understand. In this country where the air is dry and rain seldom falls, and
the ground is parched, the trees have no need of wind or sun. Moisture lacking,
sap is lacking also. Hence these narrow leaves, which seek to defend themselves
against the light, and prevent too great evaporation. This is why they present the
profile and not the face to the sun's rays. There is nothing more intelligent than a
leaf."

"And nothing more selfish," added the Major. "These only thought of
themselves, and not at all of travelers."

Everyone inclined to the opinion of McNabbs except Paganel, who
congratulated himself on walking under shadeless trees, though all the time he
was wiping the perspiration from his forehead. However, this disposition of
foliage was certainly to be regretted, for the journey through the forest was often
long and painful, as the traveler had no protection whatever against the sun's
fierce rays.

The whole of this day the wagon continued to roll along through
interminable rows of eucalyptus, without meeting either quadruped or native. A
few cockatoos lived in the tops of the trees, but at such a height they could
scarcely be distinguished, and their noisy chatter was changed into an
imperceptible murmur. Occasionally a swarm of par-roquets flew along a distant
path, and lighted it up for an instant with gay colors; but otherwise, solemn
silence reigned in this vast green temple, and the tramp of the horses, a few
words exchanged with each other by the riders, the grinding noise of the wheels,
and from time to time a cry from Ayrton to stir up his lazy team, were the only
sounds which disturbed this immense solitude.

When night came they camped at the foot of some eucalyptus, which bore
marks of a comparatively recent fire. They looked like tall factory chimneys, for
the flame had completely hollowed them out their whole length. With the thick
bark still covering them, they looked none the worse. However, this bad habit of
squatters or natives will end in the destruction of these magnificent trees, and
they will disappear like the cedars of Lebanon, those world monuments burnt by
unlucky camp fires.


Olbinett, acting on Paganel's advice, lighted his fire to prepare supper in one
of these tubular trunks. He found it drew capitally, and the smoke was lost in the
dark foliage above. The requisite precautions were taken for the night, and
Ayrton, Mulrady, Wilson and John Mangles undertook in turn to keep watch
until sunrise.

On the 3d of January, all day long, they came to nothing but the same
symmetrical avenues of trees; it seemed as if they never were going to end.
However, toward evening the ranks of trees began to thin, and on a little plain a
few miles off an assemblage of regular houses.

"Seymour!" cried Paganel; "that is the last town we come to in the province
of Victoria."

"Is it an important one?" asked Lady Helena.

"Tt is a mere village, madam, but on the way to become a municipality."

"Shall we find a respectable hotel there?" asked Glenarvan.

"I hope so," replied Paganel.

"Very well; let us get on to the town, for our fair travelers, with all their
courage, will not be sorry, I fancy, to have a good night's rest."

"My dear Edward, Mary and I will accept it gladly, but only on the condition
that it will cause no delay, or take us the least out of the road."

"It will do neither," replied Lord Glenarvan. "Besides, our bullocks are
fatigued, and we will start tomorrow at daybreak."

It was now nine o'clock; the moon was just beginning to rise, but her rays
were only slanting yet, and lost in the mist. It was gradually getting dark when
the little party entered the wide streets of Seymour, under Paganel's guidance,
who seemed always to know what he had never seen; but his instinct led him
right, and he walked straight to Campbell's North British Hotel.

The Major without even leaving the hotel, was soon aware that fear absorbed
the inhabitants of the little town. Ten minutes' conversation with Dickson, the
loquacious landlord, made him completely acquainted with the actual state of
affairs; but he never breathed a word to any one.

When supper was over, though, and Lady Glenarvan, and Mary, and Robert
had retired, the Major detained his companions a little, and said, "They have
found out the perpetrators of the crime on the Sandhurst railroad."

"And are they arrested?" asked Ayrton, eagerly.

"No," replied McNabbs, without apparently noticing the EMPRESSMENT
of the quartermaster--an EMPRESSMENT which, moreover, was reasonable
enough under the circumstances.

"So much the worse," replied Ayrton.

"Well," said Glenarvan, "who are the authors of the crime?"


"Read," replied the Major, offering Glenarvan a copy of the Australian and
New Zealand Gazette, "and you will see that the inspector of the police was not
mistaken."

Glenarvan read aloud the following message:

SYDNEY, Jan. 2, 1866.

It will be remembered that on the night of the 29th or 30th of last December
there was an accident at Camden Bridge, five miles beyond the station at
Castlemaine, on the railway from Melbourne to Sandhurst. The night express,
11.45, dashing along at full speed, was precipitated into the Loddon River.

Camden Bridge had been left open. The numerous robberies committed after
the accident, the body of the guard picked up about half a mile from Camden
Bridge, proved that this catastrophe was the result of a crime.

Indeed, the coroner's inquest decided that the crime must be attributed to the
band of convicts which escaped six months ago from the Penitentiary at Perth,
Western Australia, just as they were about to be transferred to Norfolk Island.

The gang numbers twenty-nine men; they are under the command of a
certain Ben Joyce, a criminal of the most dangerous class, who arrived in
Australia a few months ago, by what ship is not known, and who has hitherto
succeeded in evading the hands of justice.

The inhabitants of towns, colonists and squatters at stations, are hereby
cautioned to be on their guard, and to communicate to the Surveyor-General any
information that may aid his search. J. P. MITCHELL, S. G.

When Glenarvan had finished reading this article, McNabbs turned to the
geographer and said, "You see, Paganel, there can be convicts in Australia."

"Escaped convicts, that is evident," replied Paganel, "but not regularly
transported criminals. Those fellows have no business here."

"Well, they are here, at any rate," said Glenarvan; "but I don't suppose the
fact need materially alter our arrangements. What do you think, John?"

John Mangles did not reply immediately; he hesitated between the sorrow it
would cause the two children to give up the search, and the fear of
compromising the expedition.

"If Lady Glenarvan, and Miss Grant were not with us," he said, "I should not
give myself much concern about these wretches."

Glenarvan understood him and added, "Of course I need not say that it is not
a question of giving up our task; but would it perhaps be prudent, for the sake of
our companions, to rejoin the DUNCAN at Melbourne, and proceed with our
search for traces of Harry Grant on the eastern side. What do you think of it,
McNabbs?"

"Before I give my opinion," replied the Major, "I should like to hear


Ayrton's."

At this direct appeal, the quartermaster looked at Glenarvan, and said, "I
think we are two hundred miles from Melbourne, and that the danger, if it exists,
is as great on the route to the south as on the route to the east. Both are little
frequented, and both will serve us. Besides, I do not think that thirty scoundrels
can frighten eight well-armed, determined men. My advice, then, is to go
forward."

"And good advice too, Ayrton," replied Paganel. "By going on we may come
across the traces of Captain Grant. In returning south, on the contrary, we turn
our backs to them. I think with you, then, and I don't care a snap for these
escaped fellows. A brave man wouldn't care a bit for them!"

Upon this they agreed with the one voice to follow their original programme.

"Just one thing, my Lord," said Ayrton, when they were about to separate.

"Say on, Ayrton."

"Wouldn't it be advisable to send orders to the DUNCAN to be at the coast?"

"What good would that be," replied John Mangles. "When we reach Twofold
Bay it will be time enough for that. If any unexpected event should oblige us to
go to Melbourne, we might be sorry not to find the DUNCAN there. Besides, her
injuries can not be repaired yet. For these reasons, then, I think it would be better
to wait."

"All right," said Ayrton, and forbore to press the matter further.


CHAPTER XIV WEALTH IN THE WILDERNESS


ON January 6, at 7 A. M., after a tranquil night passed in longitude 146
degrees 15", the travelers continued their journey across the vast district. They
directed their course steadily toward the rising sun, and made a straight line
across the plain. Twice over they came upon the traces of squatters going toward
the north, and their different footprints became confused, and Glenarvan's horse
no longer left on the dust the Blackpoint mark, recognizable by its double
shamrock.

The plain was furrowed in some places by fantastic winding creeks
surrounded by box, and whose waters were rather temporary than permanent.
They originated in the slopes of the Buffalo Ranges, a chain of mountains of
moderate height, the undulating line of which was visible on the horizon. It was
resolved to camp there the same night. Ayrton goaded on his team, and after a
journey of thirty-five miles, the bullocks arrived, somewhat fatigued. The tent
was pitched beneath the great trees, and as night had drawn on supper was
served as quickly as possible, for all the party cared more for sleeping than
eating, after such a day's march.

Paganel who had the first watch did not lie down, but shouldered his rifle
and walked up and down before the camp, to keep himself from going to sleep.
In spite of the absence of the moon, the night was almost luminous with the light
of the southern constellations. The SAVANT amused himself with reading the
great book of the firmament, a book which is always open, and full of interest to
those who can read it. The profound silence of sleeping nature was only
interrupted by the clanking of the hobbles on the horses' feet.

Paganel was engrossed in his astronomical meditations, and thinking more
about the celestial than the terrestrial world, when a distant sound aroused him
from his reverie. He listened attentively, and to his great amaze, fancied he heard
the sounds of a piano. He could not be mistaken, for he distinctly heard chords
struck.

"A piano in the wilds!" said Paganel to himself. "I can never believe it is
that."

It certainly was very surprising, but Paganel found it easier to believe it was
some Australian bird imitating the sounds of a Pleyel or Erard, as others do the
sounds of a clock or mill. But at this very moment, the notes of a clear ringing
voice rose on the air. The PIANIST was accompanied by singing. Still Paganel
was unwilling to be convinced. However, next minute he was forced to admit the


fact, for there fell on his ear the sublime strains of Mozart's "I] mio tesoro tanto"
from Don Juan.

"Well, now," said the geographer to himself, "let the Australian birds be as
queer as they may, and even granting the paroquets are the most musical in the
world, they can't sing Mozart!"

He listened to the sublime inspiration of the great master to the end. The
effect of this soft melody on the still clear night was indescribable. Paganel
remained as if spellbound for a time; the voice ceased and all was silence. When
Wilson came to relieve the watch, he found the geographer plunged into a deep
reverie. Paganel made no remark, however, to the sailor, but reserved his
information for Glenarvan in the morning, and went into the tent to bed.

Next day, they were all aroused from sleep by the sudden loud barking of
dogs, Glenarvan got up forthwith. Two magnificent pointers, admirable
specimens of English hunting dogs, were bounding in front of the little wood,
into which they had retreated at the approach of the travelers, redoubling their
clamor.

"There is some station in this desert, then," said Glenarvan, "and hunters too,
for these are regular setters."

Paganel was just about to recount his nocturnal experiences, when two young
men appeared, mounted on horses of the most perfect breed, true "hunters."

The two gentlemen dressed in elegant hunting costume, stopped at the sight
of the little group camping in gipsy fashion. They looked as if they wondered
what could bring an armed party there, but when they saw the ladies get out of
the wagon, they dismounted instantly, and went toward them hat in hand. Lord
Glenarvan came to meet them, and, as a stranger, announced his name and rank.

The gentlemen bowed, and the elder of them said, "My Lord, will not these
ladies and yourself and friends honor us by resting a little beneath our roof?"

"Mr.--," began Glenarvan.

"Michael and Sandy Patterson are our names, proprietors of Hottam Station.
Our house is scarcely a quarter of a mile distant."

"Gentlemen," replied Glenarvan, "I should not like to abuse such kindly-
offered hospitality."

"My Lord," returned Michael Patterson, "by accepting it you will confer a
favor on poor exiles, who will be only too happy to do the honors of the wilds."

Glenarvan bowed in token of acquiescence.

"Sir," said Paganel, addressing Michael Patterson, "if it is not an impudent
question, may I ask whether it was you that sung an air from the divine Mozart
last night?"

"It was, sir," replied the stranger, "and my cousin Sandy accompanied me."


"Well, sir," replied Paganel, holding out his hand to the young man, "receive
the sincere compliments of a Frenchman, who is a passionate admirer of this
music."

Michael grasped his hand cordially, and then pointing out the road to take,
set off, accompanied by the ladies and Lord Glenarvan and his friends, for the
station. The horses and the camp were left to the care of Ayrton and the sailors.

Hottam Station was truly a magnificent establishment, kept as scrupulously
in order as an English park. Immense meadows, enclosed in gray fences,
stretched away out of sight. In these, thousands of bullocks and millions of sheep
were grazing, tended by numerous shepherds, and still more numerous dogs. The
crack of the stockwhip mingled continually with the barking of the "collies" and
the bellowing and bleating of the cattle and sheep.

Toward the east there was a boundary of myalls and gum-trees, beyond
which rose Mount Hottam, its imposing peak towering 7,500 feet high. Long
avenues of green trees were visible on all sides. Here and there was a thick
clump of "grass trees," tall bushes ten feet high, like the dwarf palm, quite lost in
their crown of long narrow leaves. The air was balmy and odorous with the
perfume of scented laurels, whose white blossoms, now in full bloom, distilled
on the breeze the finest aromatic perfume.

To these charming groups of native trees were added transplantations from
European climates. The peach, pear, and apple trees were there, the fig, the
orange, and even the oak, to the rapturous delight of the travelers, who greeted
them with loud hurrahs! But astonished as the travelers were to find themselves
walking beneath the shadow of the trees of their own native land, they were still
more so at the sight of the birds that flew about in the branches-- the "satin bird,"
with its silky plumage, and the "king-honeysuckers," with their plumage of gold
and black velvet.

For the first time, too, they saw here the "Lyre" bird, the tail of which
resembles in form the graceful instrument of Orpheus. It flew about among the
tree ferns, and when its tail struck the branches, they were almost surprised not
to hear the harmonious strains that inspired Amphion to rebuild the walls of
Thebes. Paganel had a great desire to play on it.

However, Lord Glenarvan was not satisfied with admiring the fairy-like
wonders of this oasis, improvised in the Australian desert. He was listening to
the history of the young gentlemen. In England, in the midst of civilized
countries, the new comer acquaints his host whence he comes and whither he is
going; but here, by a refinement of delicacy, Michael and Sandy Patterson
thought it a duty to make themselves known to the strangers who were about to
receive their hospitality.


Michael and Sandy Patterson were the sons of London bankers. When they
were twenty years of age, the head of their family said, "Here are some
thousands, young men. Go to a distant colony; and start some useful settlement
there. Learn to know life by labor. If you succeed, so much the better. If you fail,
it won't matter much. We shall not regret the money which makes you men."

The two young men obeyed. They chose the colony of Victoria in Australia,
as the field for sowing the paternal bank-notes, and had no reason to repent the
selection. At the end of three years the establishment was flourishing. In
Victoria, New South Wales, and Southern Australia, there are more than three
thousand stations, some belonging to squatters who rear cattle, and others to
settlers who farm the ground. Till the arrival of the two Pattersons, the largest
establishment of this sort was that of Mr. Jamieson, which covered an area of
seventy-five miles, with a frontage of about eight miles along the Peron, one of
the affluents of the Darling.

Now Hottam Station bore the palm for business and extent. The young men
were both squatters and settlers. They managed their immense property with rare
ability and uncommon energy.

The station was far removed from the chief towns in the

V. IV Verne midst of the unfrequented districts of the Murray. It occupied a
long wide space of five leagues in extent, lying between the Buffalo Ranges and
Mount Hottam. At the two angles north of this vast quadrilateral, Mount
Aberdeen rose on the left, and the peaks of High Barven on the right. Winding,
beautiful streams were not wanting, thanks to the creeks and affluents of the
Oven's River, which throws itself at the north into the bed of the Murray.
Consequently they were equally successful in cattle breeding and farming. Ten
thousand acres of ground, admirably cultivated, produced harvests of native
productions and exotics, and several millions of animals fattened in the fertile
pastures. The products of Hottam Station fetched the very highest price in the
markets of Castlemaine and Melbourne.

Michael and Sandy Patterson had just concluded these details of their busy
life, when their dwelling came in sight, at the extremity of the avenue of the
oaks.

It was a charming house, built of wood and brick, hidden in groves of
emerophilis. Nothing at all, however, belonging to a station was visible--neither
sheds, nor stables, nor cart-houses. All these out-buildings, a perfect village,
comprising more than twenty huts and houses, were about a quarter of a mile off
in the heart of a little valley. Electric communication was established between
this village and the master's house, which, far removed from all noise, seemed
buried in a forest of exotic trees.


At Sandy Patterson's bidding, a sumptuous breakfast was served in less than
a quarter of an hour. The wines and viands were of the finest quality; but what
pleased the guests most of all in the midst of these refinements of opulence, was
the joy of the young squatters in offering them this splendid hospitality.

It was not long before they were told the history of the expedition, and had
their liveliest interest awakened for its success. They spoke hopefully to the
young Grants, and Michael said: "Harry Grant has evidently fallen into the hands
of natives, since he has not turned up at any of the settlements on the coast. He
knows his position exactly, as the document proves, and the reason he did not
reach some English colony is that he must have been taken prisoner by the
savages the moment he landed!"

"That is precisely what befell his quartermaster, Ayrton," said John Mangles.

"But you, gentlemen, then, have never heard the catastrophe of the
BRITANNIA, mentioned?" inquired Lady Helena.

"Never, Madam," replied Michael.

"And what treatment, in your opinion, has Captain Grant met with among the
natives?"

"The Australians are not cruel, Madam," replied the young squatter, "and
Miss Grant may be easy on that score. There have been many instances of the
gentleness of their nature, and some Europeans have lived a long time among
them without having the least cause to complain of their brutality."

"King, among others, the sole survivor of the Burke expedition," put in
Paganel.

"And not only that bold explorer," returned Sandy, "but also an English
soldier named Buckley, who deserted at Port Philip in 1803, and who was
welcomed by the natives, and lived thirty-three years among them."

"And more recently," added Michael," one of the last numbers of the
AUSTRALASIA informs us that a certain Morrilli has just been restored to his
countrymen after sixteen years of slavery. His story is exactly similar to the
captain's, for it was at the very time of his shipwreck in the PRUVIENNE, in
1846, that he was made prisoner by the natives, and dragged away into the
interior of the continent. I therefore think you have reason to hope still."

The young squatter's words caused great joy to his auditors. They completely
corroborated the opinions of Paganel and Ayrton.

The conversation turned on the convicts after the ladies had left the table.
The squatters had heard of the catastrophe at Camden Bridge, but felt no
uneasiness about the escaped gang. It was not a station, with more than a
hundred men on it, that they would dare to attack. Besides, they would never go
into the deserts of the Murray, where they could find no booty, nor near the


colonies of New South Wales, where the roads were too well watched. Ayrton
had said this too.

Glenarvan could not refuse the request of his amiable hosts, to spend the
whole day at the station. It was twelve hours' delay, but also twelve hours' rest,
and both horses and bullocks would be the better for the comfortable quarters
they would find there. This was accordingly agreed upon, and the young
squatters sketched out a programme of the day's amusements, which was
adopted eagerly.

At noon, seven vigorous hunters were before the door. An elegant brake was
intended for the ladies, in which the coachman could exhibit his skill in driving
four-in-hand. The cavalcade set off preceded by huntsmen, and armed with first-
rate rifles, followed by a pack of pointers barking joyously as they bounded
through the bushes. For four hours the hunting party wandered through the paths
and avenues of the park, which was as large as a small German state. The
Reuiss-Schleitz, or Saxe-Coburg Gotha, would have gone inside it comfortably.
Few people were to be met in it certainly, but sheep in abundance. As for game,
there was a complete preserve awaiting the hunters. The noisy reports of guns
were soon heard on all sides. Little Robert did wonders in company with Major
McNabbs. The daring boy, in spite of his sister's injunctions, was always in
front, and the first to fire. But John Mangles promised to watch over him, and
Mary felt less uneasy.

During this BATTUE they killed certain animals peculiar to the country, the
very names of which were unknown to Paganel; among others the "wombat" and
the "bandicoot." The wombat is an herbivorous animal, which burrows in the
ground like a badger. It is as large as a sheep, and the flesh is excellent.

The bandicoot is a species of marsupial animal which could outwit the
European fox, and give him lessons in pillaging poultry yards. It was a
repulsive-looking animal, a foot and a half long, but, as Paganel chanced to kill
it, of course he thought it charming.

"An adorable creature," he called it.

But the most interesting event of the day, by far, was the kangaroo hunt.
About four o'clock, the dogs roused a troop of these curious marsupials. The
little ones retreated precipitately into the maternal pouch, and all the troop
decamped in file. Nothing could be more astonishing than the enormous bounds
of the kangaroo. The hind legs of the animal are twice as long as the front ones,
and unbend like a spring. At the head of the flying troop was a male five feet
high, a magnificent specimen of the macropus giganteus, an "old man," as the
bushmen say.

For four or five miles the chase was vigorously pursued. The kangaroos


showed no signs of weariness, and the dogs, who had reason enough to fear their
strong paws and sharp nails, did not care to approach them. But at last, worn out
with the race, the troop stopped, and the "old man" leaned against the trunk of a
tree, ready to defend himself. One of the pointers, carried away by excitement,
went up to him. Next minute the unfortunate beast leaped into the air, and fell
down again completely ripped up.

The whole pack, indeed, would have had little chance with these powerful
marsupia. They had to dispatch the fellow with rifles. Nothing but balls could
bring down the gigantic animal.

Just at this moment, Robert was well nigh the victim of his own imprudence.
To make sure of his aim, he had approached too near the kangaroo, and the
animal leaped upon him immediately. Robert gave a loud cry and fell. Mary
Grant saw it all from the brake, and in an agony of terror, speechless and almost
unable even to see, stretched out her arms toward her little brother. No one dared
to fire, for fear of wounding the child.

But John Mangles opened his hunting knife, and at the risk of being ripped
up himself, sprang at the animal, and plunged it into his heart. The beast dropped
forward, and Robert rose unhurt. Next minute he was in his sister's arms.

"Thank you, Mr. John, thank you!" she said, holding out her hand to the
young captain.

"I had pledged myself for his safety," was all John said, taking her trembling
fingers into his own.

This occurrence ended the sport. The band of marsupia had disappeared after
the death of their leader. The hunting party returned home, bringing their game
with them. It was then six o'clock. A magnificent dinner was ready. Among other
things, there was one dish that was a great success. It was kangaroo-tail soup,
prepared in the native manner.

Next morning very early, they took leave of the young squatters, with hearty
thanks and a positive promise from them of a visit to Malcolm Castle when they
should return to Europe.

Then the wagon began to move away, round the foot of Mount Hottam, and
soon the hospitable dwelling disappeared from the sight of the travelers like
some brief vision which had come and gone.

For five miles further, the horses were still treading the station lands. It was
not till nine o'clock that they had passed the last fence, and entered the almost
unknown districts of the province of Victoria.


CHAPTER XV SUSPICIOUS OCCURRENCES


AN immense barrier lay across the route to the southeast. It was the
Australian Alps, a vast fortification, the fantastic curtain of which extended
1,500 miles, and pierced the clouds at the height of 4,000 feet.

The cloudy sky only allowed the heat to reach the ground through a close
veil of mist. The temperature was just bearable, but the road was toilsome from
its uneven character. The extumescences on the plain became more and more
marked. Several mounds planted with green young gum trees appeared here and
there. Further on these protuberances rising sharply, formed the first steps of the
great Alps. From this time their course was a continual ascent, as was soon
evident in the strain it made on the bullocks to drag along the cumbrous wagon.
Their yoke creaked, they breathed heavily, and the muscles of their houghs were
stretched as if they would burst. The planks of the vehicle groaned at the
unexpected jolts, which Ayrton with all his skill could not prevent. The ladies
bore their share of discomfort bravely.

John Mangles and his two sailors acted as scouts, and went about a hundred
steps in advance. They found out practical paths, or passes, indeed they might be
called, for these projections of the ground were like so many rocks, between
which the wagon had to steer carefully. It required absolute navigation to find a
safe way over the billowy region.

It was a difficult and often perilous task. Many a time Wilson's hatchet was
obliged to open a passage through thick tangles of shrubs. The damp argillaceous
soil gave way under their feet. The route was indefinitely prolonged owing to the
insurmountable obstacles, huge blocks of granite, deep ravines, suspected
lagoons, which obliged them to make a thousand detours. When night came they
found they had only gone over half a degree. They camped at the foot of the
Alps, on the banks of the creek of Cobongra, on the edge of a little plain,
covered with little shrubs four feet high, with bright red leaves which gladdened
the eye.

"We shall have hard work to get over," said Glenarvan, looking at the chain
of mountains, the outlines of which were fast fading away in the deepening
darkness. "The very name Alps gives plenty of room for reflection."

"It is not quite so big as it sounds, my dear Glenarvan. Don't suppose you
have a whole Switzerland to traverse. In Australia there are the Grampians, the
Pyrenees, the Alps, the Blue Mountains, as in Europe and America, but in
miniature. This simply implies either that the imagination of geographers is not


infinite, or that their vocabulary of proper names is very poor."

"Then these Australian Alps," said Lord Glenarvan, "are--"

"Mere pocket mountains," put in Paganel; "we shall get over them without
knowing it."

"Speak for yourself," said the Major. "It would certainly take a very absent
man who could cross over a chain of mountains and not know it."

"Absent! But I am not an absent man now. I appeal to the ladies. Since ever I
set foot on the Australian continent, have I been once at fault? Can you reproach
me with a single blunder?"

"Not one. Monsieur Paganel,"” said Mary Grant. "You are now the most
perfect of men."

"Too perfect," added Lady Helena, laughing; "your blunders suited you
admirably."

"Didn't they, Madam? If I have no faults now, I shall soon get like everybody
else. I hope then I shall make some outrageous mistake before long, which will
give you a good laugh. You see, unless I make mistakes, it seems to me I fail in
my vocation."

Next day, the 9th of January, notwithstanding the assurances of the confident
geographer, it was not without great difficulty that the little troop made its way
through the Alpine pass. They were obliged to go at a venture, and enter the
depths of narrow gorges without any certainty of an outlet. Ayrton would
doubtless have found himself very much embarrassed if a little inn, a miserable
public house, had not suddenly presented itself.

"My goodness!" cried Paganel, "the landlord of this inn won't make his
fortune in a place like this. What is the use of it here?"

"To give us the information we want about the route,
"Let us go in."

Glenarvan, followed by Ayrton, entered the inn forthwith. The landlord of
the "Bush Inn," as it was called, was a coarse man with an ill-tempered face,
who must have considered himself his principal customer for the gin, brandy and
whisky he had to sell. He seldom saw any one but the squatters and rovers. He
answered all the questions put to him in a surly tone. But his replies sufficed to
make the route clear to Ayrton, and that was all that was wanted. Glenarvan
rewarded him with a handful of silver for his trouble, and was about to leave the
tavern, when a placard against the wall arrested his attention.

It was a police notice, and announcing the escape of the convicts from Perth,
and offering a reward for the capture of Ben Joyce of pounds 100 sterling.

"He's a fellow that's worth hanging, and no mistake," said Glenarvan to the
quartermaster.


W


replied Glenarvan.


"And worth capturing still more. But what a sum to offer! He is not worth
a"

"I don't feel very sure of the innkeeper though, in spite of the notice," said
Glenarvan.

"No more do J," replied Ayrton.

They went back to the wagon, toward the point where the route to Lucknow
stopped. A narrow path wound away from this which led across the chain in a
slanting direction. They had commenced the ascent.

It was hard work. More than once both the ladies and gentlemen had to get
down and walk. They were obliged to help to push round the wheels of the
heavy vehicle, and to support it frequently in dangerous declivities, to unharness
the bullocks when the team could not go well round sharp turnings, prop up the
wagon when it threatened to roll back, and more than once Ayrton had to
reinforce his bullocks by harnessing the horses, although they were tired out
already with dragging themselves along.

Whether it was this prolonged fatigue, or from some other cause altogether,
was not known, but one of the horses sank suddenly, without the slightest
symptom of illness. It was Mulrady's horse that fell, and on attempting to pull it
up, the animal was found to be dead. Ayrton examined it immediately, but was
quite at a loss to account for the disaster.

"The beast must have broken some blood vessels," said Glenarvan.

"Evidently," replied Ayrton.

"Take my horse, Mulrady," added Glenarvan. "I will join Lady Helena in the
wagon."

Mulrady obeyed, and the little party continued their fatiguing ascent, leaving
the carcass of the dead animal to the ravens.

The Australian Alps are of no great thickness, and the base is not more than
eight miles wide. Consequently if the pass chosen by Ayrton came out on the
eastern side, they might hope to get over the high barrier within forty-eight hours
more. The difficulty of the route would then be surmounted, and they would only
have to get to the sea.

During the 18th the travelers reached the top-most point of the pass, about
2,000 feet high. They found themselves on an open plateau, with nothing to
intercept the view. Toward the north the quiet waters of Lake Omco, all alive
with aquatic birds, and beyond this lay the vast plains of the Murray. To the
south were the wide spreading plains of Gippsland, with its abundant gold-fields
and tall forests. There nature was still mistress of the products and water, and
great trees where the woodman's ax was as yet unknown, and the squatters, then
five in number, could not struggle against her. It seemed as if this chain of the


Alps separated two different countries, one of which had retained its primitive
wildness. The sun went down, and a few solitary rays piercing the rosy clouds,
lighted up the Murray district, leaving Gippsland in deep shadow, as if night had
suddenly fallen on the whole region. The contrast was presented very vividly to
the spectators placed between these two countries so divided, and some emotion
filled the minds of the travelers, as they contemplated the almost unknown
district they were about to traverse right to the frontiers of Victoria.

They camped on the plateau that night, and next day the descent commenced.
It was tolerably rapid. A hailstorm of extreme violence assailed the travelers, and
obliged them to seek a shelter among the rocks. It was not hail-stones, but
regular lumps of ice, as large as one's hand, which fell from the stormy clouds. A
waterspout could not have come down with more violence, and sundry big
bruises warned Paganel and Robert to retreat. The wagon was riddled in several
places, and few coverings would have held out against those sharp icicles, some
of which had fastened themselves into the trunks of the trees. It was impossible
to go on till this tremendous shower was over, unless the travelers wished to be
stoned. It lasted about an hour, and then the march commenced anew over
slanting rocks still slippery after the hail.

Toward evening the wagon, very much shaken and disjointed in several
parts, but still standing firm on its wooden disks, came down the last slopes of
the Alps, among great isolated pines. The passage ended in the plains of
Gippsland. The chain of the Alps was safely passed, and the usual arrangements
were made for the nightly encampment.

On the 21st, at daybreak, the journey was resumed with an ardor which never
relaxed. Everyone was eager to reach the goal--that is to say the Pacific Ocean--
at that part where the wreck of the BRITANNIA had occurred. Nothing could be
done in the lonely wilds of Gippsland, and Ayrton urged Lord Glenarvan to send
orders at once for the DUNCAN to repair to the coast, in order to have at hand
all means of research. He thought it would certainly be advisable to take
advantage of the Lucknow route to Melbourne. If they waited it would be
difficult to find any way of direct communication with the capital.

This advice seemed good, and Paganel recommended that they should act
upon it. He also thought that the presence of the yacht would be very useful, and
he added, that if the Lucknow road was once passed, it would be impossible to
communicate with Melbourne.

Glenarvan was undecided what to do, and perhaps he would have yielded to
Ayrton's arguments, if the Major had not combated this decision vigorously. He
maintained that the presence of Ayrton was necessary to the expedition, that he
would know the country about the coast, and that if any chance should put them


on the track of Harry Grant, the quartermaster would be better able to follow it
up than any one else, and, finally, that he alone could point out the exact spot
where the shipwreck occurred.

McNabbs voted therefore for the continuation of the voyage, without making
the least change in their programme. John Mangles was of the same opinion. The
young captain said even that orders would reach the DUNCAN more easily from
Twofold Bay, than if a message was sent two hundred miles over a wild country.

His counsel prevailed. It was decided that they should wait till they came to
Twofold Bay. The Major watched Ayrton narrowly, and noticed his disappointed
look. But he said nothing, keeping his observations, as usual, to himself.

The plains which lay at the foot of the Australian Alps were level, but
slightly inclined toward the east. Great clumps of mimosas and eucalyptus, and
various odorous gum-trees, broke the uniform monotony here and there. The
gastrolobium grandiflorum covered the ground, with its bushes covered with gay
flowers. Several unimportant creeks, mere streams full of little rushes, and half
covered up with orchids, often interrupted the route. They had to ford these.
Flocks of bustards and emus fled at the approach of the travelers. Below the
shrubs, kangaroos were leaping and springing like dancing jacks. But the hunters
of the party were not thinking much of the sport, and the horses little needed any
additional fatigue.

Moreover, a sultry heat oppressed the plain. The atmosphere was completely
saturated with electricity, and its influence was felt by men and beasts. They just
dragged themselves along, and cared for nothing else. The silence was only
interrupted by the cries of Ayrton urging on his burdened team.

From noon to two o'clock they went through a curious forest of ferns, which
would have excited the admiration of less weary travelers. These plants in full
flower measured thirty feet in height. Horses and riders passed easily beneath
their drooping leaves, and sometimes the spurs would clash against the woody
stems. Beneath these immovable parasols there was a refreshing coolness which
every one appreciated. Jacques Paganel, always demonstrative, gave such deep
sighs of satisfaction that the paroquets and cockatoos flew out in alarm, making
a deafening chorus of noisy chatter.

The geographer was going on with his sighs and jubilations with the utmost
coolness, when his companions suddenly saw him reel forward, and he and his
horse fell down in a lump. Was it giddiness, or worse still, suffocation, caused by
the high temperature? They ran to him, exclaiming: "Paganel! Paganel! what is
the matter?"

"Just this. I have no horse, now!" he replied, disengaging his feet from the
stirrups.


"What! your horse?"

"Dead like Mulrady's, as if a thunderbolt had struck him."

Glenarvan, John Mangles, and Wilson examined the animal; and found
Paganel was right. His horse had been suddenly struck dead.

"That is strange," said John.

"Very strange, truly," muttered the Major.

Glenarvan was greatly disturbed by this fresh accident. He could not get a
fresh horse in the desert, and if an epidemic was going to seize their steeds, they
would be seriously embarrassed how to proceed.

Before the close of the day, it seemed as if the word epidemic was really
going to be justified. A third horse, Wilson's, fell dead, and what was, perhaps
equally disastrous, one of the bullocks also. The means of traction and transport
were now reduced to three bullocks and four horses.

The situation became grave. The unmounted horsemen might walk, of
course, aS many squatters had done already; but if they abandoned the wagon,
what would the ladies do? Could they go over the one hundred and twenty miles
which lay between them and Twofold Bay? John Mangles and Lord Glenarvan
examined the surviving horses with great uneasiness, but there was not the
slightest symptom of illness or feebleness in them. The animals were in perfect
health, and bravely bearing the fatigues of the voyage. This somewhat reassured
Glenarvan, and made him hope the malady would strike no more victims. Ayrton
agreed with him, but was unable to find the least solution of the mystery.

They went on again, the wagon serving, from time to time, as a house of rest
for the pedestrians. In the evening, after a march of only ten miles, the signal to
halt was given, and the tent pitched. The night passed without inconvenience
beneath a vast mass of bushy ferns, under which enormous bats, properly called
flying foxes, were flapping about.

The next day's journey was good; there were no new calamities. The health
of the expedition remained satisfactory; horses and cattle did their task cheerily.
Lady Helena's drawing-room was very lively, thanks to the number of visitors.
M. Olbinett busied himself in passing round refreshments which were very
acceptable in such hot weather. Half a barrel of Scotch ale was sent in bodily.
Barclay and Co. was declared to be the greatest man in Great Britain, even above
Wellington, who could never have manufactured such good beer. This was a
Scotch estimate. Jacques Paganel drank largely, and discoursed still more de
omni re scibili.

A day so well commenced seemed as if it could not but end well; they had
gone fifteen good miles, and managed to get over a pretty hilly district where the
soil was reddish. There was every reason to hope they might camp that same


night on the banks of the Snowy River, an important river which throws itself
into the Pacific, south of Victoria.

Already the wheels of the wagon were making deep ruts on the wide plains,
covered with blackish alluvium, as it passed on between tufts of luxuriant grass
and fresh fields of gastrolobium. As evening came on, a white mist on the
horizon marked the course of the Snowy River. Several additional miles were
got over, and a forest of tall trees came in sight at a bend of the road, behind a
gentle eminence. Ayrton tured his team a little toward the great trunks, lost in
shadow, and he had got to the skirts of the wood, about half-a-mile from the
river, when the wagon suddenly sank up to the middle of the wheels.

"Stop!" he called out to the horsemen following him.

"What is wrong?" inquired Glenarvan.

"We have stuck in the mud," replied Ayrton.

He tried to stimulate the bullocks to a fresh effort by voice and goad, but the
animals were buried half-way up their legs, and could not stir.

"Let us camp here," suggested John Mangles.

"Tt would certainly be the best place," said Ayrton. "We shall see by daylight
tomorrow how to get ourselves out."

Glenarvan acted on their advice, and came to a halt. Night came on rapidly
after a brief twilight, but the heat did not withdraw with the light. Stifling vapors
filled the air, and occasionally bright flashes of lightning, the reflections of a
distant storm, lighted up the sky with a fiery glare. Arrangements were made for
the night immediately. They did the best they could with the sunk wagon, and
the tent was pitched beneath the shelter of the great trees; and if the rain did not
come, they had not much to complain about.

Ayrton succeeded, though with some difficulty, in extricating the three
bullocks. These courageous beasts were engulfed up to their flanks. The
quartermaster turned them out with the four horses, and allowed no one but
himself to see after their pasturage. He always executed his task wisely, and this
evening Glenarvan noticed he redoubled his care, for which he took occasion to
thank him, the preservation of the team being of supreme importance.

Meantime, the travelers were dispatching a hasty supper. Fatigue and heat
destroy appetite, and sleep was needed more than food. Lady Helena and Miss
Grant speedily bade the company good-night, and retired. Their companions
soon stretched themselves under the tent or outside under the trees, which is no
great hardship in this salubrious climate.

Gradually they all fell into a heavy sleep. The darkness deepened owing to a
thick current of clouds which overspread the sky. There was not a breath of
wind. The silence of night was only interrupted by the cries of the "morepork" in


the minor key, like the mournful cuckoos of Europe.

Towards eleven o'clock, after a wretched, heavy, unre-freshing sleep, the
Major woke. His half-closed eyes were struck with a faint light running among
the great trees. It looked like a white sheet, and glittered like a lake, and
McNabbs thought at first it was the commencement of a fire.

He started up, and went toward the wood; but what was his surprise to
perceive a purely natural phenomenon! Before him lay an immense bed of
mushrooms, which emitted a phosphorescent light. The luminous spores of the
cryptograms shone in the darkness with intensity.

The Major, who had no selfishness about him, was going to waken Paganel,
that he might see this phenomenon with his own eyes, when something occurred
which arrested him. This phosphorescent light illumined the distance half a mile,
and McNabbs fancied he saw a shadow pass across the edge of it. Were his eyes
deceiving him? Was it some hallucination?

McNabbs lay down on the ground, and, after a close scrutiny, he could
distinctly see several men stooping down and lifting themselves up alternately,
as if they were looking on the ground for recent marks.

The Major resolved to find out what these fellows were about, and without
the least hesitation or so much as arousing his companions, crept along, lying
flat on the ground, like a savage on the prairies, completely hidden among the
long grass.


CHAPTER XVI A STARTLING DISCOVERY


IT was a frightful night. At two A. M. the rain began to fall in torrents from
the stormy clouds, and continued till daybreak. The tent became an insufficient
shelter. Glenarvan and his companions took refuge in the wagon; they did not
sleep, but talked of one thing and another. The Major alone, whose brief absence
had not been noticed, contented himself with being a silent listener. There was
reason to fear that if the storm lasted longer the Snowy River would overflow its
banks, which would be a very unlucky thing for the wagon, stuck fast as it was
already in the soft ground. Mulrady, Ayrton and Mangles went several times to
ascertain the height of the water, and came back dripping from head to foot.

At last day appeared; the rain ceased, but sunlight could not break through
the thick clouds. Large patches of yellowish water-- muddy, dirty ponds indeed
they were--covered the ground. A hot steam rose from the soaking earth, and
saturated the atmosphere with unhealthy humidity.

Glenarvan's first concern was the wagon; this was the main thing in his eyes.
They examined the ponderous vehicle, and found it sunk in the mud in a deep
hollow in the stiff clay. The forepart had disappeared completely, and the hind
part up to the axle. It would be a hard job to get the heavy conveyance out, and
would need the united strength of men, bullocks, and horses.

"At any rate, we must make haste," said John Mangles. "If the clay dries, it
will make our task still more difficult."

"Let us be quick, then," replied Ayrton.

Glenarvan, his two sailors, John Mangles, and Ayrton went off at once into
the wood, where the animals had passed the night. It was a gloomy-looking
forest of tall gum-trees; nothing but dead trees, with wide spaces between, which
had been barked for ages, or rather skinned like the cork-oak at harvest time. A
miserable network of bare branches was seen above two hundred feet high in the
air. Not a bird built its nest in these aerial skeletons; not a leaf trembled on the
dry branches, which rattled together like bones. To what cataclysm is this
phenomenon to be attributed, so frequent in Australia, entire forests struck dead
by some epidemic; no one knows; neither the oldest natives, nor their ancestors
who have lain long buried in the groves of the dead, have ever seen them green.

Glenarvan as he went along kept his eye fixed on the gray sky, on which the
smallest branch of the gum-trees was sharply defined. Ayrton was astonished not
to discover the horses and bullocks where he had left them the preceding night.
They could not have wandered far with the hobbles on their legs.


They looked over the wood, but saw no signs of them, and Ayrton returned
to the banks of the river, where magnificent mimosas were growing. He gave a
cry well known to his team, but there was no reply. The quartermaster seemed
uneasy, and his companions looked at him with disappointed faces. An hour had
passed in vain endeavors, and Glenarvan was about to go back to the wagon,
when a neigh struck on his ear, and immediately after a bellow.

"They are there!" cried John Mangles, slipping between the tall branches of
gastrolobium, which grew high enough to hide a whole flock. Glenarvan,
Mulrady, and Ayrton darted after him, and speedily shared his stupefaction at the
spectacle which met their gaze.

Two bullocks and three horses lay stretched on the ground, struck down like
the rest. Their bodies were already cold, and a flock of half-starved looking
ravens croaking among the mimosas were watching the unexpected prey.
Glenarvan and his party gazed at each other and Wilson could not keep back the
oath that rose to his lips.

"What do you mean, Wilson?" said Glenarvan, with difficulty controlling
himself. "Ayrton, bring away the bullock and the horse we have left; they will
have to serve us now.”

"If the wagon were not sunk in the mud," said John Mangles, "these two
animals, by making short journeys, would be able to take us to the coast; so we
must get the vehicle out, cost what it may."

"We will try, John," replied Glenarvan. "Let us go back now, or they will be
uneasy at our long absence."

Ayrton removed the hobbles from the bullock and Mulrady from the horse,
and they began to return to the encampment, following the winding margin of
the river. In half an hour they rejoined Paganel, and McNabbs, and the ladies,
and told them of this fresh disaster.

"Upon my honor, Ayrton," the Major could not help saying, "it is a pity that
you hadn't had the shoeing of all our beasts when we forded the Wimerra."

"Why, sir?" asked Ayrton.

"Because out of all our horses only the one your blacksmith had in his hands
has escaped the common fate."

"That's true," said John Mangles. "It's strange it happens so."

"A mere chance, and nothing more,” replied the quartermaster, looking
firmly at the Major.

Major McNabbs bit his lips as if to keep back something

V. IV Verne he was about to say. Glenarvan and the rest waited for him to
speak out his thoughts, but the Major was silent, and went up to the wagon,
which Ayrton was examining.


"What was he going to say. Mangles?" asked Glenarvan.

"I don't know," replied the young captain; "but the Major is not at all a man
to speak without reason."

"No, John," said Lady Helena. "McNabbs must have suspicions about
Ayrton."

"Suspicions!" exclaimed Paganel, shrugging his shoulders.

"And what can they be?" asked Glenarvan. "Does he suppose him capable of
having killed our horses and bullocks? And for what purpose? Is not Ayrton's
interest identical with our own?"

"You are right, dear Edward," said Lady Helena! "and what is more, the
quartermaster has given us incontestable proofs of his devotion ever since the
commencement of the journey.”

"Certainly he has," replied Mangles; "but still, what could the Major mean? I
wish he would speak his mind plainly out."

"Does he suppose him acting in concert with the convicts?" asked Paganel,
imprudently.

"What convicts?" said Miss Grant.

"Monsieur Paganel is making a mistake," replied John Mangles, instantly.
"He knows very well there are no convicts in the province of Victoria."

"Ah, that is true," returned Paganel, trying to get out of his unlucky speech.
"Whatever had I got in my head? Convicts! who ever heard of convicts being in
Australia? Besides, they would scarcely have disembarked before they would
turn into good, honest men. The climate, you know, Miss Mary, the regenerative
climate--"

Here the poor SAVANT stuck fast, unable to get further, like the wagon in
the mud. Lady Helena looked at him in surprise, which quite deprived him of his
remaining sang-froid; but seeing his embarrassment, she took Mary away to the
side of the tent, where M. Olbinett was laying out an elaborate breakfast.

"I deserve to be transported myself," said Paganel, woefully.

"T think so," said Glenarvan.

And after this grave reply, which completely overwhelmed the worthy
geographer, Glenarvan and John Mangles went toward the wagon.

They found Ayrton and the two sailors doing their best to get it out of the
deep ruts, and the bullock and horse, yoked together, were straining every
muscle. Wilson and Mulrady were pushing the wheels, and the quartermaster
urging on the team with voice and goad; but the heavy vehicle did not stir, the
clay, already dry, held it as firmly as if sealed by some hydraulic cement.

John Mangles had the clay watered to loosen it, but it was of no use. After
renewed vigorous efforts, men and animals stopped. Unless the vehicle was


W


taken to pieces, it would be impossible to extricate it from the mud; but they had
no tools for the purpose, and could not attempt such a task.

However, Ayrton, who was for conquering this obstacle at all costs, was
about to commence afresh, when Glenarvan stopped him by saying: "Enough,
Ayrton, enough. We must husband the strength of our remaining horse and
bullock. If we are obliged to continue our journey on foot, the one animal can
carry the ladies and the other the provisions. They may thus still be of great
service to us."

"Very well, my Lord," replied the quartermaster, un-yoking the exhausted
beasts.

"Now, friends," added Glenarvan, "let us return to the encampment and
deliberately examine our situation, and determine on our course of action."

After a tolerably good breakfast to make up for their bad night, the
discussion was opened, and every one of the party was asked to give his opinion.
The first point was to ascertain their exact position, and this was referred to
Paganel, who informed them, with his customary rigorous accuracy, that the
expedition had been stopped on the 37th parallel, in longitude 147 degrees 53
minutes, on the banks of the Snowy River.

"What is the exact longitude of Twofold Bay?" asked Glenarvan.

"One hundred and fifty degrees," replied Paganel; "two degrees seven
minutes distant from this, and that is equal to seventy-five miles."

"And Melbourne is?"

"Two hundred miles off at least."

"Very good. Our position being then settled, what is best to do?"

The response was unanimous to get to the coast without delay. Lady Helena
and Mary Grant undertook to go five miles a day. The courageous ladies did not
shrink, if necessary, from walking the whole distance between the Snowy River
and Twofold Bay.

"You are a brave traveling companion, dear Helena," said Lord Glenarvan.
"But are we sure of finding at the bay all we want when we get there?"

"Without the least doubt," replied Paganel. "Eden is a municipality which
already numbers many years in existence; its port must have frequent
communication with Melbourne. I suppose even at Delegete, on the Victoria
frontier, thirty-five miles from here, we might revictual our expedition, and find
fresh means of transport."

"And the DUNCAN?" asked Ayrton. "Don't you think it advisable to send for
her to come to the bay?"

"What do you think, John?" said Glenarvan.

"I don't think your lordship should be in any hurry about it," replied the


young captain, after brief reflection. "There will be time enough to give orders to
Tom Austin, and summon him to the coast."

"That's quite certain," added Paganel.

"You see," said John, "in four or five days we shall reach Eden."

"Four or five days!" repeated Ayrton, shaking his head; "say fifteen or
twenty, Captain, if you don't want to repent your mistake when it is too late."

"Fifteen or twenty days to go seventy-five miles?" cried Glenarvan.

"At the least, my Lord. You are going to traverse the most difficult portion of
Victoria, a desert, where everything is wanting, the squatters say; plains covered
with scrub, where is no beaten track and no stations. You will have to walk
hatchet or torch in hand, and, believe me, that's not quick work."

Ayrton had spoken in a firm tone, and Paganel, at whom all the others looked
inquiringly, nodded his head in token of his agreement in opinion with the
quartermaster.

But John Mangles said, "Well, admitting these difficulties, in fifteen days at
most your Lordship can send orders to the DUNCAN."

"IT have to add," said Ayrton, "that the principal difficulties are not the
obstacles in the road, but the Snowy River has to be crossed, and most probably
we must wait till the water goes down."

"Wait!" cried John. "Is there no ford?"

"T think not," replied Ayrton. "This morning I was looking for some practical
crossing, but could not find any. It is unusual to meet with such a tumultuous
river at this time of the year, and it is a fatality against which I am powerless."

"Is this Snowy River wide?" asked Lady Helena.

"Wide and deep, Madam," replied Ayrton; "a mile wide, with an impetuous
current. A good swimmer could not go over without danger."

"Let us build a boat then," said Robert, who never stuck at anything. "We
have only to cut down a tree and hollow it out, and get in and be off."

"He's going ahead, this boy of Captain Grant's!" said Paganel.

"And he's right," returned John Mangles. "We shall be forced to come to that,
and I think it is useless to waste our time in idle discussion."

"What do you think of it, Ayrton?" asked Glenarvan seriously.

"I think, my Lord, that a month hence, unless some help arrives, we shall
find ourselves still on the banks of the Snowy."

"Well, then, have you any better plan to propose?" said John Mangles,
somewhat impatiently.

"Yes, that the DUNCAN should leave Melbourne, and go to the east coast."

"Oh, always the same story! And how could her presence at the bay facilitate
our means of getting there?"


Ayrton waited an instant before answering, and then said, rather evasively: "I
have no wish to obtrude my opinions. What I do is for our common good, and I
am ready to start the moment his honor gives the signal." And he crossed his
arms and was silent.

"That is no reply, Ayrton," said Glenarvan. "Tell us your plan, and we will
discuss it. What is it you propose?"

Ayrton replied in a calm tone of assurance: "I propose that we should not
venture beyond the Snowy in our present condition. It is here we must wait till
help comes, and this help can only come from the DUNCAN. Let us camp here,
where we have provisions, and let one of us take your orders to Tom Austin to
go on to Twofold Bay."

This unexpected proposition was greeted with astonishment, and by John
Mangles with openly-expressed opposition.

"Meantime," continued Ayrton, "either the river will get lower, and allow us
to ford it, or we shall have time to make a canoe. This is the plan I submit for
your Lordship's approval."

"Well, Ayrton," replied Glenarvan, "your plan is worthy of serious
consideration. The worst thing about it is the delay it would cause; but it would
save us great fatigue, and perhaps danger. What do you think of it, friends?"

"Speak your mind, McNabbs," said Lady Helena. "Since the beginning of the
discussion you have been only a listener, and very sparing of your words."

"Since you ask my advice," said the Major, "I will give it you frankly. I think
Ayrton has spoken wisely and well, and I side with him."

Such a reply was hardly looked for, as hitherto the Major had been strongly
opposed to Ayrton's project. Ayrton himself was surprised, and gave a hasty
glance at the Major. However, Paganel, Lady Helena, and the sailors were all of
the same way of thinking; and since McNabbs had come over to his opinion,
Glenarvan decided that the quartermaster's plan should be adopted in principle.

"And now, John," he added, "don't you think yourself it would be prudent to
encamp here, on the banks of the river Snowy, till we can get some means of
conveyance."

"Yes," replied John Mangles, "if our messenger can get across the Snowy
when we cannot.”

All eyes were turned on the quartermaster, who said, with the air of a man
who knew what he was about: "The messenger will not cross the river."

"Indeed!" said John Mangles.

"He will simply go back to the Lucknow Road which leads straight to
Melbourne."

"Go two hundred and fifty miles on foot!" cried the young Captain.


"On horseback," replied Ayrton. "There is one horse sound enough at
present. It will only be an affair of four days. Allow the DUNCAN two days
more to get to the bay and twenty hours to get back to the camp, and in a week
the messenger can be back with the entire crew of the vessel."

The Major nodded approvingly as Ayrton spoke, to the profound
astonishment of John Mangles; but as every one was in favor of the plan all there
was to do was to carry it out as quickly as possible.

"Now, then, friends," said Glenarvan, "we must settle who is to be our
messenger. It will be a fatiguing, perilous mission. I would not conceal the fact
from you. Who is disposed, then, to sacrifice himself for his companions and
carry our instructions to Melbourne?"

Wilson and Mulrady, and also Paganel, John Mangles and Robert instantly
offered their services. John particularly insisted that he should be intrusted with
the business; but Ayrton, who had been silent till that moment, now said: "With
your Honor's permission I will go myself. I am accustomed to all the country
round. Many a time I have been across worse parts. I can go through where
another would stick. I ask then, for the good of all, that I may be sent to
Melbourne. A word from you will accredit me with your chief officer, and in six
days I guarantee the DUNCAN shall be in Twofold Bay."

"That's well spoken," replied Glenarvan. "You are a clever, daring fellow,
and you will succeed."

It was quite evident the quartermaster was the fittest man for the mission. All
the rest withdrew from the competition. John Mangles made this one last
objection, that the presence of Ayrton was necessary to discover traces of the
BRITANNIA or Harry Grant. But the Major justly observed that the expedition
would remain on the banks of the Snowy till the return of Ayrton, that they had
no idea of resuming their search without him, and that consequently his absence
would not in the least prejudice the Captain's interests.

"Well, go, Ayrton," said Glenarvan. "Be as quick as you can, and come back
by Eden to our camp."

A gleam of satisfaction shot across the quartermaster's face. He turned away
his head, but not before John Mangles caught the look and instinctively felt his
old distrust of Ayrton revive.

The quartermaster made immediate preparations for departure, assisted by
the two sailors, one of whom saw to the horse and the other to the provisions.
Glenarvan, meantime, wrote his letter for Tom Austin. He ordered his chief
officer to repair without delay to Twofold Bay. He introduced the quartermaster
to him as a man worthy of all confidence. On arriving at the coast, Tom was to
dispatch a detachment of sailors from the yacht under his orders.


Glenarvan was just at this part of his letter, when McNabbs, who was
following him with his eyes, asked him in a singular tone, how he wrote Ayrton's
name.

"Why, as it is pronounced, of course," replied Glenarvan.

"It is a mistake," replied the Major quietly. "He pronounces it AYRTON, but
he writes it Ben Joyce!"


CHAPTER XVII THE PLOT UNVEILED


THE revelation of Tom Ayrton's name was like a clap of thunder. Ayrton had
started up quickly and grasped his revolver. A report was heard, and Glenarvan
fell wounded by a ball. Gunshots resounded at the same time outside.

John Mangles and the sailors, after their first surprise, would have seized
Ben Joyce; but the bold convict had already disappeared and rejoined his gang
scattered among the gum-trees.

The tent was no shelter against the balls. It was necessary to beat a retreat.
Glenarvan was slightly wounded, but could stand up.

"To the wagon--to the wagon!" cried John Mangles, dragging Lady Helena
and Mary Grant along, who were soon in safety behind the thick curtains.

John and the Major, and Paganel and the sailors seized their carbines in
readiness to repulse the convicts. Glenarvan and Robert went in beside the
ladies, while Olbinett rushed to the common defense.

These events occurred with the rapidity of lightning. John Mangles watched
the skirts of the wood attentively. The reports had ceased suddenly on the arrival
of Ben Joyce; profound silence had succeeded the noisy fusillade. A few wreaths
of white smoke were still curling over the tops of the gum trees. The tall tufts of
gastrolobium were motionless. All signs of attack had disappeared.

The Major and John Mangles examined the wood closely as far as the great
trees; the place was abandoned. Numerous footmarks were there and several
half-burned caps were lying smoking on the ground. The Major, like a prudent
man, extinguished these carefully, for a spark would be enough to kindle a
tremendous conflagration in this forest of dry trees.

"The convicts have disappeared!" said John Mangles.

"Yes," replied the Major; "and the disappearance of them makes me uneasy. I
prefer seeing them face to face. Better to meet a tiger on the plain than a serpent
in the grass. Let us beat the bushes all round the wagon."

The Major and John hunted all round the country, but there was not a convict
to be seen from the edge of the wood right down to the river. Ben Joyce and his
gang seemed to have flown away like a flock of marauding birds. It was too
sudden a disappearance to let the travelers feel perfectly safe; consequently they
resolved to keep a sharp lookout. The wagon, a regular fortress buried in mud,
was made the center of the camp, and two men mounted guard round it, who
were relieved hour by hour.

The first care of Lady Helena and Mary was to dress Glenarvan's wound.


Lady Helena rushed toward him in terror, as he fell down struck by Ben Joyce's
ball. Controlling her agony, the courageous woman helped her husband into the
wagon. Then his shoulder was bared, and the Major found, on examination, that
the ball had only gone into the flesh, and there was no internal lesion. Neither
bone nor muscle appeared to be injured. The wound bled profusely, but
Glenarvan could use his fingers and forearm; and consequently there was no
occasion for any uneasiness about the issue. As soon as his shoulder was
dressed, he would not allow any more fuss to be made about himself, but at once
entered on the business in hand.

All the party, except Mulrady and Wilson, who were on guard, were brought
into the wagon, and the Major was asked to explain how this DENOUEMENT
had come about.

Before commencing his recital, he told Lady Helena about the escape of the
convicts at Perth, and their appearance in Victoria; as also their complicity in the
railway catastrophe. He handed her the Australian and New Zealand Gazette
they had bought in Seymour, and added that a reward had been offered by the
police for the apprehension of Ben Joyce, a redoubtable bandit, who had become
a noted character during the last eighteen months, for doing deeds of villainy and
crime.

But how had McNabbs found out that Ayrton and Ben Joyce were one and
the same individual? This was the mystery to be unraveled, and the Major soon
explained it.

Ever since their first meeting, McNabbs had felt an instinctive distrust of the
quartermaster. Two or three insignificant facts, a hasty glance exchanged
between him and the blacksmith at the Wimerra River, his unwillingness to cross
towns and villages, his persistence about getting the DUNCAN summoned to the
coast, the strange death of the animals entrusted to his care, and, lastly, a want of
frankness in all his behavior--all these details combined had awakened the
Major's suspicions.

However, he could not have brought any direct accusation against him till the
events of the preceding evening had occurred. He then told of his experience.

McNabbs, slipping between the tall shrubs, got within reach of the
suspicious shadows he had noticed about half a mile away from the
encampment. The phosphorescent furze emitted a faint light, by which he could
discern three men examining marks on the ground, and one of the three was the
blacksmith of Black Point.

"Tt is them!' said one of the men. 'Yes,' replied another, 'there is the trefoil on
the mark of the horseshoe. It has been like that since the Wimerra.' 'All the
horses are dead." 'The poison is not far off.' "There is enough to kill a regiment of


cavalry.’ 'A useful plant this gastrolobium.'

"T heard them say this to each other, and then they were quite silent; but I did
not know enough yet, so I followed them. Soon the conversation began again.
'He is a clever fellow, this Ben Joyce,’ said the blacksmith. 'A capital
quartermaster, with his invention of shipwreck." 'If his project succeeds, it will be
a stroke of fortune.’ 'He is a very devil, is this Ayrton.’ 'Call him Ben Joyce, for
he has well earned his name.' And then the scoundrels left the forest.

"I had all the information I wanted now, and came back to the camp quite
convinced, begging Paganel's pardon, that Australia does not reform criminals."

This was all the Major's story, and his companions sat silently thinking over
it.

"Then Ayrton has dragged us here," said Glenarvan, pale with anger, "on
purpose to rob and assassinate us."

"For nothing else," replied the Major; "and ever since we left the Wimerra,
his gang has been on our track and spying on us, waiting for a favorable
opportunity."

"Yes."

"Then the wretch was never one of the sailors on the BRITANNIA; he had
stolen the name of Ayrton and the shipping papers."

They were all looking at McNabbs for an answer, for he must have put the
question to himself already.

"There is no great certainty about the matter," he replied, in his usual calm
voice; "but in my opinion the man's name is really Ayrton. Ben Joyce is his nom
de guerre. It is an incontestible fact that he knew Harry Grant, and also that he
was quartermaster on the BRITANNIA. These facts were proved by the minute
details given us by Ayrton, and are corroborated by the conversation between the
convicts, which I repeated to you. We need not lose ourselves in vain
conjectures, but consider it as certain that Ben Joyce is Ayrton, and that Ayrton is
Ben Joyce; that is to say, one of the crew of the BRITANNIA has turned leader
of the convict gang."

The explanations of McNabbs were accepted without discussion.

"Now, then," said Glenarvan, "will you tell us how and why Harry Grant's
quartermaster comes to be in Australia?"

"How, I don't know," replied McNabbs; "and the police declare they are as
ignorant on the subject as myself. Why, it is impossible to say; that is a mystery
which the future may explain."

"The police are not even aware of Ayrton's identity with Ben Joyce," said
John Mangles.

"You are right, John," replied the Major, "and this circumstance would throw


light on their search."

"Then, I suppose," said Lady Helena, "the wicked wretch had got work on
Paddy O'Moore's farm with a criminal intent?"

"There is not the least doubt of it. He was planning some evil design against
the Irishman, when a better chance presented itself. Chance led us into his
presence. He heard Paganel's story and all about the shipwreck, and the
audacious fellow determined to act his part immediately. The expedition was
decided on. At the Wimerra he found means of communicating with one of his
gang, the blacksmith of Black Point, and left traces of our journey which might
be easily recognized. The gang followed us. A poisonous plant enabled them
gradually to kill our bullocks and horses. At the right moment he sunk us in the
marshes of the Snowy, and gave us into the hands of his gang."

Such was the history of Ben Joyce. The Major had shown him up in his
character--a bold and formidable criminal. His manifestly evil designs called for
the utmost vigilance on the part of Glenarvan. Happily the unmasked bandit was
less to be feared than the traitor.

But one serious consequence must come out of this revelation; no one had
thought of it yet except Mary Grant. John Mangles was the first to notice her
pale, despairing face; he understood what was passing in her mind at a glance.

"Miss Mary! Miss Mary!" he cried; "you are crying!"

"Crying, my child!" said Lady Helena.

"My father, madam, my father!" replied the poor girl.

She could say no more, but the truth flashed on every mind. They all knew
the cause of her grief, and why tears fell from her eyes and her father's name
came to her lips.

The discovery of Ayrton's treachery had destroyed all hope; the convict had
invented a shipwreck to entrap Glenarvan. In the conversation overheard by
McNabbs, the convicts had plainly said that the BRITANNIA had never been
wrecked on the rocks in Twofold Bay. Harry Grant had never set foot on the
Australian continent!

A second time they had been sent on the wrong track by an erroneous
interpretation of the document. Gloomy silence fell on the whole party at the
sight of the children's sorrow, and no one could find a cheering word to say.
Robert was crying in his sister's arms. Paganel muttered in a tone of vexation:
"That unlucky document! It may boast of having half-crazed a dozen peoples'
wits!" The worthy geographer was in such a rage with himself, that he struck his
forehead as if he would smash it in.

Glenarvan went out to Mulrady and Wilson, who were keeping watch.
Profound silence reigned over the plain between the wood and the river. Ben


Joyce and his band must be at considerable distance, for the atmosphere was in
such a state of complete torpor that the slightest sound would have been heard. It
was evident, from the flocks of birds on the lower branches of the trees, and the
kangaroos feeding quietly on the young shoots, and a couple of emus whose
confiding heads passed between the great clumps of bushes, that those peaceful
solitudes were untroubled by the presence of human beings.

"You have neither seen nor heard anything for the last hour?" said Glenarvan
to the two sailors.

"Nothing whatever, your honor," replied Wilson. "The convicts must be
miles away from here."

"They were not in numbers enough to attack us, I suppose," added Mulrady.
"Ben Joyce will have gone to recruit his party, with some bandits like himself,
among the bushrangers who may be lurking about the foot of the Alps."

"That is probably the case, Mulrady," replied Glenarvan. "The rascals are
cowards; they know we are armed, and well armed too. Perhaps they are waiting
for nightfall to commence the attack. We must redouble our watchfulness. Oh, if
we could only get out of this bog, and down the coast; but this swollen river bars
our passage. I would pay its weight in gold for a raft which would carry us over
to the other side."

"Why does not your honor give orders for a raft to be constructed? We have
plenty of wood."

"No, Wilson," replied Glenarvan; "this Snowy is not a river, it is an
impassable torrent."

John Mangles, the Major, and Paganel just then came out of the wagon on
purpose to examine the state of the river. They found it still so swollen by the
heavy rain that the water was a foot above the level. It formed an impetuous
current, like the American rapids. To venture over that foaming current and that
rushing flood, broken into a thousand eddies and hollows and gulfs, was
impossible.

John Mangles declared the passage impracticable. "But we must not stay
here," he added, "without attempting anything. What we were going to do before
Ayrton's treachery is still more necessary now."

"What do you mean, John?" asked Glenarvan.

"I mean that our need is urgent, and that since we cannot go to Twofold Bay,
we must go to Melbourne. We have still one horse. Give it to me, my Lord, and I
will go to Melbourne.”

"But that will be a dangerous venture, John," said Glenarvan. "Not to speak
of the perils of a journey of two hundred miles over an unknown country, the
road and the by-ways will be guarded by the accomplices of Ben Joyce."


"I know it, my Lord, but I know also that things can't stay long as they are;
Ayrton only asked a week's absence to fetch the crew of the DUNCAN, and I
will be back to the Snowy River in six days. Well, my Lord, what are your
commands?"

"Before Glenarvan decides," said Paganel, "I must make an observation.
That some one must go to Melbourne is evident, but that John Mangles should
be the one to expose himself to the risk, cannot be. He is the captain of the
DUNCAN, and must be careful of his life. I will go instead."

"That is all very well, Paganel,” said the Major; "but why should you be the
one to go?"

"Are we not here?" said Mulrady and Wilson.

"And do you think," replied McNabbs, "that a journey of two hundred miles
on horseback frightens me."

"Friends," said Glenarvan, "one of us must go, so let it be decided by
drawing lots. Write all our names, Paganel."

"Not yours, my Lord," said John Mangles.

"And why not?"

"What! separate you from Lady Helena, and before your wound is healed,
too!"

"Glenarvan," said Paganel, "you cannot leave the expedition."

"No," added the Major. "Your place is here, Edward, you ought not to go."

"Danger is involved in it," said Glenarvan, "and I will take my share along
with the rest. Write the names, Paganel, and put mine among them, and I hope
the lot may fall on me."

His will was obeyed. The names were written, and the lots drawn. Fate fixed
on Mulrady. The brave sailor shouted hurrah! and said: "My Lord, I am ready to
start." Glenarvan pressed his hand, and then went back to the wagon, leaving
John Mangles and the Major on watch.

Lady Helena was informed of the determination to send a message to
Melbourne, and that they had drawn lots who should go, and Mulrady had been
chosen. Lady Helena said a few kind words to the brave sailor, which went
straight to his heart. Fate could hardly have chosen a better man, for he was not
only brave and intelligent, but robust and superior to all fatigue.

Mulrady's departure was fixed for eight o'clock, immediately after the short
twilight. Wilson undertook to get the horse ready. He had a project in his head of
changing the horse's left shoe, for one off the horses that had died in the night.
This would prevent the convicts from tracking Mulrady, or following him, as
they were not mounted.

While Wilson was arranging this, Glenarvan got his letter ready for Tom


Austin, but his wounded arm troubled him, and he asked Paganel to write it for
him. The SAVANT was so absorbed in one fixed idea that he seemed hardly to
know what he was about. In all this succession of vexations, it must be said the
document was always uppermost in Paganel's mind. He was always worrying
himself about each word, trying to discover some new meaning, and losing the
wrong interpretation of it, and going over and over himself in perplexities.

He did not hear Glenarvan when he first spoke, but on the request being
made a second time, he said: "Ah, very well. I'm ready."

While he spoke he was mechanically getting paper from his note-book. He
tore a blank page off, and sat down pencil in hand to write.

Glenarvan began to dictate as follows: "Order to Tom Austin, Chief Officer,
to get to sea without delay, and bring the DUNCAN to--"

Paganel was just finishing the last word, when his eye chanced to fall on the
Australian and New Zealand Gazette lying on the ground. The paper was so
folded that only the last two syllables of the title were visible. Paganel's pencil
stopped, and he seemed to become oblivious of Glenarvan and the letter entirely,
till his friends called out: "Come, Paganel!"

"Ah!" said the geographer, with a loud exclamation.

"What is the matter?" asked the Major.

"Nothing, nothing,” replied Paganel. Then he muttered to himself, "Aland!
aland! aland!"

He had got up and seized the newspaper. He shook it in his efforts to keep
back the words that involuntarily rose to his lips.

Lady Helena, Mary, Robert, and Glenarvan gazed at him in astonishment, at
a loss to understand this unaccountable agitation. Paganel looked as if a sudden
fit of insanity had come over him. But his excitement did not last. He became by
degrees calmer. The gleam of joy that shone in his eyes died away. He sat down
again, and said quietly:

"When you please, my Lord, I am ready." Glenarvan resumed his dictation at
once, and the letter was soon completed. It read as follows: "Order to Tom
Austin to go to sea without delay; and take the DUNCAN to Melbourne by the
37th degree of latitude to the eastern coast of Australia."

"Of Australia?" said Paganel. "Ah yes! of Australia."

Then he finished the letter, and gave it to Glenarvan to sign, who went
through the necessary formality as well as he could, and closed and sealed the
letter. Paganel, whose hand still trembled with emotion, directed it thus: "Tom
Austin, Chief Officer on board the Yacht DUNCAN, Melbourne."

Then he got up and went out of the wagon, gesticulating and repeating the
incomprehensible words:


"Aland aland! aland!"


CHAPTER XVIIT FOUR DAYS OF ANGUISH


THE rest of the day passed on without any further incident. All the
preparations for Mulrady's journey were completed, and the brave sailor rejoiced
in being able to give his Lordship this proof of devotion.

Paganel had recovered his usual sang-froid and manners. His look, indeed,
betrayed his preoccupation, but he seemed resolved to keep it secret. No doubt
he had strong reasons for this course of action, for the Major heard him
repeating, like a man struggling with himself: "No, no, they would not believe it;
and, besides, what good would it be? It is too late!"

Having taken this resolution, he busied himself with giving Mulrady the
necessary directions for getting to Melbourne, and showed him his way on the
map. All the TRACKS, that is to say, paths through the prairie, came out on the
road to Lucknow. This road, after running right down to the coast took a sudden
bend in the direction of Melbourne. This was the route that must be followed
steadily, for it would not do to attempt a short cut across an almost unknown
country. Nothing, consequently, could be more simple. Mulrady could not lose
his way.

As to dangers, there were none after he had gone a few miles beyond the
encampment, out of the reach of Ben Joyce and his gang. Once past their hiding
place, Mulrady was certain of soon being able to outdistance the convicts, and
execute his important mission successfully.

At six o'clock they all dined together. The rain was falling in torrents. The
tent was not protection enough, and the whole party had to take refuge in the
wagon. This was a sure refuge. The clay kept it firmly imbedded in the soil, like
a fortress resting on sure foundations. The arsenal was composed of seven
carbines and seven revolvers, and could stand a pretty long siege, for they had
plenty of ammunition and provisions. But before six days were over, the
DUNCAN would anchor in Twofold Bay, and twenty-four hours after her crew
would reach the other shore of the Snowy River; and should the passage still
remain impracticable, the convicts at any rate would be forced to retire before
the increased strength. But all depended on Mulrady's success in his perilous
enterprise.

At eight o'clock it got very dark; now was the time to start. The horse
prepared for Mulrady was brought out. His feet, by way of extra precaution,
were wrapped round with cloths, so that they could not make the least noise on
the ground. The animal seemed tired, and yet the safety of all depended on his


strength and surefootedness. The Major advised Mulrady to let him go gently as
soon as he got past the convicts. Better delay half-a-day than not arrive safely.

John Mangles gave his sailor a revolver, which he had loaded with the
utmost care. This is a formidable weapon in the hand of a man who does not
tremble, for six shots fired in a few seconds would easily clear a road infested
with criminals. Mulrady seated himself in the saddle ready to start.

"Here is the letter you are to give to Tom Austin," said Glenarvan. "Don't let
him lose an hour. He is to sail for Twofold Bay at once; and if he does not find
us there, if we have not managed to cross the Snowy, let him come on to us
without delay. Now go, my brave sailor, and God be with you."

He shook hands with him, and bade him good-by; and so did Lady Helena
and Mary Grant. A more timorous man than the sailor would have shrunk back a
little from setting out on such a dark, raining night on an errand so full of danger,
across vast unknown wilds. But his farewells were calmly spoken, and he
speedily disappeared down a path which skirted the wood.

At the same moment the gusts of wind redoubled their violence. The high
branches of the eucalyptus clattered together noisily, and bough after bough fell
on the wet ground. More than one great tree, with no living sap, but still standing
hitherto, fell with a crash during this storm. The wind howled amid the cracking
wood, and mingled its moans with the ominous roaring of the rain. The heavy
clouds, driving along toward the east, hung on the ground like rays of vapor, and
deep, cheerless gloom intensified the horrors of the night.

The travelers went back into the wagon immediately Mulrady had gone.
Lady Helena, Mary Grant, Glenarvan and Paganel occupied the first
compartment, which had been hermetically closed. The second was occupied by
Olbinett, Wilson and Robert. The Major and John Mangles were on duty outside.
This precaution was necessary, for an attack on the part of the convicts would be
easy enough, and therefore probable enough.

The two faithful guardians kept close watch, bearing philosophically the rain
and wind that beat on their faces. They tried to pierce through the darkness so
favorable to ambushes, for nothing could be heard but the noise of the tempest,
the sough of the wind, the rattling branches, falling trees, and roaring of the
unchained waters.

At times the wind would cease for a few moments, as if to take breath.
Nothing was audible but the moan of the Snowy River, as it flowed between the
motionless reeds and the dark curtain of gum trees. The silence seemed deeper in
these momentary lulls, and the Major and John Mangles listened attentively.

During one of these calms a sharp whistle reached them. John Mangles went
hurriedly up to the Major. "You heard that?" he asked.


"Yes," said McNabbs. "Is it man or beast?"

"A man," replied John Mangles.

And then both listened. The mysterious whistle was repeated, and answered
by a kind of report, but almost indistinguishable, for the storm was raging with
renewed violence. McNabbs and John Mangles could not hear themselves speak.
They went for comfort under the shelter of the wagon.

At this moment the leather curtains were raised and Glenarvan rejoined his
two companions. He too had heard this ill-boding whistle, and the report which
echoed under the tilt. "Which way was it?" asked he.

"There," said John, pointing to the dark track in the direction taken by
Mulrady.

"How far?"

"The wind brought it; I should think, three or four miles, at least."

"Come," said Glenarvan, putting his gun on his shoulder.

"No," said the Major. "It is a decoy to get us away from the wagon."

"But if Mulrady has even now fallen beneath the blows of these rascals?"
exclaimed Glenarvan, seizing McNabbs by the hand.

"We shall know by tomorrow," said the Major, coolly, determined to prevent
Glenarvan from taking a step which was equally rash and futile.

"You cannot leave the camp, my Lord," said John. "I will go alone."

"You will do nothing of the kind!" cried McNabbs, energetically. "Do you
want to have us killed one by one to diminish our force, and put us at the mercy
of these wretches? If Mulrady has fallen a victim to them, it is a misfortune that
must not be repeated. Mulrady was sent, chosen by chance. If the lot had fallen
to me, I should have gone as he did; but I should neither have asked nor
expected assistance."

In restraining Glenarvan and John Mangles, the Major was right in every
aspect of the case. To attempt to follow the sailor, to run in the darkness of night
among the convicts in their leafy ambush was madness, and more than that--it
was useless. Glenarvan's party was not so numerous that it could afford to
sacrifice another member of it.

Still Glenarvan seemed as if he could not yield; his hand was always on his
carbine. He wandered about the wagon, and bent a listening ear to the faintest
sound. The thought that one of his men was perhaps mortally wounded,
abandoned to his fate, calling in vain on those for whose sake he had gone forth,
was a torture to him. McNabbs was not sure that he should be able to restrain
him, or if Glenarvan, carried away by his feelings, would not run into the arms
of Ben Joyce.

"Edward," said he, "be calm. Listen to me as a friend. Think of Lady Helena,


of Mary Grant, of all who are left. And, besides, where would you go? Where
would you find Mulrady? He must have been attacked two miles off. In what
direction? Which track would you follow?"

At that very moment, as if to answer the Major, a cry of distress was heard.

"Listen!" said Glenarvan.

This cry came from the same quarter as the report, but less than a quarter of a
mile off.

Glenarvan, repulsing McNabbs, was already on the track, when at three
hundred paces from the wagon they heard the exclamation: "Help! help!"

The voice was plaintive and despairing. John Mangles and the Major sprang
toward the spot. A few seconds after they perceived among the scrub a human
form dragging itself along the ground and uttering mournful groans. It was
Mulrady, wounded, apparently dying; and when his companions raised him they
felt their hands bathed in blood.

The rain came down with redoubled violence, and the wind raged among the
branches of the dead trees. In the pelting storm, Glenarvan, the Major and John
Mangles transported the body of Mulrady.

On their arrival everyone got up. Paganel, Robert, Wilson and Olbinett left
the wagon, and Lady Helena gave up her compartment to poor Mulrady. The
Major removed the poor fellow's flannel shirt, which was dripping with blood
and rain. He soon found the wound; it was a stab in the right side.

McNabbs dressed it with great skill. He could not tell whether the weapon
had touched any vital part. An intermittent jet of scarlet blood flowed from it;
the patient's paleness and weakness showed that he was seriously injured. The
Major washed the wound first with fresh water and then closed the orifice; after
this he put on a thick pad of lint, and then folds of scraped linen held firmly in
place with a bandage. He succeeded in stopping the hemorrhage. Mulrady was
laid on his side, with his head and chest well raised, and Lady Helena succeeded
in making him swallow a few drops of water.

After about a quarter of an hour, the wounded man, who till then had lain
motionless, made a slight movement. His eyes unclosed, his lips muttered
incoherent words, and the Major, bending toward him, heard him repeating: "My
Lord--the letter--Ben Joyce."

The Major repeated these words, and looked at his companions. What did
Mulrady mean? Ben Joyce had been the attacking party, of course; but why?
Surely for the express purpose of intercepting him, and preventing his arrival at
the DUNCAN. This letter--

Glenarvan searched Mulrady's pockets. The letter addressed to Tom Austin
was gone!


The night wore away amid anxiety and distress; every moment, they feared,
would be poor Mulrady's last. He suffered from acute fever. The Sisters of
Charity, Lady Helena and Mary Grant, never left him. Never was patient so well
tended, nor by such sympathetic hands.

Day came, and the rain had ceased. Great clouds filled the sky still; the
ground was strewn with broken branches; the marly soil, soaked by the torrents
of rain, had yielded still more; the approaches to the wagon became difficult, but
it could not sink any deeper.

John Mangles, Paganel, and Glenarvan went, as soon as it was light enough,
to reconnoiter in the neighborhood of the encampment. They revisited the track,
which was still stained with blood. They saw no vestige of Ben Joyce, nor of his
band. They penetrated as far as the scene of the attack. Here two corpses lay on
the ground, struck down by Mulrady's bullets. One was the blacksmith of
Blackpoint. His face, already changed by death, was a dreadful spectacle.
Glenarvan searched no further. Prudence forbade him to wander from the camp.
He returned to the wagon, deeply absorbed by the critical position of affairs.

"We must not think of sending another messenger to Melbourne,” said he.

"But we must,” said John Mangles; "and I must try to pass where my sailor
could not succeed."

"No, John! it is out of the question. You have not even a horse for the
journey, which is full two hundred miles!"

This was true, for Mulrady's horse, the only one that remained, had not
returned. Had he fallen during the attack on his rider, or was he straying in the
bush, or had the convicts carried him off?

"Come what will," replied Glenarvan, "we will not separate again. Let us
wait a week, or a fortnight, till the Snowy falls to its normal level. We can then
reach Twofold Bay by short stages, and from there we can send on to the
DUNCAN, by a safer channel, the order to meet us."

"That seems the only plan," said Paganel.

"Therefore, my friends," rejoined Glenarvan, "no more parting. It is too great
a risk for one man to venture alone into a robber-haunted waste. And now, may
God save our poor sailor, and protect the rest of us!"

Glenarvan was right in both points; first in prohibiting all isolated attempts,
and second, in deciding to wait till the passage of the Snowy River was
practicable. He was scarcely thirty miles from Delegete, the first frontier village
of New South Wales, where he would easily find the means of transport to
Twofold Bay, and from there he could telegraph to Melbourne his orders about
the DUNCAN.

These measures were wise, but how late! If Glenarvan had not sent Mulrady


to Lucknow what misfortunes would have been averted, not to speak of the
assassination of the sailor!

When he reached the camp he found his companions in better spirits. They
seemed more hopeful than before. "He is better! he is better!" cried Robert,
running out to meet Lord Glenarvan.

"Mulrady?--"

"Yes, Edward," answered Lady Helena. "A reaction has set in. The Major is
more confident. Our sailor will live."

"Where is McNabbs?" asked Glenarvan.

"With him. Mulrady wanted to speak to him, and they must not be
disturbed."

He then learned that about an hour since, the wounded man had awakened
from his lethargy, and the fever had abated. But the first thing he did on
recovering his memory and speech was to ask for Lord Glenarvan, or, failing
him, the Major. McNabbs seeing him so weak, would have forbidden any
conversation; but Mulrady insisted with such energy that the Major had to give
in. The interview had already lasted some minutes when Glenarvan returned.
There was nothing for it but to await the return of McNabbs.

Presently the leather curtains of the wagon moved, and the Major appeared.
He rejoined his friends at the foot of a gum-tree, where the tent was placed. His
face, usually so stolid, showed that something disturbed him. When his eyes fell
on Lady Helena and the young girl, his glance was full of sorrow.

Glenarvan questioned him, and extracted the following information: When
he left the camp Mulrady followed one of the paths indicated by Paganel. He
made as good speed as the darkness of the night would allow. He reckoned that
he had gone about two miles when several men--five, he thought--sprang to his
horse's head. The animal reared; Mulrady seized his revolver and fired. He
thought he saw two of his assailants fall. By the flash he recognized Ben Joyce.
But that was all. He had not time to fire all the barrels. He felt a violent blow on
his side and was thrown to the ground.

Still he did not lose consciousness. The murderers thought he was dead. He
felt them search his pockets, and then heard one of them say: "I have the letter."

"Give it to me," returned Ben Joyce, "and now the DUNCAN is ours."

At this point of the story, Glenarvan could not help uttering a cry.

McNabbs continued: "Now you fellows,’ added Ben Joyce, ‘catch the horse.
In two days I shall be on board the DUNCAN, and in six I shall reach Twofold
Bay. This is to be the rendezvous. My Lord and his party will be still stuck in the
marshes of the Snowy River. Cross the river at the bridge of Kemple Pier,
proceed to the coast, and wait for me. I will easily manage to get you on board.


Once at sea in a craft like the DUNCAN, we shall be masters of the Indian
Ocean." 'Hurrah for Ben Joyce!’ cried the convicts. Mulrady's horse was brought,
and Ben Joyce disappeared, galloping on the Lucknow Road, while the band
took the road southeast of the Snowy River. Mulrady, though severely wounded,
had the strength to drag himself to within three hundred paces from the camp,
whence we found him almost dead. There," said McNabbs, "is the history of
Mulrady; and now you can understand why the brave fellow was so determined
to speak."

This revelation terrified Glenarvan and the rest of the party.

"Pirates! pirates!" cried Glenarvan. "My crew massacred! my DUNCAN in
the hands of these bandits!"

"Yes, for Ben Joyce will surprise the ship,” said the Major, "and then--"

"Well, we must get to the coast first," said Paganel.

"But how are we to cross the Snowy River?" said Wilson.

"As they will," replied Glenarvan. "They are to cross at Kemple Pier Bridge,
and so will we."

"But about Mulrady?" asked Lady Helena.

"We will carry him; we will have relays. Can I leave my crew to the mercy of
Ben Joyce and his gang?"

To cross the Snowy River at Kemple Pier was practicable, but dangerous.
The convicts might entrench themselves at that point, and defend it. They were
at least thirty against seven! But there are moments when people do not
deliberate, or when they have no choice but to go on.

"My Lord," said John Mangles, "before we throw away our chance, before
venturing to this bridge, we ought to reconnoiter, and I will undertake it."

"I will go with you, John," said Paganel.

This proposal was agreed to, and John Mangles and Paganel prepared to start
immediately. They were to follow the course of the Snowy River, follow its
banks till they reached the place indicated by Ben Joyce, and especially they
were to keep out of sight of the convicts, who were probably scouring the bush.

So the two brave comrades started, well provisioned and well armed, and
were soon out of sight as they threaded their way among the tall reeds by the
river. The rest anxiously awaited their return all day. Evening came, and still the
scouts did not return. They began to be seriously alarmed. At last, toward eleven
o'clock, Wilson announced their arrival. Paganel and John Mangles were worn
out with the fatigues of a ten-mile walk.

"Well, what about the bridge? Did you find it?" asked Glenarvan, with
impetuous eagerness.

"Yes, a bridge of supple-jacks," said John Mangles. "The convicts passed


over, but--"
"But what?" said Glenarvan, who foreboded some new misfortune.
"They burned it after they passed!" said Paganel.


CHAPTER XIX HELPLESS AND HOPELESS


IT was not a time for despair, but action. The bridge at Kemple Pier was
destroyed, but the Snowy River must be crossed, come what might, and they
must reach Twofold Bay before Ben Joyce and his gang, so, instead of wasting
time in empty words, the next day (the 16th of January) John Mangles and
Glenarvan went down to examine the river, and arrange for the passage over.

The swollen and tumultuous waters had not gone down the least. They
rushed on with indescribable fury. It would be risking life to battle with them.
Glenarvan stood gazing with folded arms and downcast face.

"Would you like me to try and swim across?" said John Mangles.

"No, John, no!" said Lord Glenarvan, holding back the bold, daring young
fellow, "let us wait."

And they both returned to the camp. The day passed in the most intense
anxiety. Ten times Lord Glenarvan went to look at the river, trying to invent
some bold way of getting over; but in vain. Had a torrent of lava rushed between
the shores, it could not have been more impassable.

During these long wasted hours, Lady Helena, under the Major's advice, was
nursing Mulrady with the utmost skill. The sailor felt a throb of returning life.
McNabbs ventured to affirm that no vital part was injured. Loss of blood
accounted for the patient's extreme exhaustion. The wound once closed and the
hemorrhage stopped, time and rest would be all that was needed to complete his
cure. Lady Helena had insisted on giving up the first compartment of the wagon
to him, which greatly tried his modesty. The poor fellow's greatest trouble was
the delay his condition might cause Glenarvan, and he made him promise that
they should leave him in the camp under Wilson's care, should the passage of the
river become practicable.

But, unfortunately, no passage was practicable, either that day or the next
(January 17); Glenarvan was in despair. Lady Helena and the Major vainly tried
to calm him, and preached patience.

Patience, indeed, when perhaps at this very moment Ben Joyce was boarding
the yacht; when the DUNCAN, loosing from her moorings, was getting up steam
to reach the fatal coast, and each hour was bringing her nearer.

John Mangles felt in his own breast all that Glenarvan was suffering. He
determined to conquer the difficulty at any price, and constructed a canoe in the
Australian manner, with large sheets of bark of the gum-trees. These sheets were
kept together by bars of wood, and formed a very fragile boat. The captain and


the sailor made a trial trip in it during the day. All that skill, and strength, and
tact, and courage could do they did; but they were scarcely in the current before
they were upside down, and nearly paid with their lives for the dangerous
experiment. The boat disappeared, dragged down by the eddy. John Mangles and
Wilson had not gone ten fathoms, and the river was a mile broad, and swollen by
the heavy rains and melted snows.

Thus passed the 19th and 20th of January. The Major and Glenarvan went
five miles up the river in search of a favorable passage, but everywhere they
found the same roaring, rushing, impetuous torrent. The whole southern slope of
the Australian Alps poured its liquid masses into this single bed.

All hope of saving the DUNCAN was now at an end. Five days had elapsed
since the departure of Ben Joyce. The yacht must be at this moment at the coast,
and in the hands of the convicts.

However, it was impossible that this state of things could last. The temporary
influx would soon be exhausted, and the violence also. Indeed, on the morning
of the 21st, Paganel announced that the water was already lower. "What does it
matter now?" said Glenarvan. "It is too late!"

"That is no reason for our staying longer here," said the Major.

"Certainly not," replied John Mangles. "Perhaps tomorrow the river may be
practicable."

"And will that save my unhappy men?" cried Glenarvan.

"Will your Lordship listen to me?" returned John Mangles. "I know Tom
Austin. He would execute your orders, and set out as soon as departure was
possible. But who knows whether the DUNCAN was ready and her injury
repaired on the arrival of Ben Joyce. And suppose the

V. IV Verne yacht could not go to sea; suppose there was a delay of a day, or
two days."

"You are right, John," replied Glenarvan. "We must get to Twofold Bay; we
are only thirty-five miles from Delegete."

"Yes," added Paganel, "and that's a town where we shall find rapid means of
conveyance. Who knows whether we shan't arrive in time to prevent a
catastrophe."

"Let us start," cried Glenarvan.

John Mangles and Wilson instantly set to work to construct a canoe of larger
dimensions. Experience had proved that the bark was powerless against the
violence of the torrent, and John accordingly felled some of the gum-trees, and
made a rude but solid raft with the trunks. It was a long task, and the day had
gone before the work was ended. It was completed next morning.

By this time the waters had visibly diminished; the torrent had once more


become a river, though a very rapid one, it is true. However, by pursuing a
zigzag course, and overcoming it to a certain extent, John hoped to reach the
opposite shore. At half-past twelve, they embarked provisions enough for a
couple of days. The remainder was left with the wagon and the tent. Mulrady
was doing well enough to be carried over; his convalescence was rapid.

At one o'clock, they all seated themselves on the raft, still moored to the
shore. John Mangles had installed himself at the starboard, and entrusted to
Wilson a sort of oar to steady the raft against the current, and lessen the leeway.
He took his own stand at the back, to steer by means of a large scull; but,
notwithstanding their efforts, Wilson and John Mangles soon found themselves
in an inverse position, which made the action of the oars impossible.

There was no help for it; they could do nothing to arrest the gyratory
movement of the raft; it turned round with dizzying rapidity, and drifted out of
its course. John Mangles stood with pale face and set teeth, gazing at the
whirling current.

However, the raft had reached the middle of the river, about half a mile from
the starting point. Here the current was extremely strong, and this broke the
whirling eddy, and gave the raft some stability. John and Wilson seized their oars
again, and managed to push it in an oblique direction. This brought them nearer
to the left shore. They were not more than fifty fathoms from it, when Wilson's
oar snapped short off, and the raft, no longer supported, was dragged away. John
tried to resist at the risk of breaking his own oar, too, and Wilson, with bleeding
hands, seconded his efforts with all his might.

At last they succeeded, and the raft, after a passage of more than half an
hour, struck against the steep bank of the opposite shore. The shock was so
violent that the logs became disunited, the cords broke, and the water bubbled up
between. The travelers had barely time to catch hold of the steep bank. They
dragged out Mulrady and the two dripping ladies. Everyone was safe; but the
provisions and firearms, except the carbine of the Major, went drifting down
with the DEBRIS of the raft.

The river was crossed. The little company found themselves almost without
provisions, thirty-five miles from Delegete, in the midst of the unknown deserts
of the Victoria frontier. Neither settlers nor squatters were to be met with; it was
entirely uninhabited, unless by ferocious bushrangers and bandits.

They resolved to set off without delay. Mulrady saw clearly that he would be
a great drag on them, and he begged to be allowed to remain, and even to remain
alone, till assistance could be sent from Delegete.

Glenarvan refused. It would be three days before he could reach Delegete,
and five the shore--that is to say, the 26th of January. Now, as the DUNCAN had


left Melbourne on the 16th, what difference would a few days' delay make?

"No, my friend," he said, "I will not leave anyone behind. We will make a
litter and carry you in turn."

The litter was made of boughs of eucalyptus covered with branches; and,
whether he would or not, Mulrady was obliged to take his place on it. Glenarvan
would be the first to carry his sailor. He took hold of one end and Wilson of the
other, and all set off.

What a sad spectacle, and how lamentably was this expedition to end which
had commenced so well. They were no longer in search of Harry Grant. This
continent, where he was not, and never had been, threatened to prove fatal to
those who sought him. And when these intrepid countrymen of his should reach
the shore, they would find the DUNCAN waiting to take them home again. The
first day passed silently and painfully. Every ten minutes the litter changed
bearers. All the sailor's comrades took their share in this task without
murmuring, though the fatigue was augmented by the great heat.

In the evening, after a journey of only five miles, they camped under the
gum-trees. The small store of provisions saved from the raft composed the
evening meal. But all they had to depend upon now was the Major's carbine.

It was a dark, rainy night, and morming seemed as if it would never dawn.
They set off again, but the Major could not find a chance of firing a shot. This
fatal region was only a desert, unfrequented even by animals. Fortunately,
Robert discovered a bustard's nest with a dozen of large eggs in it, which
Olbinett cooked on hot cinders. These, with a few roots of purslain which were
growing at the bottom of a ravine, were all the breakfast of the 22d.

The route now became extremely difficult. The sandy plains were bristling
with SPINIFEX, a prickly plant, which is called in Melbourne the porcupine. It
tears the clothing to rags, and makes the legs bleed. The courageous ladies never
complained, but footed it bravely, setting an example, and encouraging one and
another by word or look.

They stopped in the evening at Mount Bulla Bulla, on the edge of the
Jungalla Creek. The supper would have been very scant, if McNabbs had not
killed a large rat, the mus conditor, which is highly spoken of as an article of
diet. Olbinett roasted it, and it would have been pronounced even superior to its
reputation had it equaled the sheep in size. They were obliged to be content with
it, however, and it was devoured to the bones.

On the 23d the weary but still energetic travelers started off again. After
having gone round the foot of the mountain, they crossed the long prairies where
the grass seemed made of whalebone. It was a tangle of darts, a medley of sharp
little sticks, and a path had to be cut through either with the hatchet or fire.


That morning there was not even a question of breakfast. Nothing could be
more barren than this region strewn with pieces of quartz. Not only hunger, but
thirst began to assail the travelers. A burning atmosphere heightened their
discomfort. Glenarvan and his friends could only go half a mile an hour. Should
this lack of food and water continue till evening, they would all sink on the road,
never to rise again.

But when everything fails a man, and he finds himself without resources, at
the very moment when he feels he must give up, then Providence steps in. Water
presented itself in the CEPHALOTES, a species of cup-shaped flower, filled
with refreshing liquid, which hung from the branches of coralliform-shaped
bushes. They all quenched their thirst with these, and felt new life returning.

The only food they could find was the same as the natives were forced to
subsist upon, when they could find neither game, nor serpents, nor insects.
Paganel discovered in the dry bed of a creek, a plant whose excellent properties
had been frequently described by one of his colleagues in the Geographical
Society.

It was the NARDOU, a cryptogamous plant of the family Marsilacea, and the
same which kept Burke and King alive in the deserts of the interior. Under its
leaves, which resembled those of the trefoil, there were dried sporules as large as
a lentil, and these sporules, when crushed between two stones, made a sort of
flour. This was converted into coarse bread, which stilled the pangs of hunger at
least. There was a great abundance of this plant growing in the district, and
Olbinett gathered a large supply, so that they were sure of food for several days.

The next day, the 24th, Mulrady was able to walk part of the way. His wound
was entirely cicatrized. The town of Delegete was not more than ten miles off,
and that evening they camped in longitude 140 degrees, on the very frontier of
New South Wales.

For some hours, a fine but penetrating rain had been falling. There would
have been no shelter from this, if by chance John Mangles had not discovered a
sawyer's hut, deserted and dilapidated to a degree. But with this miserable cabin
they were obliged to be content. Wilson wanted to kindle a fire to prepare the
NARDOU bread, and he went out to pick up the dead wood scattered all over the
ground. But he found it would not light, the great quantity of albuminous matter
which it contained prevented all combustion. This is the incombustible wood put
down by Paganel in his list of Australian products.

They had to dispense with fire, and consequently with food too, and sleep in
their wet clothes, while the laughing jackasses, concealed in the high branches,
seemed to ridicule the poor unfortunates. However, Glenarvan was nearly at the
end of his sufferings. It was time. The two young ladies were making heroic


efforts, but their strength was hourly decreasing. They dragged themselves
along, almost unable to walk.

Next morning they started at daybreak. At 11 A. M. Delegete came in sight
in the county of Wellesley, and fifty miles from Twofold Bay.

Means of conveyance were quickly procured here. Hope returned to
Glenarvan as they approached the coast. Perhaps there might have been some
slight delay, and after all they might get there before the arrival of the
DUNCAN. In twenty-four hours they would reach the bay.

At noon, after a comfortable meal, all the travelers installed in a mail-coach,
drawn by five strong horses, left Delegete at a gallop. The postilions, stimulated
by a promise of a princely DOUCEUR, drove rapidly along over a well-kept
road. They did not lose a minute in changing horses, which took place every ten
miles. It seemed as if they were infected with Glenarvan's zeal. All that day, and
night, too, they traveled on at the rate of six miles an hour.

In the morning at sunrise, a dull murmur fell on their ears, and announced
their approach to the Indian Ocean. They required to go round the bay to gain the
coast at the 37th parallel, the exact point where Tom Austin was to wait their
arrival.

When the sea appeared, all eyes anxiously gazed at the offing. Was the
DUNCAN, by a miracle of Providence, there running close to the shore, as a
month ago, when they crossed Cape Corrientes, they had found her on the
Argentine coast? They saw nothing. Sky and earth mingled in the same horizon.
Not a sail enlivened the vast stretch of ocean.

One hope still remained. Perhaps Tom Austin had thought it his duty to cast
anchor in Twofold Bay, for the sea was heavy, and a ship would not dare to
venture near the shore. "To Eden!" cried Glenarvan. Immediately the mail-coach
resumed the route round the bay, toward the little town of Eden, five miles
distant. The postilions stopped not far from the lighthouse, which marks the
entrance of the port. Several vessels were moored in the roadstead, but none of
them bore the flag of Malcolm.

Glenarvan, John Mangles, and Paganel got out of the coach, and rushed to
the custom-house, to inquire about the arrival of vessels within the last few days.

No ship had touched the bay for a week.

"Perhaps the yacht has not started," Glenarvan said, a sudden revulsion of
feeling lifting him from despair. "Perhaps we have arrived first."

John Mangles shook his head. He knew Tom Austin. His first mate would
not delay the execution of an order for ten days.

"T must know at all events how they stand," said Glenarvan. "Better certainty
than doubt."


A quarter of an hour afterward a telegram was sent to the syndicate of
shipbrokers in Melbourne. The whole party then repaired to the Victoria Hotel.

At 2 P.M. the following telegraphic reply was received: "LORD
GLENARVAN, Eden.

"Twofold Bay.

"The DUNCAN left on the 16th current. Destination unknown. J.
ANDREWS, S. B."

The telegram dropped from Glenarvan's hands.

There was no doubt now. The good, honest Scotch yacht was now a pirate
ship in the hands of Ben Joyce!

So ended this journey across Australia, which had commenced under
circumstances so favorable. All trace of Captain Grant and his shipwrecked men
seemed to be irrevocably lost. This ill success had cost the loss of a ship's crew.
Lord Glenarvan had been vanquished in the strife; and the courageous searchers,
whom the unfriendly elements of the Pampas had been unable to check, had
been conquered on the Australian shore by the perversity of man.

END OF BOOK TWO


In Search of the Castaways or The Children of Captain Grant
New Zealand

[page intentionally blank]

In Search of the Castaways

New Zealand


CHAPTER I A ROUGH CAPTAIN


IF ever the searchers after Captain Grant were tempted to despair, surely it
was at this moment when all their hopes were destroyed at a blow. Toward what
quarter of the world should they direct their endeavors? How were they to
explore new countries? The DUNCAN was no longer available, and even an
immediate return to their own land was out of the question. Thus the enterprise
of these generous Scots had failed! Failed! a despairing word that finds no echo
in a brave soul; and yet under the repeated blows of adverse fate, Glenarvan
himself was compelled to acknowledge his inability to prosecute his devoted
efforts.

Mary Grant at this crisis nerved herself to the resolution never to utter the
name of her father. She suppressed her own anguish, when she thought of the
unfortunate crew who had perished. The daughter was merged in the friend, and
she now took upon her to console Lady Glenarvan, who till now had been her
faithful comforter. She was the first to speak of returning to Scotland. John
Mangles was filled with admiration at seeing her so courageous and so resigned.
He wanted to say a word further in the Captain's interest, but Mary stopped him
with a glance, and afterward said to him: "No, Mr. John, we must think of those
who ventured their lives. Lord Glenarvan must return to Europe!"

"You are right, Miss Mary," answered John Mangles; "he must. Beside, the
English authorities must be informed of the fate of the DUNCAN. But do not
despair. Rather than abandon our search I will resume it alone! I will either find
Captain Grant or perish in the attempt!"

It was a serious undertaking to which John Mangles bound himself; Mary
accepted, and gave her hand to the young captain, as if to ratify the treaty. On
John Mangles' side it was a life's devotion; on Mary's undying gratitude.

During that day, their departure was finally arranged; they resolved to reach
Melbourne without delay. Next day John went to inquire about the ships ready to
sail. He expected to find frequent communication between Eden and Victoria.

He was disappointed; ships were scarce. Three or four vessels, anchored in
Twofold Bay, constituted the mercantile fleet of the place; none of them were
bound for Melbourne, nor Sydney, nor Point de Galle, at any of which ports
Glenarvan would have found ships loading for England. In fact, the Peninsular
and Oriental Company has a regular line of packets between these points and
England.

Under these circumstances, what was to be done? Waiting for a ship might


be a tedious affair, for Twofold Bay is not much frequented. Numbers of ships
pass by without touching. After due reflection and discussion, Glenarvan had
nearly decided to follow the coast road to Sydney, when Paganel made an
unexpected proposition.

The geographer had visited Twofold Bay on his own account, and was aware
that there were no means of transport for Sydney or Melbourne. But of the three
vessels anchored in the roadstead one was loading for Auckland, the capital of
the northern island of New Zealand. Paganel's proposal was to take the ship in
question, and get to Auckland, whence it would be easy to return to Europe by
the boats of the Peninsular and Oriental Company.

This proposition was taken into serious consideration. Paganel on this
occasion dispensed with the volley of arguments he generally indulged in. He
confined himself to the bare proposition, adding that the voyage to New Zealand
was only five or six days-- the distance, in fact, being only about a thousand
miles.

By a singular coincidence Auckland is situated on the self-same parallel-- the
thirty-seventh--which the explorers had perseveringly followed since they left
the coast of Araucania. Paganel might fairly have used this as an argument in
favor of his scheme; in fact, it was a natural opportunity of visiting the shores of
New Zealand.

But Paganel did not lay stress on this argument. After two mistakes, he
probably hesitated to attempt a third interpretation of the document. Besides,
what could he make of it? It said positively that a "continent" had served as a
refuge for Captain Grant, not an island. Now, New Zealand was nothing but an
island. This seemed decisive. Whether, for this reason, or for some other,
Paganel did not connect any idea of further search with this proposition of
reaching Auckland. He merely observed that regular communication existed
between that point and Great Britain, and that it was easy to take advantage of it.

John Mangles supported Paganel's proposal. He advised its adoption, as it
was hopeless to await the problematical arrival of a vessel in Twofold Bay. But
before coming to any decision, he thought it best to visit the ship mentioned by
the geographer. Glenarvan, the Major, Paganel, Robert, and Mangles himself,
took a boat, and a few strokes brought them alongside the ship anchored two
cables' length from the quay.

It was a brig of 150 tons, named the MACQUARIE. It was engaged in the
coasting trade between the various ports of Australia and New Zealand. The
captain, or rather the "master," received his visitors gruffly enough. They
perceived that they had to do with a man of no education, and whose manners
were in no degree superior to those of the five sailors of his crew. With a coarse,


red face, thick hands, and a broken nose, blind of an eye, and his lips stained
with the pipe, Will Halley was a sadly brutal looking person. But they had no
choice, and for so short a voyage it was not necessary to be very particular.

"What do you want?" asked Will Halley, when the strangers stepped on the
poop of his ship.

"The captain," answered John Mangles.

"T am the captain," said Halley. "What else do you want?"

"The MACQUARIE is loading for Auckland, I believe?"

"Yes. What else?"

"What does she carry?"

"Everything salable and purchasable. What else?"

"When does she sail?"

"Tomorrow at the mid-day tide. What else?"

"Does she take passengers?"

"That depends on who the passengers are, and whether they are satisfied with
the ship's mess."

"They would bring their own provisions."

"What else?"

"What else?"

"Yes. How many are there?"

"Nine; two of them are ladies."

"T have no cabins."

"We will manage with such space as may be left at their disposal."

"What else?"

"Do you agree?" said John Mangles, who was not in the least put out by the
captain's peculiarities.

"We'll see," said the master of the MACQUARIE.

Will Halley took two or three turns on the poop, making it resound with iron-
heeled boots, and then he turned abruptly to John Mangles.

"What would you pay?" said he.

"What do you ask?" replied John.

"Fifty pounds."

Glenarvan looked consent.

"Very good! Fifty pounds," replied John Mangles.

"But passage only," added Halley.

"Yes, passage only."

"Food extra."

"Extra."

"Agreed. And now," said Will, putting out his hand, "what about the deposit


money?"

"Here is half of the passage-money, twenty-five pounds," said Mangles,
counting out the sum to the master.

"All aboard tomorrow," said he, "before noon. Whether or no, I weigh
anchor."

"We will be punctual."

This said, Glenarvan, the Major, Robert, Paganel, and John Mangles left the
ship, Halley not so much as touching the oilskin that adorned his red locks.

"What a brute," exclaimed John.

"He will do," answered Paganel. "He is a regular sea-wolf."

"A downright bear!" added the Major.

"I fancy," said John Mangles, "that the said bear has dealt in human flesh in
his time."

"What matter?" answered Glenarvan, "as long as he commands the
MACQUARIE, and the MACQUARIE goes to New Zealand. From Twofold
Bay to Auckland we shall not see much of him; after Auckland we shall see him
no more."

Lady Helena and Mary Grant were delighted to hear that their departure was
arranged for tomorrow. Glenarvan warned them that the MACQUARIE was
inferior in comfort to the DUNCAN. But after what they had gone through, they
were indifferent to trifling annoyances. Wilson was told off to arrange the
accommodation on board the MACQUARIE. Under his busy brush and broom
things soon changed their aspect.

Will Halley shrugged his shoulders, and let the sailor have his way.
Glenarvan and his party gave him no concern. He neither knew, nor cared to
know, their names. His new freight represented fifty pounds, and he rated it far
below the two hundred tons of cured hides which were stowed away in his hold.
Skins first, men after. He was a merchant. As to his sailor qualification, he was
said to be skillful enough in navigating these seas, whose reefs make them very
dangerous.

As the day drew to a close, Glenarvan had a desire to go again to the point on
the coast cut by the 37th parallel. Two motives prompted him. He wanted to
examine once more the presumed scene of the wreck. Ayrton had certainly been
quartermaster on the BRITANNIA, and the BRITANNIA might have been lost
on this part of the Australian coast; on the east coast if not on the west. It would
not do to leave without thorough investigation, a locality which they were never
to revisit.

And then, failing the BRITANNIA, the DUNCAN certainly had fallen into
the hands of the convicts. Perhaps there had been a fight? There might yet be


found on the coast traces of a struggle, a last resistance. If the crew had perished
among the waves, the waves probably had thrown some bodies on the shore.

Glenarvan, accompanied by his faithful John, went to carry out the final
search. The landlord of the Victoria Hotel lent them two horses, and they set out
on the northern road that skirts Twofold Bay.

It was a melancholy journey. Glenarvan and Captain John trotted along
without speaking, but they understood each other. The same thoughts, the same
anguish harrowed both their hearts. They looked at the sea-worn rocks; they
needed no words of question or answer. John's well-tried zeal and intelligence
were a guarantee that every point was scrupulously examined, the least likely
places, as well as the sloping beaches and sandy plains where even the slight
tides of the Pacific might have thrown some fragments of wreck. But no
indication was seen that could suggest further search in that quarter--all trace of
the wreck escaped them still.

As to the DUNCAN, no trace either. All that part of Australia, bordering the
ocean, was desert.

Still John Mangles discovered on the skirts of the shore evident traces of
camping, remains of fires recently kindled under solitary Myall-trees. Had a
tribe of wandering blacks passed that way lately? No, for Glenarvan saw a token
which furnished incontestable proof that the convicts had frequented that part of
the coast.

This token was a grey and yellow garment worn and patched, an ill-omened
rag thrown down at the foot of a tree. It bore the convict's original number at the
Perth Penitentiary. The felon was not there, but his filthy garments betrayed his
passage. This livery of crime, after having clothed some miscreant, was now
decaying on this desert shore.

"You see, John," said Glenarvan, "the convicts got as far as here! and our
poor comrades of the DUNCAN--"

"Yes," said John, in a low voice, "they never landed, they perished!"

"Those wretches!" cried Glenarvan. "If ever they fall into my hands I will
avenge my crew--"

Grief had hardened Glenarvan's features. For some minutes he gazed at the
expanse before him, as if taking a last look at some ship disappearing in the
distance. Then his eyes became dim; he recovered himself in a moment, and
without a word or look, set off at a gallop toward Eden.

The wanderers passed their last evening sadly enough. Their thoughts
recalled all the misfortunes they had encountered in this country. They
remembered how full of well-warranted hope they had been at Cape Bernouilli,
and how cruelly disappointed at Twofold Bay!


Paganel was full of feverish agitation. John Mangles, who had watched him
since the affair at Snowy River, felt that the geographer was hesitating whether
to speak or not to speak. A thousand times he had pressed him with questions,
and failed in obtaining an answer.

But that evening, John, in lighting him to his room, asked him why he was so
nervous.

"Friend John," said Paganel, evasively, "I am not more nervous to-night than
I always am."

"Mr. Paganel,” answered John, "you have a secret that chokes you."

"Well!" cried the geographer, gesticulating, "what can I do? It is stronger
than I!"

"What is stronger?"

"My joy on the one hand, my despair on the other."

"You rejoice and despair at the same time!"

"Yes; at the idea of visiting New Zealand."

"Why! have you any trace?" asked John, eagerly. "Have you recovered the
lost tracks?"

"No, friend John. No one returns from New Zealand; but still-- you know
human nature. All we want to nourish hope is breath. My device is ‘Spiro spero,'
and it is the best motto in the world!"


CHAPTER IIT NAVIGATORS AND THEIR
DISCOVERIES


NEXT day, the 27th of January, the passengers of the MACQUARIE were
installed on board the brig. Will Halley had not offered his cabin to his lady
passengers. This omission was the less to be deplored, for the den was worthy of
the bear.

At half past twelve the anchor was weighed, having been loosed from its
holding-ground with some difficulty. A moderate breeze was blowing from the
southwest. The sails were gradually unfurled; the five hands made slow work.
Wilson offered to assist the crew; but Halley begged him to be quiet and not to
interfere with what did not concern him. He was accustomed to manage his own
affairs, and required neither assistance nor advice.

This was aimed at John Mangles, who had smiled at the clumsiness of some
maneuver. John took the hint, but mentally resolved that he would nevertheless
hold himself in readiness in case the incapacity of the crew should endanger the
safety of the vessel.

However, in time, the sails were adjusted by the five sailors, aided by the
stimulus of the captain's oaths. The MACQUARIE stood out to sea on the
larboard tack, under all her lower sails, topsails, topgallants, cross-jack, and jib.
By and by, the other sails were hoisted. But in spite of this additional canvas the
brig made very little way. Her rounded bow, the width of her hold, and her heavy
stern, made her a bad sailor, the perfect type of a wooden shoe.

They had to make the best of it. Happily, five days, or, at most, six, would
take them to Auckland, no matter how bad a sailor the MACQUARIE was.

At seven o'clock in the evening the Australian coast and the lighthouse of the
port of Eden had faded out of sight. The ship labored on the lumpy sea, and
rolled heavily in the trough of the waves. The passengers below suffered a good
deal from this motion. But it was impossible to stay on deck, as it rained
violently. Thus they were condemned to close imprisonment.

Each one of them was lost in his own reflections. Words were few. Now and
then Lady Helena and Miss Grant exchanged a few syllables. Glenarvan was
restless; he went in and out, while the Major was impassive. John Mangles,
followed by Robert, went on the poop from time to time, to look at the weather.
Paganel sat in his corner, muttering vague and incoherent words.

What was the worthy geographer thinking of? Of New Zealand, the country
to which destiny was leading him. He went mentally over all his history; he


called to mind the scenes of the past in that ill-omened country.

But in all that history was there a fact, was there a solitary incident that could
justify the discoverers of these islands in considering them as "a continent."
Could a modem geographer or a sailor concede to them such a designation.
Paganel was always revolving the meaning of the document. He was possessed
with the idea; it became his ruling thought. After Patagonia, after Australia, his
imagination, allured by a name, flew to New Zealand. But in that direction, one
point, and only one, stood in his way.

"Contin--contin," he repeated, "that must mean continent!"

And then he resumed his mental retrospect of the navigators who made
known to us these two great islands of the Southern Sea.

It was on the 13th of December, 1642, that the Dutch navigator Tasman, after
discovering Van Diemen's Land, sighted the unknown shores of New Zealand.
He coasted along for several days, and on the 17th of December his ships
penetrated into a large bay, which, terminating in a narrow Strait, separated the
two islands.

The northern island was called by the natives Ikana-Mani, a word which
signifies the fish of Mani. The southern island was called Tavai-Pouna-Mou,
"the whale that yields the green-stones."

Abel Tasman sent his boats on shore, and they returned accompanied by two
canoes and a noisy company of natives. These savages were middle height, of
brown or yellow complexion, angular bones, harsh voices, and black hair, which
was dressed in the Japanese manner, and surmounted by a tall white feather.

This first interview between Europeans and aborigines seemed to promise
amicable and lasting intercourse. But the next day, when one of Tasman's boats
was looking for an anchorage nearer to the land, seven canoes, manned by a
great number of natives, attacked them fiercely. The boat capsized and filled.
The quartermaster in command was instantly struck with a badly-sharpened
spear, and fell into the sea. Of his six companions four were killed; the other two
and the quartermaster were able to swim to the ships, and were picked up and
recovered.

After this sad occurrence Tasman set sail, confining his revenge to giving the
natives a few musket-shots, which probably did not reach them. He left this bay-
-which still bears the name of Massacre Bay-- followed the western coast, and
on the Sth of January, anchored near the northern-most point. Here the violence
of the surf, as well as the unfriendly attitude of the natives, prevented his
obtaining water, and he finally quitted these shores, giving them the name
Staten-land or the Land of the States, in honor of the States-General.

The Dutch navigator concluded that these islands were adjacent to the


islands of the same name on the east of Terra del Fuego, at the southern point of
the American continent. He thought he had found "the Great Southern
Continent."

"But," said Paganel to himself, "what a seventeenth century sailor might call
a ‘continent’ would never stand for one with a nineteenth century man. No such
mistake can be supposed! No! there is something here that baffles me."


CHAPTER IIIT THE MARTYR-ROLL OF
NAVIGATORS


ON the 31st of January, four days after starting, the MACQUARIE had not
done two-thirds of the distance between Australia and New Zealand. Will Halley
took very little heed to the working of the ship; he let things take their chance.
He seldom showed himself, for which no one was sorry. No one would have
complained if he had passed all his time in his cabin, but for the fact that the
brutal captain was every day under the influence of gin or brandy. His sailors
willingly followed his example, and no ship ever sailed more entirely depending
on Providence than the MACQUARIE did from Twofold Bay.

This unpardonable carelessness obliged John Mangles to keep a watchful eye
ever open. Mulrady and Wilson more than once brought round the helm when
some careless steering threatened to throw the ship on her beam-ends. Often Will
Halley would interfere and abuse the two sailors with a volley of oaths. The
latter, in their impatience, would have liked nothing better than to bind this
drunken captain, and lower him into the hold, for the rest of the voyage. But
John Mangles succeeded, after some persuasion, in calming their well-grounded
indignation.

Still, the position of things filled him with anxiety; but, for fear of alarming
Glenarvan, he spoke only to Paganel or the Major. McNabbs recommended the
same course as Mulrady and Wilson.

"If you think it would be for the general good, John," said McNabbs, "you
should not hesitate to take the command of the vessel. When we get to Auckland
the drunken imbecile can resume his command, and then he is at liberty to wreck
himself, if that is his fancy."

"All that is very true, Mr. McNabbs, and if it is absolutely necessary I will do
it. As long as we are on open sea, a careful lookout is enough; my sailors and I
are watching on the poop; but when we get near the coast, I confess I shall be
uneasy if Halley does not come to his senses."

"Could not you direct the course?" asked Paganel.

"That would be difficult," replied John. "Would you believe it that there is
not a chart on board?"

"Is that so?"

"It is indeed. The MACQUARIE only does a coasting trade between Eden
and Auckland, and Halley is so at home in these waters that he takes no
observations."


"I suppose he thinks the ship knows the way, and steers herself." "Ha! ha!"
laughed John Mangles; "I do not believe in ships that steer themselves; and if
Halley is drunk when we get among soundings, he will get us all into trouble."

"Let us hope," said Paganel, "that the neighborhood of land will bring him to
his senses."

"Well, then," said McNabbs, "if needs were, you could not sail the
MACQUARIE into Auckland?"

"Without a chart of the coast, certainly not. The coast is very dangerous. It is
a series of shallow fiords as irregular and capricious as the fiords of Norway.
There are many reefs, and it requires great experience to avoid them. The
strongest ship would be lost if her keel struck one of those rocks that are
submerged but a few feet below the water."

"In that case those on board would have to take refuge on the coast."

"If there was time."

"A terrible extremity," said Paganel, "for they are not hospitable shores, and
the dangers of the land are not less appalling than the dangers of the sea."

"You refer to the Maories, Monsieur Paganel?" asked John Mangles.

"Yes, my friend. They have a bad name in these waters. It is not a matter of
timid or brutish Australians, but of an intelligent and sanguinary race, cannibals
greedy of human flesh, man-eaters to whom we should look in vain for pity."

"Well, then," exclaimed the Major, "if Captain Grant had been wrecked on
the coast of New Zealand, you would dissuade us from looking for him."

"Oh, you might search on the coasts," replied the geographer, "because you
might find traces of the BRITANNIA, but not in the interior, for it would be
perfectly useless. Every European who ventures into these fatal districts falls
into the hands of the Maories, and a prisoner in the hands of the Maories is a lost
man. I have urged my friends to cross the Pampas, to toil over the plains of
Australia, but I will never lure them into the mazes of the New Zealand forest.
May heaven be our guide, and keep us from ever being thrown within the power
of those fierce natives!"

CHAPTER IV THE WRECK OF THE "MACQUARIE"

STILL this wearisome voyage dragged on. On the 2d of February, six days
from starting, the MACQUARIE had not yet made a nearer acquaintance with
the shores of Auckland. The wind was fair, nevertheless, and blew steadily from
the southwest; but the currents were against the ship's course, and she scarcely
made any way. The heavy, lumpy sea strained her cordage, her timbers creaked,
and she labored painfully in the trough of the sea. Her standing rigging was so
out of order that it allowed play to the masts, which were violently shaken at
every roll of the sea.


Fortunately, Will Halley was not a man in a hurry, and did not use a press of
canvas, or his masts would inevitably have come down. John Mangles therefore
hoped that the wretched hull would reach port without accident; but it grieved
him that his companions should have to suffer so much discomfort from the
defective arrangements of the brig.

But neither Lady Helena nor Mary Grant uttered a word of complaint,
though the continuous rain obliged them to stay below, where the want of air and
the violence of the motion were painfully felt. They often braved the weather,
and went on the poop till driven down again by the force of a sudden squall.
Then they returned to the narrow space, fitter for stowing cargo than
accommodating passengers, especially ladies.

Their friends did their best to amuse them. Paganel tried to beguile the time
with his stories, but it was a hopeless case. Their minds were so distracted at this
change of route as to be quite unhinged. Much as they had been interested in his
dissertation on the Pampas, or Australia, his lectures on New Zealand fell on
cold and indifferent ears. Besides, they were going to this new and ill-reputed
country without enthusiasm, without conviction, not even of their own free will,
but solely at the bidding of destiny.

Of all the passengers on board the MACQUARIE, the most to be pitied was
Lord Glenarvan. He was rarely to be seen below. He could not stay in one place.
His nervous organization, highly excited, could not submit to confinement
between four narrow bulkheads. All day long, even all night, regardless of the
torrents of rain and the dashing waves, he stayed on the poop, sometimes leaning
on the rail, sometimes walking to and fro in feverish agitation. His eyes
wandered ceaselessly over the blank horizon. He scanned it eagerly during every
short interval of clear weather. It seemed as if he sought to question the voiceless
waters; he longed to tear away the veil of fog and vapor that obscured his view.
He could not be resigned, and his features expressed the bitterness of his grief.
He was a man of energy, till now happy and powerful, and deprived in a moment
of power and happiness. John Mangles bore him company, and endured with him
the inclemency of the weather. On this day Glenarvan looked more anxiously
than ever at each point where a break in the mist enabled him to do so. John
came up to him and said, "Your Lordship is looking out for land?"

Glenarvan shook his head in dissent.

"And yet," said the young captain, "you must be longing to quit this vessel.
We ought to have seen the lights of Auckland thirty-six hours ago."

Glenarvan made no reply. He still looked, and for a moment his glass was
pointed toward the horizon to windward.

"The land is not on that side, my Lord," said John Mangles. "Look more to


starboard."

"Why, John?" replied Glenarvan. "I am not looking for the land."

"What then, my Lord?"

"My yacht! the DUNCAN," said Glenarvan, hotly. "It must be here on these
coasts, skimming these very waves, playing the vile part of a pirate! It is here,
John; I am certain of it, on the track of vessels between Australia and New
Zealand; and I have a presentiment that we shall fall in with her."

"God keep us from such a meeting!"

"Why, John?"

"Your Lordship forgets our position. What could we do in this ship if the
DUNCAN gave chase. We could not even fly!"

"Fly, John?"

"Yes, my Lord; we should try in vain! We should be taken, delivered up to
the mercy of those wretches, and Ben Joyce has shown us that he does not stop
at a crime! Our lives would be worth little. We would fight to the death, of
course, but after that! Think of Lady Glenarvan; think of Mary Grant!"

"Poor girls!" murmured Glenarvan. "John, my heart is broken; and
sometimes despair nearly masters me. I feel as if fresh misfortunes awaited us,
and that Heaven itself is against us. It terrifies me!"

"You, my Lord?"

"Not for myself, John, but for those I love--whom you love, also."

"Keep up your heart, my Lord," said the young captain. "We must not look
out for troubles. The MACQUARIE sails badly, but she makes some way
nevertheless. Will Halley is a brute, but I am keeping my eyes open, and if the
coast looks dangerous, I will put the ship's head to sea again. So that, on that
score, there is little or no danger. But as to getting alongside the DUNCAN! God
forbid! And if your Lordship is bent on looking out for her, let it be in order to
give her a wide berth."

John Mangles was right. An encounter with the DUNCAN would have been
fatal to the MACQUARIE. There was every reason to fear such an engagement
in these narrow seas, in which pirates could ply their trade without risk.
However, for that day at least, the yacht did not appear, and the sixth night from
their departure from Twofold Bay came, without the fears of John Mangles being
realized.

But that night was to be a night of terrors. Darkness came on almost
suddenly at seven o'clock in the evening;

V. IV Verne

[illustration omitted] [page intentionally blank] the sky was very threatening.
The sailor instinct rose above the stupefaction of the drunkard and roused Will


Halley. He left his cabin, rubbed his eyes, and shook his great red head. Then he
drew a great deep breath of air, as other people swallow a draught of water to
revive themselves. He examined the masts. The wind freshened, and veering a
point more to the westward, blew right for the New Zealand coast.

Will Halley, with many an oath, called his men, tightened his topmast
cordage, and made all snug for the night. John Mangles approved in silence. He
had ceased to hold any conversation with the coarse seaman; but neither
Glenarvan nor he left the poop. Two hours after a stiff breeze came on. Will
Halley took in the lower reef of his topsails. The maneuver would have been a
difficult job for five men if the MACQUARIE had not carried a double yard, on
the American plan. In fact, they had only to lower the upper yard to bring the sail
to its smallest size.

Two hours passed; the sea was rising. The MACQUARIE was struck so
violently that it seemed as if her keel had touched the rocks. There was no real
danger, but the heavy vessel did not rise easily to the waves. By and by the
returning waves would break over the deck in great masses. The boat was
washed out of the davits by the force of the water.

John Mangles never released his watch. Any other ship would have made no
account of a sea like this; but with this heavy craft there was a danger of sinking
by the bow, for the deck was filled at every lurch, and the sheet of water not
being able to escape quickly by the scuppers, might submerge the ship. It would
have been the wisest plan to prepare for emergency by knocking out the
bulwarks with an ax to facilitate their escape, but Halley refused to take this
precaution.

But a greater danger was at hand, and one that it was too late to prevent.
About half-past eleven, John Mangles and Wilson, who stayed on deck
throughout the gale, were suddenly struck by an unusual noise. Their nautical
instincts awoke. John seized the sailor's hand. "The reef!" said he.

"Yes," said Wilson; "the waves breaking on the bank."

"Not more than two cables' length off?"

"At farthest? The land is there!"

John leaned over the side, gazed into the dark water, and called out, "Wilson,
the lead!"

The master, posted forward, seemed to have no idea of his position. Wilson
seized the lead-line, sprang to the fore-chains, and threw the lead; the rope ran
out between his fingers, at the third knot the lead stopped.

"Three fathoms," cried Wilson.

"Captain," said John, running to Will Halley, "we are on the breakers."

Whether or not he saw Halley shrug his shoulders is of very little


importance. But he hurried to the helm, put it hard down, while Wilson, leaving
the line, hauled at the main-topsail brace to bring the ship to the wind. The man
who was steering received a smart blow, and could not comprehend the sudden
attack.

"Let her go! Let her go!" said the young captain, working her to get away
from the reefs.

For half a minute the starboard side of the vessel was turned toward them,
and, in spite of the darkness, John could discern a line of foam which moaned
and gleamed four fathoms away.

At this moment, Will Halley, comprehending the danger, lost his head. His
sailors, hardly sobered, could not understand his orders. His incoherent words,
his contradictory orders showed that this stupid sot had quite lost his self-
control. He was taken by surprise at the proximity of the land, which was eight
miles off, when he thought it was thirty or forty miles off. The currents had
thrown him out of his habitual track, and this miserable slave of routine was left
quite helpless.

Still the prompt maneuver of John Mangles succeeded in keeping the
MACQUARIE off the breakers. But John did not know the position. For
anything he could tell he was girdled in by reefs. The wind blew them strongly
toward the east, and at every lurch they might strike.

In fact, the sound of the reef soon redoubled on the starboard side of the bow.
They must luff again. John put the helm down again and brought her up. The
breakers increased under the bow of the vessel, and it was necessary to put her
about to regain the open sea. Whether she would be able to go about under
shortened sail, and badly trimmed as she was, remained to be seen, but there was
nothing else to be done.

"Helm hard down!" cried Mangles to Wilson.

The MACQUARIE began to near the new line of reefs: in another moment
the waves were seen dashing on submerged rocks. It was a moment of
inexpressible anxiety. The spray was luminous, just as if lit up by sudden
phosphorescence. The roaring of the sea was like the voice of those ancient
Tritons whom poetic mythology endowed with life. Wilson and Mulrady hung to
the wheel with all their weight. Some cordage gave way, which endangered the
foremast. It seemed doubtful whether she would go about without further
damage.

Suddenly the wind fell and the vessel fell back, and turning her became
hopeless. A high wave caught her below, carried her up on the reefs, where she
struck with great violence. The foremast came down with all the fore-rigging.
The brig rose twice, and then lay motionless, heeled over on her port side at an


angle of 30 degrees.

The glass of the skylight had been smashed to powder. The passengers
rushed out. But the waves were sweeping the deck from one side to the other,
and they dared not stay there. John Mangles, knowing the ship to be safely
lodged in the sand, begged them to return to their own quarters.

"Tell me the truth, John," said Glenarvan, calmly.

"The truth, my Lord, is that we are at a standstill. Whether the sea will
devour us is another question; but we have time to consider."

"Tt is midnight?"

"Yes, my Lord, and we must wait for the day."

"Can we not lower the boat?"

"In such a sea, and in the dark, it is impossible. And, besides, where could
we land?"

"Well, then, John, let us wait for the daylight."

Will Halley, however, ran up and down the deck like a maniac. His crew had
recovered their senses, and now broached a cask of brandy, and began to drink.
John foresaw that if they became drunk, terrible scenes would ensue.

The captain could not be relied on to restrain them; the wretched man tore
his hair and wrung his hands. His whole thought was his uninsured cargo. "I am
ruined! I am lost!" he would cry, as he ran from side to side.

John Mangles did not waste time on him. He armed his two companions, and
they all held themselves in readiness to resist the sailors who were filling
themselves with brandy, seasoned with fearful blasphemies.

"The first of these wretches that comes near the ladies, I will shoot like a
dog," said the Major, quietly.

The sailors doubtless saw that the passengers were determined to hold their
own, for after some attempts at pillage, they disappeared to their own quarters.
John Mangles thought no more of these drunken rascals, and waited impatiently
for the dawn. The ship was now quite motionless. The sea became gradually
calmer. The wind fell. The hull would be safe for some hours yet. At daybreak
John examined the landing-place; the yawl, which was now their only boat,
would carry the crew and the passengers. It would have to make three trips at
least, as it could only hold four.

As he was leaning on the skylight, thinking over the situation of affairs, John
Mangles could hear the roaring of the surf. He tried to pierce the darkness. He
wondered how far it was to the land they longed for no less than dreaded. A reef
sometimes extends for miles along the coast. Could their fragile boat hold out on
a long trip?

While John was thus ruminating and longing for a little light from the murky


sky, the ladies, relying on him, slept in their little berths. The stationary attitude
of the brig insured them some hours of repose. Glenarvan, John, and their
companions, no longer disturbed by the noise of the crew who were now
wrapped in a drunken sleep, also refreshed themselves by a short nap, and a
profound silence reigned on board the ship, herself slumbering peacefully on her
bed of sand.

Toward four o'clock the first peep of dawn appeared in the east. The clouds
were dimly defined by the pale light of the dawn. John returned to the deck. The
horizon was veiled with a curtain of fog. Some faint outlines were shadowed in
the mist, but at a considerable height. A slight swell still agitated the sea, but the
more distant waves were undistinguishable in a motionless bank of clouds.

John waited. The light gradually increased, and the horizon acquired a rosy
hue. The curtain slowly rose over the vast watery stage. Black reefs rose out of
the waters. Then a line became defined on the belt of foam, and there gleamed a
luminous beacon-light point behind a low hill which concealed the scarcely risen
sun. There was the land, less than nine miles off.

"Land ho!" cried John Mangles.

His companions, aroused by his voice, rushed to the poop, and gazed in
silence at the coast whose outline lay on the horizon. Whether they were
received as friends or enemies, that coast must be their refuge.


"Where is Halley?" asked Glenarvan.

"I do not know, my Lord," replied John Mangles.

"Where are the sailors?"

"Invisible, like himself."

"Probably dead drunk, like himself," added McNabbs.

"Let them be called," said Glenarvan, "we cannot leave them on the ship."

Mulrady and Wilson went down to the forecastle, and two minutes after they
returned. The place was empty! They then searched between decks, and then the
hold. But found no trace of Will Halley nor his sailors.

"What! no one?" exclaimed Glenarvan.

"Could they have fallen into the sea?" asked Paganel.

"Everything is possible," replied John Mangles, who was getting uneasy.
Then turning toward the stern: "To the boat!" said he.

Wilson and Mulrady followed to launch the yawl. The yawl was gone.


CHAPTER V CANNIBALS


WILL HALLEY and his crew, taking advantage of the darkness of night and
the sleep of the passengers, had fled with the only boat. There could be no doubt
about it. The captain, whose duty would have kept him on board to the last, had
been the first to quit the ship.

"The cowards are off!" said John Mangles. "Well, my Lord, so much the
better. They have spared us some trying scenes."

"No doubt," said Glenarvan; "besides we have a captain of our own, and
courageous, if unskillful sailors, your companions, John. Say the word, and we
are ready to obey."

The Major, Paganel, Robert, Wilson, Mulrady, Olbinett himself, applauded
Glenarvan's speech, and ranged themselves on the deck, ready to execute their
captain's orders.

"What is to be done?" asked Glenarvan.

It was evident that raising the MACQUARIE was out of the question, and no
less evident that she must be abandoned. Waiting on board for succor that might
never come, would have been imprudence and folly. Before the arrival of a
chance vessel on the scene, the MACQUARIE would have broken up. The next
storm, or even a high tide raised by the winds from seaward, would roll it on the
sands, break it up into splinters, and scatter them on the shore. John was anxious
to reach the land before this inevitable consummation.

He proposed to construct a raft strong enough to carry the passengers, and a
sufficient quantity of provisions, to the coast of New Zealand.

There was no time for discussion, the work was to be set about at once, and
they had made considerable progress when night came and interrupted them.

Toward eight o'clock in the evening, after supper, while Lady Helena and
Mary Grant slept in their berths, Paganel and his friends conversed on serious
matters as they walked up and down the deck. Robert had chosen to stay with
them. The brave boy listened with all his ears, ready to be of use, and willing to
enlist in any perilous adventure.

Paganel asked John Mangles whether the raft could not follow the coast as
far as Auckland, instead of landing its freight on the coast.

John replied that the voyage was impossible with such an unmanageable
craft.

"And what we cannot do on a raft could have been done in the ship's boat?"

"Yes, if necessary," answered John; "but we should have had to sail by day


and anchor at night."

"Then those wretches who abandoned us--"

"Oh, as for them," said John, "they were drunk, and in the darkness I have no
doubt they paid for their cowardice with their lives."

"So much the worse for them and for us," replied Paganel; "for the boat
would have been very useful to us."

"What would you have, Paganel? The raft will bring us to the shore," said
Glenarvan.

"The very thing I would fain avoid," exclaimed the geographer.

"What! do you think another twenty miles after crossing the Pampas and
Australia, can have any terrors for us, hardened as we are to fatigue?"

"My friend," replied Paganel, "I do not call in question our courage nor the
bravery of our friends. Twenty miles would be nothing in any other country than
New Zealand. You cannot suspect me of faint-heartedness. I was the first to
persuade you to cross America and Australia. But here the case is different. I
repeat, anything is better than to venture into this treacherous country."

"Anything is better, in my judgment," said John Mangles, "than braving
certain destruction on a stranded vessel."

"What is there so formidable in New Zealand?" asked Glenarvan.

"The savages," said Paganel.

"The savages!" repeated Glenarvan. "Can we not avoid them by keeping to
the shore? But in any case what have we to fear? Surely, two resolute and well-
armed Europeans need not give a thought to an attack by a handful of miserable
beings."

Paganel shook his head. "In this case there are no miserable beings to
contend with. The New Zealanders are a powerful race, who are rebelling
against English rule, who fight the invaders, and often beat them, and who
always eat them!"

"Cannibals!" exclaimed Robert, "cannibals?" Then they heard him whisper,
"My sister! Lady Helena."

"Don't frighten yourself, my boy," said Glenarvan; "our friend Paganel
exaggerates."

"Far from it," rejoined Paganel. "Robert has shown himself a man, and I treat
him as such, in not concealing the truth from him."

Paganel was right. Cannibalism has become a fixed fact in New Zealand, as
it is in the Fijis and in Torres Strait. Superstition is no doubt partly to blame, but
cannibalism is certainly owing to the fact that there are moments when game is
scarce and hunger great. The savages began by eating human flesh to appease
the demands of an appetite rarely satiated; subsequently the priests regulated and


satisfied the monstrous custom. What was a meal, was raised to the dignity of a
ceremony, that is all.

Besides, in the eyes of the Maories, nothing is more natural than to eat one
another. The missionaries often questioned them about cannibalism. They asked
them why they devoured their brothers; to which the chiefs made answer that
fish eat fish, dogs eat men, men eat dogs, and dogs eat one another. Even the
Maori mythology has a legend of a god who ate another god; and with such a
precedent, who could resist eating his neighbor?

Another strange notion is, that in eating a dead enemy they consume his
spiritual being, and so inherit his soul, his strength and his bravery, which they
hold are specially lodged in the brain. This accounts for the fact that the brain
figures in their feasts as the choicest delicacy, and is offered to the most honored
guest.

But while he acknowledged all this, Paganel maintained, not without a show
of reason, that sensuality, and especially hunger, was the first cause of
cannibalism among the New Zealanders, and not only among the Polynesian
races, but also among the savages of Europe.

"For," said he, "cannibalism was long prevalent among the ancestors of the
most civilized people, and especially (if the Major will not think me personal)
among the Scotch."

"Really," said McNabbs.

"Yes, Major," replied Paganel. "If you read certain passages of Saint Jerome,
on the Atticoli of Scotland, you will see what he thought of your forefathers.
And without going so far back as historic times, under the reign of Elizabeth,
when Shakespeare was dreaming out his Shy-lock, a Scotch bandit, Sawney
Bean, was executed for the crime of cannibalism. Was it religion that prompted
him to cannibalism? No! it was hunger."

"Hunger?" said John Mangles.

"Hunger!" repeated Paganel; "but, above all, the necessity of the carnivorous
appetite of replacing the bodily waste, by the azote contained in animal tissues.
The lungs are satisfied with a provision of vegetable and farinaceous food. But
to be strong and active the body must be supplied with those plastic elements
that renew the muscles. Until the Maories become members of the Vegetarian
Association they will eat meat, and human flesh as meat."

"Why not animal flesh?" asked Glenarvan.

"Because they have no animals," replied Paganel; "and that ought to be taken
into account, not to extenuate, but to explain, their cannibal habits. Quadrupeds,
and even birds, are rare on these inhospitable shores, so that the Maories have
always eaten human flesh. There are even 'man-eating seasons,' as there are in


civilized countries hunting seasons. Then begin the great wars, and whole tribes
are served up on the tables of the conquerors."

"Well, then," said Glenarvan, "according to your mode of reasoning, Paganel,
cannibalism will not cease in New Zealand until her pastures teem with sheep
and oxen."

"Evidently, my dear Lord; and even then it will take years to wean them from
Maori flesh, which they prefer to all others; for the children will still have a
relish for what their fathers so highly appreciated. According to them it tastes
like pork, with even more flavor. As to white men's flesh, they do not like it so
well, because the whites eat salt with their food, which gives a peculiar flavor,
not to the taste of connoisseurs."

"They are dainty," said the Major. "But, black or white, do they eat it raw, or
cook it?"

"Why, what is that to you, Mr. McNabbs?" cried Robert.

"What is that to me!" exclaimed the Major, earnestly. "If I am to make a meal
a cannibal, I should prefer being cooked."

"Why?"

"Because then I should be sure of not being eaten alive!"

"Very good. Major," said Paganel; "but suppose they cooked you alive?"
"The fact is," answered the Major, "I would not give half-a-crown for the
choice!"

"Well, McNabbs, if it will comfort you--you may as well be told-- the New
Zealanders do not eat flesh without cooking or smoking it. They are very clever
and experienced in cookery. For my part, I very much dislike the idea of being
eaten! The idea of ending one's life in the maw of a savage! bah!"

"The conclusion of all," said John Mangles, "is that we must not fall into
their hands. Let us hope that one day Christianity will abolish all these
monstrous customs."

"Yes, we must hope so," replied Paganel; "but, believe me, a savage who has
tasted human flesh, is not easily persuaded to forego it. I will relate two facts
which prove it."

"By all means let us have the facts, Paganel," said Glenarvan.

"The first is narrated in the chronicles of the Jesuit Society in Brazil. A
Portuguese missionary was one day visiting an old Brazilian woman who was
very ill. She had only a few days to live. The Jesuit inculcated the truths of
religion, which the dying woman accepted, without objection. Then having
attended to her spiritual wants, he bethought himself of her bodily needs, and
offered her some European delicacies. ‘Alas,’ said she, 'my digestion is too weak
to bear any kind of food. There is only one thing I could fancy, and nobody here


fo


=


could get it for me.’ 'What is it?’ asked the Jesuit. 'Ah! my son,’ said she, 'it is the
hand of a little boy! I feel as if I should enjoy munching the little bones!"

"Horrid! but I wonder is it so very nice?" said Robert.

"My second tale will answer you, my boy," said Paganel: "One day a
missionary was reproving a cannibal for the horrible custom, so abhorrent to
God's laws, of eating human flesh! 'And beside,’ said he, ‘it must be so nasty!’
'Oh, father,’ said the savage, looking greedily at the missionary, 'say that God
forbids it! That is a reason for what you tell us. But don't say it is nasty! If you
had only tasted it!"


CHAPTER VI A DREADED COUNTRY


PAGANEL'S facts were indisputable. The cruelty of the New Zealanders was
beyond a doubt, therefore it was dangerous to land. But had the danger been a
hundredfold greater, it had to be faced. John Mangles felt the necessity of
leaving without delay a vessel doomed to certain and speedy destruction. There
were two dangers, one certain and the other probable, but no one could hesitate
between them.

As to their chance of being picked up by a passing vessel, they could not
reasonably hope for it. The MACQUARIE was not in the track of ships bound to
New Zealand. They keep further north for Auckland, further south for New
Plymouth, and the ship had struck just between these two points, on the desert
region of the shores of Ika-na-Mani, a dangerous, difficult coast, and infested by
desperate characters.

"When shall we get away?" asked Glenarvan.

"To-morrow morning at ten o'clock," replied John Mangles. "The tide will
then turn and carry us to land."

Next day, February 5, at eight o'clock, the raft was finished. John had given
all his attention to the building of this structure. The foreyard, which did very
well for mooring the anchors, was quite inadequate to the transport of passengers
and provisions. What was needed was a strong, manageable raft, that would
resist the force of the waves during a passage of nine miles. Nothing but the
masts could supply suitable materials.

Wilson and Mulrady set to work; the rigging was cut clear, and the
mainmast, chopped away at the base, fell over the starboard rail, which crashed
under its weight. The MACQUARIE was thus razed like a pontoon.

When the lower mast, the topmasts, and the royals were sawn and split, the
principal pieces of the raft were ready. They were then joined to the fragments of
the foremast and the whole was fastened securely together. John took the
precaution to place in the interstices half a dozen empty barrels, which would
raise the structure above the level of the water. On this strong foundation, Wilson
laid a kind of floor in open work, made of the gratings off the hatches. The spray
could then dash on the raft without staying there, and the passengers would be
kept dry. In addition to this, the hose-pipes firmly lashed together formed a kind
of circular barrier which protected the deck from the waves.

That morning, John seeing that the wind was in their favor, rigged up the
royal-yard in the middle of the raft as a mast. It was stayed with shrouds, and


carried a makeshift sail. A large broad-bladed oar was fixed behind to act as a
rudder in case the wind was sufficient to require it. The greatest pains had been
expended on strengthening the raft to resist the force of the waves, but the
question remained whether, in the event of a change of wind, they could steer, or
indeed, whether they could hope ever to reach the land.

At nine o'clock they began to load. First came the provisions, in quantity
sufficient to last till they should reach Auckland, for they could not count on the
productions of this barren region.

Olbinett's stores furnished some preserved meat which remained of the
purchase made for their voyage in the MACQUARIE. This was but a scanty
resource. They had to fall back on the coarse viands of the ship; sea biscuits of
inferior quality, and two casks of salt fish. The steward was quite crestfallen.

These provisions were put in hermetically sealed cases, staunch and safe
from sea water, and then lowered on to the raft and strongly lashed to the foot of
the mast. The arms and ammunition were piled in a dry corner. Fortunately the
travelers were well armed with carbines and revolvers.

A holding anchor was also put on board in case John should be unable to
make the land in one tide, and would have to seek moorings.

At ten o'clock the tide turned. The breeze blew gently from the northwest,
and a slight swell rocked the frail craft.

"Are we ready?" asked John.

"All ready, captain," answered Wilson.

"All aboard!" cried John.

Lady Helena and Mary Grant descended by a rope ladder, and took their
station at the foot of the mast on the cases of provisions, their companions near
them. Wilson took the helm. John stood by the tackle, and Mulrady cut the line
which held the raft to the ship's side.

The sail was spread, and the frail structure commenced its progress toward
the land, aided by wind and tide. The coast was about nine miles off, a distance
that a boat with good oars would have accomplished in three hours. But with a
raft allowance must be made. If the wind held, they might reach the land in one
tide. But if the breeze died away, the ebb would carry them away from the shore,
and they would be compelled to anchor and wait for the next tide, a serious
consideration, and one that filled John Mangles with anxiety.

Still he hoped to succeed. The wind freshened. The tide had turned at ten
o'clock, and by three they must either make the land or anchor to save
themselves from being carried out to sea. They made a good start. Little by little
the black line of the reefs and the yellow banks of sand disappeared under the
swelling tide. Extreme watchfulness and perfect skill were necessary to avoid


these submerged rocks, and steer a bark that did not readily answer to the helm,
and that constantly broke off.

At noon they were still five miles from shore. A tolerably clear sky allowed
them to make out the principal features of the land. In the northeast rose a
mountain about 2,300 feet high, whose sharply defined outline was exactly like
the grinning face of a monkey turned toward the sky. It was Pirongia, which the
map gave as exactly on the 38th parallel.

At half-past twelve, Paganel remarked that all the rocks had disappeared
under the rising tide.

"All but one," answered Lady Helena.

"Which, Madam?" asked Paganel.

"There," replied she, pointing to a black speck a mile off.

"Yes, indeed," said Paganel. "Let us try to ascertain its position, so as not to
get too near it, for the sea will soon conceal it."

"It is exactly in a line with the northern slope of the mountain," said John
Mangles. "Wilson, mind you give it a wide berth."

"Yes, captain," answered the sailor, throwing his whole weight on the great
oar that steered the raft.

In half an hour they had made half a mile. But, strange to say, the black point
still rose above the waves.

John looked attentively, and in order to make it out, borrowed Paganel's
telescope.

"That is no reef," said he, after a moment; "it is something floating, which
rises and falls with the swell."

"Is it part of the mast of the MACQUARIE?" asked Lady Helena.

"No," said Glenarvan, "none of her timbers could have come so far."

"Stay!" said John Mangles; "I know it! It is the boat."

"The ship's boat?" exclaimed Glenarvan.

"Yes, my lord. The ship's boat, keel up."

"The unfortunate creatures," cried Lady Helena, "they have perished!"

"Yes, Madam," replied John Mangles, "they must have perished, for in the
midst of these breakers in a heavy swell on that pitchy night, they ran to certain
death."

For a few minutes the passengers were silent. They gazed at the frail craft as
they drew near it. It must evidently have capsized about four miles from the
shore, and not one of the crew could have escaped.

"But this boat may be of use to us," said Glenarvan.

"That is true," answered John Mangles. "Keep her up, Wilson."

The direction was slightly changed, but the breeze fell gradually, and it was


two hours before they reached the boat.

Mulrady, stationed forward, fended off the blow, and the yawl was drawn
alongside.

"Empty?" asked John Mangles.

"Yes, captain,” answered the sailor, "the boat is empty. and all its seams are
open. It is of no use to us."

"No use at all?" said McNabbs.

"None at all," said John Mangles.

"It is good for nothing but to burn."

"T regret it," said Paganel, "for the yawl might have taken us to Auckland."

"We must bear our fate, Monsieur Paganel," replied John Mangles. "But, for
my part, in such a stormy sea I prefer our raft to that crazy boat. A very slight
shock would be enough to break her up. Therefore, my lord, we have nothing to
detain us further."

"As you think best, John."

"On then, Wilson," said John, "and bear straight for the land."

There was still an hour before the turn of the tide. In that time they might
make two miles. But the wind soon fell almost entirely, and the raft became
nearly motionless, and soon began to drift to seaward under the influence of the
ebb-tide.

John did not hesitate a moment.

"Let go the anchor," said he.

Mulrady, who stood to execute this order, let go the anchor in five fathoms
water. The raft backed about two fathoms on the line, which was then at full
stretch. The sail was taken in, and everything made snug for a tedious period of
inaction.

The returning tide would not occur till nine o'clock in the evening; and as
John Mangles did not care to go on in the dark, the anchorage was for the night,
or at least till five o'clock in the morning, land being in sight at a distance of less
than three miles.

A considerable swell raised the waves, and seemed to set in continuously
toward the coast, and perceiving this, Glenarvan asked John why he did not take
advantage of this swell to get nearer to the land.

"Your Lordship is deceived by an optical illusion," said the young captain.
"Although the swell seems to carry the waves landward, it does not really move
at all. It is mere undulating molecular motion, nothing more. Throw a piece of
wood overboard and you will see that it will remain quite stationary except as
the tide affects it. There is nothing for it but patience."

"And dinner," said the Major.


Olbinett unpacked some dried meat and a dozen biscuits. The steward
blushed as he proffered the meager bill of fare. But it was received with a good
grace, even by the ladies, who, however, had not much appetite, owing to the
violent motion.

This motion, produced by the jerking of the raft on the cable, while she lay
head on to the sea, was very severe and fatiguing. The blows of the short,
tumbling seas were as severe as if she had been striking on a submerged rock.
Sometimes it was hard to believe that she was not aground. The cable strained
violently, and every half hour John had to take in a fathom to ease it. Without
this precaution it would certainly have given way, and the raft must have drifted
to destruction.

John's anxiety may easily be understood. His cable might break, or his
anchor lose its hold, and in either case the danger was imminent.

Night drew on; the sun's disc, enlarged by refraction, was dipping blood-red
below the horizon. The distant waves glittered in the west, and sparkled like
sheets of liquid silver. Nothing was to be seen in that direction but sky and water,
except one sharply-defined object, the hull of the MACQUARIE motionless on
her rocky bed.

The short twilight postponed the darkness only by a few minutes, and soon
the coast outline, which bounded the view on the east and north, was lost in
darkness.

The shipwrecked party were in an agonizing situation on their narrow raft,
and overtaken by the shades of night.

Some of the party fell into a troubled sleep, a prey to evil dreams; others
could not close an eye. When the day dawned, the whole party were worn out
with fatigue.

With the rising tide the wind blew again toward the land. It was six o'clock in
the morming, and there was no time to lose. John arranged everything for
resuming their voyage, and then he ordered the anchor to be weighed. But the
anchor flukes had been so imbedded in the sand by the repeated jerks of the
cable, that without a windlass it was impossible to detach it, even with the tackle
which Wilson had improvised.

Half an hour was lost in vain efforts. John, impatient of delay, cut the rope,
thus sacrificing his anchor, and also the possibility of anchoring again if this tide
failed to carry them to land. But he decided that further delay was not to be
thought of, and an ax-blow committed the raft to the mercy of the wind, assisted
by a current of two knots an hour.

The sail was spread. They drifted slowly toward the land, which rose in gray,
hazy masses, on a background of sky illumined by the rising sun. The reef was


dexterously avoided and doubled, but with the fitful breeze the raft could not get
near the shore. What toil and pain to reach a coast so full of danger when
attained.

At nine o'clock, the land was less than a mile off. It was a steeply-shelving
shore, fringed with breakers; a practicable landing-place had to be discovered.

Gradually the breeze grew fainter, and then ceased enV. IV Verne tirely. The
sail flapped idly against the mast, and John had it furled. The tide alone carried
the raft to the shore, but steering had become impossible, and its passage was
impeded by immense bands of FUCUS.

At ten o'clock John found himself almost at a stand-still, not three cables'
lengths from the shore. Having lost their anchor, they were at the mercy of the
ebb-tide.

John clenched his hands; he was racked with anxiety, and cast frenzied
glances toward this inaccessible shore.

In the midst of his perplexities, a shock was felt. The raft stood still. It had
landed on a sand-bank, twenty-five fathoms from the coast.

Glenarvan, Robert, Wilson, and Mulrady, jumped into the water. The raft was
firmly moored to the nearest rocks. The ladies were carried to land without
wetting a fold of their dresses, and soon the whole party, with their arms and
provisions, were finally landed on these much dreaded New Zealand shores.


CHAPTER VII THE MAORI WAR


GLENARVAN would have liked to start without an hour's delay, and follow
the coast to Auckland. But since the morning heavy clouds had been gathering,
and toward eleven o'clock, after the landing was effected, the vapors condensed
into violent rain, so that instead of starting they had to look for shelter.

Wilson was fortunate enough to discover what just suited their wants: a
grotto hollowed out by the sea in the basaltic rocks. Here the travelers took
shelter with their arms and provisions. In the cave they found a ready-garnered
store of dried sea-weed, which formed a convenient couch; for fire, they lighted
some wood near the mouth of the cavern, and dried themselves as well as they
could.

John hoped that the duration of this deluge of rain would be in an inverse
ratio to its violence, but he was doomed to disappointment. Hours passed
without any abatement of its fury. Toward noon the wind freshened, and
increased the force of the storm. The most patient of men would have rebelled at
such an untoward incident; but what could be done; without any vehicle, they
could not brave such a tempest; and, after all, unless the natives appeared on the
scene, a delay of twelve hours was not so much consequence, as the journey to
Auckland was only a matter of a few days. During this involuntary halt, the
conversation turned on the incidents of the New Zealand war. But to understand
and appreciate the critical position into which these MACQUARIE passengers
were thrown, something ought to be known of the history of the struggle which
had deluged the island of Ika-na-Mani with blood.

Since the arrival of Abel Tasman in Cook's Strait, on the 16th of December,
1642, though the New Zealanders had often been visited by European vessels,
they had maintained their liberty in their several islands. No European power
had thought of taking possession of this archipelago, which commands the whole
Pacific Ocean. The missionaries stationed at various points were the sole
channels of Christian civilization. Some of them, especially the Anglicans,
prepared the minds of the New Zealand chiefs for submitting to the English
yoke. It was cleverly managed, and these chiefs were influenced to sign a letter
addressed to Queen Victoria to ask her protection. But the most clearsighted of
them saw the folly of this step; and one of them, after having affixed his tattoo-
mark to the letter by way of signature, uttered these prophetic words: "We have
lost our country! henceforth it is not ours; soon the stranger will come and take
it, and we shall be his slaves."


And so it was; on January 29, 1840, the English corvette HERALD arrived
to claim possession.

From the year 1840, till the day the DUNCAN left the Clyde, nothing had
happened here that Paganel did not know and he was ready to impart his
information to his companions.

"Madam," said he, in answer to Lady Helena's questions, "I must repeat what
I had occasion to remark before, that the New Zealanders are a courageous
people, who yielded for a moment, but afterward fought foot to foot against the
English invaders. The Maori tribes are organized like the old clans of Scotland.
They are so many great families owning a chief, who is very jealous of his
prerogative. The men of this race are proud and brave, one tribe tall, with
straight hair, like the Maltese, or the Jews of Bagdad; the other smaller, thickset
like mulattoes, but robust, haughty, and warlike. They had a famous chief,
named Hihi, a real Vercingetorix, so that you need not be astonished that the war
with the English has become chronic in the Northern Island, for in it is the
famous tribe of the Waikatos, who defend their lands under the leadership of
William Thompson."

"But," said John Mangles, "are not the English in possession of the principal
points in New Zealand?"

"Certainly, dear John," replied Paganel. "After Captain Hobson took formal
possession, and became governor, nine colonies were founded at various times
between 1840 and 1862, in the most favorable situations. These formed the
nucleus of nine provinces, four in the North Island and five in the southern
island, with a total population of 184,346 inhabitants on the 30th of June, 1864."

"But what about this interminable war?" asked John Mangles.

"Well," said Paganel, "six long months have gone by since we left Europe,
and I cannot say what may have happened during that time, with the exception
of a few facts which I gathered from the newspapers of Maryborough and
Seymour during our Australian journey. At that time the fighting was very lively
in the Northern Island."

"And when did the war commence?" asked Mary Grant.

"Recommence, you mean, my dear young lady," replied Paganel; "for there
was an insurrection so far back as 1845. The present war began toward the close
of 1863; but long before that date the Maories were occupied in making
preparations to shake off the English yoke. The national party among the natives
carried on an active propaganda for the election of a Maori ruler. The object was
to make old Potatau king, and to fix as the capital of the new kingdom his
village, which lay between the Waikato and Waipa Rivers. Potatau was an old
man, remarkable rather for cunning than bravery; but he had a Prime Minister


who was both intelligent and energetic, a descendant of the Ngatihahuas, who
occupied the isthmus before the arrival of the strangers. This minister, William
Thompson, became the soul of the War of Independence, and organized the
Maori troops, with great skill. Under this guidance a Taranaki chief gathered the
scattered tribes around the same flag; a Waikato chief formed a ‘Land League,’
intended to prevent the natives from selling their land to the English
Government, and warlike feasts were held just as in civilized countries on the
verge of revolution. The English newspapers began to notice these alarming
symptoms, and the government became seriously disturbed at these ‘Land
League’ proceedings. In short, the train was laid, and the mine was ready to
explode. Nothing was wanted but the spark, or rather the shock of rival interests
to produce the spark.

"This shock took place in 1860, in the Taranaki province on the southwest
coast of Ika-na-Mani. A native had six hundred acres of land in the
neighborhood of New Plymouth. He sold them to the English Government; but
when the surveyor came to measure the purchased land, the chief Kingi
protested, and by the month of March he had made the six hundred acres in
question into a fortified camp, surrounded with high palisades. Some days after
Colonel Gold carried this fortress at the head of his troops, and that day heard
the first shot fired of the native war."

"Have the rebels been successful up to this time?"

"Yes, Madam, and the English themselves have often been compelled to
admire the courage and bravery of the New Zealanders. Their mode of warfare is
of the guerilla type; they form skirmishing parties, come down in small
detachments, and pillage the colonists' homes. General Cameron had no easy
time in the campaigns, during which every bush had to be searched. In 1863,
after a long and sanguinary struggle, the Maories were entrenched in strong and
fortified position on the Upper Waikato, at the end of a chain of steep hills, and
covered by three miles of forts. The native prophets called on all the Maori
population to defend the soil, and promised the extermination of the pakekas, or
white men. General Cameron had three thousand volunteers at his disposal, and
they gave no quarter to the Maories after the barbarous murder of Captain
Sprent. Several bloody engagements took place; in some instances the fighting
lasted twelve hours before the Maories yielded to the English cannonade. The
heart of the army was the fierce Waikato tribe under William Thompson. This
native general commanded at the outset 2,500 warriors, afterward increased to
8,000. The men of Shongi and Heki, two powerful chiefs, came to his assistance.
The women took their part in the most trying labors of this patriotic war. But
right has not always might. After severe struggles General Cameron succeeded


in subduing the Waikato district, but empty and depopulated, for the Maories
escaped in all directions. Some wonderful exploits were related. Four hundred
Maories who were shut up in the fortress of Orakau, besieged by 1,000 English,
under Brigadier-General Carey, without water or provisions, refused to
surrender, but one day at noon cut their way through the then decimated 40th
Regiment, and escaped to the marshes.”

"But," asked John Mangles, "did the submission of the Waikato district put
an end to this sanguinary war?"

"No, my friend," replied Paganel. "The English resolved to march on
Taranaki province and besiege Mataitawa, William Thompson's fortress. But
they did not carry it without great loss. Just as I was leaving Paris, I heard that
the Governor and the General had accepted the submission of the Tauranga
tribes, and left them in possession of three-fourths of their lands. It was also
rumored that the principal chief of the rebellion, William Thompson, was
inclined to surrender, but the Australian papers have not confirmed this, but
rather the contrary, and I should not be surprised to find that at this moment the
war is going on with renewed vigor."

"Then, according to you, Paganel," said Glenarvan, "this struggle is still
going on in the provinces of Auckland and Taranaki?"

"T think so."

"This very province where the MACQUARIE'S wreck has deposited us."

"Exactly. We have landed a few miles above Kawhia harbor, where the
Maori flag is probably still floating."

"Then our most prudent course would be to keep toward the north,"
remarked Glenarvan.

"By far the most prudent," said Paganel. "The New Zealanders are incensed
against Europeans, and especially against the English. Therefore let us avoid
falling into their hands."

"We might have the good fortune to fall in with a detachment of European
troops," said Lady Helena.

"We may, Madam," replied the geographer; "but I do not expect it. Detached
parties do not like to go far into the country, where the smallest tussock, the
thinnest brushwood, may conceal an accomplished marksman. I don't fancy we
shall pick up an escort of the 40th Regiment. But there are mission-stations on
this west coast, and we shall be able to make them our halting-places till we get
to Auckland."

CHAPTER VIII ON THE ROAD TO AUCKLAND

ON the 7th of February, at six o'clock in the morning, the signal for departure
was given by Glenarvan. During the night the rain had ceased. The sky was


veiled with light gray clouds, which moderated the heat of the sun, and allowed
the travelers to venture on a journey by day.

Paganel had measured on the map a distance of eighty miles between Point
Kawhia and Auckland; it was an eight days' journey if they made ten miles a
day. But instead of following the windings of the coast, he thought it better to
make for a point thirty miles off, at the confluence of the Waikato and the Waipa,
at the village of Ngarnavahia. The "overland track" passes that point, and is
rather a path than a road, practicable for the vehicles which go almost across the
island, from Napier, in Hawke's Bay, to Auckland. From this village it would be
easy to reach Drury, and there they could rest in an excellent hotel, highly
recommended by Dr. Hochstetter.

The travelers, each carrying a share of the provisions, commenced to follow
the shore of Aotea Bay. From prudential motives they did not allow themselves
to straggle, and by instinct they kept a look-out over the undulating plains to the
eastward, ready with their loaded carbines. Paganel, map in hand, took a
professional pleasure in verifying the minutest details.

The country looked like an immense prairie which faded into distance, and
promised an easy walk. But the travelers were undeceived when they came to the
edge of this verdant plain. The grass gave way to a low scrub of small bushes
bearing little white flowers, mixed with those innumerable tall ferns with which
the lands of New Zealand abound. They had to cut a path across the plain,
through these woody stems, and this was a matter of some difficulty, but at eight
o'clock in the evening the first slopes of the Hakarihoata Ranges were turned,
and the party camped immediately. After a fourteen miles' march, they might
well think of resting.

Neither wagon or tent being available, they sought repose beneath some
magnificent Norfolk Island pines. They had plenty of rugs which make good
beds. Glenarvan took every possible precaution for the night. His companions
and he, well armed, were to watch in turns, two and two, till daybreak. No fires
were lighted. Barriers of fire are a potent preservation from wild beasts, but New
Zealand has neither tiger, nor lion, nor bear, nor any wild animal, but the Maori
adequately fills their place, and a fire would only have served to attract this two-
footed jaguar.

The night passed pleasantly with the exception of the attack of the sand-flies,
called by the natives, "ngamu," and the visit of the audacious family of rats, who
exercised their teeth on the provisions.

Next day, on the 8th of February, Paganel rose more sanguine, and almost
reconciled to the country. The Maories, whom he particularly dreaded, had not
yet appeared, and these ferocious cannibals had not molested him even in his


dreams. "I begin to think that our little journey will end favorably. This evening
we shall reach the confluence of the Waipa and Waikato, and after that there is
not much chance of meeting natives on the way to Auckland."

"How far is it now," said Glenarvan, "to the confluence of the Waipa and
Waikato?"

"Fifteen miles; just about what we did yesterday."

"But we shall be terribly delayed if this interminable scrub continues to
obstruct our path."

"No," said Paganel, "we shall follow the banks of the Waipa, and then we
shall have no obstacle, but on the contrary, a very easy road."

"Well, then," said Glenarvan, seeing the ladies ready, "let us make a start."

During the early part of the day, the thick brushwood seriously impeded their
progress. Neither wagon nor horses could have passed where travelers passed, so
that their Australian vehicle was but slightly regretted. Until practicable wagon
roads are cut through these forests of scrub, New Zealand will only be accessible
to foot passengers. The ferns, whose name is legion, concur with the Maories in
keeping strangers off the lands.

The little party overcame many obstacles in crossing the plains in which the
Hakarihoata Ranges rise. But before noon they reached the banks of the Waipa,
and followed the northward course of the river.

The Major and Robert, without leaving their companions, shot some snipe
and partridge under the low shrubs of the plain. Olbinett, to save time, plucked
the birds as he went along.

Paganel was less absorbed by the culinary importance of the game than by
the desire of obtaining some bird peculiar to New Zealand. His curiosity as a
naturalist overcame his hunger as a traveler. He called to mind the peculiarities
of the "tui" of the natives, sometimes called the mocking-bird from its incessant
chuckle, and sometimes "the parson," in allusion to the white cravat it wears
over its black, cassock-like plumage.

"The tui," said Paganel to the Major, "grows so fat during the Winter that it
makes him ill, and prevents him from flying. Then he tears his breast with his
beak, to relieve himself of his fat, and so becomes lighter. Does not that seem to
you singular, McNabbs?"

"So singular that I don't believe a word of it," replied the Major.

Paganel, to his great regret, could not find a single specimen, or he might
have shown the incredulous Major the bloody scars on the breast. But he was
more fortunate with a strange animal which, hunted by men, cats and dogs, has
fled toward the unoccupied country, and is fast disappearing from the fauna of
New Zealand. Robert, searching like a ferret, came upon a nest made of


interwoven roots, and in it a pair of birds destitute of wings and tail, with four
toes, a long snipe-like beak, and a covering of white feathers over the whole
body, singular creatures, which seemed to connect the oviparous tribes with the
mam-mifers.

It was the New Zealand "kiwi," the Apteryx australis of naturalists, which
lives with equal satisfaction on larvae, insects, worms or seeds. This bird is
peculiar to the country. It has been introduced into very few of the zoological
collections of Europe. Its graceless shape and comical motions have always
attracted the notice of travelers, and during the great exploration of the Astrolabe
and the Zelee, Dumont d'Urville was principally charged by the Academy of
Sciences to bring back a specimen of these singular birds. But in spite of rewards
offered to the natives, he could not obtain a single specimen.

Paganel, who was elated at such a piece of luck, tied the two birds together,
and carried them along with the intention of presenting them to the Jardin des
Plantes, in Paris. "Presented by M. Jacques Paganel." He mentally saw the
flattering inscription on the handsomest cage in the gardens. Sanguine
geographer!

The party pursued their way without fatigue along the banks of the Waipa.
The country was quite deserted; not a trace of natives, nor any track that could
betray the existence of man. The stream was fringed with tall bushes, or glided
along sloping banks, so that nothing obstructed the view of the low range of hills
which closed the eastern end of the valley. With their grotesque shapes, and their
outlines lost in a deceptive haze, they brought to mind giant animals, worthy of
antediluvian times. They might have been a herd of enormous whales, suddenly
turned to stone. These disrupted masses proclaimed their essentially volcanic
character. New Zealand is, in fact, a formation of recent plutonic origin. Its
emergence from the sea is constantly increasing. Some points are known to have
risen six feet in twenty years. Fire still runs across its center, shakes it, convulses
it, and finds an outlet in many places by the mouths of geysers and the craters of
volcanoes.

At four in the afternoon, nine miles had been easily accomplished.
According to the map which Paganel constantly referred to, the confluence of
the Waipa and Waikato ought to be reached about five miles further on, and there
the night halt could be made. Two or three days would then suffice for the fifty
miles which lay between them and the capital; and if Glenarvan happened to fall
in with the mail coach that plies between Hawkes' Bay and Auckland twice a
month, eight hours would be sufficient.

"Therefore," said Glenarvan, "we shall be obliged to camp during the night
once more."


"Yes," said Paganel, "but I hope for the last time."

"IT am very glad to think so, for it is very trying for Lady Helena and Mary
Grant."

"And they never utter a murmur," added John Mangles. "But I think I heard
you mention a village at the confluence of these rivers."

"Yes," said the geographer, "here it is, marked on Johnston's map. It is
Ngarnavahia, two miles below the junction."

"Well, could we not stay there for the night? Lady Helena and Miss Grant
would not grudge two miles more to find a hotel even of a humble character."

"A hotel!" cried Paganel, "a hotel in a Maori village! you would not find an
inn, not a tavern! This village will be a mere cluster of huts, and so far from
seeking rest there, my advice is that you give it a wide berth."

"Your old fears, Paganel!" retorted Glenarvan.

"My dear Lord, where Maories are concerned, distrust is safer than
confidence. I do not know on what terms they are with the English, whether the
insurrection is suppressed or successful, or whether indeed the war may not be
going on with full vigor. Modesty apart, people like us would be a prize, and I
must say, I would rather forego a taste of Maori hospitality. I think it certainly
more prudent to avoid this village of Ngarnavahia, to skirt it at a distance, so as
to avoid all encounters with the natives. When we reach Drury it will be another
thing, and there our brave ladies will be able to recruit their strength at their
leisure."

This advice prevailed. Lady Helena preferred to pass another night in the
open air, and not to expose her companions to danger. Neither Mary Grant or she
wished to halt, and they continued their march along the river.

Two hours later, the first shades of evening began to fall. The sun, before
disappearing below the western horizon, darted some bright rays through an
opening in the clouds. The distant eastern summits were empurpled with the
parting glories of the day. It was like a flying salute addressed to the way-worn
travelers.

Glenarvan and his friends hastened their steps, they knew how short the
twilight is in this high latitude, and how quickly the night follows it. They were
very anxious to reach the confluence of the two rivers before the darkness
overtook them. But a thick fog rose from the ground, and made it very difficult
to see the way.

Fortunately hearing stood them in the stead of sight; shortly a nearer sound
of water indicated that the confluence was at hand. At eight o'clock the little
troop arrived at the point where the Waipa loses itself in the Waikato, with a
moaning sound of meeting waves.


"There is the Waikato!" cried Paganel, "and the road to Auckland is along its
right bank."

"We shall see that to-morrow," said the Major, "Let us camp here. It seems to
me that that dark shadow is that of a little clump of trees grown expressly to
shelter us. Let us have supper and then get some sleep."

"Supper by all means," said Paganel, "but no fire; nothing but biscuit and
dried meat. We have reached this spot incognito, let us try and get away in the
same manner. By good luck, the fog is in our favor."

The clump of trees was reached and all concurred in the wish of the
geographer. The cold supper was eaten without a sound, and presently a
profound sleep overcame the travelers, who were tolerably fatigued with their
fifteen miles' march.


CHAPTER IX INTRODUCTION TO THE
CANNIBALS


THE next morning at daybreak a thick fog was clinging to the surface of the
river. A portion of the vapors that saturated the air were condensed by the cold,
and lay as a dense cloud on the water. But the rays of the sun soon broke through
the watery mass and melted it away.

A tongue of land, sharply pointed and bristling with bushes, projected into
the uniting streams. The swifter waters of the Waipa rushed against the current
of the Waikato for a quarter of a mile before they mingled with it; but the calm
and majestic river soon quieted the noisy stream and carried it off quietly in its
course to the Pacific Ocean.

When the vapor disappeared, a boat was seen ascending the current of the
Waikato. It was a canoe seventy feet long, five broad, and three deep; the prow
raised like that of a Venetian gondola, and the whole hollowed out of a trunk of a
kahikatea. A bed of dry fern was laid at the bottom. It was swiftly rowed by eight
oars, and steered with a paddle by a man seated in the stern.

This man was a tall Maori, about forty-five years of age, broad-chested,
muscular, with powerfully developed hands and feet. His prominent and deeply-
furrowed brow, his fierce look, and sinister expression, gave him a formidable
aspect.

Tattooing, or "moko," as the New Zealanders call it, is a mark of great
distinction. None is worthy of these honorary lines, who has not distinguished
himself in repeated fights. The slaves and the lower class can not obtain this
decoration. Chiefs of high position may be known by the finish and precision
and truth of the design, which sometimes covers their whole bodies with the
figures of animals. Some are found to undergo the painful operation of "moko"
five times. The more illustrious, the more illustrated, is the rule of New Zealand.

Dumont D'Urville has given some curious details as to this custom. He justly
observes that "moko" is the counterpart of the armorial bearings of which many
families in Europe are so vain. But he remarks that there is this difference: the
armorial bearings of Europe are frequently a proof only of the merits of the first
who bore them, and are no certificate of the merits of his descendants; while the
individual coat-of-arms of the Maori is an irrefragible proof that it was earned by
the display of extraordinary personal courage.

The practice of tattooing, independently of the consideration it procures, has
also a useful aspect. It gives the cu-taneous system an increased thickness,


enabling it to resist the inclemency of the season and the incessant attacks of the
mosquito.

As to the chief who was steering the canoe, there could be no mistake. The
sharpened albatross bone used by the Maori tattooer, had five times scored his
countenance. He was in his fifth edition, and betrayed it in his haughty bearing.

His figure, draped in a large mat woven of "phormium" trimmed with
dogskins, was clothed with a pair of cotton drawers, blood-stained from recent
combats. From the pendant lobe of his ears hung earrings of green jade, and
round his neck a quivering necklace of "pounamous," a kind of jade stone sacred
among the New Zealanders. At his side lay an English rifle, and a "patou-patou,"
a kind of two-headed ax of an emerald color, and eighteen inches long. Beside
him sat nine armed warriors of inferior rank, ferocious-looking fellows, some of
them suffering from recent wounds. They sat quite motionless, wrapped in their
flax mantles. Three savage-looking dogs lay at their feet. The eight rowers in the
prow seemed to be servants or slaves of the chief. They rowed vigorously, and
propelled the boat against the not very rapid current of the Waikato, with
extraordinary velocity.

In the center of this long canoe, with their feet tied together, sat ten European
prisoners closely packed together.

It was Glenarvan and Lady Helena, Mary Grant, Robert, Paganel, the Major,
John Mangles, the steward, and the two sailors.

The night before, the little band had unwittingly, owing to the mist,
encamped in the midst of a numerous party of natives. Toward the middle of the
night they were surprised in their sleep, were made prisoners, and carried on
board the canoe. They had not been ill-treated, so far, but all attempts at
resistance had been vain. Their arms and ammunition were in the hands of the
savages, and they would soon have been targets for their own balls.

They were soon aware, from a few English words used by the natives, that
they were a retreating party of the tribe who had been beaten and decimated by
the English troops, and were on their way back to the Upper Waikato. The Maori
chief, whose principal warriors had been picked off by the soldiers of the 42nd
Regiment, was returning to make a final appeal to the tribes of the Waikato
district, so that he might go to the aid of the indomitable William Thompson,
who was still holding his own against the conquerors. The chief's name was
"Kai-Koumou," a name of evil boding in the native language, meaning "He who
eats the limbs of his enemy." He was bold and brave, but his cruelty was equally
remarkable. No pity was to be expected at his hands. His name was well known
to the English soldiers, and a price had been set on his head by the governor of
New Zealand.


This terrible blow befell Glenarvan at the very moment when he was about
to reach the long-desired haven of Auckland, and so regain his own country; but
no one who looked at his cool, calm features, could have guessed the anguish he
endured. Glenarvan always rose to his misfortunes. He felt that his part was to be
the strength and the example of his wife and companions; that he was the head
and chief; ready to die for the rest if circumstances required it. He was of a
deeply religious turn of mind, and never lost his trust in Providence nor his
belief in the sacred character of his enterprise. In the midst of this crowning peril
he did not give way to any feeling of regret at having been induced to venture
into this country of savages.

His companions were worthy of him; they entered into his lofty views; and
judging by their haughty demeanor, it would scarcely have been supposed that
they were hurrying to the final catastrophe. With one accord, and by Glenarvan's
advice, they resolved to affect utter indifference before the natives. It was the
only way to impress these ferocious natures. Savages in general, and particularly
the Maories, have a notion of dignity from which they never derogate. They
respect, above all things, coolness and courage. Glenarvan was aware that by
this mode of procedure, he and his companions would spare themselves needless
humiliation.

From the moment of embarking, the natives, who were very taciturn, like all
savages, had scarcely exchanged a word, but from the few sentences they did
utter, Glenarvan felt certain that the English language was familiar to them. He
therefore made up his mind to question the chief on the fate that awaited them.
Addressing himself to Kai-Koumou, he said in a perfectly unconcerned voice:

"Where are we going, chief?"

Kai-Koumou looked coolly at him and made no answer.

"What are you going to do with us?" pursued Glenarvan.

A sudden gleam flashed into the eyes of Kai-Koumou, and he said in a deep
voice:

"Exchange you, if your own people care to have you; eat you if they don't."

Glenarvan asked no further questions; but hope revived in his heart. He
concluded that some Maori chiefs had fallen into the hands of the English, and
that the natives would try to get them exchanged. So they had a chance of
salvation, and the case was not quite so desperate.

The canoe was speeding rapidly up the river. Paganel, whose excitable
temperament always rebounded from one extreme to the other, had quite
regained his spirits. He consoled himself that the natives were saving them the
trouble of the journey to the English outposts, and that was so much gain. So he
took it quite quietly and followed on the map the course of the Waikato across


the plains and valleys of the province. Lady Helena and Mary Grant, concealing
their alarm, conversed in a low voice with Glenarvan, and the keenest
physiognomists would have failed to see any anxiety in their faces.

The Waikato is the national river in New Zealand. It is to the Maories what
the Rhine is to the Germans, and the Danube to the Slavs. In its course of 200
miles it waters the finest lands of the North Island, from the province of
Wellington to the province of Auckland. It gave its name to all those indomitable
tribes of the river district, which rose en masse against the invaders.

The waters of this river are still almost strangers to any craft but the native
canoe. The most audacious tourist will scarcely venture to invade these sacred
shores; in fact, the Upper Waikato is sealed against profane Europeans.

Paganel was aware of the feelings of veneration with which the natives
regard this great arterial stream. He knew that the English and German
naturalists had never penetrated further than its junction with the Waipa. He
wondered how far the good pleasure of Kai-Koumou would carry his captives?
He could not have guessed, but for hearing the word "Taupo" repeatedly uttered
between the chief and his warriors. He consulted his map and saw that "Taupo"
was the name of a lake celebrated in geographical annals, and lying in the most
mountainous part of the island, at the southern extremity of Auckland province.
The Waikato passes through this lake and then flows on for 120 miles.


CHAPTER X A MOMENTOUS INTERVIEW


AN unfathomable gulf twenty-five miles long, and twenty miles broad was
produced, but long before historic times, by the falling in of caverns among the
trachytic lavas of the center of the island. And these waters falling from the
surrounding heights have taken possession of this vast basin. The gulf has
become a lake, but it is also an abyss, and no lead-line has yet sounded its
depths.

Such is the wondrous lake of Taupo, lying 1,250 feet above the level of the
sea, and in view of an amphitheater of mountains 2,400 feet high. On the west
are rocky peaks of great size; on the north lofty summits clothed with low trees;
on the east a broad beach with a road track, and covered with pumice stones,
which shimmer through the leafy screen of the bushes; on the southern side rise
volcanic cones behind a forest flat. Such is the majestic frame that incloses this
vast sheet of water whose roaring tempests rival the cyclones of Ocean.

The whole region boils like an immense cauldron hung over subterranean
fires. The ground vibrates from the agitation of the central furnace. Hot springs
filter out everywhere. The crust of the earth cracks in great rifts like a cake, too
quickly baked.

About a quarter of a mile off, on a craggy spur of the mountain stood a
"pah," or Maori fortress. The prisoners, whose feet and hands were liberated,
were landed one by one, and conducted into it by the warriors. The path which
led up to the intrenchment, lay across fields of "phormium" and a grove of
beautiful trees, the "kai-kateas" with persistent leaves and red berries; "dracaenas
australis," the "ti-trees" of the natives, whose crown is a graceful counterpart of
the cabbage-palm, and "huious," which are used to give a black dye to cloth.
Large doves with metallic sheen on their plumage, and a world of starlings with
reddish carmeles, flew away at the approach of the natives.

After a rather circuitous walk, Glenarvan and his party arrived at the "pah."

The fortress was defended by an outer inclosure of strong palisades, fifteen
feet high; a second line of stakes; then a fence composed of osiers, with loop-
holes, inclosed

V. IV. Verne the inner space, that is the plateau of the "pah," on which were
erected the Maori buildings, and about forty huts arranged symmetrically.

When the captives approached they were horror-struck at the sight of the
heads which adorned the posts of the inner circle. Lady Helena and Mary Grant
turned away their eyes more with disgust than with terror. These heads were


those of hostile chiefs who had fallen in battle, and whose bodies had served to
feed the conquerors. The geographer recognized that it was so, from their eye
sockets being hollow and deprived of eye-balls.

Glenarvan and his companions had taken in all this scene at a glance. They
stood near an empty house, waiting the pleasure of the chief, and exposed to the
abuse of a crowd of old crones. This troop of harpies surrounded them, shaking
their fists, howling and vociferating. Some English words that escaped their
coarse mouths left no doubt that they were clamoring for immediate vengeance.

In the midst of all these cries and threats, Lady Helena, tranquil to all
outward seeming, affected an indifference she was far from feeling. This
courageous woman made heroic efforts to restrain herself, lest she should disturb
Glenarvan's coolness. Poor Mary Grant felt her heart sink within her, and John
Mangles stood by ready to die in her behalf. His companions bore the deluge of
invectives each according to his disposition; the Major with utter indifference,
Paganel with exasperation that increased every moment.

Glenarvan, to spare Lady Helena the attacks of these witches, walked
straight up to Kai-Koumou, and pointing to the hideous group:

"Send them away," said he.

The Maori chief stared fixedly at his prisoner without speaking; and then,
with a nod, he silenced the noisy horde. Glenarvan bowed, as a sign of thanks,
and went slowly back to his place.

At this moment a hundred Maories were assembled in the "pah," old men,
full grown men, youths; the former were calm, but gloomy, awaiting the orders
of Kai-Koumou; the others gave themselves up to the most violent sorrow,
bewailing their parents and friends who had fallen in the late engagements.

Kai-Koumou was the only one of all the chiefs that obeyed the call of
William Thompson, who had returned to the lake district, and he was the first to
announce to his tribe the defeat of the national insurrection, beaten on the plains
of the lower Waikato. Of the two hundred warriors who, under his orders,
hastened to the defence of the soil, one hundred and fifty were missing on his
return. Allowing for a number being made prisoners by the invaders, how many
must be lying on the field of battle, never to return to the country of their
ancestors!

This was the secret of the outburst of grief with which the tribe saluted the
arrival of Kai-Koumou. Up to that moment nothing had been known of the last
defeat, and the fatal news fell on them like a thunder clap.

Among the savages, sorrow is always manifested by physical signs; the
parents and friends of deceased warriors, the women especially, lacerated their
faces and shoulders with sharpened shells. The blood spurted out and blended


with their tears. Deep wounds denoted great despair. The unhappy Maories,
bleeding and excited, were hideous to look upon.

There was another serious element in their grief. Not only had they lost the
relative or friend they mourned, but his bones would be missing in the family
mausoleum. In the Maori religion the possession of these relics is regarded as
indispensable to the destinies of the future life; not the perishable flesh, but the
bones, which are collected with the greatest care, cleaned, scraped, polished,
even varnished, and then deposited in the "oudoupa," that is the "house of glory."
These tombs are adorned with wooden statues, representing with perfect
exactness the tattoo of the deceased. But now their tombs would be left empty,
the religious rites would be unsolemnized, and the bones that escaped the teeth
of the wild dog would whiten without burial on the field of battle.

Then the sorrowful chorus redoubled. The menaces of the women were
intensified by the imprecations of the men against the Europeans. Abusive
epithets were lavished, the accompanying gestures became more violent. The
howl was about to end in brutal action.

Kai-Koumou, fearing that he might be overpowered by the fanatics of his
tribe, conducted his prisoners to a sacred place, on an abruptly raised plateau at
the other end of the "pah." This hut rested against a mound elevated a hundred
feet above it, which formed the steep outer buttress of the entrenchment. In this
"Ware-Atoua," sacred house, the priests or arikis taught the Maories about a
Triune God, father, son, and bird, or spirit. The large, well constructed hut,
contained the sacred and choice food which Maoui-Ranga-Rangui eats by the
mouths of his priests.

In this place, and safe for the moment from the frenzied natives, the captives
lay down on the flax mats. Lady Helena was quite exhausted, her moral energies
prostrate, and she fell helpless into her husband's arms.

Glenarvan pressed her to his bosom and said:

"Courage, my dear Helena; Heaven will not forsake us!"

Robert was scarcely in when he jumped on Wilson's shoulders, and squeezed
his head through a crevice left between the roof and the walls, from which
chaplets of amulets were hung. From that elevation he could see the whole
extent of the "pah," and as far as Kai-Koumou's house.

"They are all crowding round the chief," said he softly. "They are throwing


their arms about... . They are howling. .... Kai-Koumou is trying to speak."
Then he was silent for a few minutes.
"Kai-Koumou is speaking. . . . The savages are quieter..... They are
listening..... -


"Evidently," said the Major, "this chief has a personal interest in protecting


us. He wants to exchange his prisoners for some chiefs of his tribe! But will his
warriors consent?"

"Yes! ... They are listening..... They have dispersed, some are gone into
their huts. ... The others have left the intrenchment."

"Are you sure?" said the Major.

"Yes, Mr. McNabbs," replied Robert, "Kai-Koumou is left alone with the
warriors of his canoe..... Oh! one of them is coming up here..... 4

"Come down, Robert," said Glenarvan.

At this moment, Lady Helena who had risen, seized her husband's arm.

"Edward," she said in a resolute tone, "neither Mary Grant nor I must fall
into the hands of these savages alive!"

And so saying, she handed Glenarvan a loaded revolver.

"Firearm!" exclaimed Glenarvan, with flashing eyes.

"Yes! the Maories do not search their prisoners. But, Edward, this is for us,
not for them."

Glenarvan slipped the revolver under his coat; at the same moment the mat at
the entrance was raised, and a native entered.

He motioned to the prisoners to follow him. Glenarvan and the rest walked
across the "pah" and stopped before Kai-Koumou. He was surrounded by the
principal warriors of his tribe, and among them the Maori whose canoe joined
that of the Kai-Koumou at the confluence of Pohain-henna, on the Waikato. He
was a man about forty years of age, powerfully built and of fierce and cruel
aspect. His name was Kara-Tete, meaning "the irascible" in the native tongue.
Kai-Koumou treated him with a certain tone of respect, and by the fineness of
his tattoo, it was easy to perceive that Kara-Tete held a lofty position in the tribe,
but a keen observer would have guessed the feeling of rivalry that existed
between these two chiefs. The Major observed that the influence of Kara-Tete
gave umbrage to Kai-Koumou. They both ruled the Waikato tribes, and were
equal in authority. During this interview Kai-Koumou smiled, but his eyes
betrayed a deep-seated enmity.

Kai-Koumou interrogated Glenarvan.

"You are English?" said he.

"Yes," replied Glenarvan, unhesitatingly, as his nationality would facilitate
the exchange.

"And your companions?" said Kai-Koumou.

"My companions are English like myself. We are shipwrecked travelers, but
it may be important to state that we have taken no part in the war."

"That matters little!" was the brutal answer of Kara-Tete. "Every Englishman
is an enemy. Your people invaded our island! They robbed our fields! they


bumed our villages!"

"They were wrong!" said Glenarvan, quietly. "I say so, because I think it, not
because I am in your power."

"Listen," said Kai-Koumou, "the Tohonga, the chief priest of Noui-Atoua has
fallen into the hands of your brethren; he is a prisoner among the Pakekas. Our
deity has commanded us to ransom him. For my own part, I would rather have
torn out your heart, I would have stuck your head, and those of your
companions, on the posts of that palisade. But Noui-Atoua has spoken."

As he uttered these words, Kai-Koumou, who till now had been quite
unmoved, trembled with rage, and his features expressed intense ferocity.

Then after a few minutes' interval he proceeded more calmly.

"Do you think the English will exchange you for our Tohonga?"

Glenarvan hesitated, all the while watching the Maori chief.

"IT do not know," said he, after a moment of silence.

"Speak," returned Kai-Koumou, "is your life worth that of our Tohonga?"

"No," replied Glenarvan. "I am neither a chief nor a priest among my own
people."

Paganel, petrified at this reply, looked at Glenarvan in amazement. Kai-
Koumou appeared equally astonished.

"You doubt it then?" said he.

"I do not know," replied Glenarvan.

"Your people will not accept you as an exchange for Tohonga?"

"Me alone? no," repeated Glenarvan. "All of us perhaps they might."

"Our Maori custom," replied Kai-Koumou, "is head for head."

"Offer first these ladies in exchange for your priest," said Glenarvan,
pointing to Lady Helena and Mary Grant.

Lady Helena was about to interrupt him. But the Major held her back.

"Those two ladies," continued Glenarvan, bowing respectfully toward Lady
Helena and Mary Grant, "are personages of rank in their own country."

The warrior gazed coldly at his prisoner. An evil smile relaxed his lips for a
moment; then he controlled himself, and in a voice of ill-concealed anger:

"Do you hope to deceive Kai-Koumou with lying words, accursed Pakeka?
Can not the eyes of Kai-Koumou read hearts?"

And pointing to Lady Helena: "That is your wife?" he said.

"No! mine!" exclaimed Kara-Tete.

And then pushing his prisoners aside, he laid his hand on the shoulder of
Lady Helena, who tured pale at his touch.

"Edward!" cried the unfortunate woman in terror.

Glenarvan, without a word, raised his arm, a shot! and Kara-Tete fell at his


feet.

The sound brought a crowd of natives to the spot. A hundred arms were
ready, and Glenarvan's revolver was snatched from him.

Kai-Koumou glanced at Glenarvan with a curious expression: then with one
hand protecting Glenarvan, with the other he waved off the crowd who were
rushing on the party.

At last his voice was heard above the tumult.

"Taboo! Taboo!" he shouted.

At that word the crowd stood still before Glenarvan and his companions,
who for the time were preserved by a supernatural influence.

A few minutes after they were re-conducted to Ware-Atoua, which was their
prison. But Robert Grant and Paganel were not with them.


CHAPTER XI THE CHIEF'S FUNERAL


KAI-KOUMOU, as frequently happens among the Maories, joined the title
of ariki to that of tribal chief. He was invested with the dignity of priest, and, as
such, he had the power to throw over persons or things the superstitious
protection of the "taboo."

The "taboo," which is common to all the Polynesian races, has the primary
effect of isolating the "tabooed" person and preventing the use of "tabooed"
things. According to the Maori doctrine, anyone who laid sacrilegious hands on
what had been declared "taboo," would be punished with death by the insulted
deity, and even if the god delayed the vindication of his power, the priests took
care to accelerate his vengeance.

By the chiefs, the "taboo" is made a political engine, except in some cases,
for domestic reasons. For instance, a native is tabooed for several days when his
hair is cut; when he is tattooed; when he is building a canoe, or a house; when he
is seriously ill, and when he is dead. If excessive consumption threatens to
exterminate the fish of a river, or ruin the early crop of sweet potatoes, these
things are put under the protection of the taboo. If a chief wishes to clear his
house of hangers-on, he taboos it; if an English trader displeases him he is
tabooed. His interdict has the effect of the old royal "veto."

If an object is tabooed, no one can touch it with impunity. When a native is
under the interdict, certain aliments are denied him for a prescribed period. If he
is relieved, as regards the severe diet, his slaves feed him with the viands he is
forbidden to touch with his hands; if he is poor and has no slaves, he has to take
up the food with his mouth, like an animal.

In short, the most trifling acts of the Maories are directed and modified by
this singular custom, the deity is brought into constant contact with their daily
life. The taboo has the same weight as a law; or rather, the code of the Maories,
indisputable and undisputed, is comprised in the frequent applications of the
taboo.

As to the prisoners confined in the Ware-Atoua, it was an arbitrary taboo
which had saved them from the fury of the tribe. Some of the natives, friends
and partisans of Kai-Koumou, desisted at once on hearing their chief's voice, and
protected the captives from the rest.

Glenarvan cherished no illusive hopes as to his own fate; nothing but his
death could atone for the murder of a chief, and among these people death was
only the concluding act of a martyrdom of torture. Glenarvan, therefore, was


fully prepared to pay the penalty of the righteous indignation that nerved his
arm, but he hoped that the wrath of Kai-Koumou would not extend beyond
himself.

What a night he and his companions passed! Who could picture their agonies
or measure their sufferings? Robert and Paganel had not been restored to them,
but their fate was no doubtful matter. They were too surely the first victims of
the frenzied natives. Even McNabbs, who was always sanguine, had abandoned
hope. John Mangles was nearly frantic at the sight of Mary Grant's despair at
being separated from her brother. Glenarvan pondered over the terrible request
of Lady Helena, who preferred dying by his hand to submitting to torture and
slavery. How was he to summon the terrible courage!

"And Mary? who has a right to strike her dead?" thought John, whose heart
was broken.

Escape was clearly impossible. Ten warriors, armed to the teeth, kept watch
at the door of Ware-Atoua.

The morning of February 13th arrived. No communication had taken place
between the natives and the "tabooed" prisoners. A limited supply of provisions
was in the house, which the unhappy inmates scarcely touched. Misery deadened
the pangs of hunger. The day passed without change, and without hope; the
funeral ceremonies of the dead chief would doubtless be the signal for their
execution.

Although Glenarvan did not conceal from himself the probability that Kai-
Koumou had given up all idea of exchange, the Major still cherished a spark of
hope.

"Who knows," said he, as he reminded Glenarvan of the effect produced on
the chief by the death of Kara-Tete--"who knows but that Kai-Koumou, in his
heart, is very much obliged to you?"

But even McNabbs' remarks failed to awaken hope in Glenarvan's mind. The
next day passed without any appearance of preparation for their punishment; and
this was the reason of the delay.

The Maories believe that for three days after death the soul inhabits the body,
and therefore, for three times twenty-four hours, the corpse remains unburied.
This custom was rigorously observed. Till February 15th the "pah" was deserted.

John Mangles, hoisted on Wilson's shoulders, frequently reconnoitered the
outer defences. Not a single native was visible; only the watchful sentinels
relieving guard at the door of the Ware-Atoua.

But on the third day the huts opened; all the savages, men, women, and
children, in all several hundred Maories, assembled in the "pah," silent and calm.

Kai-Koumou came out of his house, and surrounded by the principal chiefs


of his tribe, he took his stand on a mound some feet above the level, in the center
of the enclosure. The crowd of natives formed in a half circle some distance off,
in dead silence.

At a sign from Kai-Koumou, a warrior bent his steps toward Ware-Atoua.

"Remember," said Lady Helena to her husband. Glenarvan pressed her to his
heart, and Mary Grant went closer to John Mangles, and said hurriedly:

"Lord and Lady Glenarvan cannot but think if a wife may claim death at her
husband's hands, to escape a shameful life, a betrothed wife may claim death at
the hands of her betrothed husband, to escape the same fate. John! at this last
moment I ask you, have we not long been betrothed to each other in our secret
hearts? May I rely on you, as Lady Helena relies on Lord Glenarvan?"

"Mary!" cried the young captain in his despair. "Ah! dear Mary--"

The mat was lifted, and the captives led to Kai-Koumou; the two women
were resigned to their fate; the men dissembled their sufferings with superhuman
effort.

They arrived in the presence of the Maori chief.

"You killed Kara-Tete," said he to Glenarvan.

"T did," answered Glenarvan.

"You die to-morrow at sunrise."

"Alone?" asked Glenarvan, with a beating heart.

"Oh! if our Tohonga's life was not more precious than yours!" exclaimed
Kai-Koumou, with a ferocious expression of regret.

At this moment there was a commotion among the natives. Glenarvan looked
quickly around; the crowd made way, and a warrior appeared heated by running,
and sinking with fatigue.

Kai-Koumou, as soon as he saw him, said in English, evidently for the
benefit of the captives:

"You come from the camp of the Pakekas?"

"Yes," answered the Maori.

"You have seen the prisoner, our Tohonga?"

"T have seen him."

"Alive?"

"Dead! English have shot him."

It was all over with Glenarvan and his companions.

"All!" cried Kai-Koumou; "you all die to-morrow at daybreak."

Punishment fell on all indiscriminately. Lady Helena and Mary Grant were
grateful to Heaven for the boon.

The captives were not taken back to Ware-Atoua. They were destined to
attend the obsequies of the chief and the bloody rites that accompanied them. A


guard of natives conducted them to the foot of an immense kauri, and then stood
on guard without taking their eyes off the prisoners.

The three prescribed days had elapsed since the death of Kara-Tete, and the
soul of the dead warrior had finally departed; so the ceremonies commenced.

The body was laid on a small mound in the central enclosure. It was clothed
in a rich dress, and wrapped in a magnificent flax mat. His head, adorned with
feathers, was encircled with a crown of green leaves. His face, arms, and chest
had been rubbed with oil, and did not show any sign of decay.

The parents and friends arrived at the foot of the mound, and at a certain
moment, as if the leader of an orchestra were leading a funeral chant, there arose
a great wail of tears, sighs, and sobs. They lamented the deceased with a
plaintive rhythm and doleful cadence. The kinsmen beat their heads; the
kinswomen tore their faces with their nails and lavished more blood than tears.
But these demonstrations were not sufficient to propitiate the soul of the
deceased, whose wrath might strike the survivors of his tribe; and his warriors,
as they could not recall him to life, were anxious that he should have nothing to
wish for in the other world. The wife of Kara-Tete was not to be parted from
him; indeed, she would have refused to survive him. It was a custom, as well as
a duty, and Maori history has no lack of such sacrifices.

This woman came on the scene; she was still young. Her disheveled hair
flowed over her shoulders. Her sobs and cries filled the air. Incoherent words,
regrets, sobs, broken phrases in which she extolled the virtues of the dead,
alternated with her moans, and in a crowning paroxysm of sorrow, she threw
herself at the foot of the mound and beat her head on the earth.

The Kai-Koumou drew near; suddenly the wretched victim rose; but a
violent blow from a "MERE," a kind of club brandished by the chief, struck her
to the ground; she fell senseless.

Horrible yells followed; a hundred arms threatened the terror-stricken
captives. But no one moved, for the funeral ceremonies were not yet over.

The wife of Kara-Tete had joined her husband. The two bodies lay stretched
side by side. But in the future life, even the presence of his faithful companion
was not enough. Who would attend on them in the realm of Noui-Atoua, if their
slaves did not follow them into the other world.

Six unfortunate fellows were brought to the mound. They were attendants
whom the pitiless usages of war had reduced to slavery. During the chief's
lifetime they had borne the severest privations, and been subjected to all kinds of
ill-usage; they had been scantily fed, and incessantly occupied like beasts of
burden, and now, according to Maori ideas, they were to resume to all eternity
this life of bondage.


These poor creatures appeared quite resigned to their destiny. They were not
taken by surprise. Their unbound hands showed that they met their fate without
resistance.

Their death was speedy and not aggravated by tedious suffering; torture was
reserved for the authors of the murder, who, only twenty paces off, averted their
eyes from the horrible scene which was to grow yet more horrible.

Six blows of the MERE, delivered by the hands of six powerful warriors,
felled the victims in the midst of a sea of blood.

This was the signal for a fearful scene of cannibalism. The bodies of slaves
are not protected by taboo like those of their masters. They belong to the tribe;
they were a sort of small change thrown among the mourners, and the moment
the sacrifice was over, the whole crowd, chiefs, warriors, old men, women,
children, without distinction of age, or sex, fell upon the senseless remains with
brutal appetite. Faster than a rapid pen could describe it, the bodies, still reeking,
were dismembered, divided, cut up, not into morsels, but into crumbs. Of the
two hundred Maories present everyone obtained a share. They fought, they
struggled, they quarreled over the smallest fragment. The drops of hot blood
splashed over these festive monsters, and the whole of this detestable crew
groveled under a rain of blood. It was like the delirious fury of tigers fighting
over their prey, or like a circus where the wild beasts devour the deer. This scene
ended, a score of fires were lit at various points of the "pah"; the smell of charred
flesh polluted the air; and but for the fearful tumult of the festival, but for the
cries that emanated from these flesh-sated throats, the captives might have heard
the bones crunching under the teeth of the cannibals.

Glenarvan and his companions, breathless with horror, tried to conceal this
fearful scene from the eyes of the two poor ladies. They understood then what
fate awaited them next day at dawn, and also with what cruel torture this death
would be preceded. They were dumb with horror.

The funeral dances commenced. Strong liquors distilled from the "piper
excelsum" animated the intoxication of the natives. They had nothing human
left. It seemed possible that the "taboo" might be forgotten, and they might rush
upon the prisoners, who were already terrified at their delirious gestures.

But Kai-Koumou had kept his own senses amidst the general delirium. He
allowed an hour for this orgy of blood to attain its maximum and then cease, and
the final scene of the obsequies was performed with the accustomed ceremonial.

The corpses of Kara-Tete and his wife were raised, the limbs were bent, and
laid against the stomach according to the Maori usage; then came the funeral, not
the final interment, but a burial until the moment when the earth had destroyed
the flesh and nothing remained but the skeleton.


The place of "oudoupa,” or the tomb, had been chosen outside the fortress,
about two miles off at the top of a low hill called Maunganamu, situated on the
right bank of the lake, and to this spot the body was to be taken. Two palanquins
of a very primitive kind, hand-barrows, in fact, were brought to the foot of the
mound, and the corpses doubled up so that they were sitting rather than lying,
and their garments kept in place by a band of hanes, were placed on them. Four
warriors took up the litters on their shoulders, and the whole tribe, repeating
their funeral chant, followed in procession to the place of sepulture.

The captives, still strictly guarded, saw the funeral cortege leave the inner
inclosure of the "pah"; then the chants and cries grew fainter. For about half an
hour the funeral procession remained out of sight, in the hollow valley, and then
came in sight again winding up the mountain side; the distance gave a fantastic
effect to the undulating movement of this long serpentine column.

The tribe stopped at an elevation of about 800 feet, on the summit of
Maunganamu, where the burial place of Kara-Tete had been prepared. An
ordinary Maori would have had nothing but a hole and a heap of earth. But a
powerful and formidable chief destined to speedy deification, was honored with
a tomb worthy of his exploits.

The "oudoupa" had been fenced round, and posts, surmounted with faces
painted in red ochre, stood near the grave where the bodies were to lie. The
relatives had not forgotten that the "Waidoua," the spirit of the dead, lives on
mortal food, as the body did in this life. Therefore, food was deposited in the
inclosure as well as the arms and clothing of the deceased. Nothing was omitted
for comfort. The husband and wife were laid side by side, then covered with
earth and grass, after another series of laments.

Then the procession wound slowly down the mountain, and henceforth none
dare ascend the slope of Maunganamu on pain of death, for it was "tabooed,"
like Tongariro, where lie the ashes of a chief killed by an earthquake in 1846.


CHAPTER XII STRANGELY LIBERATED


JUST as the sun was sinking beyond Lake Taupo, behind the peaks of
Tuhahua and Pukepapu, the captives were conducted back to their prison. They
were not to leave it again till the tops of the Wahiti Ranges were lit with the first
fires of day.

They had one night in which to prepare for death. Overcome as they were
with horror and fatigue, they took their last meal together.

"We shall need all our strength," Glenarvan had said, "to look death in the
face. We must show these savages how Europeans can die."

The meal ended. Lady Helena repeated the evening prayer aloud, her
companions, bare-headed, repeated it after her. Who does not turn his thoughts
toward God in the hour of death? This done, the prisoners embraced each other.
Mary Grant and Helena, in a corner of the hut, lay down on a mat. Sleep, which
keeps all sorrow in abeyance, soon weighed down their eyelids; they slept in
each other's arms, overcome by exhaustion and prolonged watching.

Then Glenarvan, taking his friends aside, said: "My dear friends, our lives
and the lives of these poor women are in God's hands. If it is decreed that we die
to-morrow, let us die bravely, like Christian men, ready to appear without terror
before the Supreme Judge. God, who reads our hearts, knows that we had a
noble end in view. If death awaits us instead of success, it is by His will. Stern as
the decree may seem, I will not repine. But death here, means not death only, it
means torture, insult, perhaps, and here are two ladies--"

Glenarvan's voice, firm till now, faltered. He was silent a moment, and
having overcome his emotion, he said, addressing the young captain:

"John, you have promised Mary what I promised Lady Helena. What is your
plan?"

"I believe," said John, "that in the sight of God I have a right to fulfill that
promise."

"Yes, John; but we are unarmed."

"No!" replied John, showing him a dagger. "I snatched it from Kara-Tete
when he fell at your feet. My Lord, whichever of us survives the other will fulfill
the wish of Lady Helena and Mary Grant."

After these words were said, a profound silence ensued. At last the Major
said: "My friends, keep that to the last moment. I am not an advocate of
irremediable measures."

"I did not speak for ourselves," said Glenarvan. "Be it as it may, we can face


death! Had we been alone, I should ere now have cried, 'My friends, let us make
an effort. Let us attack these wretches!’ But with these poor girls--"

At this moment John raised the mat, and counted twenty-five natives keeping
guard on the Ware-Atoua. A great fire had been lighted, and its lurid glow threw
into strong relief the irregular outlines of the "pah." Some of the savages were
sitting round the brazier; the others standing motionless, their black outlines
relieved against the clear background of flame. But they all kept watchful guard
on the hut confided to their care.

It has been said that between a vigilant jailer and a prisoner who wishes to
escape, the chances are in favor of the prisoner; the fact is, the interest of the one
is keener than that of the other. The jailer may forget that he is on guard; the
prisoner never forgets that he is guarded. The captive thinks oftener of escaping
than the jailer of preventing his flight, and hence we hear of frequent and
wonderful escapes.

But in the present instance hatred and revenge were the jailers-- not an
indifferent warder; the prisoners were not bound, but it was because bonds were
useless when five-and-twenty men were watching the only egress from the
Ware-Atoua.

This house, with its back to the rock which closed the fortress, was only
accessible by a long, narrow promontory which joined it in front to the plateau
on which the "pah" was erected. On its two other sides rose pointed rocks, which
jutted out over an abyss a hundred feet deep. On that side descent was
impossible, and had it been possible, the bottom was shut in by the enormous
rock. The only outlet was the regular door of the Ware-Atoua, and the Maories
guarded the promontory which united it to the "pah" like a drawbridge. All
escape was thus hopeless, and Glenarvan having tried the walls for the twentieth
time, was compelled to acknowledge that it was so.

The hours of this night, wretched as they were, slipped away. Thick darkness
had settled on the mountain. Neither moon nor stars pierced the gloom. Some
gusts of wind whistled by the sides of the "pah," and the posts of the house
creaked: the fire outside revived with the puffs of wind, and the flames sent fitful
gleams into the interior of Ware-Atoua. The group of prisoners was lit up for a
moment; they were absorbed in their last thoughts, and a deathlike silence
reigned in the hut.

It might have been about four o'clock in the morning when the Major's
attention was called to a slight noise which seemed to come from the foundation
of the posts in the wall of the hut which abutted on the rock. McNabbs was at
first indifferent, but finding the noise continue, he listened; then his curiosity
was aroused, and he put his ear to the ground; it sounded as if someone was


scraping or hollowing out the ground outside.

As soon as he was sure of it, he crept over to Glenarvan and John Mangles,
and startling them from their melancholy thoughts, led them to the end of the
hut.

"Listen," said he, motioning them to stoop.

The scratching became more and more audible; they could hear the little
stones grate on a hard body and roll away.

"Some animal in his burrow," said John Mangles.

Glenarvan struck his forehead.

"Who knows?" said he, "it might be a man."

"Animal or man," answered the Major, "I will soon find out!"

Wilson and Olbinett joined their companions, and all united to dig through
the wall--John with his dagger, the others with stones taken from the ground, or
with their nails, while Mulrady, stretched along the ground, watched the native
guard through a crevice of the matting.

These savages sitting motionless around the fire, suspected nothing of what
was going on twenty feet off.

The soil was light and friable, and below lay a bed of silicious tufa;
therefore, even without tools, the aperture deepened quickly. It soon became
evident that a man, or men, clinging to the sides of the "pah," were cutting a
passage into its exterior wall. What could be the object? Did they know of the
existence of the prisoners, or was it some private enterprise that led to the
undertaking?

The prisoners redoubled their efforts. Their fingers bled, but still they
worked on; after half an hour they had gone three feet deep; they perceived by
the increased sharpness of the sounds that only a thin layer of earth prevented
immediate communication.

Some minutes more passed, and the Major withdrew his hand from the
stroke of a sharp blade. He suppressed a cry.

John Mangles, inserting the blade of his poniard, avoided the knife which
now protruded above the soil, but seized the hand that wielded it.

It was the hand of a woman or child, a European! On

V. IV Verne neither side had a word been uttered. It was evidently the cue of
both sides to be silent.

"Is it Robert?" whispered Glenarvan.

But softly as the name was breathed, Mary Grant, already awakened by the
sounds in the hut, slipped over toward Glenarvan, and seizing the hand, all
stained with earth, she covered it with kisses.

"My darling Robert," said she, never doubting, "it is you! it is you!"


"Yes, little sister," said he, "it is I am here to save you all; but be very silent."

"Brave lad!" repeated Glenarvan.

"Watch the savages outside," said Robert.

Mulrady, whose attention was distracted for a moment by the appearance of
the boy, resumed his post.

"Tt is all right," said he. "There are only four awake; the rest are asleep."

A minute after, the hole was enlarged, and Robert passed from the arms of
his sister to those of Lady Helena. Round his body was rolled a long coil of flax
rope.

"My child, my child," murmured Lady Helena, "the savages did not kill
you!"

"No, madam," said he; "I do not know how it happened, but in the scuffle I
got away; I jumped the barrier; for two days I hid in the bushes, to try and see
you; while the tribe were busy with the chief's funeral, I came and reconnoitered
this side of the path, and I saw that I could get to you. I stole this knife and rope
out of the desert hut. The tufts of bush and the branches made me a ladder, and I
found a kind of grotto already hollowed out in the rock under this hut; I had only
to bore some feet in soft earth, and here I am."

Twenty noiseless kisses were his reward.

"Let us be off!" said he, in a decided tone.

"Is Paganel below?" asked Glenarvan.

"Monsieur Paganel?" replied the boy, amazed.

"Yes; is he waiting for us?"

"No, my Lord; but is he not here?" inquired Robert.

"No, Robert!" answered Mary Grant.

"Why! have you not seen him?" asked Glenarvan. "Did you lose each other
in the confusion? Did you not get away together?"

"No, my Lord!" said Robert, taken aback by the disappearance of his friend
Paganel.

"Well, lose no more time," said the Major. "Wherever Paganel is, he cannot
be in worse plight than ourselves. Let us go."

Truly, the moments were precious. They had to fly. The escape was not very
difficult, except the twenty feet of perpendicular fall outside the grotto.

After that the slope was practicable to the foot of the mountain. From this
point the prisoners could soon gain the lower valleys; while the Maories, if they
perceived the flight of the prisoners, would have to make a long round to catch
them, being unaware of the gallery between the Ware-Atoua and the outer rock.

The escape was commenced, and every precaution was taken. The captives
passed one by one through the narrow passage into the grotto. John Mangles,


before leaving the hut, disposed of all the evidences of their work, and in his turn
slipped through the opening and let down over it the mats of the house, so that
the entrance to the gallery was quite concealed.

The next thing was to descend the vertical wall to the slope below, and this
would have been impracticable, but that Robert had brought the flax rope, which
was now unrolled and fixed to a projecting point of rock, the end hanging over.

John Mangles, before his friends trusted themselves to this flax rope, tried it;
he did not think it very strong; and it was of importance not to risk themselves
imprudently, as a fall would be fatal.

"This rope," said he, "will only bear the weight of two persons; therefore let
us go in rotation. Lord and Lady Glenarvan first; when they arrive at the bottom,
three pulls at the rope will be a signal to us to follow."

"I will go first," said Robert. "I discovered a deep hollow at the foot of the
slope where those who come down can conceal themselves and wait for the
rest."

"Go, my boy," said Glenarvan, pressing Robert's hand.

Robert disappeared through the opening out of the grotto. A minute after, the
three pulls at the cord informed them the boy had alighted safely.

Glenarvan and Lady Helena immediately ventured out of the grotto. The
darkness was still very great, though some grayish streaks were already visible
on the eastern summits.

The biting cold of the morning revived the poor young lady. She felt stronger
and commenced her perilous descent.

Glenarvan first, then Lady Helena, let themselves down along the rope, till
they came to the spot where the perpendicular wall met the top of the slope.
Then Glenarvan going first and supporting his wife, began to descend backward.

He felt for the tufts and grass and shrubs able to afford a foothold; tried them
and then placed Lady Helena's foot on them. Some birds, suddenly awakened,
flew away, uttering feeble cries, and the fugitives trembled when a stone
loosened from its bed rolled to the foot of the mountain.

They had reached half-way down the slope, when a voice was heard from the
opening of the grotto.

"Stop!" whispered John Mangles.

Glenarvan, holding with one hand to a tuft of tetragonia, with the other
holding his wife, waited with breathless anxiety.

Wilson had had an alarm. Having heard some unusual noise outside the
Ware-Atoua, he went back into the hut and watched the Maories from behind the
mat. At a sign from him, John stopped Glenarvan.

One of the warriors on guard, startled by an unusual sound, rose and drew


nearer to the Ware-Atoua. He stood still about two paces from the hut and
listened with his head bent forward. He remained in that attitude for a minute
that seemed an hour, his ear intent, his eye peering into the darkness. Then
shaking his head like one who sees he is mistaken, he went back to his
companions, took an armful of dead wood, and threw it into the smouldering
fire, which immediately revived. His face was lighted up by the flame, and was
free from any look of doubt, and after having glanced to where the first light of
dawn whitened the eastern sky, stretched himself near the fire to warm his
stiffened limbs.

"All's well!" whispered Wilson.

John signaled to Glenarvan to resume his descent.

Glenarvan let himself gently down the slope; soon Lady Helena and he
landed on the narrow track where Robert waited for them.

The rope was shaken three times, and in his turn John Mangles, preceding
Mary Grant, followed in the dangerous route.

He arrived safely; he rejoined Lord and Lady Glenarvan in the hollow
mentioned by Robert.

Five minutes after, all the fugitives had safely escaped from the Ware-Atoua,
left their retreat, and keeping away from the inhabited shores of the lakes, they
plunged by narrow paths into the recesses of the mountains.

They walked quickly, trying to avoid the points where they might be seen
from the pah. They were quite silent, and glided among the bushes like shadows.
Whither? Where chance led them, but at any rate they were free.

Toward five o'clock, the day began to dawn, bluish clouds marbled the upper
stratum of clouds. The misty summits began to pierce the morning mists. The
orb of day was soon to appear, and instead of giving the signal for their
execution, would, on the contrary, announce their flight.

It was of vital importance that before the decisive moment arrived they
should put themselves beyond the reach of the savages, so as to put them off
their track. But their progress was slow, for the paths were steep. Lady
Glenarvan climbed the slopes, supported, not to say carried, by Glenarvan, and
Mary Grant leaned on the arm of John Mangles; Robert, radiant with joy,
triumphant at his success, led the march, and the two sailors brought up the rear.

Another half an hour and the glorious sun would rise out of the mists of the
horizon. For half an hour the fugitives walked on as chance led them. Paganel
was not there to take the lead. He was now the object of their anxiety, and whose
absence was a black shadow between them and their happiness. But they bore
steadily eastward, as much as possible, and faced the gorgeous morning light.
Soon they had reached a height of 500 feet above Lake Taupo, and the cold of


the morning, increased by the altitude, was very keen. Dim outlines of hills and
mountains rose behind one another; but Glenarvan only thought how best to get
lost among them. Time enough by and by to see about escaping from the
labyrinth.

At last the sun appeared and sent his first rays on their path.

Suddenly a terrific yell from a hundred throats rent the air. It came from the
pah, whose direction Glenarvan did not know. Besides, a thick veil of fog,
which, spread at his feet, prevented any distinct view of the valleys below.

But the fugitives could not doubt that their escape had been discovered; and
now the question was, would they be able to elude pursuit? Had they been seen?
Would not their track betray them?

At this moment the fog in the valley lifted, and enveloped them for a
moment in a damp mist, and at three hundred feet below they perceived the
swarming mass of frantic natives.

While they looked they were seen. Renewed howls broke forth, mingled with
the barking of dogs, and the whole tribe, after vainly trying to scale the rock of
Ware-Atoua, rushed out of the pah, and hastened by the shortest paths in pursuit
of the prisoners who were flying from their vengeance.


CHAPTER XII THE SACRED MOUNTAIN


THE summit of the mountain was still a hundred feet above them. The
fugitives were anxious to reach it that they might continue their flight on the
eastern slope out of the view of their pursuers. They hoped then to find some
practicable ridge that would allow of a passage to the neighboring peaks that
were thrown together in an orographic maze, to which poor Paganel's genius
would doubtless have found the clew.

They hastened up the slope, spurred on by the loud cries that drew nearer and
nearer. The avenging crowd had already reached the foot of the mountain.

"Courage! my friends," cried Glenarvan, urging his companions by voice and
look.

In less than five minutes they were at the top of the mountain, and then they
turned to judge of their position, and decide on a route that would baffle their
pursuers.

From their elevated position they could see over Lake Taupo, which
stretched toward the west in its setting of picturesque mountains. On the north
the peaks of Pirongia; on the south the burning crater of Tongariro. But eastward
nothing but the rocky barrier of peaks and ridges that formed the Wahiti ranges,
the great chain whose unbroken links stretch from the East Cape to Cook's
Straits. They had no alternative but to descend the opposite slope and enter the
narrow gorges, uncertain whether any outlet existed.

Glenarvan could not prolong the halt for a moment. Wearied as they might
be, they must fly or be discovered.

"Let us go down!" cried he, "before our passage is cut off."

But just as the ladies had risen with a despairing effort, McNabbs stopped
them and said:

"Glenarvan, it is useless. Look!"

And then they all perceived the inexplicable change that had taken place in
the movements of the Maories.

Their pursuit had suddenly stopped. The ascent of the mountain had ceased
by an imperious command. The natives had paused in their career, and surged
like the sea waves against an opposing rock. All the crowd, thirsting for blood,
stood at the foot of the mountain yelling and gesticulating, brandishing guns and
hatchets, but not advancing a foot. Their dogs, rooted to the spot like themselves,
barked with rage.

What stayed them? What occult power controlled these savages? The


fugitives looked without understanding, fearing lest the charm that enchained
Kai-Koumou's tribe should be broken.

Suddenly John Mangles uttered an exclamation which attracted the attention
of his companions. He pointed to a little inclosure on the summit of the cone.

"The tomb of Kara-Tete!" said Robert.

"Are you sure, Robert?" said Glenarvan.

"Yes, my Lord, it is the tomb; I recognize it."

Robert was right. Fifty feet above, at the extreme peak of the mountain,
freshly painted posts formed a small palisaded inclosure, and Glenarvan too was
convinced that it was the chief's burial place. The chances of their flight had led
them to the crest of Maunganamu.

Glenarvan, followed by the rest, climbed to the foot of the tomb. A large
opening, covered with mats, led into it. Glenarvan was about to invade the
sanctity of the "oudoupa," when he reeled backward.

"A savage!" said he.

"In the tomb?" inquired the Major.

"Yes, McNabbs."

"No matter; go in."

Glenarvan, the Major, Robert and John Mangles entered. There sat a Maori,
wrapped in a large flax mat; the darkness of the "oudoupa" preventing them from
distinguishing his features. He was very quiet, and was eating his breakfast quite
coolly.

Glenarvan was about to speak to him when the native forestalled him by
saying gayly and in good English:

"Sit down, my Lord; breakfast is ready."

It was Paganel. At the sound of his voice they all rushed into the "oudoupa,"
and he was cordially embraced all round. Paganel was found again. He was their
salvation. They wanted to question him; to know how and why he was here on
the summit of Maunganamu; but Glenarvan stopped this misplaced curiosity.

"The savages?" said he.

"The savages," said Paganel, shrugging his shoulders. "I have a contempt for
those people! Come and look at them."

They all followed Paganel out of the "oudoupa." The Maories were still in
the same position round the base of the mountain, uttering fearful cries.

"Shout! yell! till your lungs are gone, stupid wretches!" said Paganel. "I dare
you to come here!"

"But why?" said Glenarvan.

"Because the chief is buried here, and the tomb protects us, because the
mountain is tabooed."


"Tabooed?"

"Yes, my friends! and that is why I took refuge here, as the malefactors used
to flee to the sanctuaries in the middle ages."

"God be praised!" said Lady Helena, lifting her hands to heaven.

The fugitives were not yet out of danger, but they had a moment's respite,
which was very welcome in their exhausted state.

Glenarvan was too much overcome to speak, and the Major nodded his head
with an air of perfect content.

"And now, my friends," said Paganel, "if these brutes think to exercise their
patience on us, they are mistaken. In two days we shall be out of their reach."

"By flight!" said Glenarvan. "But how?"

"That I do not know," answered Paganel, "but we shall manage it."

And now everybody wanted to know about their friend's adventures. They
were puzzled by the reserve of a man generally so talkative; on this occasion
they had to drag the words out of his mouth; usually he was a ready story-teller,
now he gave only evasive answers to the questions of the rest.

"Paganel is another man!" thought McNabbs.

His face was really altered. He wrapped himself closely in his great flax mat
and seemed to deprecate observation. Everyone noticed his embarrassment,
when he was the subject of conversation, though nobody appeared to remark it;
when other topics were under discussion, Paganel resumed his usual gayety.

Of his adventures all that could be extracted from him at this time was as
follows:

After the murder of Kara-Tete, Paganel took advantage, like Robert, of the
commotion among the natives, and got out of the inclosure. But less fortunate
than young Grant, he walked straight into a Maori camp, where he met a tall,
intelligent-looking chief, evidently of higher rank than all the warriors of his
tribe. The chief spoke excellent English, and he saluted the new-comer by
rubbing the end of his nose against the end of the geographer's nose.

Paganel wondered whether he was to consider himself a prisoner or not. But
perceiving that he could not stir without the polite escort of the chief, he soon
made up his mind on that point.

This chief, Hihi, or Sunbeam, was not a bad fellow. Paganel's spectacles and
telescope seemed to give him a great idea of Paganel's importance, and he
manifested great attachment to him, not only by kindness, but by a strong flax
rope, especially at night.

This lasted for three days; to the inquiry whether he was well treated, he said
"Yes and no!" without further answer; he was a prisoner, and except that he
expected immediate execution, his state seemed to him no better than that in


which he had left his unfortunate friends.

One night, however, he managed to break his rope and escape. He had seen
from afar the burial of the chief, and knew that he was buried on the top of
Maunganamu, and he was well acquainted with the fact that the mountain would
be therefore tabooed. He resolved to take refuge there, being unwilling to leave
the region where his companions were in durance. He succeeded in his
dangerous attempt, and had arrived the previous night at the tomb of Kara-Tete,
and there proposed to recruit his strength while he waited in the hope that his
friends might, by Divine mercy, find the means of escape.

Such was Paganel's story. Did he designedly conceal some incident of his
captivity? More than once his embarrassment led them to that conclusion. But
however that might be, he was heartily congratulated on all sides. And then the
present emergency came on for serious discussion. The natives dare not climb
Maunganamu, but they, of course, calculated that hunger and thirst would restore
them their prey. It was only a question of time, and patience is one of the virtues
of all savages. Glenarvan was fully alive to the difficulty, but made up his mind
to watch for an opportunity, or make one. First of all he made a thorough survey
of Maunganamu, their present fortress; not for the purpose of defence, but of
escape. The Major, John, Robert, Paganel, and himself, made an exact map of
the mountain. They noted the direction, outlet and inclination of the paths. The
ridge, a mile in length, which united Maunganamu to the Wahiti chain had a
downward inclination. Its slope, narrow and jagged though it was, appeared the
only practicable route, if they made good their escape at all. If they could do this
without observation, under cover of night, they might possibly reach the deep
valleys of the Range and put the Maories off the scent.

But there were dangers in this route; the last part of it was within pistol shot
of natives posted on the lower slopes. Already when they ventured on the
exposed part of the crest, they were saluted with a hail of shot which did not
reach them. Some gun wads, carried by the wind, fell beside them; they were
made of printed paper, which Paganel picked up out of curiosity, and with some
trouble deciphered.

"That is a good idea! My friends, do you know what those creatures use for
wads?"

"No, Paganel!" said Glenarvan.

"Pages of the Bible! If that is the use they make of the Holy Book, I pity the
missionaries! It will be rather difficult to establish a Maori library."

"And what text of scripture did they aim at us?"

"A message from God Himself!" exclaimed John Mangles, who was in the
act of reading the scorched fragment of paper. "It bids us hope in Him," added


the young captain, firm in the faith of his Scotch convictions.

"Read it, John!" said Glenarvan.

And John read what the powder had left visible: "I will deliver him, for he
hath trusted in me."

"My friends," said Glenarvan, "we must carry these words of hope to our
dear, brave ladies. The sound will bring comfort to their hearts."

Glenarvan and his companions hastened up the steep path to the cone, and
went toward the tomb. As they climbed they were astonished to perceive every
few moments a kind of vibration in the soil. It was not a movement like
earthquake, but that peculiar tremor that affects the metal of a boiler under high
pressure. It was clear the mountain was the outer covering of a body of vapor,
the product of subterranean fires.

This phenomenon of course excited no surprise in those that had just traveled
among the hot springs of the Waikato. They knew that the central region of the
Ika-na-Mani is essentially volcanic. It is a sieve, whose interstices furnish a
passage for the earth's vapors in the shape of boiling geysers and solfataras.

Paganel, who had already noticed this, called the attention of his friends to
the volcanic nature of the mountain. The peak of Maunganamu was only one of
the many cones which bristle on this part of the island. It was a volcano of the
future. A slight mechanical change would produce a crater of eruption in these
slopes, which consisted merely of whitish silicious tufa.

"That may be," said Glenarvan, "but we are in no more danger here than
standing by the boiler of the DUNCAN; this solid crust is like sheet iron."

"I agree with you," added the Major, "but however good a boiler may be, it
bursts at last after too long service."

"McNabbs," said Paganel, "I have no fancy for staying on the cone. When
Providence points out a way, I will go at once."

"T wish," remarked John, "that Maunganamu could carry us himself, with all
the motive power that he has inside. It is too bad that millions of horse-power
should lie under our feet unavailable for our needs. Our DUNCAN would carry
us to the end of the world with the thousandth part of it."

The recollections of the DUNCAN evoked by John Mangles turned
Glenarvan's thoughts into their saddest channel; for desperate as his own case
was he often forgot it, in vain regret at the fate of his crew.

His mind still dwelt on it when he reached the summit of Maunganamu and
met his companions in misfortune.

Lady Helena, when she saw Glenarvan, came forward to meet him.

"Dear Edward," said she, "you have made up your mind? Are we to hope or
fear?"


"Hope, my dear Helena," replied Glenarvan. "The natives will never set foot
on the mountain, and we shall have time to devise a plan of escape."

"More than that, madam, God himself has encouraged us to hope."

And so saying, John Mangles handed to Lady Helena the fragment of paper
on which was legible the sacred words; and these young women, whose trusting
hearts were always open to observe Providential interpositions, read in these
words an indisputable sign of salvation.

"And now let us go to the 'oudoupa!" cried Paganel, in his gayest mood. "It
is our castle, our dining-room, our study! None can meddle with us there!
Ladies! allow me to do the honors of this charming abode."

They followed Paganel, and when the savages saw them profaning anew the
tabooed burial place, they renewed their fire and their fearful yells, the one as
loud as the other. But fortunately the balls fell short of our friends, though the
cries reached them.

Lady Helena, Mary Grant, and their companions were quite relieved to find
that the Maories were more dominated by superstition than by anger, and they
entered the monument.

It was a palisade made of red-painted posts. Symbolic figures, tattooed on
the wood, set forth the rank and achievements of the deceased. Strings of
amulets, made of shells or cut stones, hung from one part to another. In the
interior, the ground was carpeted with green leaves, and in the middle, a slight
mound betokened the place of the newly made grave. There lay the chief's
weapons, his guns loaded and capped, his spear, his splendid ax of green jade,
with a supply of powder and ball for the happy hunting grounds.

"Quite an arsenal!" said Paganel, "of which we shall make a better use. What
ideas they have! Fancy carrying arms in the other world!"

"Well!" said the Major, "but these are English firearms."

"No doubt," replied Glenarvan, "and it is a very unwise practice to give
firearms to savages! They turn them against the invaders, naturally enough. But
at any rate, they will be very valuable to us."

"Yes," said Paganel, "but what is more useful still is the food and water
provided for Kara-Tete."

Things had been handsomely done for the deceased chief; the amount of
provisions denoted their esteem for the departed. There was food enough to
sustain ten persons for fifteen days, or the dead man forever.

The vegetable aliments consisted of edible ferns, sweet potatoes, the
"convolvulus batatas," which was indigenous, and the potato which had been
imported long before by the Europeans. Large jars contained pure water, and a
dozen baskets artistically plaited contained tablets of an unknown green gum.


The fugitives were therefore provided for some days against hunger and
thirst, and they needed no persuasion to begin their attack on the deceased chief's
stores. Glenarvan brought out the necessary quantity and put them into Olbinett's
hands. The steward, who never could forget his routine ideas, even in the most
exceptional circumstances, thought the meal a slender one. He did not know how
to prepare the roots, and, besides, had no fire.

But Paganel soon solved the difficulty by recommending him to bury his fern
roots and sweet potatoes in the soil. The temperature of the surface stratum was
very high, and a thermometer plunged into the soil would have marked from 160
to 170 degrees; in fact, Olbinett narrowly missed being scalded, for just as he
had scooped a hole for the roots, a jet of vapor sprang up and with a whistling
sound rose six feet above the ground.

The steward fell back in terror.

"Shut off steam!" cried the Major, running to close the hole with the loose
drift, while Paganel pondering on the singular phenomenon muttered to himself:

"Let me see! ha! ha! Why not?"

"Are you hurt?” inquired McNabbs of Olbinett.

"No, Major," said the steward, "but I did not expect--"

"That Providence would send you fire," interrupted Paganel in a jovial tone.
"First the larder of Kara-Tete and then fire out of the ground! Upon my word,
this mountain is a paradise! I propose that we found a colony, and cultivate the
soil and settle here for life! We shall be the Robinsons of Maunganamu. We
should want for nothing."

"If it is solid ground," said John Mangles.

"Well! it is not a thing of yesterday," said Paganel. "It has stood against the
internal fire for many a day, and will do so till we leave it, at any rate."

"Breakfast is ready," announced Olbinett with as much dignity as if he was in
Malcolm Castle.

Without delay, the fugitives sat down near the palisade, and began one of the
many meals with which Providence had supplied them in critical circumstances.
Nobody was inclined to be fastidious, but opinions were divided as regarded the
edible fern. Some thought the flavor sweet and agreeable, others pronounced it
leathery, insipid, and resembling the taste of gum. The sweet potatoes, cooked in
the burning soil, were excellent. The geographer remarked that Kara-Tete was
not badly off after all.

And now that their hunger was appeased, it was time to decide on their plan
of escape.

"So soon!" exclaimed Paganel in a piteous tone. "Would you quit the home
of delight so soon?"


"But, Monsieur Paganel," interposed Lady Helena, "if this be Capua, you
dare not intend to imitate Hannibal!"

"Madam, I dare not contradict you, and if discussion is the order of the day,
let it proceed."

"First," said Glenarvan, "I think we ought to start before we are driven to it
by hunger. We are revived now, and ought to take advantage of it. To-night we
will try to reach the eastern valleys by crossing the cordon of natives under cover
of the darkness."

"Excellent," answered Paganel, "if the Maories allow us to pass."

"And if not?" asked John Mangles.

"Then we will use our great resources,” said Paganel.

"But have we great resources?" inquired the Major.

"More than we can use!" replied Paganel, without any further explanation.

And then they waited for the night.

The natives had not stirred. Their numbers seemed even greater, perhaps
owing to the influx of the stragglers of the tribe. Fires lighted at intervals formed
a girdle of flame round the base of the mountain, so that when darkness fell,
Maunganamu appeared to rise out of a great brasier, and to hide its head in the
thick darkness. Five hundred feet below they could hear the hum and the cries of
the enemy's camp.

At nine o'clock the darkness being very intense, Glenarvan and John
Mangles went out to reconnoiter before embarking the whole party on this
critical journey. They made the descent noiselessly, and after about ten minutes,
arrived on the narrow ridge that crossed the native lines, fifty feet above the
camp.

All went well so far. The Maories, stretched beside the fires, did not appear
to observe the two fugitives. But in an instant a double fusillade burst forth from
both sides of the ridge.

"Back," exclaimed Glenarvan; "those wretches have the eyes of cats and the
guns of riflemen!"

And they turned, and once more climbed the steep slope of the mountain,
and then hastened to their friends who had been alarmed at the firing.
Glenarvan's hat was pierced by two balls, and they concluded that it was out of
the question to venture again on the ridge between two lines of marksmen.

"Wait till to-morrow," said Paganel, "and as we cannot elude their vigilance,
let me try my hand on them."

The night was cold; but happily Kara-Tete had been furnished with his best
night gear, and the party wrapped themselves each in a warm flax mantle, and
protected by native superstition, slept quietly inside the inclosure, on the warm


ground, still violating with the violence of the internal ebullition.


CHAPTER XIV A BOLD STRATAGEM


NEXT day, February 17th, the sun's first rays awoke the sleepers of the
Maunganamu. The Maories had long since been astir, coming and going at the
foot of the mountain, without leaving their line of observation. Furious clamor
broke out when they saw the Europeans leave the sacred place they had
profaned.

Each of the party glanced first at the neighboring mountains, and at the deep
valleys still drowned in mist, and over Lake Taupo, which the morming breeze
ruffled slightly. And then all clustered round Paganel eager to hear his project.

Paganel soon satisfied their curiosity. "My friends," said he, "my plan has
one great recommendation; if it does not accomplish all that I anticipate, we
shall be no worse off than we are at present. But it must, it will succeed."

"And what is it?" asked McNabbs.

"It is this," replied Paganel, "the superstition of the natives has made this
mountain a refuge for us, and we must take advantage of their superstition to
escape. If I can persuade Kai-Koumou that we have expiated our profanation,
that the wrath of the Deity has fallen on us: in a word, that we have died a
terrible death, do you think he will leave the plateau of Maunganamu to return to
his village?"

"Not a doubt of it," said Glenarvan.

"And what is the horrible death you refer to?" asked Lady Helena.

"The death of the sacrilegious, my friends," replied Paganel. "The avenging
flames are under our feet. Let us open a way for them!"

"What! make a volcano!" cried John Mangles.

"Yes, an impromptu volcano, whose fury we can regulate. There are plenty
of vapors ready to hand, and subterranean fires ready to issue forth. We can have
an eruption ready to order."

"An excellent idea, Paganel; well conceived," said the Major.

"You understand," replied the geographer, "we are to pretend to fall victims
to the flames of the Maori Pluto, and to disappear spiritually into the tomb of
Kara-Tete. And stay there three, four, even five days if necessary--that is to say,
till the savages are convinced that we have perished, and abandon their watch."

"But," said Miss Grant, "suppose they wish to be sure of our punishment, and
climb up here to see?"

"No, my dear Mary," returned Paganel. "They will not do that. The mountain
is tabooed, and if it devoured its sacrilegious intruders, it would only be more


inviolably tabooed."

"It is really a very clever plan," said Glenarvan. "There is only one chance
against it; that is, if the savages prolong their watch at the foot of Maunganamu,
we may run short of provisions. But if we play our game well there is not much
fear of that."

"And when shall we try this last chance?" asked Lady Helena.

"To-night," rejoined Paganel, "when the darkness is the deepest."

"Agreed," said McNabbs; "Paganel, you are a genius! and I, who seldom get
up an enthusiasm, I answer for the success of your plan. Oh! those villains! They
shall have a little miracle that will put off their conversion for

V. IV Verne another century. I hope the missionaries will forgive us."

The project of Paganel was therefore adopted, and certainly with the
superstitious ideas of the Maories there seemed good ground for hope. But
brilliant as the idea might be, the difficulty was in the modus operandi. The
volcano might devour the bold schemers, who offered it a crater. Could they
control and direct the eruption when they had succeeded in letting loose its vapor
and flames, and lava streams? The entire cone might be engulfed. It was
meddling with phenomena of which nature herself has the absolute monopoly.

Paganel had thought of all this; but he intended to act prudently and without
pushing things to extremes. An appearance would be enough to dupe the
Maories, and there was no need for the terrible realities of an eruption.

How long that day seemed. Each one of the party inwardly counted the
hours. All was made ready for flight. The oudoupa provisions were divided and
formed very portable packets. Some mats and firearms completed their light
equipment, all of which they took from the tomb of the chief. It is needless to
say that their preparations were made within the inclosure, and that they were
unseen by the savages.

At six o'clock the steward served up a refreshing meal. Where or when they
would eat in the valleys of the Ranges no one could foretell. So that they had to
take in supplies for the future. The principal dish was composed of half a dozen
rats, caught by Wilson and stewed. Lady Helena and Mary Grant obstinately
refused to taste this game, which is highly esteemed by the natives; but the men
enjoyed it like the real Maories. The meat was excellent and savory, and the six
devourers were devoured down to the bones.

The evening twilight came on. The sun went down in a stormy-looking bank
of clouds. A few flashes of lightning glanced across the horizon and distant
thunder pealed through the darkened sky.

Paganel welcomed the storm, which was a valuable aid to his plans, and
completed his program. The savages are superstitiously affected by the great


phenomena of nature. The New Zealanders think that thunder is the angry voice
of Noui-Atoua, and lightning the fierce gleam of his eyes. Thus their deity was
coming personally to chastise the violators of the taboo.

At eight o'clock, the summit of the Maunganamu was lost in portentous
darkness. The sky would supply a black background for the blaze which Paganel
was about to throw on it. The Maories could no longer see their prisoners; and
this was the moment for action. Speed was necessary. Glenarvan, Paganel,
McNabbs, Robert, the steward, and the two sailors, all lent a hand.

The spot for the crater was chosen thirty paces from Kara-Tete's tomb. It was
important to keep the oudoupa intact, for if it disappeared, the taboo of the
mountain would be nullified. At the spot mentioned Paganel had noticed an
enormous block of stone, round which the vapors played with a certain degree of
intensity. This block covered a small natural crater hollowed in the cone, and by
its own weight prevented the egress of the subterranean fire. If they could move
it from its socket, the vapors and the lava would issue by the disencumbered
opening.

The workers used as levers some posts taken from the interior of the
oudoupa, and they plied their tools vigorously against the rocky mass. Under
their united efforts the stone soon moved. They made a little trench so that it
might roll down the inclined plane. As they gradually raised it, the vibrations
under foot became more distinct. Dull roarings of flame and the whistling sound
of a furnace ran along under the thin crust. The intrepid la-borers, veritable
Cyclops handling Earth's fires, worked in silence; soon some fissures and jets of
steam warned them that their place was growing dangerous. But a crowning
effort moved the mass which rolled down and disappeared. Immediately the thin
crust gave way. A column of fire rushed to the sky with loud detonations, while
streams of boiling water and lava flowed toward the native camp and the lower
valleys.

All the cone trembled as if it was about to plunge into a fathomless gulf.

Glenarvan and his companions had barely time to get out of the way; they
fled to the enclosure of the oudoupa, not without having been sprinkled with
water at 220 degrees. This water at first spread a smell like soup, which soon
changed into a strong odor of sulphur.

Then the mud, the lava, the volcanic stones, all spouted forth in a torrent.
Streams of fire furrowed the sides of Maunganamu. The neighboring mountains
were lit up by the glare; the dark valleys were also filled with dazzling light.

All the savages had risen, howling under the pain inflicted by the burning
lava, which was bubbling and foaming in the midst of their camp.

Those whom the liquid fire had not touched fled to the surrounding hills;


then turned, and gazed in terror at this fearful phenomenon, this volcano in
which the anger of their deity would swallow up the profane intruders on the
sacred mountain. Now and then, when the roar of the eruption became less
violent, their cry was heard:

"Taboo! taboo! taboo!"

An enormous quantity of vapors, heated stones and lava was escaping by this
crater of Maunganamu. It was not a mere geyser like those that girdle round
Mount Hecla, in Iceland, it was itself a Hecla. All this volcanic commotion was
confined till then in the envelope of the cone, because the safety valve of
Tangariro was enough for its expansion; but when this new issue was afforded, it
rushed forth fiercely, and by the laws of equilibrium, the other eruptions in the
island must on that night have lost their usual intensity.

An hour after this volcano burst upon the world, broad streams of lava were
running down its sides. Legions of rats came out of their holes, and fled from the
scene.

All night long, and fanned by the tempest in the upper sky, the crater never
ceased to pour forth its torrents with a violence that alarmed Glenarvan. The
eruption was breaking away the edges of the opening. The prisoners. hidden
behind the inclosure of stakes, watched the fearful progress of the phenomenon.

Morning came. The fury of the volcano had not slackened. Thick yellowish
fumes were mixed with the flames; the lava torrents wound their serpentine
course in every direction.

Glenarvan watched with a beating heart, looking from all the interstices of
the palisaded enclosure, and observed the movements in the native camp.

The Maories had fled to the neighboring ledges, out of the reach of the
volcano. Some corpses which lay at the foot of the cone, were charred by the
fire. Further off toward the "pah," the lava had reached a group of twenty huts,
which were still smoking. The Maories, forming here and there groups,
contemplated the canopied summit of Maunganamu with religious awe.

Kai-Koumou approached in the midst of his warriors, and Glenarvan
recognized him. The chief advanced to the foot of the hill, on the side untouched
by the lava, but he did not ascend the first ledge.

Standing there, with his arms stretched out like an exerciser, he made some
grimaces, whose meaning was obvious to the prisoners. As Paganel had
foreseen, Kai-Koumou launched on the avenging mountain a more rigorous
taboo.

Soon after the natives left their positions and followed the winding paths that
led toward the pah.

"They are going!" exclaimed Glenarvan. "They have left their posts! God be


praised! Our stratagem has succeeded! My dear Lady Helena, my brave friends,
we are all dead and buried! But this evening when night comes, we shall rise and
leave our tomb, and fly these barbarous tribes!"

It would be difficult to conceive of the joy that pervaded the oudoupa. Hope
had regained the mastery in all hearts. The intrepid travelers forgot the past,
forgot the future, to enjoy the present delight! And yet the task before them was
not an easy one--to gain some European outpost in the midst of this unknown
country. But Kai-Koumou once off their track, they thought themselves safe
from all the savages in New Zealand.

A whole day had to elapse before they could make a start, and they employed
it in arranging a plan of flight. Paganel had treasured up his map of New
Zealand, and on it could trace out the best roads.

After discussion, the fugitives resolved to make for the Bay of Plenty,
towards the east. The region was unknown, but apparently desert. The travelers,
who from their past experience, had learned to make light of physical
difficulties, feared nothing but meeting Maories. At any cost they wanted to
avoid them and gain the east coast, where the missionaries had several stations.
That part of the country had hitherto escaped the horrors of war, and the natives
were not in the habit of scouring the country.

As to the distance that separated Lake Taupo from the Bay of Plenty, they
calculated it about a hundred miles. Ten days' march at ten miles a day, could be
done, not without fatigue, but none of the party gave that a thought. If they could
only reach the mission stations they could rest there while waiting for a
favorable opportunity to get to Auckland, for that was the point they desired to
reach.

This question settled, they resumed their watch of the native proceedings,
and continued so doing till evening fell. Not a solitary native remained at the
foot of the mountain, and when darkness set in over the Taupo valleys, not a fire
indicated the presence of the Maories at the base. The road was free.

At nine o'clock, the night being unusually dark, Glenarvan gave the order to
start. His companions and he, armed and equipped at the expense of Kara-Tete,
began cautiously to descend the slopes of Maunganamu, John Mangles and
Wilson leading the way, eyes and ears on the alert. They stopped at the slightest
sound, they started at every passing cloud. They slid rather than walked down
the spur, that their figures might be lost in the dark mass of the mountain. At two
hundred feet below the summit, John Mangles and his sailors reached the
dangerous ridge that had been so obstinately defended by the natives. If by ill
luck the Maories, more cunning than the fugitives, had only pretended to retreat;
if they were not really duped by the volcanic phenomenon, this was the spot


where their presence would be betrayed. Glenarvan could not but shudder, in
spite of his confidence, and in spite of the jokes of Paganel. The fate of the
whole party would hang in the balance for the ten minutes required to pass along
that ridge. He felt the beating of Lady Helena's heart, as she clung to his arm.

He had no thought of tuming back. Neither had John. The young captain,
followed closely by the whole party, and protected by the intense darkness, crept
along the ridge, stopping when some loose stone rolled to the bottom. If the
savages were still in the ambush below, these unusual sounds might provoke
from both sides a dangerous fusillade.

But speed was impossible in their serpent-like progress down this sloping
crest. When John Mangles had reached the lowest point, he was scarcely twenty-
five feet from the plateau, where the natives were encamped the night before,
and then the ridge rose again pretty steeply toward a wood for about a quarter of
a mile.

All this lower part was crossed without molestation, and they commenced
the ascent in silence. The clump of bush was invisible, though they knew it was
there, and but for the possibility of an ambush, Glenarvan counted on being safe
when the party arrived at that point. But he observed that after this point, they
were no longer protected by the taboo. The ascending ridge belonged not to
Maunganamu, but to the mountain system of the eastern side of Lake Taupo, so
that they had not only pistol shots, but hand-to-hand fighting to fear. For ten
minutes, the little band ascended by insensible degrees toward the higher table-
land. John could not discern the dark wood, but he knew it ought to be within
two hundred feet. Suddenly he stopped; almost retreated. He fancied he heard
something in the darkness; his stoppage interrupted the march of those behind.

He remained motionless long enough to alarm his companions. They waited
with unspeakable anxiety, wondering if they were doomed to retrace their steps,
and return to the summit of Maunganamu.

But John, finding that the noise was not repeated, resumed the ascent of the
narrow path of the ridge. Soon they perceived the shadowy outline of the wood
showing faintly through the darkness. A few steps more and they were hid from
sight in the thick foliage of the trees.


CHAPTER XV FROM PERIL TO SAFETY


THE night favored their escape, and prudence urged them to lose no time in
getting away from the fatal neighborhood of Lake Taupo. Paganel took the post
of leader, and his wonderful instinct shone out anew in this difficult mountain
journey. His nyctalopia was a great advantage, his cat-like sight enabling him to
distinguish the smallest object in the deepest gloom.

For three hours they walked on without halting along the far-reaching slope
of the eastern side. Paganel kept a little to the southeast, in order to make use of
a Narrow passage between the Kaimanawa and the Wahiti Ranges, through
which the road from Hawkes' Bay to Auckland passes. Once through that gorge,
his plan was to keep off the road, and, under the shelter of the high ranges,
march to the coast across the inhabited regions of the province.

At nine o'clock in the morning, they had made twelve miles in twelve hours.
The courageous women could not be pressed further, and, besides, the locality
was suitable for camping. The fugitives had reached the pass that separates the
two chains. Paganel, map in hand, made a loop toward the northeast, and at ten
o'clock the little party reached a sort of redan, formed by a projecting rock.

The provisions were brought out, and justice was done to their meal. Mary
Grant and the Major, who had not thought highly of the edible fern till then, now
ate of it heartily.

The halt lasted till two o'clock in the afternoon, then they resumed their
journey; and in the evening they stopped eight miles from the mountains, and
required no persuasion to sleep in the open air.

Next day was one of serious difficulties. Their route lay across this wondrous
region of volcanic lakes, geysers, and solfataras, which extended to the east of
the Wahiti Ranges. It is a country more pleasant for the eye to ramble over, than
for the limbs. Every quarter of a mile they had to turn aside or go around for
some obstacle, and thus incurred great fatigue; but what a strange sight met their
eyes! What infinite variety nature lavishes on her great panoramas!

On this vast extent of twenty miles square, the subterranean forces had a
field for the display of all their varied effects. Salt springs, of singular
transparency, peopled by myriads of insects, sprang up from thickets of tea-tree
scrub. They diffused a powerful odor of burnt powder, and scattered on the
ground a white sediment like dazzling snow. The limpid waters were nearly at
boiling point, while some neighboring springs spread out like sheets of glass.
Gigantic tree-ferns grew beside them, in conditions analogous to those of the


Silurian vegetation.

On every side jets of water rose like park fountains, out of a sea of vapor;
some of them continuous, others intermittent, as if a capricious Pluto controlled
their movements. They rose like an amphitheater on natural terraces; their waters
gradually flowed together under folds of white smoke, and corroding the edges
of the semi-transparent steps of this gigantic staircase. They fed whole lakes
with their boiling torrents.

Farther still, beyond the hot springs and tumultuous geysers, came the
solfataras. The ground looked as if covered with large pustules. These were
slumbering craters full of cracks and fissures from which rose various gases. The
air was saturated with the acrid and unpleasant odor of sulphurous acid. The
ground was encrusted with sulphur and crystalline concretions. All this
incalculable wealth had been accumulating for centuries, and if the sulphur beds
of Sicily should ever be exhausted, it is here, in this little known district of New
Zealand, that supplies must be sought.

The fatigue in traveling in such a country as this will be best understood.
Camping was very difficult, and the sportsmen of the party shot nothing worthy
of Olbinett's skill; so that they had generally to content themselves with fern and
sweet potato-- a poor diet which was scarcely sufficient to recruit the exhausted
strength of the little party, who were all anxious to escape from this barren
region.

But four days at least must elapse before they could hope to leave it. On
February 23, at a distance of fifty miles from Maunganamu, Glenarvan called a
halt, and camped at the foot of a nameless mountain, marked on Paganel's map.
The wooded plains stretched away from sight, and great forests appeared on the
horizon.

That day McNabbs and Robert killed three kiwis, which filled the chief place
on their table, not for long, however, for in a few moments they were all
consumed from the beaks to the claws.

At dessert, between the potatoes and sweet potatoes, Paganel moved a
resolution which was carried with enthusiasm. He proposed to give the name of
Glenarvan to this unnamed mountain, which rose 3,000 feet high, and then was
lost in the clouds, and he printed carefully on his map the name of the Scottish
nobleman.

It would be idle to narrate all the monotonous and uninteresting details of the
rest of the journey. Only two or three occurrences of any importance took place
on the way from the lakes to the Pacific Ocean. The march was all day long
across forests and plains. John took observations of the sun and stars. Neither
heat nor rain increased the discomfort of the journey, but the travelers were so


reduced by the trials they had undergone, that they made very slow progress; and
they longed to arrive at the mission station.

They still chatted, but the conversation had ceased to be general. The little
party broke up into groups, attracted to each other, not by narrow sympathies,
but by a more personal communion of ideas.

Glenarvan generally walked alone; his mind seemed to recur to his
unfortunate crew, as he drew nearer to the sea. He apparently lost sight of the
dangers which lay before them on their way to Auckland, in the thought of his
massacred men; the horrible picture haunted him.

Harry Grant was never spoken of; they were no longer in a position to make
any effort on his behalf. If his name was uttered at all, it was between his
daughter and John Mangles.

John had never reminded Mary of what she had said to him on that last night
at Ware-Atoua. He was too wise to take advantage of a word spoken in a
moment of despair. When he mentioned Captain Grant, John always spoke of
further search. He assured Mary that Lord Glenarvan would re-embark in the
enterprise. He persistently returned to the fact that the authenticity of the
document was indisputable, and that therefore Harry Grant was somewhere to be
found, and that they would find him, if they had to try all over the world. Mary
drank in his words, and she and John, united by the same thought, cherished the
same hope. Often Lady Helena joined in the conversation; but she did not
participate in their illusions, though she refrained from chilling their enthusiasm.

McNabbs, Robert, Wilson, and Mulrady kept up their hunting parties,
without going far from the rest, and each one furnished his QUOTA of game.

Paganel, arrayed in his flax mat, kept himself aloof, in a silent and pensive
mood.

And yet, it is only justice to say, in spite of the general rule that, in the midst
of trials, dangers, fatigues, and privations, the most amiable dispositions become
ruffled and embittered, all our travelers were united, devoted, ready to die for
one another.

On the 25th of February, their progress was stopped by a river which
answered to the Wakari on Paganel's map, and was easily forded. For two days
plains of low scrub succeeded each other without interruption. Half the distance
from Lake Taupo to the coast had been traversed without accident, though not
without fatigue.

Then the scene changed to immense and interminable forests, which
reminded them of Australia, but here the kauri took the place of the eucalyptus.
Although their enthusiasm had been incessantly called forth during their four
months' journey, Glenarvan and his companions were compelled to admire and


wonder at those gigantic pines, worthy rivals of the Cedars of Lebanon, and the
"Mammoth trees" of California. The kauris measured a hundred feet high, before
the ramification of the branches. They grew in isolated clumps, and the forest
was not composed of trees, but of innumerable groups of trees, which spread
their green canopies in the air two hundred feet from the ground.

Some of these pines, still young, about a hundred years old, resembled the
red pine of Europe. They had a dark crown surmounted by a dark conical shoot.
Their older brethren, five or six hundred years of age, formed great green
pavilions supported on the inextricable network of their branches. These
patriarchs of the New Zealand forest measured fifty yards in circumference, and
the united arms of all the travelers could not embrace the giant trunk.

For three days the little party made their way under these vast arches, over a
clayey soil which the foot of man had never trod. They knew this by the quantity
of resinous gum that lay in heaps at the foot of the trees, and which would have
lasted for native exportation many years.

The sportsmen found whole coveys of the kiwi, which are scarce in districts
frequented by the Maories; the native dogs drive them away to the shelter of
these inaccessible forests. They were an abundant source of nourishing food to
our travelers.

Paganel also had the good fortune to espy, in a thicket, a pair of gigantic
birds; his instinct as a naturalist was awakened. He called his companions, and in
spite of their fatigue, the Major, Robert, and he set off on the track of these
animals.

His curiosity was excusable, for he had recognized, or thought he had
recognized, these birds as "moas" belonging to the species of "dinornis," which
many naturalists class with the extinct birds. This, if Paganel was right, would
confirm the opinion of Dr. Hochstetter and other travelers on the present
existence of the wingless giants of New Zealand.

These moas which Paganel was chasing, the contemporaries of the
Megatherium and the Pterodactyles, must have been eighteen feet high. They
were huge ostriches, timid too, for they fled with extreme rapidity. But no shot
could stay their course. After a few minutes of chase, these fleet-footed moas
disappeared among the tall trees, and the sportsmen lost their powder and their
pains.

That evening, March 1, Glenarvan and his companions, emerging at last
from the immense kauri-forest, camped at the foot of Mount Ikirangi, whose
summit rose five thousand five hundred feet into the air. At this point they had
traveled a hundred miles from Maunganamu, and the shore was still thirty miles
away. John Mangles had calculated on accomplishing the whole journey in ten


days, but he did not foresee the physical difficulties of the country.

On the whole, owing to the circuits, the obstacles, and the imperfect
observations, the journey had been extended by fully one-fifth, and now that
they had reached Mount Ikirangi, they were quite worn out.

Two long days of walking were still to be accomplished, during which time
all their activity and vigilance would be required, for their way was through a
district often frequented by the natives. The little party conquered their
weariness, and set out next morning at daybreak.

Between Mount Ikirangi which was left to the right, and Mount Hardy whose
summit rose on the left to a height of 3,700 feet, the journey was very trying; for
about ten miles the bush was a tangle of "supple-jack," a kind of flexible rope,
appropriately called "stifling-creeper," that caught the feet at every step. For two
days, they had to cut their way with an ax through this thousand-headed hydra.
Hunting became impossible, and the sportsmen failed in their accustomed
tribute. The provisions were almost exhausted, and there was no means of
renewing them; their thirst was increasing by fatigue, and there was no water
wherewith to quench it.

The sufferings of Glenarvan and his party became terrible, and for the first
time their moral energy threatened to give way. They no longer walked, they
dragged themselves along, soulless bodies, animated only by the instinct of self-
preservation which survives every other feeling, and in this melancholy plight
they reached Point Lottin on the shores of the Pacific.

Here they saw several deserted huts, the ruins of a village lately destroyed by
the war, abandoned fields, and everywhere signs of pillage and incendiary fires.

They were toiling painfully along the shore, when they saw, at a distance of
about a mile, a band of natives, who rushed toward them brandishing their
weapons. Glenarvan, hemmed in by the sea, could not fly, and summoning all
his remaining strength he was about to meet the attack, when John Mangles
cried:

"A boat! a boat!"

And there, twenty paces off, a canoe with six oars lay on the beach. To
launch it, jump in and fly from the dangerous shore, was only a minute's work.
John Mangles, McNabbs, Wilson and Mulrady took the oars; Glenarvan the
helm; the two women, Robert and Olbinett stretched themselves beside him. In
ten minutes the canoe was a quarter of a mile from the shore. The sea was calm.
The fugitives were silent. But John, who did not want to get too far from land,
was about to give the order to go up the coast, when he suddenly stopped
rowing.

He saw three canoes coming out from behind Point Lottin and evidently


about to give chase.

"Out to sea! Out to sea!" he exclaimed. "Better to drown if we must!"

The canoe went fast under her four rowers. For half an hour she kept her
distance; but the poor exhausted fellows grew weaker, and the three pursuing
boats began to gain sensibly on them. At this moment, scarcely two miles lay
between them. It was impossible to avoid the attack of the natives, who were
already preparing to fire their long guns.

What was Glenarvan about?--standing up in the stern he was looking toward
the horizon for some chimerical help. What did he hope for? What did he wish?
Had he a presentiment?

In a moment his eyes gleamed, his hand pointed out into the distance.

"A ship! a ship!" he cried. "My friends, row! row hard!"

Not one of the rowers turned his head--not an oar-stroke must be lost.
Paganel alone rose, and turned his telescope to the point indicated.

"Yes," said he, "a ship! a steamer! they are under full steam! they are coming
to us! Found now, brave comrades!"

The fugitives summoned new energy, and for another half hour, keeping their
distance, they rowed with hasty strokes. The steamer came nearer and nearer.
They made out her two masts, bare of sails, and the great volumes of black
smoke. Glenarvan, handing the tiller to Robert, seized Paganel's glass, and
watched the movements of the steamer.

John Mangles and his companions were lost in wonder when they saw
Glenarvan's features contract and grow pale, and the glass drop from his hands.
One word explained it.

"The DUNCAN!" exclaimed Glenarvan. "The DUNCAN, and the convicts!"

"The DUNCAN!" cried John, letting go his oar and rising.

"Yes, death on all sides!" murmured Glenarvan, crushed by despair.

It was indeed the yacht, they could not mistake her--the yacht and her bandit
crew!

The major could scarcely restrain himself from cursing their destiny.

The canoe was meantime standing still. Where should they go? Whither fly?
What choice was there between the convicts and the savages?

A shot was fired from the nearest of the native boats, and the ball struck
Wilson's oar.

A few strokes then carried the canoe nearer to the DUNCAN.

The yacht was coming down at full speed, and was not more than half a mile
off.

John Mangles, between two enemies, did not know what to advise, whither
to fly! The two poor ladies on their knees, prayed in their agony.


The savages kept up a running fire, and shots were raining round the canoe,
when suddenly a loud report was heard, and a ball from the yacht's cannon
passed over their heads, and now the boat remained motionless between the
DUNCAN and the native canoes.

John Mangles, frenzied with despair, seized his ax. He was about to scuttle
the boat and sink it with his unfortunate companions, when a cry from Robert
arrested his arm.

"Tom Austin! Tom Austin!" the lad shouted. "He is on board! I see him! He
knows us! He is waving his hat."

The ax hung useless in John's hand.

A second ball whistled over his head, and cut in two the nearest of the three
native boats, while a loud hurrah burst forth on board the DUNCAN.

The savages took flight, fled and regained the shore.

"Come on, Tom, come on!" cried John Mangles in a joyous voice.

And a few minutes after, the ten fugitives, how, they knew not, were all safe
on board the DUNCAN.

CHAPTER XVI WHY THE "DUNCAN" WENT TO NEW ZEALAND

IT would be vain to attempt to depict the feelings of Glenarvan and his
friends when the songs of old Scotia fell on their ears. The moment they set foot
on the deck of the DUNCAN, the piper blew his bagpipes, and commenced the
national pibroch of the Malcolm clan, while loud hurrahs rent the air.

Glenarvan and his whole party, even the Major himself, were crying and
embracing each other. They were delirious with joy. The geographer was
absolutely mad. He frisked about, telescope in hand, pointing it at the last canoe
approaching the shore.

But at the sight of Glenarvan and his companions, with their clothing in rags,
and thin, haggard faces, bearing marks of horrible sufferings, the crew ceased
their noisy demonstrations. These were specters who had returned--not the
bright, adventurous travelers who had left the yacht three months before, so full
of hope! Chance, and chance only, had brought them back to the deck of the
yacht they never thought to see again. And in what a state of exhaustion and
feebleness. But before thinking of fatigue, or attending to the imperious demands
of hunger and thirst, Glenarvan questioned Tom Austin about his being on this
coast.

Why had the DUNCAN come to the eastern coast of New Zealand? How
was it not in the hands of Ben Joyce? By what providential fatality had God
brought them in the track of the fugitives?

Why? how? and for what purpose? Tom was stormed with questions on all
sides. The old sailor did not know which to listen to first, and at last resolved to


hear nobody but Glenarvan, and to answer nobody but him.

"But the convicts?" inquired Glenarvan. "What did you do with them?"

"The convicts?" replied Tom, with the air of a man who does not in the least
understand what he is being asked.

"Yes, the wretches who attacked the yacht."

"What yacht? Your Honor's?"

"Why, of course, Tom. The DUNCAN, and Ben Joyce, who came on board."

"I don't know this Ben Joyce, and have never seen him."

"Never seen him!" exclaimed Paganel, stupefied at the old sailor's replies.
"Then pray tell me, Tom, how it is that the DUNCAN is cruising at this moment
on the coast of New Zealand?"

But if Glenarvan and his friends were totally at a loss to understand the
bewilderment of the old sailor, what was their amazement when he replied in a
calm voice:

"The DUNCAN is cruising here by your Honor's orders."

"By my orders?" cried Glenarvan.

"Yes, my Lord. I only acted in obedience to the instructions sent in your
letter of January fourteenth."

"My letter! my letter!" exclaimed Glenarvan.

The ten travelers pressed closer round Tom Austin, devouring him with their
eyes. The letter dated from Snowy River had reached the DUNCAN, then.

"Let us come to explanations, pray, for it seems to me I am dreaming. You
received a letter, Tom?"

"Yes, a letter from your Honor."

"At Melbourne?"

"At Melbourne, just as our repairs were completed."

"And this letter?"

"Tt was not written by you, but bore your signature, my Lord."

"Just so; my letter was brought by a convict called Ben Joyce."

"No, by a sailor called Ayrton, a quartermaster on the BRITANNIA."

"Yes, Ayrton or Ben Joyce, one and the same individual. Well, and what were
the contents of this letter?"

"Tt contained orders to leave Melbourne without delay, and go and cruise on
the eastern coast of--"

"Australia!" said Glenarvan with such vehemence that the old sailor was
somewhat disconcerted.

"Of Australia?" repeated Tom, opening his eyes. "No, but New Zealand."

"Australia, Tom! Australia!" they all cried with one voice.

Austin's head began to feel in a whirl. Glenarvan spoke with such assurance


that he thought after all he must have made a mistake in reading the letter. Could
a faithful, exact old servant like himself have been guilty of such a thing! He
turned red and looked quite disturbed.

"Never mind, Tom," said Lady Helena. "God so willed it."

"But, no, madam, pardon me," replied old Tom. "No, it is impossible, I was
not mistaken. Ayrton read the letter as I did, and it was he, on the contrary, who
wished to bring me to the Australian coast."

"Ayrton!" cried Glenarvan.

"Yes, Ayrton himself. He insisted it was a mistake: that you meant to order
me to Twofold Bay."

"Have you the letter still, Tom?" asked the Major, extremely interested in this
mystery.

"Yes, Mr. McNabbs," replied Austin. "I'll go and fetch it."

V. IV Verne

He ran at once to his cabin in the forecastle. During his momentary absence
they gazed at each other in silence, all but the Major, who crossed his arms and
said:

"Well, now, Paganel, you must own this would be going a little too far."

"What?" growled Paganel, looking like a gigantic note of interrogation, with
his spectacles on his forehead and his stooping back.

Austin returned directly with the letter written by Paganel and signed by
Glenarvan.

"Will your Honor read it?" he said, handing it to him.

Glenarvan took the letter and read as follows:

"Order to Tom Austin to put out to sea without delay, and to take the
Duncan, by latitude 37 degrees to the eastern coast of New Zealand!"

"New Zealand!" cried Paganel, leaping up.

And he seized the letter from Glenarvan, rubbed his eyes, pushed down his
spectacles on his nose, and read it for himself.

"New Zealand!" he repeated in an indescribable tone, letting the order slip
between his fingers.

That same moment he felt a hand laid on his shoulder, and turning round
found himself face to face with the Major, who said in a grave tone:

"Well, my good Paganel, after all, it is a lucky thing you did not send the
DUNCAN to Cochin China!"

This pleasantry finished the poor geographer. The crew burst out into loud
Homeric laughter. Paganel ran about like a madman, seized his head with both
hands and tore his hair. He neither knew what he was doing nor what he wanted
to do. He rushed down the poop stairs mechanically and paced the deck, nodding


to himself and going straight before without aim or object till he reached the
forecastle. There his feet got entangled in a coil of rope. He stumbled and fell,
accidentally catching hold of a rope with both hands in his fall.

Suddenly a tremendous explosion was heard. The forecastle gun had gone
off, riddling the quiet calm of the waves with a volley of small shot. The
unfortunate Paganel had caught hold of the cord of the loaded gun. The
geographer was thrown down the forecastle ladder and disappeared below.

A cry of terror succeeded the surprise produced by the explosion. Everybody
thought something terrible must have happened. The sailors rushed between
decks and lifted up Paganel, almost bent double. The geographer uttered no
sound.

They carried his long body onto the poop. His companions were in despair.
The Major, who was always the surgeon on great occasions, began to strip the
unfortunate that he might dress his wounds; but he had scarcely put his hands on
the dying man when he started up as if touched by an electrical machine.

"Never! never!" he exclaimed, and pulling his ragged coat tightly round him,
he began buttoning it up in a strangely excited manner.

"But, Paganel," began the Major.

"No, I tell you!"

"[ must examine--"

"You shall not examine."

"You may perhaps have broken--" continued McNabbs.

"Yes," continued Paganel, getting up on his long legs, "but what I have
broken the carpenter can mend."

"What is it, then?"

"There."

Bursts of laughter from the crew greeted this speech. Paganel's friends were
quite reassured about him now. They were satisfied that he had come off safe
and sound from his adventure with the forecastle gun.

"At any rate," thought the Major, "the geographer is wonderfully bashful."

But now Paganel was recovered a little, he had to reply to a question he
could not escape.

"Now, Paganel," said Glenarvan, "tell us frankly all about it. I own that your
blunder was providential. It is sure and certain that but for you the DUNCAN
would have fallen into the hands of the convicts; but for you we should have
been recaptured by the Maories. But for my sake tell me by what supernatural
aberration of mind you were induced to write New Zealand instead of
Australia?"

"Well, upon my oath," said Paganel, "it is--"


But the same instant his eyes fell on Mary and Robert Grant, and he stopped
short and then went on:

"What would you have me say, my dear Glenarvan? I am mad, I am an idiot,
an incorrigible fellow, and I shall live and die the most terrible absent man. I
can't change my skin."

"Unless you get flayed alive."

"Get flayed alive!" cried the geographer, with a furious look. "Is that a
personal allusion?"

"An allusion to what?" asked McNabbs, quietly. This was all that passed.
The mystery of the DUNCAN'S presence on the coast was explained, and all that
the travelers thought about now was to get back to their comfortable cabins, and
to have breakfast.

However, Glenarvan and John Mangles stayed behind with Tom Austin after
the others had retired. They wished to put some further questions to him.

"Now, then, old Austin," said Glenarvan, "tell me, didn't it strike you as
strange to be ordered to go and cruise on the coast of New Zealand?"

"Yes, your Honor," replied Tom. "I was very much surprised, but it is not my
custom to discuss any orders I receive, and I obeyed. Could I do otherwise? If
some catastrophe had occurred through not carrying out your injunctions to the
letter, should not I have been to blame? Would you have acted differently,
captain?"

"No, Tom," replied John Mangles.

"But what did you think?" asked Glenarvan.

"I thought, your Honor, that in the interest of Harry Grant, it was necessary
to go where I was told to go. I thought that in consequence of fresh
arrangements, you were to sail over to New Zealand, and that I was to wait for
you on the east coast of the island. Moreover, on leaving Melbourne, I kept our
destination a secret, and the crew only knew it when we were right out at sea,
and the Australian continent was finally out of sight. But one circumstance
occurred which greatly perplexed me."

"What was it, Tom?" asked Glenarvan.

"Just this, that when the quartermaster of the BRITANNIA heard our
destination--"

"Ayrton!" cried Glenarvan. "Then he is on board?"

"Yes, your Honor."

"Ayrton here?" repeated Glenarvan, looking at John Mangles.

"God has so willed!" said the young captain.

In an instant, like lightning, Ayrton's conduct, his long-planned treachery,
Glenarvan's wound, Mulrady's assassination, the sufferings of the expedition in


the marshes of the Snowy River, the whole past life of the miscreant, flashed
before the eyes of the two men. And now, by the strangest concourse of events,
the convict was in their power.

"Where is he?" asked Glenarvan eagerly.

"In a cabin in the forecastle, and under guard."

"Why was he imprisoned?"

"Because when Ayrton heard the vessel was going to New Zealand, he was
in a fury; because he tried to force me to alter the course of the ship; because he
threatened me; and, last of all, because he incited my men to mutiny. I saw
clearly he was a dangerous individual, and I must take precautions against him."

"And since then?"

"Since then he has remained in his cabin without attempting to go out."

"That's well, Tom."

Just at this moment Glenarvan and John Mangles were summoned to the
saloon where breakfast, which they so sorely needed, was awaiting them. They
seated themselves at the table and spoke no more of Ayrton.

But after the meal was over, and the guests were refreshed and invigorated,
and they all went upon deck, Glenarvan acquainted them with the fact of the
quartermaster's presence on board, and at the same time announced his intention
of having him brought before them.

"May I beg to be excused from being present at his examination?" said Lady
Helena. "I confess, dear Edward, it would be extremely painful for me to see the
wretched man."

"He must be confronted with us, Helena," replied Lord Glenarvan; "I beg
you will stay. Ben Joyce must see all his victims face to face."

Lady Helena yielded to his wish. Mary Grant sat beside her, near Glenarvan.
All the others formed a group round them, the whole party that had been
compromised so seriously by the treachery of the convict. The crew of the yacht,
without understanding the gravity of the situation, kept profound silence.

"Bring Ayrton here,” said Glenarvan.


'


CHAPTER XVII AYRTON'S OBSTINACY


AYRTON came. He crossed the deck with a confident tread, and mounted
the steps to the poop. His eyes were gloomy, his teeth set, his fists clenched
convulsively. His appearance betrayed neither effrontery nor timidity. When he
found himself in the presence of Lord Glenarvan he folded his arms and awaited
the questions calmly and silently.

"Ayrton," said Glenarvan, "here we are then, you and us, on this very
DUNCAN that you wished to deliver into the hands of the convicts of Ben
Joyce."

The lips of the quartermaster trembled slightly and a quick flush suffused his
impassive features. Not the flush of remorse, but of shame at failure. On this
yacht which he thought he was to command as master, he was a prisoner, and his
fate was about to be decided in a few seconds.

However, he made no reply. Glenarvan waited patiently. But Ayrton persisted
in keeping absolute silence.

"Speak, Ayrton, what have you to say?" resumed Glenarvan.

Ayrton hesitated, the wrinkles in his forehead deepened, and at length he said
in calm voice:

"I have nothing to say, my Lord. I have been fool enough to allow myself to
be caught. Act as you please."

Then he turned his eyes away toward the coast which lay on the west, and
affected profound indifference to what was passing around him. One would have
thought him a stranger to the whole affair. But Glenarvan was determined to be
patient. Powerful motives urged him to find out certain details concerning the
mysterious life of Ayrton, especially those which related to Harry Grant and the
BRITANNIA. He therefore resumed his interrogations, speaking with extreme
gentleness and firmly restraining his violent irritation against him.

"I think, Ayrton," he went on, "that you will not refuse to reply to certain
questions that I wish to put to you; and, first of all, ought I to call you Ayrton or
Ben Joyce? Are you, or are you not, the quartermaster of the BRITANNIA?"

Ayrton remained impassive, gazing at the coast, deaf to every question.

Glenarvan's eyes kindled, as he said again:

"Will you tell me how you left the BRITANNIA, and why you are in
Australia?"

The same silence, the same impassibility.

"Listen to me, Ayrton," continued Glenarvan; "it is to your interest to speak.


Frankness is the only resource left to you, and it may stand you in good stead.
For the last time, I ask you, will you reply to my questions?"

Ayrton turned his head toward Glenarvan, and looked into his eyes.

"My Lord," he said, "it is not for me to answer. Justice may witness against
me, but I am not going to witness against myself."

"Proof will be easy," said Glenarvan.

"Easy, my Lord," repeated Ayrton, in a mocking tone. "Your honor makes
rather a bold assertion there, it seems to me. For my own part, I venture to affirm
that the best judge in the Temple would be puzzled what to make of me. Who
will say why I came to Australia, when Captain Grant is not here to tell? Who
will prove that I am the Ben Joyce placarded by the police, when the police have
never had me in their hands, and my companions are at liberty? Who can
damage me except yourself, by bringing forward a single crime against me, or
even a blameable action? Who will affirm that I intended to take possession of
this ship and deliver it into the hands of the convicts? No one, I tell you, no one.
You have your suspicions, but you need certainties to condemn a man, and
certainties you have none. Until there is a proof to the contrary, I am Ayrton,
quartermaster of the BRITANNIA."

Ayrton had become animated while he was speaking, but soon relapsed into
his former indifference.

He, no doubt, expected that his reply would close the examination, but
Glenarvan commenced again, and said:

"Ayrton, I am not a Crown prosecutor charged with your indictment. That is
no business of mine. It is important that our respective situations should be
clearly defined. I am not asking you anything that could compromise you. That
is for justice to do. But you know what I am searching for, and a single word
may put me on the track I have lost. Will you speak?"

Ayrton shook his head like a man determined to be silent.

"Will you tell me where Captain Grant is?" asked Glenarvan.

"No, my Lord," replied Ayrton.

"Will you tell me where the BRITANNIA was wrecked?"

"No, neither the one nor the other."

"Ayrton," said Glenarvan, in almost beseeching tones, "if you know where
Harry Grant is, will you, at least, tell his poor children, who are waiting for you
to speak the word?"

Ayrton hesitated. His features contracted, and he muttered in a low voice, "I
cannot, my Lord."

Then he added with vehemence, as if reproaching himself for a momentary
weakness:


"No, I will not speak. Have me hanged, if you choose."

"Hanged!" exclaimed Glenarvan, overcome by a sudden feeling of anger.

But immediately mastering himself, he added in a grave voice:

"Ayrton, there is neither judge nor executioner here. At the first port we
touch at, you will be given up into the hands of the English authorities."

"That is what I demand," was the quartermaster's reply.

Then he turned away and quietly walked back to his cabin, which served as
his prison. Two sailors kept guard at the door, with orders to watch his slightest
movement. The witnesses of this examination retired from the scene indignant
and despairing.

As Glenarvan could make no way against Ayrton's obstinacy, what was to be
done now? Plainly no course remained but to carry out the plan formed at Eden,
of returning to Europe and giving up for the time this unsuccessful enterprise, for
the traces of the BRITANNIA seemed irrevocably lost, and the document did not
appear to allow any fresh interpretation. On the 37th parallel there was not even
another country, and the DUNCAN had only to turn and go back.

After Glenarvan had consulted his friends, he talked over the question of
returning, more particularly with the captain. John examined the coal bunkers,
and found there was only enough to last fifteen days longer at the outside. It was
necessary, therefore, to put in at the nearest port for a fresh supply.

John proposed that he should steer for the Bay of Talcahuano, where the
DUNCAN had once before been revictualed before she commenced her voyage
of circumnavigation. It was a direct route across, and lay exactly along the 37th
parallel. From thence the yacht, being amply provisioned, might go south,
double Cape Horn, and get back to Scotland by the Atlantic route.

This plan was adopted, and orders were given to the engineer to get up the
steam. Half an hour afterward the beak-head of the yacht was turned toward
Talcahuano, over a sea worthy of being called the Pacific, and at six P. M. the
last mountains of New Zealand had disappeared in warm, hazy mist on the
horizon.

The return voyage was fairly commenced. A sad voyage, for the courageous
searching party to come back to the port without bringing home Harry Grant
with them! The crew, so joyous at departure and so hopeful, were coming back
to Europe defeated and discouraged. There was not one among the brave fellows
whose heart did not swell at the thought of seeing his own country once more;
and yet there was not one among them either who would not have been willing
to brave the perils of the sea for a long time still if they could but find Captain
Grant.

Consequently, the hurrahs which greeted the return of Lord Glenarvan to the


yacht soon gave place to dejection. Instead of the close intercourse which had
formerly existed among the passengers, and the lively conversations which had
cheered the voyage, each one kept apart from the others in the solitude of his
own cabin, and it was seldom that anyone appeared on the deck of the
DUNCAN.

Paganel, who generally shared in an exaggerated form the feelings of those
about him, whether painful or joyous-- a man who could have invented hope if
necessary--even Paganel was gloomy and taciturn. He was seldom visible; his
natural loquacity and French vivacity gave place to silence and dejection. He
seemed even more downhearted than his companions. If Glenarvan spoke at all
of renewing the search, he shook his head like a man who has given up all hope,
and whose convictions concerning the fate of the shipwrecked men appeared
settled. It was quite evident he believed them irrevocably lost.

And yet there was a man on board who could have spoken the decisive word,
and refused to break his silence. This was Ayrton. There was no doubt the fellow
knew, if not the present whereabouts of the captain, at least the place of
shipwreck. But it was evident that were Grant found, he would be a witness
against him. Hence his persistent silence, which gave rise to great indignation on
board, especially among the crew, who would have liked to deal summarily with
him.

Glenarvan repeatedly renewed his attempts with the quartermaster, but
promises and threats were alike useless. Ayrton's obstinacy was so great, and so
inexplicable, that the Major began to believe he had nothing to reveal. His
opinion was shared, moreover, by the geographer, as it corroborated his own
notion about Harry Grant.

But if Ayrton knew nothing, why did he not confess his ignorance? It could
not be turned against him. His silence increased the difficulty of forming any
new plan. Was the presence of the quartermaster on the Australian continent a
proof of Harry Grant's being there? It was settled that they must get this
information out of Ayrton.

Lady Helena, seeing her husband's ill-success, asked his permission to try
her powers against the obstinacy of the quartermaster. When a man had failed, a
woman perhaps, with her gentler influence, might succeed. Is there not a
constant repetition going on of the story of the fable where the storm, blow as it
will, cannot tear the cloak from the shoulders of the traveler, while the first warm
rays of sunshine make him throw it off immediately?

Glenarvan, knowing his young wife's good sense, allowed her to act as she
pleased.

The same day (the 5th of March), Ayrton was conducted to Lady Helena's


saloon. Mary Grant was to be present at the interview, for the influence of the
young girl might be considerable, and Lady Helena would not lose any chance of
success.

For a whole hour the two ladies were closeted with the quartermaster, but
nothing transpired about their interview. What had been said, what arguments
they used to win the secret from the convict, or what questions were asked,
remained unknown; but when they left Ayrton, they did not seem to have
succeeded, as the expression on their faces denoted discouragement.

In consequence of this, when the quartermaster was being taken back to his
cabin, the sailors met him with violent menaces. He took no notice except by
shrugging his shoulders, which so increased their rage, that John Mangles and
Glenarvan had to interfere, and could only repress it with difficulty.

But Lady Helena would not own herself vanquished. She resolved to struggle
to the last with this pitiless man, and went next day herself to his cabin to avoid
exposing him again to the vindictiveness of the crew.

The good and gentle Scotchwoman stayed alone with the convict leader for
two long hours. Glenarvan in a state of extreme nervous anxiety, remained
outside the cabin, alternately resolved to exhaust completely this last chance of
success, alternately resolved to rush in and snatch his wife from so painful a
situation.

But this time when Lady Helena reappeared, her look was full of hope. Had
she succeeded in extracting the secret, and awakening in that adamant heart a
last faint touch of pity?

McNabbs, who first saw her, could not restrain a gesture of incredulity.

However the report soon spread among the sailors that the quartermaster had
yielded to the persuasions of Lady Helena. The effect was electrical. The entire
crew assembled on deck far quicker than Tom Austin's whistle could have
brought them together.

Glenarvan had hastened up to his wife and eagerly asked:

"Has he spoken?"

"No," replied Lady Helena, "but he has yielded to my entreaties, and wishes
to see you."

"Ah, dear Helena, you have succeeded!"

"I hope so, Edward."

"Have you made him any promise that I must ratify?"

"Only one; that you will do all in your power to mitigate his punishment."

"Very well, dear Helena. Let Ayrton come immediately."

Lady Helena retired to her cabin with Mary Grant, and the quartermaster was
brought into the saloon where Lord Glenarvan was expecting him.


CHAPTER XVIII A DISCOURAGING
CONFESSION


As soon as the quartermaster was brought into the presence of Lord
Glenarvan, his keepers withdrew.

"You wanted to speak to me, Ayrton?" said Glenarvan.

"Yes, my Lord," replied the quartermaster.

"Did you wish for a private interview?"

"Yes, but I think if Major McNabbs and Mr. Paganel were present it would
be better."

"For whom?"

"For myself."

Ayrton spoke quite calmly and firmly. Glenarvan looked at him for an
instant, and then sent to summon McNabbs and Paganel, who came at once.

"We are all ready to listen to you," said Glenarvan, when his two friends had
taken their place at the saloon table.

Ayrton collected himself, for an instant, and then said:

"My Lord, it is usual for witnesses to be present at every contract or
transaction between two parties. That is why I desire the presence of Messrs.
Paganel and McNabbs, for it is, properly speaking, a bargain which I propose to
make."

Glenarvan, accustomed to Ayrton's ways, exhibited no surprise, though any
bargaining between this man and himself seemed strange.

"What is the bargain?" he said.

"This," replied Ayrton. "You wish to obtain from me certain facts which may
be useful to you. I wish to obtain from you certain advantages which would be
valuable to me. It is giving for giving, my Lord. Do you agree to this or not?"

"What are the facts?" asked Paganel eagerly.

"No," said Glenarvan. "What are the advantages?"

Ayrton bowed in token that he understood Glenarvan's distinction.

"These," he said, "are the advantages I ask. It is still your intention, I
suppose, to deliver me up to the English authorities?"

"Yes, Ayrton, it is only justice."

"I don't say it is not," replied the quartermaster quietly. "Then of course you
would never consent to set me at liberty."

Glenarvan hesitated before replying to a question so plainly put. On the
answer he gave, perhaps the fate of Harry Grant might depend!


However, a feeling of duty toward human justice compelled him to say:

"No, Ayrton, I cannot set you at liberty."

"I do not ask it," said the quartermaster proudly.

"Then, what is it you want?"

"A middle place, my Lord, between the gibbet that awaits me and the liberty
which you cannot grant me."

"And that is--"

"To allow me to be left on one of the uninhabited islands of the Pacific, with
such things as are absolute necessaries. I will manage as best I can, and will
repent if I have time."

Glenarvan, quite unprepared for such a proposal, looked at his two friends in
silence. But after a brief reflection, he replied:

"Ayrton, if I agree to your request, you will tell me all I have an interest in
knowing."

"Yes, my Lord, that is to say, all I know about Captain Grant and the
BRITANNIA."

"The whole truth?"

"The whole."

"But what guarantee have I?"

"Oh, I see what you are uneasy about. You need a guarantee for me, for the
truth of a criminal. That's natural. But what can you have under the
circumstances. There is no help for it, you must either take my offer or leave it."

"I will trust to you, Ayrton," said Glenarvan, simply.

"And you do right, my Lord. Besides, if I deceive you, vengeance is in your
Own power."

"How?"

"You can come and take me again from where you left me, as I shall have no
means of getting away from the island."

Ayrton had an answer for everything. He anticipated the difficulties and
furnished unanswerable arguments against himself. It was evident he intended to
affect perfect good faith in the business. It was impossible to show more
complete confidence. And yet he was prepared to go still further in
disinterestedness.

"My Lord and gentlemen," he added, "I wish to convince you of the fact that
I am playing cards on the table. I have no wish to deceive you, and I am going to
give you a fresh proof of my sincerity in this matter. I deal frankly with you,
because I reckon on your honor."

"Speak, Ayrton," said Glenarvan.

"My Lord, I have not your promise yet to accede to my proposal, and yet I


do not scruple to tell you that I know very little about Harry Grant."

"Very little," exclaimed Glenarvan.

"Yes, my Lord, the details I am in a position to give you relate to myself.
They are entirely personal, and will not do much to help you to recover the lost
traces of Captain Grant."

Keen disappointment was depicted on the faces of Glenarvan and the Major.
They thought the quartermaster in the possession of an important secret, and he
declared that his communications would be very nearly barren. Paganel's
countenance remained unmoved.

Somehow or other, this avowal of Ayrton, and surrender of himself, so to
speak, unconditionally, singularly touched his auditors, especially when the
quartermaster added:

"So I tell you beforehand, the bargain will be more to my profit than yours."

"It does not signify," replied Glenarvan. "I accept your proposal, Ayrton. I
give you my word to land you on one of the islands of the Pacific Ocean."

"All right, my Lord," replied the quartermaster.

Was this strange man glad of this decision? One might have doubted it, for
his impassive countenance betokened no emotion whatever. It seemed as if he
were acting for someone else rather than himself.

"I am ready to answer," he said.

"We have no questions to put to you,” said Glenarvan. "Tell us all you know,
Ayrton, and begin by declaring who you are."

"Gentlemen," replied Ayrton, "I am really Tom Ayrton, the quartermaster of
the BRITANNIA. I left Glasgow on Harry Grant's ship on the 12th of March,
1861. For fourteen months I cruised with him in the Pacific in search of an
advantageous spot for founding a Scotch colony. Harry Grant was the man to
carry out grand projects, but serious disputes often arose between us. His temper
and mine could not agree. I cannot bend, and with Harry Grant, when once his
resolution is taken, any resistance is impossible, my Lord. He has an iron will
both for himself and others.

"But in spite of that, I dared to rebel, and I tried to get the crew to join me,
and to take possession of the vessel. Whether I was to blame or not is of no
consequence. Be that as it may, Harry Grant had no scruples, and on the 8th of
April, 1862, he left me behind on the west coast of Australia."

"Of Australia!" said the Major, interrupting Ayrton in his narrative. "Then of
course you had quitted the BRITANNIA before she touched at Callao, which
was her last date?"

"Yes," replied the quartermaster, "for the BRITANNIA did not touch there
while I was on board. And how I came to speak of Callao at Paddy O'Moore's


farm was that I learned the circumstances from your recital."

"Go on, Ayrton," said Glenarvan.

"I found myself abandoned on a nearly desert coast, but only forty miles
from the penal settlement at Perth, the capital of Western Australia. As I was
wandering there along the shore, I met a band of convicts who had just escaped,
and I joined myself to them. You will dispense, my Lord, with any account of
my life for two years and a half. This much, however, I must tell you, that I
became the leader of the gang, under the name of Ben Joyce. In September,
1864, I introduced myself at the Irish farm, where I engaged myself as a servant
in my real name, Ayrton. I waited there till I should get some chance of seizing a
ship. This was my one idea. Two months afterward the DUNCAN arrived.
During your visit to the farm you related Captain Grant's history, and I learned
then facts of which I was not previously aware-- that the BRITANNIA had
touched at Callao, and that her latest news was dated June, 1862, two months
after my disembarkation, and also about the document and the loss of the ship
somewhere along the 37th parallel; and, lastly, the strong reasons you had for
supposing Harry Grant was on the Australian continent. Without the least
hesitation I determined to appropriate the DUNCAN, a matchless vessel, able to
outdistance the swiftest ships in the British Navy. But serious injuries had to be
repaired. I therefore let it go to Melbourne, and joined myself to you in my true
character as quartermaster, offering to guide you to the scene of the shipwreck,
fictitiously placed by me on the east coast of Australia. It was in this way,
followed or sometimes preceded by my gang of convicts, I directed your
expedition toward the province of Victoria. My men committed a bootless crime
at Camden Bridge; since the DUNCAN, if brought to the coast, could not escape
me, and with the yacht once mine, I was master of the ocean. I led you in this
way unsuspectingly as far as the Snowy River. The horses and bullocks dropped
dead one by one, poisoned by the gastrolobium. I dragged the wagon into the
marshes, where it got half buried. At my instance--but you know the rest, my
Lord, and you may be sure that but for the blunder of Mr. Paganel, I should now
command the DUNCAN. Such is my history, gentlemen. My disclosures,
unfortunately, cannot put you on the track of Harry Grant, and you perceive that
you have made but a poor bargain by coming to my terms."

The quartermaster said no more, but crossed his arms in his usual fashion
and waited. Glenarvan and his friends kept silence. They felt that this strange
criminal had spoken the whole truth. He had only missed his coveted prize, the
DUNCAN, through a cause independent of his will. His accomplices had gone to
Twofold Bay, as was proved by the convict blouse found by Glenarvan. Faithful
to the orders of their chief, they had kept watch on the yacht, and at length,


weary of waiting, had returned to the old haunt of robbers and incendiaries in the
country parts of New South Wales.

The Major put the first question, his object being to verify the dates of the
BRITANNIA.

"You are sure then," he said, "that it was on the 8th of April you were left on
the west coast of Australia?"

"On that very day," replied Ayrton.

"And do you know what projects Harry Grant had in view at the time?"

"In an indefinite way I do."

"Say all you can, Ayrton," said Glenarvan, "the least indication may set us in
the right course."

"I only know this much, my Lord," replied the quartermaster, "that Captain
Grant intended to visit New Zealand. Now, as this part of the programme was
not carried out while I was on board, it is not impossible that on leaving Callao
the BRITANNIA went to reconnoiter New Zealand. This would agree with the
date assigned by the document to the shipwreck--the 27th of June, 1862."

"Clearly," said Paganel.

"But," objected Glenarvan, "there is nothing in the fragmentary words in the
document that could apply to New Zealand."

"That I cannot answer," said the quartermaster.

"Well, Ayrton," said Glenarvan, "you have kept your word, and I will keep
mine. We have to decide now on what island of the Pacific Ocean you are to be
left?"

"It matters little, my Lord," replied Ayrton.

"Retum to your cabin," said Glenarvan, "and wait our decision."

The quartermaster withdrew, guarded by the two sailors.

"That villain might have been a man," said the Major.

"Yes," returned Glenarvan; "he is a strong, clear-headed fellow. Why was it
that he must needs turn his powers to such evil account?"

"But Harry Grant?"

"I must fear he is irrevocably lost. Poor children! Who can tell them where
their father is?"

"I can!" replied Paganel. "Yes; I can!" One could not help remarking that the
geographer, so loquacious and impatient usually, had scarcely spoken during
Ayrton's examination. He listened without opening his mouth. But this speech of
his now was worth many others, and it made Glenarvan spring to his feet, crying
out: "You, Paganel! you know where Captain Grant is?"

"Yes, as far as can be known."

"How do you know?"


"From that infernal document."

"Ah!" said the Major, in a tone of the most profound incredulity.

"Hear me first, and shrug your shoulders afterward," said Paganel. "I did not
speak sooner, because you would not have believed me. Besides, it was useless;
and I only speak to-day because Ayrton's opinion just supports my own."

V. ITV Verne

"Then it is New Zealand?" asked Glenarvan.

"Listen and judge," replied Paganel. "It is not without reason, or, rather, I had
a reason for making the blunder which has saved our lives. When I was in the
very act of writing the letter to Glenarvan's dictation, the word ZEALAND was
swimming in my brain. This is why. You remember we were in the wagon.
McNabbs had just apprised Lady Helena about the convicts; he had given her the
number of the Australian and New Zealand Gazette which contained the account
of the catastrophe at Camden Bridge. Now, just as I was writing, the newspaper
was lying on the ground, folded in such a manner that only two syllables of the
title were visible; these two syllables were ALAND. What a sudden light flashed
on my mind. ALAND was one of the words in the English document, one that
hitherto we had translated a terre, and which must have been the termination of
the proper noun, ZEALAND."

"Indeed!" said Glenarvan.

"Yes," continued Paganel, with profound conviction; "this meaning had
escaped me, and do you know why? Because my wits were exercised naturally
on the French document, as it was most complete, and in that this important
word was wanting."

"Oh, oh!" said the Major; "your imagination goes too far, Paganel; and you
forget your former deductions."

"Go on, Major; I am ready to answer you."

"Well, then, what do you make of your word AUSTRA?"

"What it was at first. It merely means southern countries."

"Well, and this syllable, INDI, which was first the root of the INDIANS, and
second the root of the word indigenes ?"

"Well, the third and last time," replied Paganel, "it will be the first syllable of
the word INDIGENCE."

"And CONTIN?" cried McNabbs. "Does that still mean CONTINENT?"

"No; since New Zealand is only an island."

"What then?" asked Glenarvan.

"My dear lord," replied Paganel, "I am going to translate the document
according to my third interpretation, and you shall judge. I only make two
observations beforehand. First, forget as much as_ possible preceding


interpretations, and divest your mind of all preconceived notions. Second,
certain parts may appear to you strained, and it is possible that I translate them
badly; but they are of no importance; among others, the word AGONIE, which
chokes me; but I cannot find any other explanation. Besides, my interpretation
was founded on the French document; and don't forget it was written by an
Englishman, who could not be familiar with the idioms of the French language.
Now then, having said this much, I will begin."

And slowly articulating each syllable, he repeated the following sentences:

"LE 27th JUIN, 1862, le trois-mats Britannia, de Glasgow, a sombre apres
une longue AGONIE dans les mers AUSTRALES sur les cotes de la Nouvelle
ZELANDE--in English Zealand. Deux matelots et le Capitaine Grant ont pu y
ABORDER. La CONTINUellement en PRoie a une CRUELIle INDIgence, ils
ont jete ce document par--_de lon_gitude ET 37 degrees 11' de LATItude. Venex
a leur secours, ou ils sont PERDUS!" (On the 27th of June, 1865, the three-mast
vessel BRITANNIA, of Glasgow, has foundered after a long AGOnie in the
Southern Seas, on the coast of New Zealand. Two sailors and Captain Grant have
succeeded in landing. Continually a prey to cruel indigence, they have thrown
this document into the sea in-- longitude and 37 degrees 11' latitude. Come to
their help, or they are lost.)

Paganel stopped. His interpretation was admissible. But precisely because it
appeared as likely as the preceding, it might be as false. Glenarvan and the
Major did not then try and discuss it. However, since no traces of the
BRITANNIA had yet been met with, either on the Patagonian or Australian
coasts, at the points where these countries are crossed by the 37th parallel, the
chances were in favor of New Zealand.


"Now, Paganel," said Glenarvan, "will you tell me why you have kept this
interpretation secret for nearly two months?"

"Because I did not wish to buoy you up again with vain hopes. Besides, we
were going to Auckland, to the very spot indicated by the latitude of the
document."

"But since then, when we were dragged out of the route, why did you not
speak?"

"Because, however just the interpretation, it could do nothing for the
deliverance of the captain."

"Why not, Paganel?"

"Because, admitting that the captain was wrecked on the New Zealand coast,
now that two years have passed and he has not reappeared, he must have
perished by shipwreck or by the New Zealanders."

"Then you are of the opinion," said Glenarvan, "that--"

"That vestiges of the wreck might be found; but that the survivors of the
BRITANNIA have, beyond doubt, perished."

"Keep all this silent, friends," said Glenarvan, "and let me choose a fitting
moment to communicate these sad tidings to Captain Grant's children."

CHAPTER XIX A CRY IN THE NIGHT

THE crew soon heard that no light had been thrown on the situation of
Captain Grant by the revelations of Ayrton, and it caused profound
disappointment among them, for they had counted on the quartermaster, and the
quartermaster knew nothing which could put the DUNCAN on the right track.

The yacht therefore continued her course. They had yet to select the island
for Ayrton's banishment.

Paganel and John Mangles consulted the charts on board, and exactly on the
37th parallel found a little isle marked by the name of Maria Theresa, a sunken
rock in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, 3,500 miles from the American coast,
and 1,500 miles from New Zealand. The nearest land on the north was the
Archipelago of Pomotou, under the protectorate of France; on the south there
was nothing but the eternal ice-belt of the Polar Sea. No ship would come to
reconnoiter this solitary isle. No echoes from the world would ever reach it. The
storm birds only would rest awhile on it during their long flight, and in many
charts the rock was not even marked.

If ever complete isolation was to be found on earth, it was on this little out-
of-the-way island. Ayrton was informed of its situation, and expressed his
willingness to live there apart from his fellows. The head of the vessel was in
consequence turned toward it immediately.

Two days later, at two o'clock, the man on watch signaled land on the


horizon. This was Maria Theresa, a low, elongated island, scarcely raised above
the waves, and looking like an enormous whale. It was still thirty miles distant
from the yacht, whose stem was rapidly cutting her way over the water at the
rate of sixteen knots an hour.

Gradually the form of the island grew more distinct on the horizon. The orb
of day sinking in the west, threw up its peculiar outlines in sharp relief. A few
peaks of no great elevation stood out here and there, tipped with sunlight. At five
o'clock John Mangles could discern a light smoke rising from it.

"Is it a volcano?" he asked of Paganel, who was gazing at this new land
through his telescope.

"I don't know what to think," replied the geographer; "Maria Theresa is a
spot little known; nevertheless, it would not be surprising if its origin were due
to some submarine upheaval, and consequently it may be volcanic."

"But in that case," said Glenarvan, "is there not reason to fear that if an
eruption produced it, an eruption may carry it away?"

"That is not possible," replied Paganel. "We know of its existence for several
centuries, which is our security. When the Isle Julia emerged from the
Mediterranean, it did not remain long above the waves, and disappeared a few
months after its birth."

"Very good," said Glenarvan. "Do you think, John, we can get there to-
night?"

"No, your honor, I must not risk the DUNCAN in the dark, for I am
unacquainted with the coast. I will keep under steam, but go very slowly, and to-
morrow, at daybreak, we can send off a boat."

At eight o'clock in the evening, Maria Theresa, though five miles to leeward,
appeared only an elongated shadow, scarcely visible. The DUNCAN was always
getting nearer.

At nine o'clock, a bright glare became visible, and flames shot up through the
darkness. The light was steady and continued.

"That confirms the supposition of a volcano," said Paganel, observing it
attentively.

"Yet," replied John Mangles, "at this distance we ought to hear the noise
which always accompanies an eruption, and the east wind brings no sound
whatever to our ear."

"That's true," said Paganel. "It is a volcano that blazes, but does not speak.
The gleam seems intermittent too, sometimes, like that of a lighthouse."

"You are right," said John Mangles, "and yet we are not on a lighted coast."

"Ah!" he exclaimed, "another fire? On the shore this time! Look! It moves! It
has changed its place!"


John was not mistaken. A fresh fire had appeared, which seemed to die out
now and then, and suddenly flare up again.

"Is the island inhabited then?" said Glenarvan.

"By savages, evidently,” replied Paganel.

"But in that case, we cannot leave the quartermaster there."

"No," replied the Major, "he would be too bad a gift even to bestow on
savages."

"We must find some other uninhabited island," said Glenarvan, who could
not help smiling at the delicacy of McNabbs. "I promised Ayrton his life, and I
mean to keep my promise."

"At all events, don't let us trust them," added Paganel. "The New Zealanders
have the barbarous custom of deceiving ships by moving lights, like the
wreckers on the Cornish coast in former times. Now the natives of Maria
Theresa may have heard of this proceeding."

"Keep her off a point," called out John to the man at the helm. "To-morrow at
sunrise we shall know what we're about."

At eleven o'clock, the passengers and John Mangles retired to their cabins. In
the forepart of the yacht the man on watch was pacing the deck, while aft, there
was no one but the man at the wheel.

At this moment Mary Grant and Robert came on the poop.

The two children of the captain, leaning over the rail, gazed sadly at the
phosphorescent waves and the luminous wake of the DUNCAN. Mary was
thinking of her brother's future, and Robert of his sister's. Their father was
uppermost in the minds of both. Was this idolized parent still in existence? Must
they give him up? But no, for what would life be without him? What would
become of them without him? What would have become of them already, but for
Lord Glenarvan and Lady Helena?

The young boy, old above his years through trouble, divined the thoughts
that troubled his sister, and taking her hand in his own, said, "Mary, we must
never despair. Remember the lessons our father gave us. Keep your courage up
and no matter what befalls you, let us show this obstinate courage which can rise
above everything. Up to this time, sister, you have been working for me, it is my
turn now, and I will work for you."

"Dear Robert!" replied the young girl.

"T must tell you something," resumed Robert. "You mustn't be vexed, Mary!"

"Why should I be vexed, my child?"

"And you will let me do it?"

"What do you mean?" said Mary, getting uneasy.

"Sister, I am going to be a sailor!"


"You are going to leave me!" cried the young girl, pressing her brother's
hand.

"Yes, sister; I want to be a sailor, like my father and Captain John. Mary, dear
Mary, Captain John has not lost all hope, he says. You have confidence in his
devotion to us, and so have I. He is going to make a grand sailor out of me some
day, he has promised me he will; and then we are going to look for our father
together. Tell me you are willing, sister mine. What our father would have done
for us it is our duty, mine, at least, to do for him. My life has one purpose to
which it should be entirely consecrated-- that is to search, and never cease
searching for my father, who would never have given us up. Ah, Mary, how
good our father was!"

"And so noble, so generous!" added Mary. "Do you know, Robert, he was
already a glory to our country, and that he would have been numbered among
our great men if fate had not arrested his course."

"Yes, I know it," said Robert.

Mary put her arm around the boy, and hugged him fondly as he felt her tears
fall on his forehead.

"Mary, Mary!" he cried, "it doesn't matter what our friends say, I still hope,
and will always hope. A man like my father doesn't die till he has finished his
work."

Mary Grant could not reply. Sobs choked her voice. A thousand feelings
struggled in her breast at the news that fresh attempts were about to be made to
recover Harry Grant, and that the devotion of the captain was so unbounded.

"And does Mr. John still hope?" she asked.

"Yes," replied Robert. "He is a brother that will never forsake us, never! I
will be a sailor, you'll say yes, won't you, sister? And let me join him in looking
for my father. I am sure you are willing."

"Yes, I am willing,” said Mary. "But the separation!" she murmured.

"You will not be alone, Mary, I know that. My friend John told me so. Lady
Helena will not let you leave her. You are a woman; you can and should accept
her kindness. To refuse would be ungrateful, but a man, my father has said a
hundred times, must make his own way."

"But what will become of our own dear home in Dundee, so full of
memories?"

"We will keep it, little sister! All that is settled, and settled so well, by our
friend John, and also by Lord Glenarvan. He is to keep you at Malcolm Castle as
if you were his daughter. My Lord told my friend John so, and he told me. You
will be at home there, and have someone to speak to about our father, while you
are waiting till John and I bring him back to you some day. Ah! what a grand day


that will be!" exclaimed Robert, his face glowing with enthusiasm.

"My boy, my brother," replied Mary, "how happy my father would be if he
could hear you. How much you are like him, dear Robert, like our dear, dear
father. When you grow up you'll be just himself."

"I hope I may," said Robert, blushing with filial and sacred pride.

"But how shall we requite Lord and Lady Glenarvan?" said Mary Grant.

"Oh, that will not be difficult," replied Robert, with boyish confidence. "We
will love and revere them, and we will tell them so; and we will give them plenty
of kisses, and some day, when we can get the chance, we will die for them."

"We'll live for them, on the contrary," replied the young girl, covering her
brother's forehead with kisses. "They will like that better, and so shall I."

The two children then relapsed into silence, gazing out into the dark night,
and giving way to long reveries, interrupted occasionally by a question or
remark from one to the other. A long swell undulated the surface of the calm sea,
and the screw turned up a luminous furrow in the darkness.

A strange and altogether supernatural incident now occurred. The brother
and sister, by some of those magnetic communications which link souls
mysteriously together, were the subjects at the same time and the same instant of
the same hallucination.

Out of the midst of these waves, with their alternations of light and shadow, a
deep plaintive voice sent up a cry, the tones of which thrilled through every fiber
of their being.

"Come! come!" were the words which fell on their ears.

They both started up and leaned over the railing, and peered into the gloom
with questioning eyes.

"Mary, you heard that? You heard that?" cried Robert.

But they saw nothing but the long shadow that stretched before them.

"Robert," said Mary, pale with emotion, "I thought--yes, I thought as you
did, that--We must both be ill with fever, Robert."

A second time the cry reached them, and this time the illusion was so great,
that they both exclaimed simultaneously, "My father! My father!"

It was too much for Mary. Overcome with emotion, she fell fainting into
Robert's arms.

"Help!" shouted Robert. "My sister! my father! Help! Help!"

The man at the wheel darted forward to lift up the girl. The sailors on watch
ran to assist, and John Mangles, Lady Helena, and Glenarvan were hastily
roused from sleep.

"My sister is dying, and my father is there!" exclaimed Robert, pointing to
the waves.


They were wholly at a loss to understand him.

"Yes!" he repeated, "my father is there! I heard my father's voice; Mary
heard it too!"

Just at this moment, Mary Grant recovering consciousness, but wandering
and excited, called out, "My father! my father is there!"

And the poor girl started up, and leaning over the side of the yacht, wanted to
throw herself into the sea.

"My Lord--Lady Helena!" she exclaimed, clasping her hands, "I tell you my
father is there! I can declare that I heard his voice come out of the waves like a
wail, as if it were a last adieu."

The young girl went off again into convulsions and spasms, which became so
violent that she had to be carried to her cabin, where Lady Helena lavished every
care on her. Robert kept on repeating, "My father! my father is there! I am sure
of it, my Lord!"

The spectators of this painful scene saw that the captain's children were
laboring under an hallucination. But how were they to be undeceived?

Glenarvan made an attempt, however. He took Robert's hand, and said, "You
say you heard your father's voice, my dear boy?"

"Yes, my Lord; there, in the middle of the waves. He cried out, 'Come!
come!"

"And did you recognize his voice?"

"Yes, I recognized it immediately. Yes, yes; I can swear to it! My sister heard
it, and recognized it as well. How could we both be deceived? My Lord, do let
us go to my father's help. A boat! a boat!"

Glenarvan saw it was impossible to undeceive the poor boy, but he tried once
more by saying to the man at the wheel:

"Hawkins, you were at the wheel, were you not, when Miss Mary was so
strangely attacked?"

"Yes, your Honor," replied Hawkins.

"And you heard nothing, and saw nothing?"

"Nothing."

"Now Robert, see?"

"If it had been Hawkins's father," returned the boy, with indomitable energy,
"Hawkins would not say he had heard nothing. It was my father, my lord! my
father."

Sobs choked his voice; he became pale and silent, and presently fell down
insensible, like his sister.

Glenarvan had him carried to his bed, where he lay in a deep swoon.

"Poor orphans," said John Mangles. "It is a terrible trial they have to bear!"


"Yes," said Glenarvan; "excessive grief has produced the same hallucination
in both of them, and at the same time."

"In both of them!" muttered Paganel; "that's strange, and pure science would
say inadmissible."

He leaned over the side of the vessel, and listened attentively, making a sign
to the rest to keep still.

But profound silence reigned around. Paganel shouted his loudest. No
response came.

"It is strange," repeated the geographer, going back to his cabin. "Close
sympathy in thought and grief does not suffice to explain this phenomenon."

Next day, March 4, at 5 A. M., at dawn, the passengers, including Mary and
Robert, who would not stay behind, were all assembled on the poop, each one
eager to examine the land they had only caught a glimpse of the night before.

The yacht was coasting along the island at the distance of about a mile, and
its smallest details could be seen by the eye.

Suddenly Robert gave a loud cry, and exclaimed he could see two men
running about and gesticulating, and a third was waving a flag.

"The Union Jack," said John Mangles, who had caught up a spy-glass.

"True enough,” said Paganel, turning sharply round toward Robert.

"My Lord," said Robert, trembling with emotion, "if you don't want me to
swim to the shore, let a boat be lowered. Oh, my Lord, I implore you to let me be
the first to land."

No one dared to speak. What! on this little isle, crossed by the 37th parallel,
there were three men, shipwrecked Englishmen! Instantaneously everyone
thought of the voice heard by Robert and Mary the preceding night. The children
were right, perhaps, in the affirmation. The sound of a voice might have reached
them, but this voice-- was it their father's? No, alas, most assuredly no. And as
they thought of the dreadful disappointment that awaited them, they trembled
lest this new trial should crush them completely. But who could stop them from
going on shore? Lord Glenarvan had not the heart to do it.

"Lower a boat," he called out.

Another minute and the boat was ready. The two children of Captain Grant,
Glenarvan, John Mangles, and Paganel, rushed into it, and six sailors, who
rowed so vigorously that they were presently almost close to the shore.

At ten fathoms' distance a piercing cry broke from Mary's lips.

"My father!" she exclaimed.

A man was standing on the beach, between two others. His tall, powerful
form, and his physiognomy, with its mingled expression of boldness and
gentleness, bore a resemblance both to Mary and Robert. This was indeed the


man the children had so often described. Their hearts had not deceived them.
This was their father, Captain Grant!

The captain had heard Mary's cry, for he held out his arms, and fell flat on
the sand, as if struck by a thunderbolt.


CHAPTER XX CAPTAIN GRANT'S STORY


JOY does not kill, for both father and children recovered before they had
reached the yacht. The scene which followed, who can describe? Language fails.
The whole crew wept aloud at the sight of these three clasped together in a close,
silent embrace.

The moment Harry Grant came on deck, he knelt down reverently. The pious
Scotchman's first act on touching the yacht, which to him was the soil of his
native land, was to return thanks to the God of his deliverance. Then, turning to
Lady Helena and Lord Glenarvan, and his companions, he thanked them in
broken words, for his heart was too full to speak. During the short passage from
the isle to the yacht, his children had given him a brief sketch of the DUNCAN'S
history.

What an immense debt he owed to this noble lady and her friends! From
Lord Glenarvan, down to the lowest sailor on board, how all had struggled and
suffered for him! Harry Grant expressed his gratitude with such simplicity and
nobleness, his manly face suffused with pure and sweet emotion, that the whole
crew felt amply recompensed for the trials they had undergone. Even the
impassable Major himself felt a tear steal down his cheek in spite of all his self-
command; while the good, simple Paganel cried like a child who does not care
who sees his tears.

Harry Grant could not take his eyes off his daughter. He thought her
beautiful, charming; and he not only said so to himself, but repeated it aloud, and
appealed to Lady Helena for confirmation of his opinion, as if to convince
himself that he was not blinded by his paternal affection. His boy, too, came in
for admiration. "How he has grown! he is a man!" was his delighted
exclamation. And he covered the two children so dear to him with the kisses he
had been heaping up for them during his two years of absence.

Robert then presented all his friends successively, and found means always
to vary the formula of introduction, though he had to say the same thing about
each. The fact was, each and all had been perfect in the children's eyes.

John Mangles blushed like a child when his turn came, and his voice
trembled as he spoke to Mary's father.

Lady Helena gave Captain Grant a narrative of the voyage, and made him
proud of his son and daughter. She told him of the young hero's exploits, and
how the lad had already paid back part of the paternal debt to Lord Glenarvan.
John Mangles sang Mary's praises in such terms, that Harry Grant, acting on a


hint from Lady Helena, put his daughter's hand into that of the brave young
captain, and turning to Lord and Lady Glenarvan, said: "My Lord, and you,
Madam, also give your blessing to our children."

When everything had been said and re-said over and over again, Glenarvan
informed Harry Grant about Ayrton. Grant confirmed the quartermaster's
confession as far as his disembarkation on the coast of Australia was concerned.

"He is an intelligent, intrepid man," he added, "whose passions have led him
astray. May reflection and repentance bring him to a better mind!"

But before Ayrton was transferred, Harry Grant wished to do the honors of
his rock to his friends. He invited them to visit his wooden house, and dine with
him in Robinson Crusoe fashion.

Glenarvan and his friends accepted the invitation most willingly. Robert and
Mary were eagerly longing to see the solitary house where their father had so
often wept at the thought of them. A boat was manned, and the Captain and his
two children, Lord and Lady Glenarvan, the Major, John Mangles, and Paganel,
landed on the shores of the island.

A few hours sufficed to explore the whole domain of Harry Grant. It was in
fact the summit of a submarine mountain, a plateau composed of basaltic rocks
and volcanic DEBRIS. During the geological epochs of the earth, this mountain
had gradually emerged from the depths of the Pacific, through the action of the
subterranean fires, but for ages back the volcano had been a peaceful mountain,
and the filled-up crater, an island rising out of the liquid plain. Then soil formed.
The vegetable kingdom took possession of this new land. Several whalers landed
domestic animals there in passing; goats and pigs, which multiplied and ran
wild, and the three kingdoms of nature were now displayed on this island, sunk
in mid ocean.

When the survivors of the shipwrecked BRITANNIA took refuge there, the
hand of man began to organize the efforts of nature. In two years and a half,
Harry Grant and his two sailors had metamorphosed the island. Several acres of
well-cultivated land were stocked with vegetables of excellent quality.

The house was shaded by luxuriant gum-trees. The magnificent ocean
stretched before the windows, sparkling in the sunlight. Harry Grant had the
table placed beneath the grand trees, and all the guests seated themselves. A hind
quarter of a goat, nardou bread, several bowls of milk, two or three roots of wild
endive, and pure fresh water, composed the simple repast, worthy of the
shepherds of Arcadia.

Paganel was enchanted. His old fancies about Robinson Crusoe revived in
full force. "He is not at all to be pitied, that scoundrel, Ayrton!" he exclaimed,
enthusiastically. "This little isle is just a paradise!"


"Yes," replied Harry Grant, "a paradise to these poor, shipwrecked fellows
that Heaven had pity on, but I am sorry that Maria Theresa was not an extensive
and fertile island, with a river instead of a stream, and a port instead of a tiny bay
exposed to the open sea.”

"And why, captain?” asked Glenarvan.

"Because I should have made it the foundation of the colony with which I
mean to dower Scotland."

"Ah, Captain Grant, you have not given up the project, then, which made you
so popular in our old country?"

"No, my Lord, and God has only saved me through your efforts that I might
accomplish my task. My poor brothers in old Caledonia, all who are needy must
have a refuge provided for them in another land against their misery, and my
dear country must have a colony of her own, for herself alone, somewhere in
these seas, where she may find that independence and comfort she so lacks in
Europe."

"Ah, that is very true, Captain Grant," said Lady Helena. "This is a grand
project of yours, and worthy of a noble heart. But this little isle--"

"No, madam, it is a rock only fit at most to support a few settlers; while what
we need is a vast country, whose virgin soil abounds in untouched stores of
wealth," replied the captain.

"Well, captain," exclaimed Glenarvan, "the future is ours, and this country
we will seek for together."

And the two brave Scotchmen joined hands in a hearty grip and so sealed the
compact.

A general wish was expressed to hear, while they were on the island, the
account of the shipwreck of the BRITANNIA, and of the two years spent by the
survivors in this very place. Harry Grant was delighted to gratify their curiosity,
and commenced his narration forthwith.

"My story," he said, "is that of all the Robinson Crusoes cast upon an island,
with only God and themselves to rely on, and feeling it a duty to struggle for life
with the elements.

"It was during the night of the 26th or 27th of June, 1862, that the
BRITANNIA, disabled by a six days' storm, struck against the rocks of Maria
Theresa. The sea was mountains high, and lifeboats were useless. My
unfortunate crew all perished, except Bob Learce and Joe Bell, who with myself
managed to reach shore after twenty unsuccessful attempts.

"The land which received us was only an uninhabited island, two miles broad
and five long, with about thirty trees in the interior, a few meadows, and a brook
of fresh water, which fortunately never dried up. Alone with my sailors, in this


comer of the globe, I did not despair. I put my trust in God, and accustomed
myself to struggle resolutely for existence. Bob and Joe, my brave companions
in misfortune, my friends, seconded me energetically.

"We began like the fictitious Robinson Crusoe of Defoe, our model, by
collecting the planks of the ship, the tools, a little powder, and firearms, and a
bag of precious seeds. The first few days were painful enough, but hunting and
fishing soon afforded us a sure supply of food, for wild goats were in abundance
in the interior of the island, and marine animals abounded on the coast. By
degrees we fell into regular ways and habits of life.

"T had saved my instruments from the wreck, and knew exactly the position
of the island. I found we were out of the route of vessels, and could not be
rescued unless by some providential chance. I accepted our trying lot
composedly, always thinking, however, of my dear ones, remembering them
every day in my prayers, though never hoping to see them again.

"However, we toiled on resolutely, and before long several acres of land
were sown with the seed off the BRITANNIA; potatoes, endive, sorrel, and other
vegetables besides, gave wholesome variety to our daily fare. We caught some
young kids, which soon grew quite tame. We had milk and butter. The nardou,
which grew abundantly in dried up creeks, supplied us with tolerably substantial
bread, and we had no longer any fears for our material life.

"We had built a log hut with the DEBRIS of the BRITANNIA, and this was
covered over with sail cloth, carefully tarred over, and beneath this secure shelter
the rainy season passed comfortably. Many a plan was discussed here, and many
a dream indulged in, the brightest of which is this day realized.

"I had at first the idea of trying to brave the perils of the ocean in a canoe
made out of the spars of the ship, but 1,500 miles lay between us and the nearest
coast, that is to say the islands of the Archipelago of Pomotou. No boat could
have stood so long a voyage. I therefore relinquished my scheme, and looked for
no deliverance except from a divine hand.

"Ah, my poor children! how often we have stood on the top of the rocks and
watched the few vessels passing in the distance far out at sea. During the whole
period of our exile only two or three vessels appeared on the horizon, and those
only to disappear again immediately. Two years and a half were spent in this
manner. We gave up hoping, but yet did not despair. At last, early yesterday
morning, when I was standing on the highest peak of the island, I noticed a light
smoke rising in the west. It increased, and soon a ship appeared in sight. It
seemed to be coming toward us. But would it not rather steer clear of an island
where there was no harbor.

"Ah, what a day of agony that was! My heart was almost bursting. My


comrades kindled a fire on one of the peaks. Night came on, but no signal came
from the yacht. Deliverance was there, however. Were we to see it vanish from
our eyes?

"I hesitated no longer. The darkness was growing deeper. The ship might
double the island during the night. I jumped into the sea, and attempted to make
my way toward it. Hope trebled my strength, I cleft the waves with superhuman
vigor, and had got so near the yacht that I was scarcely thirty fathoms off, when
it tacked about.

"This provoked me to the despairing cry, which only my two children heard.
It was no illusion.

"Then I came back to the shore, exhausted and overcome with emotion and
fatigue. My two sailors received me half dead. It was a horrible night this last we
spent on the island, and we believed ourselves abandoned forever, when day
dawned, and there was the yacht sailing nearly alongside, under easy steam.
Your boat was lowered--we were saved--and, oh, wonder of Divine goodness,
my children, my beloved children, were there holding out their arms to me!"

Robert and Mary almost smothered their father with kisses and caresses as he
ended his narrative.

It was now for the first time that the captain heard that he owed his
deliverance to the somewhat hieroglyphical

V. ITV Verne document which he had placed in a bottle and confined to the
mercy of the ocean.

But what were Jacques Paganel's thoughts during Captain Grant's recital?
The worthy geographer was turning over in his brain for the thousandth time the
words of the document. He pondered his three successive interpretations, all of
which had proved false. How had this island, called Maria Theresa, been
indicated in the papers originally?

At last Paganel could contain himself no longer, and seizing Harry Grant's
hand, he exclaimed:

"Captain! will you tell me at last what really was in your indecipherable
document?"

A general curiosity was excited by this question of the geographer, for the
enigma which had been for nine months a mystery was about to be explained.

"Well, captain," repeated Paganel, "do you remember the precise words of
the document?"

"Exactly," replied Harry Grant; "and not a day has passed without my
recalling to memory words with which our last hopes were linked."

"And what are they, captain?" asked Glenarvan. "Speak, for our amour
propre is wounded to the quick!"


"I am ready to satisfy you," replied Harry Grant; "but, you know, to multiply
the chances of safety, I had inclosed three documents in the bottle, in three
different languages. Which is it you wish to hear?"

"They are not identical, then?" cried Paganel.

"Yes, they are, almost to a word."

"Well, then, let us have the French document," replied Glenarvan. "That is
the one that is most respected by the waves, and the one on which our
interpretations have been mostly founded."

"My Lord, I will give it you word for word," replied Harry Grant.

"LE 27 JUIN, 1862, le trois-mats Britannia, de Glasgow, s'est perdu a quinze
cents lieues de la Patagonie, dans I'hemisphere austral. Partes a terre, deux
matelots et le Capitaine Grant ont atteint l'ile Tabor--"

"Oh!" exclaimed Paganel.

"LA," continued Harry Grant, "continuellement en proie a une cruelle
indigence, ils ont jete ce document par 153 degrees de longitude et 37 degrees
11' de latitude. Venes a leur secours, ou ils sont perdus."

At the name of Tabor, Paganel had started up hastily, and now being unable
to restrain himself longer, he called out:

"How can it be Isle Tabor? Why, this is Maria Theresa!"

"Undoubtedly, Monsieur Paganel," replied Harry Grant. "It is Maria Theresa
on the English and German charts, but is named Tabor on the French ones!"

At this moment a vigorous thump on Paganel's shoulder almost bent him
double. Truth obliges us to say it was the Major that dealt the blow, though
strangely contrary to his usual strict politeness.

"Geographer!" said McNabbs, in a tone of the most supreme contempt.

But Paganel had not even felt the Major's hand. What was that compared to
the geographical blow which had stunned him?

He had been gradually getting nearer the truth, however, as he learned from
Captain Grant. He had almost entirely deciphered the indecipherable document.
The names Patagonia, Australia, New Zealand, had appeared to him in turn with
absolute certainty. CONTIN, at first CONTINENT, had gradually reached its
true meaning, continuelle. Indi had successively signified indiens, indigenes, and
at last the right word was found--INDIGENCE. But one mutilated word, ABOR,
had baffled the geographer's sagacity. Paganel had persisted in making it the root
of the verb ABORDER, and it turned out to be a proper name, the French name
of the Isle Tabor, the isle which had been a refuge for the shipwrecked sailors of
the BRITANNIA. It was difficult to avoid falling into the error, however, for on
the English planispheres on the DUNCAN, the little isle was marked Maria
Theresa.


"No matter?" cried Paganel, tearing his hair; "I ought not to have forgotten
its double appellation. It is an unpardonable mistake, one unworthy of a
secretary of the Geographical Society. I am disgraced!"

"Come, come, Monsieur Paganel,” said Lady Helena; "moderate your grief."

"No, madam, no; I am a mere ass!"

"And not even a learned one!" added the Major, by way of consolation.

When the meal was over, Harry Grant put everything in order in his house.
He took nothing away, wishing the guilty to inherit the riches of the innocent.
Then they returned to the vessel, and, as Glenarvan had determined to start the
same day, he gave immediate orders for the disembarkation of the quartermaster.
Ayrton was brought up on the poop, and found himself face to face with Harry
Grant.

"It is I, Ayrton!" said Grant

"Yes, it is you, captain,” replied Ayrton, without the least sign of surprise at
Harry Grant's recovery. "Well, I am not sorry to see you again in good health."

"It seems, Ayrton, that I made a mistake in landing you on an inhabited
coast."

"It seems so, captain.”

"You are going to take my place on this uninhabited island. May Heaven
give you repentance!"

"Amen," said Ayrton, calmly.

Glenarvan then addressed the quartermaster.

"Tt is still your wish, then, Ayrton, to be left behind?"

"Yes, my Lord!"

"And Isle Tabor meets your wishes?"

"Perfectly."

"Now then, listen to my last words, Ayrton. You will be cut off here from all
the world, and no communication with your fellows is possible. Miracles are
rare, and you will not be able to quit this isle. You will be alone, with no eye
upon you but that of God, who reads the deepest secrets of the heart; but you
will be neither lost nor forsaken, as Captain Grant was. Unworthy as you are of
anyone's remembrance, you will not be dropped out of recollection. I know
where you are, Ayrton; I know where to find you-- I shall never forget."

"God keep your Honor," was all Ayrton's reply.

These were the final words exchanged between Glenarvan and the
quartermaster. The boat was ready and Ayrton got into it.

John Mangles had previously conveyed to the island several cases of
preserved food, besides clothing, and tools and firearms, and a supply of powder
and shot. The quartermaster could commence a new life of honest labor. Nothing


was lacking, not even books; among others, the Bible, so dear to English hearts.

The parting hour had come. The crew and all the passengers were assembled
on deck. More than one felt his heart swell with emotion. Mary Grant and Lady
Helena could not restrain their feelings.

"Must it be done?" said the young wife to her husband. "Must the poor man
be left there?"

"He must, Helena," replied Lord Glenarvan. "It is in expiation of his crimes."

At that moment the boat, in charge of John Mangles, turned away. Ayrton,
who remained standing, and still unmoved, took off his cap and bowed gravely.

Glenarvan uncovered, and all the crew followed his example, as if in
presence of a man who was about to die, and the boat went off in profound
silence.

On reaching land, Ayrton jumped on the sandy shore, and the boat returned
to the yacht. It was then four o'clock in the afternoon, and from the poop the
passengers could see the quartermaster gazing at the ship, standing with folded
arms on a rock, motionless as a statue.

"Shall we set sail, my Lord?" asked John Mangles.

"Yes, John," replied Glenarvan, hastily, more moved than he cared to show.

"Go on!" shouted John to the engineer.

The steam hissed and puffed out, the screw began to stir the waves, and by
eight o'clock the last peaks of Isle Tabor disappeared in the shadows of the night.


CHAPTER XXI PAGANEL'S LAST
ENTANGLEMENT


ON the 19th of March, eleven days after leaving the island, the DUNCAN
sighted the American coast, and next day dropped anchor in the bay of
Talcahuano. They had come back again after a voyage of five months, during
which, and keeping strictly along the 37th parallel, they had gone round the
world. The passengers in this memorable expedition, unprecedented in the
annals of the Travelers’ Club, had visited Chili, the Pampas, the Argentine
Republic, the Atlantic, the island of Tristan d'Acunha, the Indian Ocean,
Amsterdam Island, Australia, New Zealand, Isle Tabor, and the Pacific. Their
search had not been fruitless, for they were bringing back the survivors of the
shipwrecked BRITANNIA.

Not one of the brave Scots who set out at the summons of their chief, but
could answer to their names; all were returning to their old Scotia.

As soon as the DUNCAN had re-provisioned, she sailed along the coast of
Patagonia, doubled Cape Horn, and made a swift run up the Atlantic Ocean. No
voyage could be more devoid of incident. The yacht was simply carrying home a
cargo of happiness. There was no secret now on board, not even John Mangles's
attachment to Mary Grant.

Yes, there was one mystery still, which greatly excited McNabbs's curiosity.
Why was it that Paganel remained always hermetically fastened up in his
clothes, with a big comforter round his throat and up to his very ears? The Major
was burning with desire to know the reason of this singular fashion. But in spite
of interrogations, allusions, and suspicions on the part of McNabbs, Paganel
would not unbutton.

Not even when the DUNCAN crossed the line, and the heat was so great that
the seams of the deck were melting. "He is so DISTRAIT that he thinks he is at
St. Petersburg," said the Major, when he saw the geographer wrapped in an
immense great-coat, as if the mercury had been frozen in the thermometer.

At last on the 9th of May, fifty-three days from the time of leaving
Talcahuano, John Mangles sighted the lights of Cape Clear. The yacht entered St.
George's Channel, crossed the Irish Sea, and on the 10th of May reached the
Firth of Clyde. At 11 o'clock she dropped anchor off Dunbarton, and at 2 P.M.
the passengers arrived at Malcolm Castle amidst the enthusiastic cheering of the
Highlanders.

As fate would have it then, Harry Grant and his two companions were saved.


John Mangles wedded Mary Grant in the old cathedral of St. Mungo, and Mr.
Paxton, the same clergyman who had prayed nine months before for the
deliverance of the father, now blessed the marriage of his daughter and his
deliverer. Robert was to become a sailor like Harry Grant and John Mangles, and
take part with them in the captain's grand projects, under the auspices of Lord
Glenarvan.

But fate also decreed that Paganel was not to die a bachelor? Probably so.

The fact was, the learned geographer after his heroic exploits, could not
escape celebrity. His blunders made quite a FURORE among the fashionables of
Scotland, and he was overwhelmed with courtesies.

It was then that an amiable lady, about thirty years of age, in fact, a cousin of
McNabbs, a little eccentric herself, but good and still charming, fell in love with
the geographer's oddities, and offered him her hand. Forty thousand pounds went
with it, but that was not mentioned.

Paganel was far from being insensible to the sentiments of Miss Arabella,
but yet he did not dare to speak. It was the Major who was the medium of
communication between these two souls, evidently made for each other. He even
told Paganel that his marriage was the last freak he would be able to allow
himself. Paganel was in a great state of embarrassment, but strangely enough
could not make up his mind to speak the fatal word.

"Does not Miss Arabella please you then?" asked McNabbs.

"Oh, Major, she is charming,” exclaimed Paganel, "a thousand times too
charming, and if I must tell you all, she would please me better if she were less
so. I wish she had a defect!"

"Be easy on that score," replied the Major, "she has, and more than one. The
most perfect woman in the world has always her quota. So, Paganel, it is settled
then, I suppose?"

"T dare not."

"Come, now, my learned friend, what makes you hesitate?"

"IT am unworthy of Miss Arabella," was the invariable reply of the
geographer. And to this he would stick.

At last, one day being fairly driven in a corner by the intractable Major, he
ended by confiding to him, under the seal of secrecy, a certain peculiarity which
would facilitate his apprehension should the police ever be on his track.

"Bah!" said the Major.

"It is really as I tell you," replied Paganel.

"What does it matter, my worthy friend?"

"Do you think so, Major?"

"On the contrary, it only makes you more uncommon. It adds to your


personal merits. It is the very thing to make you the nonpareil husband that
Arabella dreams about."

And the Major with imperturbable gravity left Paganel in a state of the
utmost disquietude.

A short conversation ensued between McNabbs and Miss Arabella. A
fortnight afterwards, the marriage was celebrated in grand style in the chapel of
Malcolm Castle. Paganel looked magnificent, but closely buttoned up, and Miss
Arabella was arrayed in splendor.

And this secret of the geographer would have been forever buried in
oblivion, if the Major had not mentioned it to Glenarvan, and he could not hide it
from Lady Helena, who gave a hint to Mrs. Mangles. To make a long story short,
it got in the end to M. Olbinett's ears, and soon became noised abroad.

Jacques Paganel, during his three days' captivity among the Maories, had
been tattooed from the feet to the shoulders, and he bore on his chest a heraldic
kiwi with outspread wings, which was biting at his heart.

This was the only adventure of his grand voyage that Paganel could never
get over, and he always bore a grudge to New Zealand on account of it. It was
for this reason too, that, notwithstanding solicitation and regrets, he never would
return to France. He dreaded lest he should expose the whole Geographical
Society in his person to the jests of caricaturists and low newspapers, by their
secretary coming back tattooed.

The return of the captain to Scotland was a national event, and Harry Grant
was soon the most popular man in old Caledonia. His son Robert became a sailor
like himself and Captain Mangles, and under the patronage of Lord Glenarvan
they resumed the project of founding a Scotch colony in the Southern Seas.


MICHAEL STROGOFF
OR, THE COURIER OF THE CZAR
by Jules Verne


BOOK I


CHAPTER I A FETE AT THE NEW PALACE

"SIRE, a fresh dispatch."

"Whence?"

"From Tomsk?"

"Is the wire cut beyond that city?"

"Yes, sire, since yesterday."

"Telegraph hourly to Tomsk, General, and keep me informed of all that
occurs."

"Sire, it shall be done," answered General Kissoff.

These words were exchanged about two hours after midnight, at the moment
when the fete given at the New Palace was at the height of its splendor.

During the whole evening the bands of the Preobra-jensky and Paulowsky
regiments had played without cessation polkas, mazurkas, schottisches, and
waltzes from among the choicest of their repertoires. Innumerable couples of
dancers whirled through the magnificent saloons of the palace, which stood at a
few paces only from the "old house of stones"--in former days the scene of so
many terrible dramas, the echoes of whose walls were this night awakened by
the gay strains of the musicians.

The grand-chamberlain of the court, was, besides, well seconded in his
arduous and delicate duties. The grand-dukes and their aides-de-camp, the
chamberlains-in-waiting and other officers of the palace, presided personally in
the arrangement of the dances. The grand duchesses, covered with diamonds, the
ladies-in-waiting in their most exquisite costumes, set the example to the wives
of the military and civil dignitaries of the ancient "city of white stone." When,
therefore, the signal for the "polonaise" resounded through the saloons, and the
guests of all ranks took part in that measured promenade, which on occasions of
this kind has all the importance of a national dance, the mingled costumes, the
sweeping robes adorned with lace, and uniforms covered with orders, presented
a scene of dazzling splendor, lighted by hundreds of lusters multiplied tenfold by
the numerous mirrors adorning the walls.

The grand saloon, the finest of all those contained in the New Palace, formed
to this procession of exalted personages and splendidly dressed women a frame
worthy of the magnificence they displayed. The rich ceiling, with its gilding


already softened by the touch of time, appeared as if glittering with stars. The
embroidered drapery of the curtains and doors, falling in gorgeous folds,
assumed rich and varied hues, broken by the shadows of the heavy masses of
damask.

Through the panes of the vast semicircular bay-windows the light, with
which the saloons were filled, shone forth with the brilliancy of a conflagration,
vividly illuminating the gloom in which for some hours the palace had been
shrouded. The attention of those of the guests not taking part in the dancing was
attracted by the contrast. Resting in the recesses of the windows, they could
discern, standing out dimly in the darkness, the vague outlines of the countless
towers, domes, and spires which adorn the ancient city. Below the sculptured
balconies were visible numerous sentries, pacing silently up and down, their
rifles carried horizontally on the shoulder, and the spikes of their helmets
glittering like flames in the glare of light issuing from the palace. The steps also
of the patrols could be heard beating time on the stones beneath with even more
regularity than the feet of the dancers on the floor of the saloon. From time to
time the watchword was repeated from post to post, and occasionally the notes
of a trumpet, mingling with the strains of the orchestra, penetrated into their
midst. Still farther down, in front of the facade, dark masses obscured the rays of
light which proceeded from the windows of the New Palace. These were boats
descending the course of a river, whose waters, faintly illumined by a few lamps,
washed the lower portion of the terraces.

The principal personage who has been mentioned, the giver of the fete, and
to whom General Kissoff had been speaking in that tone of respect with which
sovereigns alone are usually addressed, wore the simple uniform of an officer of
chasseurs of the guard. This was not affectation on his part, but the custom of a
man who cared little for dress, his contrasting strongly with the gorgeous
costumes amid which he moved, encircled by his escort of Georgians, Cossacks,
and Circassians--a brilliant band, splendidly clad in the glittering uniforms of the
Caucasus.

This personage, of lofty stature, affable demeanor, and physiognomy calm,
though bearing traces of anxiety, moved from group to group, seldom speaking,
and appearing to pay but little attention either to the merriment of the younger
guests or the graver remarks of the exalted dignitaries or members of the
diplomatic corps who represented at the Russian court the principal governments
of Europe. Two or three of these astute politicians--physiognomists by virtue of
their profession--failed not to detect on the countenance of their host symptoms
of disquietude, the source of which eluded their penetration; but none ventured
to interrogate him on the subject.


It was evidently the intention of the officer of chasseurs that his own
anxieties should in no way cast a shade over the festivities; and, as he was a
personage whom almost the population of a world in itself was wont to obey, the
gayety of the ball was not for a moment checked.

Nevertheless, General Kissoff waited until the officer to whom he had just
communicated the dispatch forwarded from Tomsk should give him permission
to withdraw; but the latter still remained silent. He had taken the telegram, he
had read it carefully, and his visage became even more clouded than before.
Involuntarily he sought the hilt of his sword, and then passed his hand for an
instant before his eyes, as though, dazzled by the brilliancy of the light, he
wished to shade them, the better to see into the recesses of his own mind.

"We are, then,” he continued, after having drawn General Kissoff aside
towards a window, "since yesterday without intelligence from the Grand Duke?"

"Without any, sire; and it is to be feared that in a short time dispatches will
no longer cross the Siberian frontier."

"But have not the troops of the provinces of Amoor and Irkutsk, as those also
of the Trans-Balkan territory, received orders to march immediately upon
Irkutsk?"

"The orders were transmitted by the last telegram we were able to send
beyond Lake Baikal."

"And the governments of Yeniseisk, Omsk, Semipolatinsk, and Tobolsk--are
we still in direct communication with them as before the insurrection?"

"Yes, sire; our dispatches have reached them, and we are assured at the
present moment that the Tartars have not advanced beyond the Irtish and the
Obi."

"And the traitor Ivan Ogareff, are there no tidings of him?"

"None," replied General Kissoff. "The head of the police cannot state
whether or not he has crossed the frontier."

"Let a description of him be immediately dispatched to Nijni-Novgorod,
Perm, Ekaterenburg, Kasirnov, Tioumen, Ishim, Omsk, Tomsk, and to all the
telegraphic stations with which communication is yet open.”

"Your majesty's orders shall be instantly carried out."

"You will observe the strictest silence as to this."

The General, having made a sign of respectful assent, bowing low, mingled
with the crowd, and finally left the apartments without his departure being
remarked.

The officer remained absorbed in thought for a few moments, when,
recovering himself, he went among the various groups in the saloon, his
countenance reassuming that calm aspect which had for an instant been


disturbed.

Nevertheless, the important occurrence which had occasioned these rapidly
exchanged words was not so unknown as the officer of the chasseurs of the
guard and General Kissoff had possibly supposed. It was not spoken of officially,
it is true, nor even officiously, since tongues were not free; but a few exalted
personages had been informed, more or less exactly, of the events which had
taken place beyond the frontier. At any rate, that which was only slightly known,
that which was not matter of conversation even between members of the corps
diplomatique, two guests, distinguished by no uniform, no decoration, at this
reception in the New Palace, discussed in a low voice, and with apparently very
correct information.

By what means, by the exercise of what acuteness had these two ordinary
mortals ascertained that which so many persons of the highest rank and
importance scarcely even suspected? It is impossible to say. Had they the gifts of
foreknowledge and foresight? Did they possess a supplementary sense, which
enabled them to see beyond that limited horizon which bounds all human gaze?
Had they obtained a peculiar power of divining the most secret events? Was it
owing to the habit, now become a second nature, of living on information, that
their mental constitution had thus become really transformed? It was difficult to
escape from this conclusion.

Of these two men, the one was English, the other French; both were tall and
thin, but the latter was sallow as are the southern Provencals, while the former
was ruddy like a Lancashire gentleman. The Anglo-Norman, formal, cold, grave,
parsimonious of gestures and words, appeared only to speak or gesticulate under
the influence of a spring operating at regular intervals. The Gaul, on the contrary,
lively and petulant, expressed himself with lips, eyes, hands, all at once, having
twenty different ways of explaining his thoughts, whereas his interlocutor
seemed to have only one, immutably stereotyped on his brain.

The strong contrast they presented would at once have struck the most
superficial observer; but a physiognomist, regarding them closely, would have
defined their particular characteristics by saying, that if the Frenchman was "all
eyes," the Englishman was "all ears."

In fact, the visual apparatus of the one had been singularly perfected by
practice. The sensibility of its retina must have been as instantaneous as that of
those conjurors who recognize a card merely by a rapid movement in cutting the
pack or by the arrangement only of marks invisible to others. The Frenchman
indeed possessed in the highest degree what may be called "the memory of the
eye."

The Englishman, on the contrary, appeared especially organized to listen and


to hear. When his aural apparatus had been once struck by the sound of a voice
he could not forget it, and after ten or even twenty years he would have
recognized it among a thousand. His ears, to be sure, had not the power of
moving as freely as those of animals who are provided with large auditory flaps;
but, since scientific men know that human ears possess, in fact, a very limited
power of movement, we should not be far wrong in affirming that those of the
said Englishman became erect, and turned in all directions while endeavoring to
gather in the sounds, in a manner apparent only to the naturalist. It must be
observed that this perfection of sight and hearing was of wonderful assistance to
these two men in their vocation, for the Englishman acted as correspondent of
the Daily Telegraph, and the Frenchman, as correspondent of what newspaper, or
of what newspapers, he did not say; and when asked, he replied in a jocular
manner that he corresponded with "his cousin Madeleine." This Frenchman,
however, neath his careless surface, was wonderfully shrewd and sagacious.
Even while speaking at random, perhaps the better to hide his desire to learn, he
never forgot himself. His loquacity even helped him to conceal his thoughts, and
he was perhaps even more discreet than his confrere of the Daily Telegraph.
Both were present at this fete given at the New Palace on the night of the 15th of
July in their character of reporters.

It is needless to say that these two men were devoted to their mission in the
world--that they delighted to throw themselves in the track of the most
unexpected intelligence--that nothing terrified or discouraged them from
succeeding--that they possessed the imperturbable sang froid and the genuine
intrepidity of men of their calling. Enthusiastic jockeys in this steeplechase, this
hunt after information, they leaped hedges, crossed rivers, sprang over fences,
with the ardor of pure-blooded racers, who will run "a good first" or die!

Their journals did not restrict them with regard to money--the surest, the
most rapid, the most perfect element of information known to this day. It must
also be added, to their honor, that neither the one nor the other ever looked over
or listened at the walls of private life, and that they only exercised their vocation
when political or social interests were at stake. In a word, they made what has
been for some years called "the great political and military reports."

It will be seen, in following them, that they had generally an independent
mode of viewing events, and, above all, their consequences, each having his own
way of observing and appreciating.

The French correspondent was named Alcide Jolivet. Harry Blount was the
name of the Englishman. They had just met for the first time at this fete in the
New Palace, of which they had been ordered to give an account in their papers.
The dissimilarity of their characters, added to a certain amount of jealousy,


which generally exists between rivals in the same calling, might have rendered
them but little sympathetic. However, they did not avoid each other, but
endeavored rather to exchange with each other the chat of the day. They were
sportsmen, after all, hunting on the same ground. That which one missed might
be advantageously secured by the other, and it was to their interest to meet and
converse.

This evening they were both on the look out; they felt, in fact, that there was
something in the air.

"Even should it be only a wildgoose chase," said Alcide Jolivet to himself,
"it may be worth powder and shot."

The two correspondents therefore began by cautiously sounding each other.

"Really, my dear sir, this little fete is charming!" said Alcide Jolivet
pleasantly, thinking himself obliged to begin the conversation with this
eminently French phrase.

"I have telegraphed already, 'splendid!"" replied Harry Blount calmly,
employing the word specially devoted to expressing admiration by all subjects of
the United Kingdom.

"Nevertheless," added Alcide Jolivet, "I felt compelled to remark to my
cousin--"

"Your cousin?” repeated Harry Blount in a tone of surprise, interrupting his
brother of the pen.

"Yes," returned Alcide Jolivet, "my cousin Madeleine. It is with her that I
correspond, and she likes to be quickly and well informed, does my cousin. I
therefore remarked to her that, during this fete, a sort of cloud had appeared to
overshadow the sovereign's brow."

"To me, it seemed radiant," replied Harry Blount, who perhaps, wished to
conceal his real opinion on this topic.

"And, naturally, you made it ‘radiant,’ in the columns of the Daily
Telegraph."

"Exactly."

"Do you remember, Mr. Blount, what occurred at Zakret in 1812?"

"IT remember it as well as if I had been there, sir," replied the English
correspondent.

"Then," continued Alcide Jolivet, "you know that, in the middle of a fete
given in his honor, it was announced to the Emperor Alexander that Napoleon
had just crossed the Niemen with the vanguard of the French army. Nevertheless
the Emperor did not leave the fete, and notwithstanding the extreme gravity of
intelligence which might cost him his empire, he did not allow himself to show
more uneasiness."


"Than our host exhibited when General Kissoff informed him that the
telegraphic wires had just been cut between the frontier and the government of
Irkutsk."

"Ah! you are aware of that?"

"Tam!"

"As regards myself, it would be difficult to avoid knowing it, since my last
telegram reached Udinsk," observed Alcide Jolivet, with some satisfaction.

"And mine only as far as Krasnoiarsk," answered Harry Blount, in a no less
satisfied tone.

"Then you know also that orders have been sent to the troops of
Nikolaevsk?"

"I do, sir; and at the same time a telegram was sent to the Cossacks of the
government of Tobolsk to concentrate their forces."

"Nothing can be more true, Mr. Blount; I was equally well acquainted with
these measures, and you may be sure that my dear cousin shall know of them to-
morrow."

"Exactly as the readers of the Daily Telegraph shall know it also, M. Jolivet."

"Well, when one sees all that is going on...."

"And when one hears all that is said...."

"An interesting campaign to follow, Mr. Blount."

"T shall follow it, M. Jolivet!"

"Then it is possible that we shall find ourselves on ground less safe, perhaps,
than the floor of this ball-room."

"Less safe, certainly, but--"

"But much less slippery," added Alcide Jolivet, holding up his companion,
just as the latter, drawing back, was about to lose his equilibrium.

Thereupon the two correspondents separated, pleased that the one had not
stolen a march on the other.

At that moment the doors of the rooms adjoining the great reception saloon
were thrown open, disclosing to view several immense tables beautifully laid
out, and groaning under a profusion of valuable china and gold plate. On the
central table, reserved for the princes, princesses, and members of the corps
diplomatique, glittered an epergne of inestimable price, brought from London,
and around this chef-d'oeuvre of chased gold reflected under the light of the
lusters a thousand pieces of most beautiful service from the manufactories of
Sevres.

The guests of the New Palace immediately began to stream towards the
supper-rooms.

At that moment. General Kissoff, who had just re-entered, quickly


approached the officer of chasseurs.

"Well?" asked the latter abruptly, as he had done the former time.

"Telegrams pass Tomsk no longer, sire."

"A courier this moment!"

The officer left the hall and entered a large antechamber adjoining. It was a
cabinet with plain oak furniture, situated in an angle of the New Palace. Several
pictures, amongst others some by Horace Vernet, hung on the wall.

The officer hastily opened a window, as if he felt the want of air, and stepped
out on a balcony to breathe the pure atmosphere of a lovely July night. Beneath
his eyes, bathed in moonlight, lay a fortified inclosure, from which rose two
cathedrals, three palaces, and an arsenal. Around this inclosure could be seen
three distinct towns: Kitai-Gorod, Beloi-Gorod, Zemlianai-Gorod--European,
Tartar, and Chinese quarters of great extent, commanded by towers, belfries,
minarets, and the cupolas of three hundred churches, with green domes,
surmounted by the silver cross. A little winding river, here and there reflected the
rays of the moon.

This river was the Moskowa; the town Moscow; the fortified inclosure the
Kremlin; and the officer of chasseurs of the guard, who, with folded arms and
thoughtful brow, was listening dreamily to the sounds floating from the New
Palace over the old Muscovite city, was the Czar.


CHAPTER IT RUSSIANS AND TARTARS


THE Czar had not so suddenly left the ball-room of the New Palace, when
the fete he was giving to the civil and military authorities and principal people of
Moscow was at the height of its brilliancy, without ample cause; for he had just
received information that serious events were taking place beyond the frontiers
of the Ural. It had become evident that a formidable rebellion threatened to wrest
the Siberian provinces from the Russian crown.

Asiatic Russia, or Siberia, covers a superficial area of 1,790,208 square
miles, and contains nearly two millions of inhabitants. Extending from the Ural
Mountains, which separate it from Russia in Europe, to the shores of the Pacific
Ocean, it is bounded on the south by Turkestan and the Chinese Empire; on the
north by the Arctic Ocean, from the Sea of Kara to Behring's Straits. It is divided
into several governments or provinces, those of Tobolsk, Yeniseisk, Irkutsk,
Omsk, and Yakutsk; contains two districts, Okhotsk and Kamtschatka; and
possesses two countries, now under the Muscovite dominion--that of the Kirghiz
and that of the Tshouktshes. This immense extent of steppes, which includes
more than one hundred and ten degrees from west to east, is a land to which
criminals and political offenders are banished.

Two governor-generals represent the supreme authority of the Czar over this
vast country. The higher one resides at Irkutsk, the far capital of Eastern Siberia.
The River Tchouna separates the two Siberias.

No rail yet furrows these wide plains, some of which are in reality extremely
fertile. No iron ways lead from those precious mines which make the Siberian
soil far richer below than above its surface. The traveler journeys in summer in a
kibick or telga; in winter, in a sledge.

An electric telegraph, with a single wire more than eight thousand versts in
length, alone affords communication between the western and eastern frontiers
of Siberia. On issuing from the Ural, it passes through Ekaterenburg, Kasirnov,
Tioumen, Ishim, Omsk, Elamsk, Kolyvan, Tomsk, Krasnoiarsk, Nijni-Udinsk,
Irkutsk, Verkne-Nertschink, Strelink, Albazine, Blagowstenks, Radde,
Orlomskaya, Alexandrowskoe, and Nikolaevsk; and six roubles and nineteen
copecks are paid for every word sent from one end to the other. From Irkutsk
there is a branch to Kiatka, on the Mongolian frontier; and from thence, for thirty
copecks a word, the post conveys the dispatches to Pekin in a fortnight.

It was this wire, extending from Ekaterenburg to Nikolaevsk, which had been
cut, first beyond Tomsk, and then between Tomsk and Kolyvan.


This was why the Czar, to the communication made to him for the second
time by General Kissoff, had answered by the words, "A courier this moment!"

The Czar remained motionless at the window for a few moments, when the
door was again opened. The chief of police appeared on the threshold.

"Enter, General," said the Czar briefly, "and tell me all you know of Ivan
Ogareff."

"He is an extremely dangerous man, sire," replied the chief of police.

"He ranked as colonel, did he not?"

"Yes, sire."

"Was he an intelligent officer?"

"Very intelligent, but a man whose spirit it was impossible to subdue; and
possessing an ambition which stopped at nothing, he became involved in secret
intrigues, and was degraded from his rank by his Highness the Grand Duke, and
exiled to Siberia."

"How long ago was that?"

"Two years since. Pardoned after six months of exile by your majesty's favor,
he returned to Russia."

"And since that time, has he not revisited Siberia?"

"Yes, sire; but he voluntarily returned there," replied the chief of police,
adding, and slightly lowering his voice, "there was a time, sire, when NONE
returned from Siberia."

"Well, whilst I live, Siberia is and shall be a country whence men CAN
return."

The Czar had the right to utter these words with some pride, for often, by his
clemency, he had shown that Russian justice knew how to pardon.

The head of the police did not reply to this observation, but it was evident
that he did not approve of such half-measures. According to his idea, a man who
had once passed the Ural Mountains in charge of policemen, ought never again
to cross them. Now, it was not thus under the new reign, and the chief of police
sincerely deplored it. What! no banishment for life for other crimes than those
against social order! What! political exiles returning from Tobolsk, from
Yakutsk, from Irkutsk! In truth, the chief of police, accustomed to the despotic
sentences of the ukase which formerly never pardoned, could not understand this
mode of governing. But he was silent, waiting until the Czar should interrogate
him further. The questions were not long in coming.

"Did not Ivan Ogareff," asked the Czar, "return to Russia a second time, after
that journey through the Siberian provinces, the object of which remains
unknown?"

"He did."


"And have the police lost trace of him since?"

"No, sire; for an offender only becomes really dangerous from the day he has
received his pardon."

The Czar frowned. Perhaps the chief of police feared that he had gone rather
too far, though the stubbornness of his ideas was at least equal to the boundless
devotion he felt for his master. But the Czar, disdaining to reply to these indirect
reproaches cast on his policy, continued his questions. "Where was Ogareff last
heard of?"

"In the province of Perm."

"In what town?"

"At Perm itself."

"What was he doing?"

"He appeared unoccupied, and there was nothing suspicious in his conduct."

"Then he was not under the surveillance of the secret police?"

"No, sire."

"When did he leave Perm?"

"About the month of March?"

"To go...?"

"Where, is unknown."

"And it is not known what has become of him?"

"No, sire; it is not known."

"Well, then, I myself know," answered the Czar. "I have received anonymous
communications which did not pass through the police department; and, in the
face of events now taking place beyond the frontier, I have every reason to
believe that they are correct."

"Do you mean, sire,” cried the chief of police, "that Ivan Ogareff has a hand
in this Tartar rebellion?"

"Indeed I do; and I will now tell you something which you are ignorant of.
After leaving Perm, Ivan Ogareff crossed the Ural mountains, entered Siberia,
and penetrated the Kirghiz steppes, and there endeavored, not without success, to
foment rebellion amongst their nomadic population. He then went so far south as
free Turkestan; there, in the provinces of Bokhara, Khokhand, and Koondooz, he
found chiefs willing to pour their Tartar hordes into Siberia, and excite a general
rising in Asiatic Russia. The storm has been silently gathering, but it has at last
burst like a thunderclap, and now all means of communication between Eastern
and Western Siberia have been stopped. Moreover, Ivan Ogareff, thirsting for
vengeance, aims at the life of my brother!"

The Czar had become excited whilst speaking, and now paced up and down
with hurried steps. The chief of police said nothing, but he thought to himself


that, during the time when the emperors of Russia never pardoned an exile,
schemes such as those of Ivan Ogareff could never have been realized.
Approaching the Czar, who had thrown himself into an armchair, he asked,
"Your majesty has of course given orders so that this rebellion may be
suppressed as soon as possible?"

"Yes," answered the Czar. "The last telegram which reached Nijni-Udinsk
would set in motion the troops in the governments of Yenisei, Irkutsk, Yakutsk,
as well as those in the provinces of the Amoor and Lake Baikal. At the same
time, the regiments from Perm and Nijni-Novgorod, and the Cossacks from the
frontier, are advancing by forced marches towards the Ural Mountains; but some
weeks must pass before they can attack the Tartars."

"And your majesty's brother, his Highness the Grand Duke, is now isolated
in the government of Irkutsk, and is no longer in direct communication with
Moscow?"

"That is so."

"But by the last dispatches, he must know what measures have been taken by
your majesty, and what help he may expect from the governments nearest
Irkutsk?"

"He knows that," answered the Czar; "but what he does not know is, that
Ivan Ogareff, as well as being a rebel, is also playing the part of a traitor, and
that in him he has a personal and bitter enemy. It is to the Grand Duke that
Ogareff owes his first disgrace; and what is more serious is, that this man is not
known to him. Ogareff's plan, therefore, is to go to Irkutsk, and, under an
assumed name, offer his services to the Grand Duke. Then, after gaining his
confidence, when the Tartars have invested Irkutsk, he will betray the town, and
with it my brother, whose life he seeks. This is what I have learned from my
secret intelligence; this is what the Grand Duke does not know; and this is what
he must know!"

"Well, sire, an intelligent, courageous courier..."

"I momentarily expect one."

"And it is to be hoped he will be expeditious," added the chief of police; "for,
allow me to add, sire, that Siberia is a favorable land for rebellions."

"Do you mean to say. General, that the exiles would make common cause
with the rebels?" exclaimed the Czar.

"Excuse me, your majesty," stammered the chief of police, for that was really
the idea suggested to him by his uneasy and suspicious mind.

"I believe in their patriotism," returned the Czar.

"There are other offenders besides political exiles in Siberia," said the chief
of police.


"The criminals? Oh, General, I give those up to you! They are the vilest, I
grant, of the human race. They belong to no country. But the insurrection, or
rather, the rebellion, is not to oppose the emperor; it is raised against Russia,
against the country which the exiles have not lost all hope of again seeing--and
which they will see again. No, a Russian would never unite with a Tartar, to
weaken, were it only for an hour, the Muscovite power!"

The Czar was right in trusting to the patriotism of those whom his policy
kept, for a time, at a distance. Clemency, which was the foundation of his justice,
when he could himself direct its effects, the modifications he had adopted with
regard to applications for the formerly terrible ukases, warranted the belief that
he was not mistaken. But even without this powerful element of success in
regard to the Tartar rebellion, circumstances were not the less very serious; for it
was to be feared that a large part of the Kirghiz population would join the rebels.

The Kirghiz are divided into three hordes, the greater, the lesser, and the
middle, and number nearly four hundred thousand "tents," or two million souls.
Of the different tribes some are independent and others recognize either the
sovereignty of Russia or that of the Khans of Khiva, Khokhand, and Bokhara,
the most formidable chiefs of Turkestan. The middle horde, the richest, is also
the largest, and its encampments occupy all the space between the rivers Sara
Sou, Irtish, and the Upper Ishim, Lake Saisang and Lake Aksakal. The greater
horde, occupying the countries situated to the east of the middle one, extends as
far as the governments of Omsk and Tobolsk. Therefore, if the Kirghiz
population should rise, it would be the rebellion of Asiatic Russia, and the first
thing would be the separation of Siberia, to the east of the Yenisei.

It is true that these Kirghiz, mere novices in the art of war, are rather
nocturnal thieves and plunderers of caravans than regular soldiers. As M.
Levchine says, "a firm front or a square of good infantry could repel ten times
the number of Kirghiz; and a single cannon might destroy a frightful number."

That may be; but to do this it is necessary for the square of good infantry to
reach the rebellious country, and the cannon to leave the arsenals of the Russian
provinces, perhaps two or three thousand versts distant. Now, except by the
direct route from Ekaterenburg to Irkutsk, the often marshy steppes are not easily
practicable, and some weeks must certainly pass before the Russian troops could
reach the Tartar hordes.

Omsk is the center of that military organization of Western Siberia which is
intended to overawe the Kirghiz population. Here are the bounds, more than
once infringed by the half-subdued nomads, and there was every reason to
believe that Omsk was already in danger. The line of military stations, that is to
say, those Cossack posts which are ranged in echelon from Omsk to


Semipolatinsk, must have been broken in several places. Now, it was to be
feared that the "Grand Sultans," who govern the Kirghiz districts would either
voluntarily accept, or involuntarily submit to, the dominion of Tartars,
Mussulmen like themselves, and that to the hate caused by slavery was not
united the hate due to the antagonism of the Greek and Mussulman religions. For
some time, indeed, the Tartars of Turkestan had endeavored, both by force and
persuasion, to subdue the Kirghiz hordes.

A few words only with respect to these Tartars. The Tartars belong more
especially to two distinct races, the Caucasian and the Mongolian. The
Caucasian race, which, as Abel de Remusat says, "is regarded in Europe as the
type of beauty in our species, because all the nations in this part of the world
have sprung from it," includes also the Turks and the Persians. The purely
Mongolian race comprises the Mongols, Manchoux, and Thibetans.

The Tartars who now threatened the Russian Empire, belonged to the
Caucasian race, and occupied Turkestan. This immense country is divided into
different states, governed by Khans, and hence termed Khanats. The principal
khanats are those of Bokhara, Khokhand, Koondooz, etc. At this period, the
most important and the most formidable khanat was that of Bokhara. Russia had
already been several times at war with its chiefs, who, for their own interests,
had supported the independence of the Kirghiz against the Muscovite dominion.
The present chief, Feofar-Khan, followed in the steps of his predecessors.

The khanat of Bokhara has a population of two million five hundred
thousand inhabitants, an army of sixty thousand men, trebled in time of war, and
thirty thousand horsemen. It is a rich country, with varied animal, vegetable, and
mineral products, and has been increased by the accession of the territories of
Balkh, Aukoi, and Meimaneh. It possesses nineteen large towns. Bokhara,
surrounded by a wall measuring more than eight English miles, and flanked with
towers, a glorious city, made illustrious by Avicenna and other learned men of
the tenth century, is regarded as the center of Mussulman science, and ranks
among the most celebrated cities of Central Asia. Samarcand, which contains the
tomb of Tamerlane and the famous palace where the blue stone is kept on which
each new khan must seat himself on his accession, is defended by a very strong
citadel. Karschi, with its triple cordon, situated in an oasis, surrounded by a
marsh peopled with tortoises and lizards, is almost impregnable, Is-chardjoui is
defended by a population of twenty thousand souls. Protected by its mountains,
and isolated by its steppes, the khanat of Bokhara is a most formidable state; and
Russia would need a large force to subdue it.

The fierce and ambitious Feofar now governed this corner of Tartary.
Relying on the other khans--principally those of Khokhand and Koondooz, cruel


and rapacious warriors, all ready to join an enterprise so dear to Tartar instincts--
aided by the chiefs who ruled all the hordes of Central Asia, he had placed
himself at the head of the rebellion of which Ivan Ogareff was the instigator.
This traitor, impelled by insane ambition as much as by hate, had ordered the
movement so as to attack Siberia. Mad indeed he was, if he hoped to rupture the
Muscovite Empire. Acting under his suggestion, the Emir--which is the title
taken by the khans of Bokhara--had poured his hordes over the Russian frontier.
He invaded the government of Semipolatinsk, and the Cossacks, who were only
in small force there, had been obliged to retire before him. He had advanced
farther than Lake Balkhash, gaining over the Kirghiz population on his way.
Pillaging, ravaging, enrolling those who submitted, taking prisoners those who
resisted, he marched from one town to another, followed by those impedimenta
of Oriental sovereignty which may be called his household, his wives and his
slaves--all with the cool audacity of a modern Ghengis-Khan. It was impossible
to ascertain where he now was; how far his soldiers had marched before the
news of the rebellion reached Moscow; or to what part of Siberia the Russian
troops had been forced to retire. All communication was interrupted. Had the
wire between Kolyvan and Tomsk been cut by Tartar scouts, or had the Emir
himself arrived at the Yeniseisk provinces? Was all the lower part of Western
Siberia in a ferment? Had the rebellion already spread to the eastern regions? No
one could say. The only agent which fears neither cold nor heat, which can
neither be stopped by the rigors of winter nor the heat of summer, and which
flies with the rapidity of lightning--the electric current--was prevented from
traversing the steppes, and it was no longer possible to warn the Grand Duke,
shut up in Irkutsk, of the danger threatening him from the treason of Ivan
Ogareff.

A courier only could supply the place of the interrupted current. It would
take this man some time to traverse the five thousand two hundred versts
between Moscow and Irkutsk. To pass the ranks of the rebels and invaders he
must display almost superhuman courage and intelligence. But with a clear head
and a firm heart much can be done.

"Shall I be able to find this head and heart?" thought the Czar.


CHAPTER IT MICHAEL STROGOFF MEETS THE CZAR

THE door of the imperial cabinet was again opened and General Kissoff was
announced.

"The courier?" inquired the Czar eagerly.

"He is here, sire," replied General Kissoff.


"Have you found a fitting man?"

"T will answer for him to your majesty."

"Has he been in the service of the Palace?"

"Yes, sire."

"You know him?"

"Personally, and at various times he has fulfilled difficult missions with
success."

"Abroad?"

"In Siberia itself."

"Where does he come from?"

"From Omsk. He is a Siberian."

"Has he coolness, intelligence, courage?"

"Yes, sire; he has all the qualities necessary to succeed, even where others
might possibly fail."

"What is his age?"

"Thirty."

"Is he strong and vigorous?"

"Sire, he can bear cold, hunger, thirst, fatigue, to the very last extremities."

"He must have a frame of iron."

"Sire, he has."

"And a heart?"

"A heart of gold."

"His name?"

"Michael Strogoff."

"Is he ready to set out?"

"He awaits your majesty's orders in the guard-room."

"Let him come in," said the Czar.

In a few moments Michael Strogoff, the courier, entered the imperial library.
He was a tall, vigorous, broad-shouldered, deep-chested man. His powerful head
possessed the fine features of the Caucasian race. His well-knit frame seemed
built for the performance of feats of strength. It would have been a difficult task
to move such a man against his will, for when his feet were once planted on the
ground, it was as if they had taken root. As he doffed his Muscovite cap, locks of
thick curly hair fell over his broad, massive forehead. When his ordinarily pale
face became at all flushed, it arose solely from a more rapid action of the heart.
His eyes, of a deep blue, looked with clear, frank, firm gaze. The slightly-
contracted eyebrows indicated lofty heroism--"the hero's cool courage,"
according to the definition of the physiologist. He possessed a fine nose, with
large nostrils; and a well-shaped mouth, with the slightly-projecting lips which


denote a generous and noble heart.

Michael Strogoff had the temperament of the man of action, who does not
bite his nails or scratch his head in doubt and indecision. Sparing of gestures as
of words, he always stood motionless like a soldier before his superior; but when
he moved, his step showed a firmness, a freedom of movement, which proved
the confidence and vivacity of his mind.

Michael Strogoff wore a handsome military uniform something resembling
that of a light-cavalry officer in the field--boots, spurs, half tightly-fitting
trousers, brown pelisse, trimmed with fur and ornamented with yellow braid. On
his breast glittered a cross and several medals.

Michael Strogoff belonged to the special corps of the Czar's couriers, ranking
as an officer among those picked men. His most discernible characteristic--
particularly in his walk, his face, in the whole man, and which the Czar
perceived at a glance--was, that he was "a fulfiller of orders." He therefore
possessed one of the most serviceable qualities in Russia--one which, as the
celebrated novelist Tourgueneff says, "will lead to the highest positions in the
Muscovite empire."

In short, if anyone could accomplish this journey from Moscow to Irkutsk,
across a rebellious country, surmount obstacles, and brave perils of all sorts,
Michael Strogoff was the man.

A circumstance especially favorable to the success of his plan was, that he
was thoroughly acquainted with the country which he was about to traverse, and
understood its different dialects--not only from having traveled there before, but
because he was of Siberian origin.

His father--old Peter Strogoff, dead ten years since--inhabited the town of
Omsk, situated in the government of the same name; and his mother, Marfa
Strogoff, lived there still. There, amid the wild steppes of the provinces of Omsk
and Tobolsk, had the famous huntsman brought up his son Michael to endure
hardship. Peter Strogoff was a huntsman by profession. Summer and winter--in
the burning heat, as well as when the cold was sometimes fifty degrees below
zero--he scoured the frozen plains, the thickets of birch and larch, the pine
forests; setting traps; watching for small game with his gun, and for large game
with the spear or knife. The large game was nothing less than the Siberian bear, a
formidable and ferocious animal, in size equaling its fellow of the frozen seas.
Peter Strogoff had killed more than thirty-nine bears--that is to say, the fortieth
had fallen under his blows; and, according to Russian legends, most huntsmen
who have been lucky enough up to the thirty-ninth bear, have succumbed to the
fortieth.

Peter Strogoff had, however, passed the fatal number without even a scratch.


From that time, his son Michael, aged eleven years, never failed to accompany
him to the hunt, carrying the ragatina or spear to aid his father, who was armed
only with the knife. When he was fourteen, Michael Strogoff had killed his first
bear, quite alone--that was nothing; but after stripping it he dragged the gigantic
animal's skin to his father's house, many versts distant, exhibiting remarkable
strength in a boy so young.

This style of life was of great benefit to him, and when he arrived at
manhood he could bear any amount of cold, heat, hunger, thirst, or fatigue. Like
the Yakout of the northern countries, he was made of iron. He could go four-and-
twenty hours without eating, ten nights without sleeping, and could make
himself a shelter in the open steppe where others would have been frozen to
death. Gifted with marvelous acuteness, guided by the instinct of the Delaware
of North America, over the white plain, when every object is hidden in mist, or
even in higher latitudes, where the polar night is prolonged for many days, he
could find his way when others would have had no idea whither to turn. All his
father's secrets were known to him. He had learnt to read almost imperceptible
signs--the forms of icicles, the appearance of the small branches of trees, mists
rising far away in the horizon, vague sounds in the air, distant reports, the flight
of birds through the foggy atmosphere, a thousand circumstances which are so
many words to those who can decipher them. Moreover, tempered by snow like
a Damascus blade in the waters of Syria, he had a frame of iron, as General
Kissoff had said, and, what was no less true, a heart of gold.

The only sentiment of love felt by Michael Strogoff was that which he
entertained for his mother, the aged Marfa, who could never be induced to leave
the house of the Strogoffs, at Omsk, on the banks of the Irtish, where the old
huntsman and she had lived so long together. When her son left her, he went
away with a full heart, but promising to come and see her whenever he could
possibly do so; and this promise he had always religiously kept.

When Michael was twenty, it was decided that he should enter the personal
service of the Emperor of Russia, in the corps of the couriers of the Czar. The
hardy, intelligent, zealous, well-conducted young Siberian first distinguished
himself especially, in a journey to the Caucasus, through the midst of a difficult
country, ravaged by some restless successors of Schamyl; then later, in an
important mission to Petropolowski, in Kamtschatka, the extreme limit of
Asiatic Russia. During these long journeys he displayed such marvelous
coolness, prudence, and courage, as to gain him the approbation and protection
of his chiefs, who rapidly advanced him in his profession.

The furloughs which were his due after these distant missions, he never
failed to devote to his old mother. Having been much employed in the south of


the empire, he had not seen old Marfa for three years--three ages!--the first time
in his life he had been so long absent from her. Now, however, in a few days he
would obtain his furlough, and he had accordingly already made preparations for
departure for Omsk, when the events which have been related occurred. Michael
Strogoff was therefore introduced into the Czar's presence in complete ignorance
of what the emperor expected from him.

The Czar fixed a penetrating look upon him without uttering a word, whilst
Michael stood perfectly motionless.

The Czar, apparently satisfied with his scrutiny, motioned to the chief of
police to seat himself, and dictated in a low voice a letter of not more than a few
lines.

The letter penned, the Czar re-read it attentively, then signed it, preceding his
name with the words "Byt po semou," which, signifying "So be it," constitutes
the decisive formula of the Russian emperors.

The letter was then placed in an envelope, which was sealed with the
imperial arms.

The Czar, rising, told Michael Strogoff to draw near.

Michael advanced a few steps, and then stood motionless, ready to answer.

The Czar again looked him full in the face and their eyes met. Then in an
abrupt tone, "Thy name?" he asked.

"Michael Strogoff, sire."

"Thy rank?"

"Captain in the corps of couriers of the Czar."

"Thou dost know Siberia?"

"Tam a Siberian."

"A native of?"

"Omsk, sire."

"Hast thou relations there?"

"Yes sire."

"What relations?"

"My old mother."

The Czar suspended his questions for a moment. Then, pointing to the letter
which he held in his hand, "Here is a letter which I charge thee, Michael
Strogoff, to deliver into the hands of the Grand Duke, and to no other but him."

"T will deliver it, sire."

"The Grand Duke is at Irkutsk."

"T will go to Irkutsk."

"Thou wilt have to traverse a rebellious country, invaded by Tartars, whose
interest it will be to intercept this letter."


"T will traverse it."

"Above all, beware of the traitor, Ivan Ogareff, who will perhaps meet thee
on the way."

"T will beware of him."

"Wilt thou pass through Omsk?"

"Sire, that is my route."

"If thou dost see thy mother, there will be the risk of being recognized. Thou
must not see her!"

Michael Strogoff hesitated a moment.

"T will not see her," said he.

"Swear to me that nothing will make thee acknowledge who thou art, nor
whither thou art going.”

"I swear it."

"Michael Strogoff," continued the Czar, giving the letter to the young
courier, "take this letter; on it depends the safety of all Siberia, and perhaps the
life of my brother the Grand Duke."

"This letter shall be delivered to his Highness the Grand Duke."

"Then thou wilt pass whatever happens?"

"T shall pass, or they shall kill me."

"T want thee to live."

"T shall live, and I shall pass," answered Michael Strogoff.

The Czar appeared satisfied with Strogoff's calm and simple answer.

"Go then, Michael Strogoff," said he, "go for God, for Russia, for my
brother, and for myself!"

The courier, having saluted his sovereign, immediately left the imperial
cabinet, and, in a few minutes, the New Palace.

"You made a good choice there, General," said the Czar.

"I think so, sire," replied General Kissoff; "and your majesty may be sure
that Michael Strogoff will do all that a man can do."

"He is indeed a man," said the Czar.


CHAPTER IV FROM MOSCOW TO NIJNI-
NOVGOROD


THE distance between Moscow and Irkutsk, about to be traversed by
Michael Strogoff, was three thousand four hundred miles. Before the telegraph
wire extended from the Ural Mountains to the eastern frontier of Siberia, the
dispatch service was performed by couriers, those who traveled the most rapidly
taking eighteen days to get from Moscow to Irkutsk. But this was the exception,
and the journey through Asiatic Russia usually occupied from four to five
weeks, even though every available means of transport was placed at the
disposal of the Czar's messengers.

Michael Strogoff was a man who feared neither frost nor snow. He would
have preferred traveling during the severe winter season, in order that he might
perform the whole distance by sleighs. At that period of the year the difficulties
which all other means of locomotion present are greatly diminished, the wide
steppes being leveled by snow, while there are no rivers to cross, but simply
sheets of glass, over which the sleigh glides rapidly and easily.

Perhaps certain natural phenomena are most to be feared at that time, such as
long-continuing and dense fogs, excessive cold, fearfully heavy snowstorms,
which sometimes envelop whole caravans and cause their destruction. Hungry
wolves also roam over the plain in thousands. But it would have been better for
Michael Strogoff to face these risks; for during the winter the Tartar invaders
would have been stationed in the towns, any movement of their troops would
have been impracticable, and he could consequently have more easily performed
his journey. But it was not in his power to choose either weather or time.
Whatever the circumstances, he must accept them and set out.

Such were the difficulties which Michael Strogoff boldly confronted and
prepared to encounter.

In the first place, he must not travel as a courier of the Czar usually would.
No one must even suspect what he really was. Spies swarm in a rebellious
country; let him be recognized, and his mission would be in danger. Also, while
supplying him with a large sum of money, which was sufficient for his journey,
and would facilitate it in some measure, General Kissoff had not given him any
document notifying that he was on the Emperor's service, which is the Sesame
par excellence. He contented himself with furnishing him with a "podorojna."

This podorojna was made out in the name of Nicholas Korpanoff, merchant,
living at Irkutsk. It authorized Nicholas Korpanoff to be accompanied by one or


more persons, and, moreover, it was, by special notification, made available in
the event of the Muscovite government forbidding natives of any other countries
to leave Russia.

The podorojna is simply a permission to take post-horses; but Michael
Strogoff was not to use it unless he was sure that by so doing he would not excite
suspicion as to his mission, that is to say, whilst he was on European territory.
The consequence was that in Siberia, whilst traversing the insurgent provinces,
he would have no power over the relays, either in the choice of horses in
preference to others, or in demanding conveyances for his personal use; neither
was Michael Strogoff to forget that he was no longer a courier, but a plain
merchant, Nicholas Korpanoff, traveling from Moscow to Irkutsk, and, as such
exposed to all the impediments of an ordinary journey.

To pass unknown, more or less rapidly, but to pass somehow, such were the
directions he had received.

Thirty years previously, the escort of a traveler of rank consisted of not less
than two hundred mounted Cossacks, two hundred foot-soldiers, twenty-five
Baskir horsemen, three hundred camels, four hundred horses, twenty-five
wagons, two portable boats, and two pieces of cannon. All this was requisite for
a journey in Siberia.

Michael Strogoff, however, had neither cannon, nor horsemen, nor foot-
soldiers, nor beasts of burden. He would travel in a carriage or on horseback,
when he could; on foot, when he could not.

There would be no difficulty in getting over the first thousand miles, the
distance between Moscow and the Russian frontier. Railroads, post-carriages,
steamboats, relays of horses, were at everyone's disposal, and consequently at
the disposal of the courier of the Czar.

Accordingly, on the morning of the 16th of July, having doffed his uniform,
with a knapsack on his back, dressed in the simple Russian costume--tightly-
fitting tunic, the traditional belt of the Moujik, wide trousers, gartered at the
knees, and high boots--Michael Strogoff arrived at the station in time for the first
train. He carried no arms, openly at least, but under his belt was hidden a
revolver and in his pocket, one of those large knives, resembling both a cutlass
and a yataghan, with which a Siberian hunter can so neatly disembowel a bear,
without injuring its precious fur.

A crowd of travelers had collected at the Moscow station. The stations on the
Russian railroads are much used as places for meeting, not only by those who
are about to proceed by the train, but by friends who come to see them off. The
station resembles, from the variety of characters assembled, a small news
exchange.


The train in which Michael took his place was to set him down at Nijni-
Novgorod. There terminated at that time, the iron road which, uniting Moscow
and St. Petersburg, has since been continued to the Russian frontier. It was a
journey of under three hundred miles, and the train would accomplish it in ten
hours. Once arrived at Nijni-Novgorod, Strogoff would either take the land route
or the steamer on the Volga, so as to reach the Ural Mountains as soon as
possible.

Michael Strogoff ensconced himself in his corner, like a worthy citizen
whose affairs go well with him, and who endeavors to kill time by sleep.
Nevertheless, as he was not alone in his compartment, he slept with one eye
open, and listened with both his ears.

In fact, rumor of the rising of the Kirghiz hordes, and of the Tartar invasion
had transpired in some degree. The occupants of the carriage, whom chance had
made his traveling companions, discussed the subject, though with that caution
which has become habitual among Russians, who know that spies are ever on the
watch for any treasonable expressions which may be uttered.

These travelers, as well as the large number of persons in the train, were
merchants on their way to the celebrated fair of Nijni-Novgorod;--a very mixed
assembly, composed of Jews, Turks, Cossacks, Russians, Georgians, Kalmucks,
and others, but nearly all speaking the national tongue.

They discussed the pros and cons of the serious events which were taking
place beyond the Ural, and those merchants seemed to fear lest the government
should be led to take certain restrictive measures, especially in the provinces
bordering on the frontier--measures from which trade would certainly suffer.
They apparently thought only of the struggle from the single point of view of
their threatened interests. The presence of a private soldier, clad in his uniform--
and the importance of a uniform in Russia is great--would have certainly been
enough to restrain the merchants' tongues. But in the compartment occupied by
Michael Strogoff, there was no one who seemed a military man, and the Czar's
courier was not the person to betray himself. He listened, then.

"They say that caravan teas are up," remarked a Persian, known by his cap of
Astrakhan fur, and his ample brown robe, worn threadbare by use.

"Oh, there's no fear of teas falling,” answered an old Jew of sullen aspect.
"Those in the market at Nijni-Novgorod will be easily cleared off by the West;
but, unfortunately, it won't be the same with Bokhara carpets."

"What! are you expecting goods from Bokhara?" asked the Persian.

"No, but from Samarcand, and that is even more exposed. The idea of
reckoning on the exports of a country in which the khans are in a state of revolt
from Khiva to the Chinese frontier!"


"Well," replied the Persian, "if the carpets do not arrive, the drafts will not
arrive either, I suppose."

"And the profits, Father Abraham!" exclaimed the little Jew, "do you reckon
them as nothing?"

"You are right," said another; "goods from Central Asia run a great risk in the
market, and it will be the same with the tallow and shawls from the East."

"Why, look out, little father," said a Russian traveler, in a bantering tone;
"you'll grease your shawls terribly if you mix them up with your tallow."

"That amuses you," sharply answered the merchant, who had little relish for
that sort of joke.

"Well, if you tear your hair, or if you throw ashes on your head," replied the
traveler, "will that change the course of events? No; no more than the course of
the Exchange."

"One can easily see that you are not a merchant," observed the little Jew.

"Faith, no, worthy son of Abraham! I sell neither hops, nor eider-down, nor
honey, nor wax, nor hemp-seed, nor salt meat, nor caviare, nor wood, nor wool,
nor ribbons, nor, hemp, nor flax, nor morocco, nor furs."

"But do you buy them?" asked the Persian, interrupting the traveler's list.

"As little as I can, and only for my own private use," answered the other,
with a wink.

"He's a wag," said the Jew to the Persian.

"Or a spy," replied the other, lowering his voice. "We had better take care,
and not speak more than necessary. The police are not over-particular in these
times, and you never can know with whom you are traveling.”

In another corer of the compartment they were speaking less of mercantile
affairs, and more of the Tartar invasion and its annoying consequences.

"All the horses in Siberia will be requisitioned," said a traveler, "and
communication between the different provinces of Central Asia will become
very difficult."

"Is it true," asked his neighbor, "that the Kirghiz of the middle horde have
joined the Tartars?"

"So it is said," answered the traveler, lowering his voice; "but who can flatter
themselves that they know anything really of what is going on in this country?"

"I have heard speak of a concentration of troops on the frontier. The Don
Cossacks have already gathered along the course of the Volga, and they are to be
opposed to the rebel Kirghiz."

"If the Kirghiz descend the Irtish, the route to Irkutsk will not be safe,"
observed his neighbor. "Besides, yesterday I wanted to send a telegram to
Krasnoiarsk, and it could not be forwarded. It's to be feared that before long the


W


Tartar columns will have isolated Eastern Siberia."

"In short, little father," continued the first speaker, "these merchants have
good reason for being uneasy about their trade and transactions. After
requisitioning the horses, they will take the boats, carriages, every means of
transport, until presently no one will be allowed to take even one step in all the
empire."

"I'm much afraid that the Nijni-Novgorod fair won't end as brilliantly as it
has begun," responded the other, shaking his head. "But the safety and integrity
of the Russian territory before everything. Business is business."

If in this compartment the subject of conversation varied but little--nor did it,
indeed, in the other carriages of the train--in all it might have been observed that
the talkers used much circumspection. When they did happen to venture out of
the region of facts, they never went so far as to attempt to divine the intentions
of the Muscovite government, or even to criticize them.

This was especially remarked by a traveler in a carriage at the front part of
the train. This person--evidently a stranger--made good use of his eyes, and
asked numberless questions, to which he received only evasive answers. Every
minute leaning out of the window, which he would keep down, to the great
disgust of his fellow-travelers, he lost nothing of the views to the right. He
inquired the names of the most insignificant places, their position, what were
their commerce, their manufactures, the number of their inhabitants, the average
mortality, etc., and all this he wrote down in a note-book, already full.

This was the correspondent Alcide Jolivet, and the reason of his putting so
many insignificant questions was, that amongst the many answers he received,
he hoped to find some interesting fact "for his cousin." But, naturally enough, he
was taken for a spy, and not a word treating of the events of the day was uttered
in his hearing.

Finding, therefore, that he could learn nothing of the Tartar invasion, he
wrote in his book, "Travelers of great discretion. Very close as to political
matters."

Whilst Alcide Jolivet noted down his impressions thus minutely, his
confrere, in the same train, traveling for the same object, was devoting himself to
the same work of observation in another compartment. Neither of them had seen
each other that day at the Moscow station, and they were each ignorant that the
other had set out to visit the scene of the war. Harry Blount, speaking little, but
listening much, had not inspired his companions with the suspicions which
Alcide Jolivet had aroused. He was not taken for a spy, and therefore his
neighbors, without constraint, gossiped in his presence, allowing themselves
even to go farther than their natural caution would in most cases have allowed


them. The correspondent of the Daily Telegraph had thus an opportunity of
observing how much recent events preoccupied the merchants of Nijni-
Novgorod, and to what a degree the commerce with Central Asia was threatened
in its transit.

He therefore noted in his book this perfectly correct observation, "My
fellow-travelers extremely anxious. Nothing is talked of but war, and they speak
of it, with a freedom which is astonishing, as having broken out between the
Volga and the Vistula."

The readers of the Daily Telegraph would not fail to be as well informed as
Alcide Jolivet's "cousin." But as Harry Blount, seated at the left of the train, only
saw one part of the country, which was hilly, without giving himself the trouble
of looking at the right side, which was composed of wide plains, he added, with
British assurance, "Country mountainous between Moscow and Wladimir."

It was evident that the Russian government purposed taking severe measures
to guard against any serious eventualities even in the interior of the empire. The
rebel lion had not crossed the Siberian frontier, but evil influences might be
feared in the Volga provinces, so near to the country of the Kirghiz.

The police had as yet found no traces of Ivan Ogareff. It was not known
whether the traitor, calling in the foreigner to avenge his personal rancor, had
rejoined Feofar-Khan, or whether he was endeavoring to foment a revolt in the
government of Nijni-Novgorod, which at this time of year contained a
population of such diverse elements. Perhaps among the Persians, Armenians, or
Kalmucks, who flocked to the great market, he had agents, instructed to provoke
a rising in the interior. All this was possible, especially in such a country as
Russia. In fact, this vast empire, 4,000,000 square miles in extent, does not
possess the homogeneousness of the states of Western Europe. The Russian
territory in Europe and Asia contains more than seventy millions of inhabitants.
In it thirty different languages are spoken. The Sclavonian race predominates, no
doubt, but there are besides Russians, Poles, Lithuanians, Courlanders. Add to
these, Finns, Laplanders, Esthonians, several other northern tribes with
unpronounceable names, the Permiaks, the Germans, the Greeks, the Tartars, the
Caucasian tribes, the Mongol, Kalmuck, Samoid, Kamtschatkan, and Aleutian
hordes, and one may understand that the unity of so vast a state must be difficult
to maintain, and that it could only be the work of time, aided by the wisdom of
many successive rulers.

Be that as it may, Ivan Ogareff had hitherto managed to escape all search,
and very probably he might have rejoined the Tartar army. But at every station
where the train stopped, inspectors came forward who scrutinized the travelers
and subjected them all to a minute examination, as by order of the


superintendent of police, these officials were seeking Ivan Ogareff. The
government, in fact, believed it to be certain that the traitor had not yet been able
to quit European Russia. If there appeared cause to suspect any traveler, he was
carried off to explain himself at the police station, and in the meantime the train
went on its way, no person troubling himself about the unfortunate one left
behind.

With the Russian police, which is very arbitrary, it is absolutely useless to
argue. Military rank is conferred on its employees, and they act in military
fashion. How can anyone, moreover, help obeying, unhesitatingly, orders which
emanate from a monarch who has the right to employ this formula at the head of
his ukase: "We, by the grace of God, Emperor and Autocrat of all the Russias of
Moscow, Kiev, Wladimir, and Novgorod, Czar of Kasan and Astrakhan, Czar of
Poland, Czar of Siberia, Czar of the Tauric Chersonese, Seignior of Pskov,
Prince of Smolensk, Lithuania, Volkynia, Podolia, and Finland, Prince of
Esthonia, Livonia, Courland, and of Semigallia, of Bialystok, Karelia, Sougria,
Perm, Viatka, Bulgaria, and many other countries; Lord and Sovereign Prince of
the territory of Nijni-Novgorod, Tchemigoff, Riazan, Polotsk, Rostov, Jaroslavl,
Bielozersk, Oudoria, Obdoria, Kondinia, Vitepsk, and of Mstislaf, Governor of
the Hyperborean Regions, Lord of the countries of Iveria, Kartalinia, Grou-zinia,
Kabardinia, and Armenia, Hereditary Lord and Suzerain of the Scherkess
princes, of those of the mountains, and of others; heir of Norway, Duke of
Schleswig-Holstein, Stormarn, Dittmarsen, and Oldenburg." A powerful lord, in
truth, is he whose arms are an eagle with two heads, holding a scepter and a
globe, surrounded by the escutcheons of Novgorod, Wladimir, Kiev, Kasan,
Astrakhan, and of Siberia, and environed by the collar of the order of St.
Andrew, surmounted by a royal crown!

As to Michael Strogoff, his papers were in order, and he was, consequently,
free from all police supervision.

At the station of Wladimir the train stopped for several minutes, which
appeared sufficient to enable the correspondent of the Daily Telegraph to take a
twofold view, physical and moral, and to form a complete estimate of this
ancient capital of Russia.

At the Wladimir station fresh travelers joined the train. Among others, a
young girl entered the compartment occupied by Michael Strogoff. A vacant
place was found opposite the courier. The young girl took it, after placing by her
side a modest traveling-bag of red leather, which seemed to constitute all her
luggage. Then seating herself with downcast eyes, not even glancing at the
fellow-travelers whom chance had given her, she prepared for a journey which
was still to last several hours.


Michael Strogoff could not help looking attentively at his newly-arrived
fellow-traveler. As she was so placed as to travel with her back to the engine, he
even offered her his seat, which he might prefer to her own, but she thanked him
with a slight bend of her graceful neck.

The young girl appeared to be about sixteen or seventeen years of age. Her
head, truly charming, was of the purest Sclavonic type--slightly severe, and
likely in a few summers to unfold into beauty rather than mere prettiness. From
beneath a sort of kerchief which she wore on her head escaped in profusion light
golden hair. Her eyes were brown, soft, and expressive of much sweetness of
temper. The nose was straight, and attached to her pale and somewhat thin
cheeks by delicately mobile nostrils. The lips were finely cut, but it seemed as if
they had long since forgotten how to smile.

The young traveler was tall and upright, as far as could be judged of her
figure from the very simple and ample pelisse that covered her. Although she
was still a very young girl in the literal sense of the term, the development of her
high forehead and clearly-cut features gave the idea that she was the possessor of
great moral energy--a point which did not escape Michael Strogoff. Evidently
this young girl had already suffered in the past, and the future doubtless did not
present itself to her in glowing colors; but she had surely known how to struggle
still with the trials of life. Her energy was evidently both prompt and persistent,
and her calmness unalterable, even under circumstances in which a man would
be likely to give way or lose his self-command.

Such was the impression which she produced at first sight. Michael Strogoff,
being himself of an energetic temperament, was naturally struck by the character
of her physiognomy, and, while taking care not to cause her annoyance by a too
persistent gaze, he observed his neighbor with no small interest. The costume of
the young traveler was both extremely simple and appropriate. She was not rich-
-that could be easily seen; but not the slightest mark of negligence was to be
discerned in her dress. All her luggage was contained in the leather bag which,
for want of room, she held on her lap.

She wore a long, dark pelisse, gracefully adjusted at the neck by a blue tie.
Under this pelisse, a short skirt, also dark, fell over a robe which reached the
ankles. Half-boots of leather, thickly soled, as if chosen in anticipation of a long
journey, covered her small feet.

Michael Strogoff fancied that he recognized, by certain details, the fashion of
the costume of Livonia, and thought his neighbor a native of the Baltic
provinces.

But whither was this young girl going, alone, at an age when the fostering
care of a father, or the protection of a brother, is considered a matter of


necessity? Had she now come, after an already long journey, from the provinces
of Western Russia? Was she merely going to Nijni-Novgorod, or was the end of
her travels beyond the eastern frontiers of the empire? Would some relation,
some friend, await her arrival by the train? Or was it not more probable, on the
contrary, that she would find herself as much isolated in the town as she was in
this compartment? It was probable.

In fact, the effect of habits contracted in solitude was clearly manifested in
the bearing of the young girl. The manner in which she entered the carriage and
prepared herself for the journey, the slight disturbance she caused among those
around her, the care she took not to incommode or give trouble to anyone, all
showed that she was accustomed to be alone, and to depend on herself only.

Michael Strogoff observed her with interest, but, himself reserved, he sought
no opportunity of accosting her. Once only, when her neighbor--the merchant
who had jumbled together so imprudently in his remarks tallow and shawls--
being asleep, and threatening her with his great head, which was swaying from
one shoulder to the other, Michael Strogoff awoke him somewhat roughly, and
made him understand that he must hold himself upright.

The merchant, rude enough by nature, grumbled some words against "people
who interfere with what does not concern them," but Michael Strogoff cast on
him a glance so stern that the sleeper leant on the opposite side, and relieved the
young traveler from his unpleasant vicinity.

The latter looked at the young man for an instant, and mute and modest
thanks were in that look.

But a circumstance occurred which gave Strogoff a just idea of the character
of the maiden. Twelve versts before arriving at Nijni-Novgorod, at a sharp curve
of the iron way, the train experienced a very violent shock. Then, for a minute, it
ran onto the slope of an embankment.

Travelers more or less shaken about, cries, confusion, general disorder in the
carriages--such was the effect at first produced. It was to be feared that some
serious accident had happened. Consequently, even before the train had stopped,
the doors were opened, and the panic-stricken passengers thought only of getting
out of the carriages.

Michael Strogoff thought instantly of the young girl; but, while the
passengers in her compartment were precipitating themselves outside, screaming
and struggling, she had remained quietly in her place, her face scarcely changed
by a slight pallor.

She waited--Michael Strogoff waited also.

Both remained quiet.

"A determined nature!" thought Michael Strogoff.


However, all danger had quickly disappeared. A breakage of the coupling of
the luggage-van had first caused the shock to, and then the stoppage of, the train,
which in another instant would have been thrown from the top of the
embankment into a bog. There was an hour's delay. At last, the road being
cleared, the train proceeded, and at half-past eight in the evening arrived at the
station of Nijni-Novgorod.


Before anyone could get out of the carriages, the inspectors of police
presented themselves at the doors and examined the passengers.

Michael Strogoff showed his podorojna, made out in the name of Nicholas
Korpanoff. He had consequently no difficulty. As to the other travelers in the
compartment, all bound for Nijni-Novgorod, their appearance, happily for them,
was in nowise suspicious.

The young girl in her turn, exhibited, not a passport, since passports are no
longer required in Russia, but a permit indorsed with a private seal, and which
seemed to be of a special character. The inspector read the permit with attention.
Then, having attentively examined the person whose description it contained:

"You are from Riga?" he said.

"Yes," replied the young girl.

"You are going to Irkutsk?"

V¥@Ss"

"By what route?"

"By Perm."

"Good!" replied the inspector. "Take care to have your permit vised, at the
police station of Nijni-Novgorod."

The young girl bent her head in token of assent.

Hearing these questions and replies, Michael Strogoff experienced a mingled
sentiment both of surprise and pity. What! this young girl, alone, journeying to
that far-off Siberia, and at a time when, to its ordinary dangers, were added all
the perils of an invaded country and one in a state of insurrection! How would
she reach it? What would become of her?

The inspection ended, the doors of the carriages were then opened, but,
before Michael Strogoff could move towards her, the young Livonian, who had
been the first to descend, had disappeared in the crowd which thronged the
platforms of the railway station.


CHAPTER V THE TWO ANNOUNCEMENTS


NIJNI-NOVGOROD, Lower Novgorod, situate at the junction of the Volga
and the Oka, is the chief town in the district of the same name. It was here that
Michael Strogoff was obliged to leave the railway, which at the time did not go
beyond that town. Thus, as he advanced, his traveling would become first less
speedy and then less safe.

Nijni-Novgorod, the fixed population of which is only from thirty to thirty-
five thousand inhabitants, contained at that time more than three hundred
thousand; that is to say, the population was increased tenfold. This addition was
in consequence of the celebrated fair, which was held within the walls for three
weeks. Formerly Makariew had the benefit of this concourse of traders, but since
1817 the fair had been removed to Nijni-Novgorod.

Even at the late hour at which Michael Strogoff left the platform, there was
still a large number of people in the two towns, separated by the stream of the
Volga, which compose Nijni-Novgorod. The highest of these is built on a steep
rock, and defended by a fort called in Russia "kreml."

Michael Strogoff expected some trouble in finding a hotel, or even an inn, to
suit him. As he had not to start immediately, for he was going to take a steamer,
he was compelled to look out for some lodging; but, before doing so, he wished
to know exactly the hour at which the steamboat would start. He went to the
office of the company whose boats plied between Nijni-Novgorod and Perm.
There, to his great annoyance, he found that no boat started for Perm till the
following day at twelve o'clock. Seventeen hours to wait! It was very vexatious
to a man so pressed for time. However, he never senselessly murmured. Besides,
the fact was that no other conveyance could take him so quickly either to Perm
or Kasan. It would be better, then, to wait for the steamer, which would enable
him to regain lost time.

Here, then, was Michael Strogoff, strolling through the town and quietly
looking out for some inn in which to pass the night. However, he troubled
himself little on this score, and, but that hunger pressed him, he would probably
have wandered on till morning in the streets of Nijni-Novgorod. He was looking
for supper rather than a bed. But he found both at the sign of the City of
Constantinople. There, the landlord offered him a fairly comfortable room, with
little furniture, it is true, but not without an image of the Virgin, and a few saints
framed in yellow gauze.

A goose filled with sour stuffing swimming in thick cream, barley bread,


some curds, powdered sugar mixed with cinnamon, and a jug of kwass, the
ordinary Russian beer, were placed before him, and sufficed to satisfy his
hunger. He did justice to the meal, which was more than could be said of his
neighbor at table, who, having, in his character of "old believer" of the sect of
Raskalniks, made the vow of abstinence, rejected the potatoes in front of him,
and carefully refrained from putting sugar in his tea.

His supper finished, Michael Strogoff, instead of going up to his bedroom,
again strolled out into the town. But, although the long twilight yet lingered, the
crowd was already dispersing, the streets were gradually becoming empty, and at
length everyone retired to his dwelling.

Why did not Michael Strogoff go quietly to bed, as would have seemed more
reasonable after a long railway journey? Was he thinking of the young Livonian
girl who had been his traveling companion? Having nothing better to do, he
WAS thinking of her. Did he fear that, lost in this busy city, she might be
exposed to insult? He feared so, and with good reason. Did he hope to meet her,
and, if need were, to afford her protection? No. To meet would be difficult. As to
protection--what right had he--

"Alone," he said to himself, "alone, in the midst of these wandering tribes!
And yet the present dangers are nothing compared to those she must undergo.
Siberia! Irkutsk! I am about to dare all risks for Russia, for the Czar, while she is
about to do so--For whom? For what? She is authorized to cross the frontier! The
country beyond is in revolt! The steppes are full of Tartar bands!"

Michael Strogoff stopped for an instant, and reflected.

"Without doubt," thought he, "she must have determined on undertaking her
journey before the invasion. Perhaps she is even now ignorant of what is
happening. But no, that cannot be; the merchants discussed before her the
disturbances in Siberia--and she did not seem surprised. She did not even ask an
explanation. She must have known it then, and knowing it, is still resolute. Poor
girl! Her motive for the journey must be urgent indeed! But though she may be
brave--and she certainly is so--her strength must fail her, and, to say nothing of
dangers and obstacles, she will be unable to endure the fatigue of such a journey.
Never can she reach Irkutsk!"

Indulging in such reflections, Michael Strogoff wandered on as chance led
him; being well acquainted with the town, he knew that he could easily retrace
his steps.

Having strolled on for about an hour, he seated himself on a bench against
the wall of a large wooden cottage, which stood, with many others, on a vast
open space. He had scarcely been there five minutes when a hand was laid
heavily on his shoulder.


"What are you doing here?" roughly demanded a tall and powerful man, who
had approached unperceived.

"I am resting," replied Michael Strogoff.

"Do you mean to stay all night on the bench?"

"Yes, if I feel inclined to do so," answered Michael Strogoff, in a tone
somewhat too sharp for the simple merchant he wished to personate.

"Come forward, then, so I can see you," said the man.

Michael Strogoff, remembering that, above all, prudence was requisite,
instinctively drew back. "It is not necessary," he replied, and calmly stepped
back ten paces.

The man seemed, as Michael observed him well, to have the look of a
Bohemian, such as are met at fairs, and with whom contact, either physical or
moral, is unpleasant. Then, as he looked more attentively through the dusk, he
perceived, near the cottage, a large caravan, the usual traveling dwelling of the
Zingaris or gypsies, who swarm in Russia wherever a few copecks can be
obtained.

As the gypsy took two or three steps forward, and was about to interrogate
Michael Strogoff more closely, the door of the cottage opened. He could just see
a woman, who spoke quickly in a language which Michael Strogoff knew to be a
mixture of Mongol and Siberian.

"Another spy! Let him alone, and come to supper. The papluka is waiting for
you."

Michael Strogoff could not help smiling at the epithet bestowed on him,
dreading spies as he did above all else.

In the same dialect, although his accent was very different, the Bohemian
replied in words which signify, "You are right, Sangarre! Besides, we start to-
morrow."

"To-morrow?" repeated the woman in surprise.

"Yes, Sangarre," replied the Bohemian; "to-morrow, and the Father himself
sends us--where we are going!"

Thereupon the man and woman entered the cottage, and carefully closed the
door.

"Good!" said Michael Strogoff, to himself; "if these gipsies do not wish to be
understood when they speak before me, they had better use some other
language."

From his Siberian origin, and because he had passed his childhood in the
Steppes, Michael Strogoff, it has been said, understood almost all the languages
in usage from Tartary to the Sea of Ice. As to the exact signification of the words
he had heard, he did not trouble his head. For why should it interest him?


It was already late when he thought of returning to his inn to take some
repose. He followed, as he did so, the course of the Volga, whose waters were
almost hidden under the countless number of boats floating on its bosom.

An hour after, Michael Strogoff was sleeping soundly on one of those
Russian beds which always seem so hard to strangers, and on the morrow, the
17th of July, he awoke at break of day.

He had still five hours to pass in Nijni-Novgorod; it seemed to him an age.
How was he to spend the morning unless in wandering, as he had done the
evening before, through the streets? By the time he had finished his breakfast,
strapped up his bag, had his podorojna inspected at the police office, he would
have nothing to do but start. But he was not a man to lie in bed after the sun had
risen; so he rose, dressed himself, placed the letter with the imperial arms on it
carefully at the bottom of its usual pocket within the lining of his coat, over
which he fastened his belt; he then closed his bag and threw it over his shoulder.
This done, he had no wish to return to the City of Constantinople, and intending
to breakfast on the bank of the Volga near the wharf, he settled his bill and left
the inn. By way of precaution, Michael Strogoff went first to the office of the
steam-packet company, and there made sure that the Caucasus would start at the
appointed hour. As he did so, the thought for the first time struck him that, since
the young Livonian girl was going to Perm, it was very possible that her
intention was also to embark in the Caucasus, in which case he should
accompany her.

The town above with its kremlin, whose circumference measures two versts,
and which resembles that of Moscow, was altogether abandoned. Even the
governor did not reside there. But if the town above was like a city of the dead,
the town below, at all events, was alive.

Michael Strogoff, having crossed the Volga on a bridge of boats, guarded by
mounted Cossacks, reached the square where the evening before he had fallen in
with the gipsy camp. This was somewhat outside the town, where the fair of
Nijni-Novgorod was held. In a vast plain rose the temporary palace of the
governor-general, where by imperial orders that great functionary resided during
the whole of the fair, which, thanks to the people who composed it, required an
ever-watchful surveillance.

This plain was now covered with booths symmetrically arranged in such a
manner as to leave avenues broad enough to allow the crowd to pass without a
crush.

Each group of these booths, of all sizes and shapes, formed a separate quarter
particularly dedicated to some special branch of commerce. There was the iron
quarter, the furriers' quarter, the woolen quarter, the quarter of the wood


merchants, the weavers' quarter, the dried fish quarter, etc. Some booths were
even built of fancy materials, some of bricks of tea, others of masses of salt
meat--that is to say, of samples of the goods which the owners thus announced
were there to the purchasers--a singular, and somewhat American, mode of
advertisement.

In the avenues and long alleys there was already a large assemblage of
people--the sun, which had risen at four o'clock, being well above the horizon--
an extraordinary mixture of Europeans and Asiatics, talking, wrangling,
haranguing, and bargaining. Everything which can be bought or sold seemed to
be heaped up in this square. Furs, precious stones, silks, Cashmere shawls,
Turkey carpets, weapons from the Caucasus, gauzes from Smyrna and Ispahan.
Tiflis armor, caravan teas. European bronzes, Swiss clocks, velvets and silks
from Lyons, English cottons, harness, fruits, vegetables, minerals from the Ural,
malachite, lapis-lazuli, spices, perfumes, medicinal herbs, wood, tar, rope, horn,
pumpkins, water-melons, etc--all the products of India, China, Persia, from the
shores of the Caspian and the Black Sea, from America and Europe, were united
at this corner of the globe.

It is scarcely possible truly to portray the moving mass of human beings
surging here and there, the excitement, the confusion, the hubbub; demonstrative
as were the natives and the inferior classes, they were completely outdone by
their visitors. There were merchants from Central Asia, who had occupied a year
in escorting their merchandise across its vast plains, and who would not again
see their shops and counting-houses for another year to come. In short, of such
importance is this fair of Nijni-Novgorod, that the sum total of its transactions
amounts yearly to nearly a hundred million dollars.

On one of the open spaces between the quarters of this temporary city were
numbers of mountebanks of every description; gypsies from the mountains,
telling fortunes to the credulous fools who are ever to be found in such
assemblies; Zingaris or Tsiganes--a name which the Russians give to the gypsies
who are the descendants of the ancient Copts--singing their wildest melodies and
dancing their most original dances; comedians of foreign theaters, acting
Shakespeare, adapted to the taste of spectators who crowded to witness them. In
the long avenues the bear showmen accompanied their four-footed dancers,
menageries resounded with the hoarse cries of animals under the influence of the
stinging whip or red-hot irons of the tamer; and, besides all these numberless
performers, in the middle of the central square, surrounded by a circle four deep
of enthusiastic amateurs, was a band of "mariners of the Volga," sitting on the
ground, as on the deck of their vessel, imitating the action of rowing, guided by
the stick of the master of the orchestra, the veritable helmsman of this imaginary


vessel! A whimsical and pleasing custom!

Suddenly, according to a time-honored observance in the fair of Nijni-
Novgorod, above the heads of the vast concourse a flock of birds was allowed to
escape from the cages in which they had been brought to the spot. In return for a
few copecks charitably offered by some good people, the bird-fanciers opened
the prison doors of their captives, who flew out in hundreds, uttering their joyous
notes.

It should be mentioned that England and France, at all events, were this year
represented at the great fair of Nijni-Novgorod by two of the most distinguished
products of modern civilization, Messrs. Harry Blount and Alcide Jolivet.
Jolivet, an optimist by nature, found everything agreeable, and as by chance both
lodging and food were to his taste, he jotted down in his book some memoranda
particularly favorable to the town of Nijni-Novgorod. Blount, on the contrary,
having in vain hunted for a supper, had been obliged to find a resting-place in the
open air. He therefore looked at it all from another point of view, and was
preparing an article of the most withering character against a town in which the
landlords of the inns refused to receive travelers who only begged leave to be
flayed, "morally and physically."

Michael Strogoff, one hand in his pocket, the other holding his cherry-
stemmed pipe, appeared the most indifferent and least impatient of men; yet,
from a certain contraction of his eyebrows every now and then, a careful
observer would have seen that he was burning to be off.

For two hours he kept walking about the streets, only to find himself
invariably at the fair again. As he passed among the groups of buyers and sellers
he discovered that those who came from countries on the confines of Asia
manifested great uneasiness. Their trade was visibly suffering. Another symptom
also was marked. In Russia military uniforms appear on every occasion. Soldiers
are wont to mix freely with the crowd, the police agents being almost invariably
aided by a number of Cossacks, who, lance on shoulder, keep order in the crowd
of three hundred thousand strangers. But on this occasion the soldiers, Cossacks
and the rest, did not put in an appearance at the great market. Doubtless, a
sudden order to move having been foreseen, they were restricted to their
barracks.

Moreover, while no soldiers were to be seen, it was not so with their officers.
Since the evening before, aides-decamp, leaving the governor's palace, galloped
in every direction. An unusual movement was going forward which a serious
state of affairs could alone account for. There were innumerable couriers on the
roads both to Wladimir and to the Ural Mountains. The exchange of telegraphic
dispatches with Moscow was incessant.


Michael Strogoff found himself in the central square when the report spread
that the head of police had been summoned by a courier to the palace of the
governor-general. An important dispatch from Moscow, it was said, was the
cause of it.

"The fair is to be closed," said one.

"The regiment of Nijni-Novgorod has received the route," declared another.

"They say that the Tartars menace Tomsk!"

"Here is the head of police!" was shouted on every side. A loud clapping of
hands was suddenly raised, which subsided by degrees, and finally was
succeeded by absolute silence. The head of police arrived in the middle of the
central square, and it was seen by all that he held in his hand a dispatch.

Then, in a loud voice, he read the following announcements: "By order of the
Governor of Nijni-Novgorod.

"1st. All Russian subjects are forbidden to quit the province upon any pretext
whatsoever.

"2nd. All strangers of Asiatic origin are commanded to leave the province
within twenty-four hours."


CHAPTER VI BROTHER AND SISTER


HOWEVER disastrous these measures might be to private interests, they
were, under the circumstances, perfectly justifiable.

"All Russian subjects are forbidden to leave the province;" if Ivan Ogareff
was still in the province, this would at any rate prevent him, unless with the
greatest difficulty, from rejoining Feofar-Khan, and becoming a very formidable
lieutenant to the Tartar chief.

"All foreigners of Asiatic origin are ordered to leave the province in four-
and-twenty hours;" this would send off in a body all the traders from Central
Asia, aS well as the bands of Bohemians, gipsies, etc., having more or less
sympathy with the Tartars. So many heads, so many spies--undoubtedly affairs
required their expulsion.

It is easy to understand the effect produced by these two thunderclaps
bursting over a town like Nijni-Novgorod, so densely crowded with visitors, and
with a commerce so greatly surpassing that of all other places in Russia. The
natives whom business called beyond the Siberian frontier could not leave the
province for a time at least. The tenor of the first article of the order was express;
it admitted of no exception. All private interests must yield to the public weal.
As to the second article of the proclamation, the order of expulsion which it
contained admitted of no evasion either. It only concerned foreigners of Asiatic
origin, but these could do nothing but pack up their merchandise and go back the
way they came. As to the mountebanks, of which there were a considerable
number, they had nearly a thousand versts to go before they could reach the
nearest frontier. For them it was simply misery.

At first there rose against this unusual measure a murmur of protestation, a
cry of despair, but this was quickly suppressed by the presence of the Cossacks
and agents of police. Immediately, what might be called the exodus from the
immense plain began. The awnings in front of the stalls were folded up; the
theaters were taken to pieces; the fires were put out; the acrobats' ropes were
lowered; the old broken-winded horses of the traveling vans came back from
their sheds. Agents and soldiers with whip or stick stimulated the tardy ones, and
made nothing of pulling down the tents even before the poor Bohemians had left
them.

Under these energetic measures the square of Nijni-Novgorod would, it was
evident, be entirely evacuated before the evening, and to the tumult of the great
fair would succeed the silence of the desert.


It must again be repeated--for it was a necessary aggravation of these severe
measures--that to all those nomads chiefly concerned in the order of expulsion
even the steppes of Siberia were forbidden, and they would be obliged to hasten
to the south of the Caspian Sea, either to Persia, Turkey, or the plains of
Turkestan. The post of the Ural, and the mountains which form, as it were, a
prolongation of the river along the Russian frontier, they were not allowed to
pass. They were therefore under the necessity of traveling six hundred miles
before they could tread a free soil.

Just as the reading of the proclamation by the head of the police came to an
end, an idea darted instinctively into the mind of Michael Strogoff. "What a
singular coincidence," thought he, "between this proclamation expelling all
foreigners of Asiatic origin, and the words exchanged last evening between those
two gipsies of the Zingari race. "The Father himself sends us where we wish to
go,’ that old man said. But 'the Father’ is the emperor! He is never called
anything else among the people. How could those gipsies have foreseen the
measure taken against them? how could they have known it beforehand, and
where do they wish to go? Those are suspicious people, and it seems to me that
to them the government proclamation must be more useful than injurious."

But these reflections were completely dispelled by another which drove
every other thought out of Michael's mind. He forgot the Zingaris, their
suspicious words, the strange coincidence which resulted from the proclamation.
The remembrance of the young Livonian girl suddenly rushed into his mind.
"Poor child!" he thought to himself. "She cannot now cross the frontier."

In truth the young girl was from Riga; she was Livonian, consequently
Russian, and now could not leave Russian territory! The permit which had been
given her before the new measures had been promulgated was no longer
available. All the routes to Siberia had just been pitilessly closed to her, and,
whatever the motive taking her to Irkutsk, she was now forbidden to go there.

This thought greatly occupied Michael Strogoff. He said to himself, vaguely
at first, that, without neglecting anything of what was due to his important
mission, it would perhaps be possible for him to be of some use to this brave
girl; and this idea pleased him. Knowing how serious were the dangers which he,
an energetic and vigorous man, would have personally to encounter, he could not
conceal from himself how infinitely greater they would prove to a young
unprotected girl. As she was going to Irkutsk, she would be obliged to follow the
same road as himself, she would have to pass through the bands of invaders, as
he was about to attempt doing himself. If, moreover, she had at her disposal only
the money necessary for a journey taken under ordinary circumstances, how
could she manage to accomplish it under conditions which made it not only


perilous but expensive?

"Well," said he, "if she takes the route to Perm, it is nearly impossible but
that I shall fall in with her. Then, I will watch over her without her suspecting it;
and as she appears to me as anxious as myself to reach Irkutsk, she will cause
me no delay."

But one thought leads to another. Michael Strogoff had till now thought only
of doing a kind action; but now another idea flashed into his brain; the question
presented itself under quite a new aspect.

"The fact is," said he to himself, "that I have much more need of her than she
can have of me. Her presence will be useful in drawing off suspicion from me. A
man traveling alone across the steppe, may be easily guessed to be a courier of
the Czar. If, on the contrary, this young girl accompanies me, I shall appear, in
the eyes of all, the Nicholas Korpanoff of my podorojna. Therefore, she must
accompany me. Therefore, I must find her again at any cost. It is not probable
that since yesterday evening she has been able to get a carriage and leave Nijni-
Novgorod. I must look for her. And may God guide me!"

Michael left the great square of Nijni-Novgorod, where the tumult produced
by the carrying out of the prescribed measures had now reached its height.
Recriminations from the banished strangers, shouts from the agents and
Cossacks who were using them so brutally, together made an indescribable
uproar. The girl for whom he searched could not be there. It was now nine
o'clock in the morning. The steamboat did not start till twelve. Michael Strogoff
had therefore nearly two hours to employ in searching for her whom he wished
to make his traveling companion.

He crossed the Volga again and hunted through the quarters on the other side,
where the crowd was much less considerable. He entered the churches, the
natural refuge for all who weep, for all who suffer. Nowhere did he meet with
the young Livonian.

"And yet," he repeated, "she could not have left Nijni-Novgorod yet. We'll
have another look." He wandered about thus for two hours. He went on without
stopping, feeling no fatigue, obeying a potent instinct which allowed no room for
thought. All was in vain.

It then occurred to him that perhaps the girl had not heard of the order--
though this was improbable enough, for such a thunderclap could not have burst
without being heard by all. Evidently interested in knowing the smallest news
from Siberia, how could she be ignorant of the measures taken by the governor,
measures which concerned her so directly?

But, if she was ignorant of it, she would come in an hour to the quay, and
there some merciless agent would refuse her a passage! At any cost, he must see


her beforehand, and enable her to avoid such a repulse.

But all his endeavors were in vain, and he at length almost despaired of
finding her again. It was eleven o'clock, and Michael thought of presenting his
podorojna at the office of the head of police. The proclamation evidently did not
concern him, since the emergency had been foreseen for him, but he wished to
make sure that nothing would hinder his departure from the town.

Michael then returned to the other side of the Volga, to the quarter in which
was the office of the head of police. An immense crowd was collected there; for
though all foreigners were ordered to quit the province, they had notwithstanding
to go through certain forms before they could depart.

Without this precaution, some Russian more or less implicated in the Tartar
movement would have been able, in a disguise, to pass the frontier--just those
whom the order wished to prevent going. The strangers were sent away, but still
had to gain permission to go.

Mountebanks, gypsies, Tsiganes, Zingaris, mingled with merchants from
Persia, Turkey, India, Turkestan, China, filled the court and offices of the police
station.

Everyone was in a hurry, for the means of transport would be much sought
after among this crowd of banished people, and those who did not set about it
soon ran a great risk of not being able to leave the town in the prescribed time,
which would expose them to some brutal treatment from the governor's agents.

Owing to the strength of his elbows Michael was able to cross the court. But
to get into the office and up to the clerk's littke window was a much more
difficult business. However, a word into an inspector's ear and a few judiciously
given roubles were powerful enough to gain him a passage. The man, after
taking him into the waiting-room, went to call an upper clerk. Michael Strogoff
would not be long in making everything right with the police and being free in
his movements.

Whilst waiting, he looked about him, and what did he see? There, fallen,
rather than seated, on a bench, was a girl, prey to a silent despair, although her
face could scarcely be seen, the profile alone being visible against the wall.
Michael Strogoff could not be mistaken. He instantly recognized the young
Livonian.

Not knowing the governor's orders, she had come to the police office to get
her pass signed. They had refused to sign it. No doubt she was authorized to go
to Irkutsk, but the order was peremptory--it annulled all previous authorizations,
and the routes to Siberia were closed to her. Michael, delighted at having found
her again, approached the girl.

She looked up for a moment and her face brightened on recognizing her


traveling companion. She instinctively rose and, like a drowning man who
clutches at a spar, she was about to ask his help.

At that moment the agent touched Michael on the shoulder, "The head of
police will see you," he said.

"Good," returned Michael. And without saying a word to her for whom he
had been searching all day, without reassuring her by even a gesture, which
might compromise either her or himself, he followed the man.

The young Livonian, seeing the only being to whom she could look for help
disappear, fell back again on her bench.

Three minutes had not passed before Michael Strogoff reappeared,
accompanied by the agent. In his hand he held his podorojna, which threw open
the roads to Siberia for him. He again approached the young Livonian, and
holding out his hand: "Sister," said he.

She understood. She rose as if some sudden inspiration prevented her from
hesitating a moment.

"Sister," repeated Michael Strogoff, "we are authorized to continue our
journey to Irkutsk. Will you come with me?"

"I will follow you, brother," replied the girl, putting her hand into that of
Michael Strogoff. And together they left the police station.


CHAPTER VII GOING DOWN THE VOLGA


A LITTLE before midday, the steamboat's bell drew to the wharf on the
Volga an unusually large concourse of people, for not only were those about to
embark who had intended to go, but the many who were compelled to go
contrary to their wishes. The boilers of the Caucasus were under full pressure; a
slight smoke issued from its funnel, whilst the end of the escape-pipe and the
lids of the valves were crowned with white vapor. It is needless to say that the
police kept a close watch over the departure of the Caucasus, and showed
themselves pitiless to those travelers who did not satisfactorily answer their
questions.

Numerous Cossacks came and went on the quay, ready to assist the agents,
but they had not to interfere, as no one ventured to offer the slightest resistance
to their orders. Exactly at the hour the last clang of the bell sounded, the
powerful wheels of the steamboat began to beat the water, and the Caucasus
passed rapidly between the two towns of which Nijni-Novgorod is composed.

Michael Strogoff and the young Livonian had taken a passage on board the
Caucasus. Their embarkation was made without any difficulty. As is known, the
podorojna, drawn up in the name of Nicholas Korpanoff, authorized this
merchant to be accompanied on his journey to Siberia. They appeared, therefore,
to be a brother and sister traveling under the protection of the imperial police.
Both, seated together at the stern, gazed at the receding town, so disturbed by the
governor's order. Michael had as yet said nothing to the girl, he had not even
questioned her. He waited until she should speak to him, when that was
necessary. She had been anxious to leave that town, in which, but for the
providential intervention of this unexpected protector, she would have remained
imprisoned. She said nothing, but her looks spoke her thanks.

The Volga, the Rha of the ancients, the largest river in all Europe, is almost
three thousand miles in length. Its waters, rather unwholesome in its upper part,
are improved at Nijni-Novgorod by those of the Oka, a rapid affluent, issuing
from the central provinces of Russia. The system of Russian canals and rivers
has been justly compared to a gigantic tree whose branches spread over every
part of the empire. The Volga forms the trunk of this tree, and it has for roots
seventy mouths opening into the Caspian Sea. It is navigable as far as Rjef, a
town in the government of Tver, that is, along the greater part of its course.

The steamboats plying between Perm and Nijni-Novgorod rapidly perform
the two hundred and fifty miles which separate this town from the town of


Kasan. It is true that these boats have only to descend the Volga, which adds
nearly two miles of current per hour to their own speed; but on arriving at the
confluence of the Kama, a little below Kasan, they are obliged to quit the Volga
for the smaller river, up which they ascend to Perm. Powerful as were her
machines, the Caucasus could not thus, after entering the Kama, make against
the current more than ten miles an hour. Including an hour's stoppage at Kasan,
the voyage from Nijni-Novgorod to Perm would take from between sixty to
sixty-two hours.

The steamer was very well arranged, and the passengers, according to their
condition or resources, occupied three distinct classes on board. Michael
Strogoff had taken care to engage two first-class cabins, so that his young
companion might retire into hers whenever she liked.

The Caucasus was loaded with passengers of every description. A number of
Asiatic traders had thought it best to leave Nijni-Novgorod immediately. In that
part of the steamer reserved for the first-class might be seen Armenians in long
robes and a sort of miter on their heads; Jews, known by their conical caps; rich
Chinese in their traditional costume, a very wide blue, violet, or black robe;
Turks, wearing the national turban; Hindoos, with square caps, and a simple
string for a girdle, some of whom, hold in their hands all the traffic of Central
Asia; and, lastly, Tartars, wearing boots, ornamented with many-colored braid,
and the breast a mass of embroidery. All these merchants had been obliged to
pile up their numerous bales and chests in the hold and on the deck; and the
transport of their baggage would cost them dear, for, according to the
regulations, each person had only a right to twenty pounds' weight.

In the bows of the Caucasus were more numerous groups of passengers, not
only foreigners, but also Russians, who were not forbidden by the order to go
back to their towns in the province. There were mujiks with caps on their heads,
and wearing checked shirts under their wide pelisses; peasants of the Volga, with
blue trousers stuffed into their boots, rose-colored cotton shirts, drawn in by a
cord, felt caps; a few women, habited in flowery-patterned cotton dresses, gay-
colored aprons, and bright handkerchiefs on their heads. These were principally
third-class passengers, who were, happily, not troubled by the prospect of a long
return voyage. The Caucasus passed numerous boats being towed up the stream,
carrying all sorts of merchandise to Nijni-Novgorod. Then passed rafts of wood
interminably long, and barges loaded to the gunwale, and nearly sinking under
water. A bootless voyage they were making, since the fair had been abruptly
broken up at its outset.

The waves caused by the steamer splashed on the banks, covered with flocks
of wild duck, who flew away uttering deafening cries. A little farther, on the dry


fields, bordered with willows, and aspens, were scattered a few cows, sheep, and
herds of pigs. Fields, sown with thin buckwheat and rye, stretched away to a
background of half-cultivated hills, offering no remarkable prospect. The pencil
of an artist in quest of the picturesque would have found nothing to reproduce in
this monotonous landscape.

The Caucasus had been steaming on for almost two hours, when the young
Livonian, addressing herself to Michael, said, "Are you going to Irkutsk,
brother?"

"Yes, sister," answered the young man. "We are going the same way.
Consequently, where I go, you shall go."

"To-morrow, brother, you shall know why I left the shores of the Baltic to go
beyond the Ural Mountains."

"I ask you nothing, sister."

"You shall know all," replied the girl, with a faint smile. "A sister should hide
nothing from her brother. But I cannot to-day. Fatigue and sorrow have broken
me."

"Will you go and rest in your cabin?" asked Michael Strogoff.

"Yes--yes; and to-morrow--"

"Come then--"

He hesitated to finish his sentence, as if he had wished to end it by the name
of his companion, of which he was still ignorant.

"Nadia," said she, holding out her hand.

"Come, Nadia," answered Michael, "and make what use you like of your
brother Nicholas Korpanoff." And he led the girl to the cabin engaged for her off
the saloon.

Michael Strogoff returned on deck, and eager for any news which might bear
on his journey, he mingled in the groups of passengers, though without taking
any part in the conversation. Should he by any chance be questioned, and
obliged to reply, he would announce himself as the merchant Nicholas
Korpanoff, going back to the frontier, for he did not wish it to be suspected that a
special permission authorized him to travel to Siberia.

The foreigners in the steamer could evidently speak of nothing but the
occurrences of the day, of the order and its consequences. These poor people,
scarcely recovered from the fatigue of a journey across Central Asia, found
themselves obliged to return, and if they did not give loud vent to their anger and
despair, it was because they dared not. Fear, mingled with respect, restrained
them. It was possible that inspectors of police, charged with watching the
passengers, had secretly embarked on board the Caucasus, and it was just as well
to keep silence; expulsion, after all, was a good deal preferable to imprisonment


in a fortress. Therefore the men were either silent, or spoke with so much caution
that it was scarcely possible to get any useful information.

Michael Strogoff thus could learn nothing here; but if mouths were often
shut at his approach--for they did not know him--his ears were soon struck by
the sound of one voice, which cared little whether it was heard or not.

The man with the hearty voice spoke Russian, but with a French accent; and
another speaker answered him more reservedly. "What," said the first, "are you
on board this boat, too, my dear fellow; you whom I met at the imperial fete in
Moscow, and just caught a glimpse of at Nijni-Novgorod?"

"Yes, it's I," answered the second drily.

"Really, I didn't expect to be so closely followed."

"I am not following you sir; I am preceding you."

"Precede! precede! Let us march abreast, keeping step, like two soldiers on
parade, and for the time, at least, let us agree, if you will, that one shall not pass
the other."

"On the contrary, I shall pass you."

"We shall see that, when we are at the seat of war; but till then, why, let us be
traveling companions. Later, we shall have both time and occasion to be rivals."

"Enemies."

"Enemies, if you like. There is a precision in your words, my dear fellow,
particularly agreeable to me. One may always know what one has to look for,
with you."

"What is the harm?"

"No harm at all. So, in my turn, I will ask your permission to state our
respective situations."

"State away."

"You are going to Perm--like me?"

"Like you."

"And probably you will go from Perm to Ekaterenburg, since that is the best
and safest route by which to cross the Ural Mountains?"

"Probably."

"Once past the frontier, we shall be in Siberia, that is to say in the midst of
the invasion."

"We shall be there."

"Well! then, and only then, will be the time to say, Each for himself, and God
for--"

"For me."

"For you, all by yourself! Very well! But since we have a week of neutral
days before us, and since it is very certain that news will not shower down upon


us on the way, let us be friends until we become rivals again."

"Enemies."

"Yes; that's right, enemies. But till then, let us act together, and not try and
ruin each other. All the same, I promise you to keep to myself all that I can see--

"And I, all that I can hear."

"Is that agreed?"

"It is agreed."

"Your hand?"

"Here it is." And the hand of the first speaker, that is to say, five wide-open
fingers, vigorously shook the two fingers coolly extended by the other.

"By the bye," said the first, "I was able this morning to telegraph the very
words of the order to my cousin at seventeen minutes past ten."

"And I sent it to the Daily Telegraph at thirteen minutes past ten."

"Bravo, Mr. Blount!"

"Very good, M. Jolivet."

"T will try and match that!"

"Tt will be difficult."

"IT can try, however."

So saying, the French correspondent familiarly saluted the Englishman, who
bowed stiffly. The governor's proclamation did not concern these two news-
hunters, as they were neither Russians nor foreigners of Asiatic origin. However,
being urged by the same instinct, they had left Nijni-Novgorod together. It was
natural that they should take the same means of transport, and that they should
follow the same route to the Siberian steppes. Traveling companions, whether
enemies or friends, they had a week to pass together before "the hunt would be
open." And then success to the most expert! Alcide Jolivet had made the first
advances, and Harry Blount had accepted them though he had done so coldly.

That very day at dinner the Frenchman open as ever and even too loquacious,
the Englishman still silent and grave, were seen hobnobbing at the same table,
drinking genuine Cliquot, at six roubles the bottle, made from the fresh sap of
the birch-trees of the country. On hearing them chatting away together, Michael
Strogoff said to himself: "Those are inquisitive and indiscreet fellows whom I
shall probably meet again on the way. It will be prudent for me to keep them at a
distance."

The young Livonian did not come to dinner. She was asleep in her cabin, and
Michael did not like to awaken her. It was evening before she reappeared on the
deck of the Caucasus. The long twilight imparted a coolness to the atmosphere
eagerly enjoyed by the passengers after the stifling heat of the day. As the


evening advanced, the greater number never even thought of going into the
saloon. Stretched on the benches, they inhaled with delight the slight breeze
caused by the speed of the steamer. At this time of year, and under this latitude,
the sky scarcely darkened between sunset and dawn, and left the steersman light
enough to guide his steamer among the numerous vessels going up or down the
Volga.

Between eleven and two, however, the moon being new, it was almost dark.
Nearly all the passengers were then asleep on the deck, and the silence was
disturbed only by the noise of the paddles striking the water at regular intervals.
Anxiety kept Michael Strogoff awake. He walked up and down, but always in
the stern of the steamer. Once, however, he happened to pass the engine-room.
He then found himself in the part reserved for second and third-class passengers.

There, everyone was lying asleep, not only on the benches, but also on the
bales, packages, and even the deck itself. Some care was necessary not to tread
on the sleepers, who were lying about everywhere. They were chiefly mujiks,
accustomed to hard couches, and quite satisfied with the planks of the deck. But
no doubt they would, all the same, have soundly abused the clumsy fellow who
roused them with an accidental kick.

Michael Strogoff took care, therefore, not to disturb anyone. By going thus to
the end of the boat, he had no other idea but that of striving against sleep by a
rather longer walk. He reached the forward deck, and was already climbing the
forecastle ladder, when he heard someone speaking near him. He stopped. The
voices appeared to come from a group of passengers enveloped in cloaks and
wraps. It was impossible to recognize them in the dark, though it sometimes
happened that, when the steamer's chimney sent forth a plume of ruddy flames,
the sparks seemed to fall amongst the group as though thousands of spangles had
been suddenly illuminated.

Michael was about to step up the ladder, when a few words reached his ear,
uttered in that strange tongue which he had heard during the night at the fair.
Instinctively he stopped to listen. Protected by the shadow of the forecastle, he
could not be perceived himself. As to seeing the passengers who were talking,
that was impossible. He must confine himself to listening.

The first words exchanged were of no importance--to him at least--but they
allowed him to recognize the voices of the man and woman whom he had heard
at Nijni-Novgorod. This, of course, made him redouble his attention. It was,
indeed, not at all impossible that these same Tsiganes, now banished, should be
on board the Caucasus.

And it was well for him that he listened, for he distinctly heard this question
and answer made in the Tartar idiom: "It is said that a courier has set out from


Moscow for Irkutsk."

"It is so said, Sangarre; but either this courier will arrive too late, or he will
not arrive at all."

Michael Strogoff started involuntarily at this reply, which concerned him so
directly. He tried to see if the man and woman who had just spoken were really
those whom he suspected, but he could not succeed.

In a few moments Michael Strogoff had regained the stern of the vessel
without having been perceived, and, taking a seat by himself, he buried his face
in his hands. It might have been supposed that he was asleep.

He was not asleep, however, and did not even think of sleeping. He was
reflecting, not without a lively apprehension: "Who is it knows of my departure,
and who can have any interest in knowing it?"


CHAPTER VIII GOING UP THE KAMA


THE next day, the 18th of July, at twenty minutes to seven in the morning,
the Caucasus reached the Kasan quay, seven versts from the town.

Kasan is situated at the confluence of the Volga and Kasanka. It is an
important chief town of the government, and a Greek archbishopric, as well as
the seat of a university. The varied population preserves an Asiatic character.
Although the town was so far from the landing-place, a large crowd was
collected on the quay. They had come for news. The governor of the province
had published an order identical with that of Nijni-Novgorod. Police officers and
a few Cossacks kept order among the crowd, and cleared the way both for the
passengers who were disembarking and also for those who were embarking on
board the Caucasus, minutely examining both classes of travelers. The one were
the Asiatics who were being expelled; the other, mujiks stopping at Kasan.

Michael Strogoff unconcernedly watched the bustle which occurs at all
quays on the arrival of a steam vessel. The Caucasus would stay for an hour to
renew her fuel. Michael did not even think of landing. He was unwilling to leave
the young Livonian girl alone on board, as she had not yet reappeared on deck.

The two journalists had risen at dawn, as all good huntsmen should do. They
went on shore and mingled with the crowd, each keeping to his own peculiar
mode of proceeding; Harry Blount, sketching different types, or noting some
observation; Alcide Jolivet contenting himself with asking questions, confiding
in his memory, which never failed him.

There was a report along all the frontier that the insurrection and invasion
had reached considerable proportions. Communication between Siberia and the
empire was already extremely difficult. All this Michael Strogoff heard from the
new arrivals. This information could not but cause him great uneasiness, and
increase his wish of being beyond the Ural Mountains, so as to judge for himself
of the truth of these rumors, and enable him to guard against any possible
contingency. He was thinking of seeking more direct intelligence from some
native of Kasan, when his attention was suddenly diverted.

Among the passengers who were leaving the Caucasus, Michael recognized
the troop of Tsiganes who, the day before, had appeared in the Nijni-Novgorod
fair. There, on the deck of the steamboat were the old Bohemian and the woman.
With them, and no doubt under their direction, landed about twenty dancers and
singers, from fifteen to twenty years of age, wrapped in old cloaks, which
covered their spangled dresses. These dresses, just then glancing in the first rays


of the sun, reminded Michael of the curious appearance which he had observed
during the night. It must have been the glitter of those spangles in the bright
flames issuing from the steamboat's funnel which had attracted his attention.

"Evidently," said Michael to himself, "this troop of Tsiganes, after remaining
below all day, crouched under the forecastle during the night. Were these gipsies
trying to show themselves as little as possible? Such is not according to the usual
custom of their race."

Michael Strogoff no longer doubted that the expressions he had heard, had
proceeded from this tawny group, and had been exchanged between the old
gypsy and the woman to whom he gave the Mongolian name of Sangarre.
Michael involuntarily moved towards the gangway, as the Bohemian troop was
leaving the steamboat.

The old Bohemian was there, in a humble attitude, little conformable with
the effrontery natural to his race. One would have said that he was endeavoring
rather to avoid attention than to attract it. His battered hat, browned by the suns
of every clime, was pulled forward over his wrinkled face. His arched back was
bent under an old cloak, wrapped closely round him, notwithstanding the heat. It
would have been difficult, in this miserable dress, to judge of either his size or
face. Near him was the Tsigane, Sangarre, a woman about thirty years old. She
was tall and well made, with olive complexion, magnificent eyes, and golden
hair.

Many of the young dancers were remarkably pretty, all possessing the clear-
cut features of their race. These Tsiganes are generally very attractive, and more
than one of the great Russian nobles, who try to vie with the English in
eccentricity, has not hesitated to choose his wife from among these gypsy girls.
One of them was humming a song of strange rhythm, which might be thus
rendered:

"Glitters brightly the gold In my raven locks streaming Rich coral around
My graceful neck gleaming; Like a bird of the air, Through the wide world I
roam."

The laughing girl continued her song, but Michael Strogoff ceased to listen.
It struck him just then that the Tsigane, Sangarre, was regarding him with a
peculiar gaze, as if to fix his features indelibly in her memory.

It was but for a few moments, when Sangarre herself followed the old man
and his troop, who had already left the vessel. "That's a bold gypsy," said
Michael to himself. "Could she have recognized me as the man whom she saw at
Nijni-Novgorod? These confounded Tsiganes have the eyes of a cat! They can
see in the dark; and that woman there might well know--"

Michael Strogoff was on the point of following Sangarre and the gypsy band,


but he stopped. "No," thought he, "no unguarded proceedings. If I were to stop
that old fortune teller and his companions my incognito would run a risk of
being discovered. Besides, now they have landed, before they can pass the
frontier I shall be far beyond it. They may take the route from Kasan to Ishim,
but that affords no resources to travelers. Besides a tarantass, drawn by good
Siberian horses, will always go faster than a gypsy cart! Come, friend Korpanoff,
be easy."

By this time the man and Sangarre had disappeared.

Kasan is justly called the "Gate of Asia" and considered as the center of
Siberian and Bokharian commerce; for two roads begin here and lead across the
Ural Mountains. Michael Strogoff had very judiciously chosen the one by Perm
and Ekaterenburg. It is the great stage road, well supplied with relays kept at the
expense of the government, and is prolonged from Ishim to Irkutsk.

It is true that a second route--the one of which Michael had just spoken--
avoiding the slight detour by Perm, also connects Kasan with Ishim. It is perhaps
shorter than the other, but this advantage is much diminished by the absence of
post-houses, the bad roads, and lack of villages. Michael Strogoff was right in
the choice he had made, and if, as appeared probable, the gipsies should follow
the second route from Kasan to Ishim, he had every chance of arriving before
them.

An hour afterwards the bell rang on board the Caucasus, calling the new
passengers, and recalling the former ones. It was now seven o'clock in the
morning. The requisite fuel had been received on board. The whole vessel began
to vibrate from the effects of the steam. She was ready to start. Passengers going
from Kasan to Perm were crowding on the deck.

Michael noticed that of the two reporters Blount alone had rejoined the
steamer. Was Alcide Jolivet about to miss his passage?

But just as the ropes were being cast off, Jolivet appeared, tearing along. The
steamer was already sheering off, the gangway had been drawn onto the quay,
but Alcide Jolivet would not stick at such a little thing as that, so, with a bound
like a harlequin, he alighted on the deck of the Caucasus almost in his rival's
arms.

"IT thought the Caucasus was going without you,” said the latter.

"Bah!" answered Jolivet, "I should soon have caught you up again, by
chartering a boat at my cousin's expense, or by traveling post at twenty copecks
a verst, and on horseback. What could I do? It was so long a way from the quay
to the telegraph office."

"Have you been to the telegraph office?" asked Harry Blount, biting his lips.

"That's exactly where I have been!" answered Jolivet, with his most amiable


smile.

"And is it still working to Kolyvan?"

"That I don't know, but I can assure you, for instance, that it is working from
Kasan to Paris."

"You sent a dispatch to your cousin?"

"With enthusiasm."

"You had learnt then--?"

"Look here, little father, as the Russians say," replied Alcide Jolivet, "I'm a
good fellow, and I don't wish to keep anything from you. The Tartars, and
Feofar-Khan at their head, have passed Semipolatinsk, and are descending the
Irtish. Do what you like with that!"

What! such important news, and Harry Blount had not known it; and his
rival, who had probably learned it from some inhabitant of Kasan, had already
transmitted it to Paris. The English paper was distanced! Harry Blount, crossing
his hands behind him, walked off and seated himself in the stern without uttering
a word.

About ten o'clock in the morning, the young Livonian, leaving her cabin,
appeared on deck. Michael Strogoff went forward and took her hand. "Look,
sister!" said he, leading her to the bows of the Caucasus.

The view was indeed well worth seeing. The Caucasus had reached the
confluence of the Volga and the Kama. There she would leave the former river,
after having descended it for nearly three hundred miles, to ascend the latter for
a full three hundred.

The Kama was here very wide, and its wooded banks lovely. A few white
sails enlivened the sparkling water. The horizon was closed by a line of hills
covered with aspens, alders, and sometimes large oaks.

But these beauties of nature could not distract the thoughts of the young
Livonian even for an instant. She had left her hand in that of her companion, and
turning to him, "At what distance are we from Moscow?" she asked.

"Nine hundred versts,"" answered Michael.

"Nine hundred, out of seven thousand!" murmured the girl.

The bell now announced the breakfast hour. Nadia followed Michael
Strogoff to the restaurant. She ate little, and as a poor girl whose means are small
would do. Michael thought it best to content himself with the fare which
satisfied his companion; and in less than twenty minutes he and Nadia returned
on deck. There they seated themselves in the stern, and without preamble, Nadia,
lowering her voice to be heard by him alone, began:

"Brother, I am the daughter of an exile. My name is Nadia Fedor. My mother
died at Riga scarcely a month ago, and I am going to Irkutsk to rejoin my father


and share his exile."

"I, too, am going to Irkutsk," answered Michael, "and I shall thank Heaven if
it enables me to give Nadia Fedor safe and sound into her father's hands."

"Thank you, brother," replied Nadia.

Michael Strogoff then added that he had obtained a special podorojna for
Siberia, and that the Russian authorities could in no way hinder his progress.

Nadia asked nothing more. She saw in this fortunate meeting with Michael a
means only of accelerating her journey to her father.

"T had," said she, "a permit which authorized me to go to Irkutsk, but the new
order annulled that; and but for you, brother, I should have been unable to leave
the town, in which, without doubt, I should have perished."

"And dared you, alone, Nadia," said Michael, "attempt to cross the steppes of
Siberia?"

"The Tartar invasion was not known when I left Riga. It was only at Moscow
that I learnt the news."

"And despite it, you continued your journey?"

"Tt was my duty."

The words showed the character of the brave girl.

She then spoke of her father, Wassili Fedor. He was a much-esteemed
physician at Riga. But his connection with some secret society having been
asserted, he received orders to start for Irkutsk. The police who brought the order
conducted him without delay beyond the frontier.

Wassili Fedor had but time to embrace his sick wife and his daughter, so
soon to be left alone, when, shedding bitter tears, he was led away. A year and a
half after her husband's departure, Madame Fedor died in the arms of her
daughter, who was thus left alone and almost penniless. Nadia Fedor then asked,
and easily obtained from the Russian government, an authorization to join her
father at Irkutsk. She wrote and told him she was starting. She had barely enough
money for this long journey, and yet she did not hesitate to undertake it. She
would do what she could. God would do the rest.


CHAPTER IX DAY AND NIGHT IN A TARANTASS

THE next day, the 19th of July, the Caucasus reached Perm, the last place at
which she touched on the Kama.

The government of which Perm is the capital is one of the largest in the
Russian Empire, and, extending over the Ural Mountains, encroaches on
Siberian territory. Marble quarries, mines of salt, platina, gold, and coal are
worked here on a large scale. Although Perm, by its situation, has become an


important town, it is by no means attractive, being extremely dirty, and without
resources. This want of comfort is of no consequence to those going to Siberia,
for they come from the more civilized districts, and are supplied with all
necessaries.

At Perm travelers from Siberia resell their vehicles, more or less damaged by
the long journey across the plains. There, too, those passing from Europe to Asia
purchase carriages, or sleighs in the winter season.

Michael Strogoff had already sketched out his programme. A vehicle
carrying the mail usually runs across the Ural Mountains, but this, of course, was
discontinued. Even if it had not been so, he would not have taken it, as he
wished to travel as fast as possible, without depending on anyone. He wisely
preferred to buy a carriage, and journey by stages, stimulating the zeal of the
postillions by well-applied "na vodkou," or tips.

Unfortunately, in consequence of the measures taken against foreigners of
Asiatic origin, a large number of travelers had already left Perm, and therefore
conveyances were extremely rare. Michael was obliged to content himself with
what had been rejected by others. As to horses, as long as the Czar's courier was
not in Siberia, he could exhibit his podorojna, and the postmasters would give
him the preference. But, once out of Europe, he had to depend alone on the
power of his roubles.

But to what sort of a vehicle should he harness his horses? To a telga or to a
tarantass? The telga is nothing but an open four-wheeled cart, made entirely of
wood, the pieces fastened together by means of strong rope. Nothing could be
more primitive, nothing could be less comfortable; but, on the other hand, should
any accident happen on the way, nothing could be more easily repaired. There is
no want of firs on the Russian frontier, and axle-trees grow naturally in forests.
The post extraordinary, known by the name of "perck-ladnoi," is carried by the
telga, as any road is good enough for it. It must be confessed that sometimes the
ropes which fasten the concern together break, and whilst the hinder part
remains stuck in some bog, the forepart arrives at the post-house on two wheels;
but this result is considered quite satisfactory.

Michael Strogoff would have been obliged to employ a telga, if he had not
been lucky enough to discover a tarantass. It is to be hoped that the invention of
Russian coach-builders will devise some improvement in this last-named
vehicle. Springs are wanting in it as well as in the telga; in the absence of iron,
wood is not spared; but its four wheels, with eight or nine feet between them,
assure a certain equilibrium over the jolting rough roads. A splash-board protects
the travelers from the mud, and a strong leathern hood, which may be pulled
quite over the occupiers, shelters them from the great heat and violent storms of


the summer. The tarantass is as solid and as easy to repair as the telga, and is,
moreover, less addicted to leaving its hinder part in the middle of the road.

It was not without careful search that Michael managed to discover this
tarantass, and there was probably not a second to be found in all Perm. He
haggled long about the price, for form's sake, to act up to his part as Nicholas
Korpanoff, a plain merchant of Irkutsk.

Nadia had followed her companion in his search after a suitable vehicle.
Although the object of each was different, both were equally anxious to arrive at
their goal. One would have said the same will animated them both.

"Sister," said Michael, "I wish I could have found a more comfortable
conveyance for you."

"Do you say that to me, brother, when I would have gone on foot, if need
were, to rejoin my father?"

"I do not doubt your courage, Nadia, but there are physical fatigues a woman
may be unable to endure."

"I shall endure them, whatever they be," replied the girl. "If you ever hear a
complaint from me you may leave me in the road, and continue your journey
alone."

Half an hour later, the podorojna being presented by Michael, three post-
horses were harnessed to the tarantass. These animals, covered with long hair,
were very like long-legged bears. They were small but spirited, being of Siberian
breed. The way in which the iemschik harnessed them was thus: one, the largest,
was secured between two long shafts, on whose farther end was a hoop carrying
tassels and bells; the two others were simply fastened by ropes to the steps of the
tarantass. This was the complete harness, with mere strings for reins.

Neither Michael Strogoff nor the young Livonian girl had any baggage. The
rapidity with which one wished to make the journey, and the more than modest
resources of the other, prevented them from embarrassing themselves with
packages. It was a fortunate thing, under the circumstances, for the tarantass
could not have carried both baggage and travelers. It was only made for two
persons, without counting the iemschik, who kept his equilibrium on his narrow
seat in a marvelous manner.

The iemschik is changed at every relay. The man who drove the tarantass
during the first stage was, like his horses, a Siberian, and no less shaggy than
they; long hair, cut square on the forehead, hat with a turned-up brim, red belt,
coat with crossed facings and buttons stamped with the imperial cipher. The
iemschik, on coming up with his team, threw an inquisitive glance at the
passengers of the tarantass. No luggage!--and had there been, where in the world
could he have stowed it? Rather shabby in appearance too. He looked


contemptuous.

"Crows," said he, without caring whether he was overheard or not; "crows, at
six copecks a verst!"

"No, eagles!" said Michael, who understood the iemschik's slang perfectly;
"eagles, do you hear, at nine copecks a verst, and a tip besides."

He was answered by a merry crack of the whip.

In the language of the Russian postillions the "crow" is the stingy or poor
traveler, who at the post-houses only pays two or three copecks a verst for the
horses. The "eagle" is the traveler who does not mind expense, to say nothing of
liberal tips. Therefore the crow could not claim to fly as rapidly as the imperial
bird.

Nadia and Michael immediately took their places in the tarantass. A small
store of provisions was put in the box, in case at any time they were delayed in
reaching the post-houses, which are very comfortably provided under direction
of the State. The hood was pulled up, as it was insupport-ably hot, and at twelve
o'clock the tarantass left Perm in a cloud of dust.

The way in which the iemschik kept up the pace of his team would have
certainly astonished travelers who, being neither Russians nor Siberians, were
not accustomed to this sort of thing. The leader, rather larger than the others,
kept to a steady long trot, perfectly regular, whether up or down hill. The two
other horses seemed to know no other pace than the gallop, though they
performed many an eccentric curvette as they went along. The iemschik,
however, never touched them, only urging them on by startling cracks of his
whip. But what epithets he lavished on them, including the names of all the
saints in the calendar, when they behaved like docile and conscientious animals!
The string which served as reins would have had no influence on the spirited
beasts, but the words "na pravo," to the right, "na levo," to the left, pronounced
in a guttural tone, were more effectual than either bridle or snaffle.

And what amiable expressions! "Go on, my doves!" the iemschik would say.
"Go on, pretty swallows! Fly, my little pigeons! Hold up, my cousin on the left!
Gee up, my little father on the right!"

But when the pace slackened, what insulting expressions, instantly
understood by the sensitive animals! "Go on, you wretched snail! Confound you,
you slug! I'll roast you alive, you tortoise, you!"

Whether or not it was from this way of driving, which requires the iemschiks
to possess strong throats more than muscular arms, the tarantass flew along at a
rate of from twelve to fourteen miles an hour. Michael Strogoff was accustomed
both to the sort of vehicle and the mode of traveling. Neither jerks nor jolts
incommoded him. He knew that a Russian driver never even tries to avoid either


stones, ruts, bogs, fallen trees, or trenches, which may happen to be in the road.
He was used to all that. His companion ran a risk of being hurt by the violent
jolts of the tarantass, but she would not complain.

For a little while Nadia did not speak. Then possessed with the one thought,
that of reaching her journey's end, "I have calculated that there are three hundred
versts between Perm and Ekaterenburg, brother," said she. "Am I right?"

"You are quite right, Nadia," answered Michael; "and when we have reached
Ekaterenburg, we shall be at the foot of the Ural Mountains on the opposite
side."

"How long will it take to get across the mountains?"

"Forty-eight hours, for we shall travel day and night. I say day and night,
Nadia," added he, "for I cannot stop even for a moment; I go on without rest to
Irkutsk."

"T shall not delay you, brother; no, not even for an hour, and we will travel
day and night."

"Well then, Nadia, if the Tartar invasion has only left the road open, we shall
arrive in twenty days."

"You have made this journey before?" asked Nadia.

"Many times."

"During winter we should have gone more rapidly and surely, should we
not?"

"Yes, especially with more rapidity, but you would have suffered much from
the frost and snow."

"What matter! Winter is the friend of Russia."

"Yes, Nadia, but what a constitution anyone must have to endure such
friendship! I have often seen the temperature in the Siberian steppes fall to more
than forty degrees below freezing point! I have felt, notwithstanding my reindeer
coat, my heart growing chill, my limbs stiffening, my feet freezing in triple
woolen socks; I have seen my sleigh horses covered with a coating of ice, their
breath congealed at their nostrils. I have seen the brandy in my flask change into
hard stone, on which not even my knife could make an impression. But my
sleigh flew like the wind. Not an obstacle on the plain, white and level farther
than the eye could reach! No rivers to stop one! Hard ice everywhere, the route
open, the road sure! But at the price of what suffering, Nadia, those alone could
say, who have never returned, but whose bodies have been covered up by the
snow storm."

"However, you have returned, brother," said Nadia.

"Yes, but Iam a Siberian, and, when quite a child, I used to follow my father
to the chase, and so became inured to these hardships. But when you said to me,


Nadia, that winter would not have stopped you, that you would have gone alone,
ready to struggle against the frightful Siberian climate, I seemed to see you lost
in the snow and falling, never to rise again."

"How many times have you crossed the steppe in winter?" asked the young
Livonian.

"Three times, Nadia, when I was going to Omsk."

"And what were you going to do at Omsk?"

"See my mother, who was expecting me."

"And I am going to Irkutsk, where my father expects me. I am taking him my
mother's last words. That is as much as to tell you, brother, that nothing would
have prevented me from setting out."

"You are a brave girl, Nadia," replied Michael. "God Himself would have led

you."
All day the tarantass was driven rapidly by the iemschiks, who succeeded
each other at every stage. The eagles of the mountain would not have found their
name dishonored by these "eagles" of the highway. The high price paid for each
horse, and the tips dealt out so freely, recommended the travelers in a special
way. Perhaps the postmasters thought it singular that, after the publication of the
order, a young man and his sister, evidently both Russians, could travel freely
across Siberia, which was closed to everyone else, but their papers were all en
regle and they had the right to pass.

However, Michael Strogoff and Nadia were not the only travelers on their
way from Perm to Ekaterenburg. At the first stages, the courier of the Czar had
learnt that a carriage preceded them, but, as there was no want of horses, he did
not trouble himself about that.

During the day, halts were made for food alone. At the post-houses could be
found lodging and provision. Besides, if there was not an inn, the house of the
Russian peasant would have been no less hospitable. In the villages, which are
almost all alike, with their white-walled, green-roofed chapels, the traveler might
knock at any door, and it would be opened to him. The moujik would come out,
smiling and extending his hand to his guest. He would offer him bread and salt,
the burning charcoal would be put into the "samovar," and he would be made
quite at home. The family would turn out themselves rather than that he should
not have room. The stranger is the relation of all. He is "one sent by God."

On arriving that evening Michael instinctively asked the postmaster how
many hours ago the carriage which preceded them had passed that stage.

"Two hours ago, little father," replied the postmaster.

"Is it a berlin?"

"No, a telga."


"How many travelers?"

"Two."

"And they are going fast?"

"Eagles!"

"Let them put the horses to as soon as possible."

Michael and Nadia, resolved not to stop even for an hour, traveled all night.
The weather continued fine, though the atmosphere was heavy and becoming
charged with electricity. It was to be hoped that a storm would not burst whilst
they were among the mountains, for there it would be terrible. Being accustomed
to read atmospheric signs, Michael Strogoff knew that a struggle of the elements
was approaching.

The night passed without incident. Notwithstanding the jolting of the
tarantass, Nadia was able to sleep for some hours. The hood was partly raised so
as to give as much air as there was in the stifling atmosphere.

Michael kept awake all night, mistrusting the iemschiks, who are apt to sleep
at their posts. Not an hour was lost at the relays, not an hour on the road.

The next day, the 20th of July, at about eight o'clock in the morning, they
caught the first glimpse of the Ural Mountains in the east. This important chain
which separates Russia from Siberia was still at a great distance, and they could
not hope to reach it until the end of the day. The passage of the mountains must
necessarily be performed during the next night. The sky was cloudy all day, and
the temperature was therefore more bearable, but the weather was very
threatening.

It would perhaps have been more prudent not to have ascended the
mountains during the night, and Michael would not have done so, had he been
permitted to wait; but when, at the last stage, the iemschik drew his attention to a
peal of thunder reverberating among the rocks, he merely said:

"Is a telga still before us?"

"Yes."

"How long is it in advance?"

"Nearly an hour."

"Forward, and a triple tip if we are at Ekaterenburg to-morrow morning."


CHAPTER X A STORM IN THE URAL MOUNTAINS

THE Ural Mountains extend in a length of over two thousand miles between
Europe and Asia. Whether they are called the Urals, which is the Tartar, or the
Poyas, which is the Russian name, they are correctly so termed; for these names
signify "belt" in both languages. Rising on the shores of the Arctic Sea, they


reach the borders of the Caspian. This was the barrier to be crossed by Michael
Strogoff before he could enter Siberian Russia. The mountains could be crossed
in one night, if no accident happened. Unfortunately, thunder muttering in the
distance announced that a storm was at hand. The electric tension was such that
it could not be dispersed without a tremendous explosion, which in the peculiar
state of the atmosphere would be very terrible.

Michael took care that his young companion should be as well protected as
possible. The hood, which might have been easily blown away, was fastened
more securely with ropes, crossed above and at the back. The traces were
doubled, and, as an additional precaution, the nave-boxes were stuffed with
straw, as much to increase the strength of the wheels as to lessen the jolting,
unavoidable on a dark night. Lastly, the fore and hinder parts, connected simply
by the axles to the body of the tarantass, were joined one to the other by a
crossbar, fixed by means of pins and screws.

Nadia resumed her place in the cart, and Michael took his seat beside her.
Before the lowered hood hung two leathern curtains, which would in some
degree protect the travelers against the wind and rain. Two great lanterns,
suspended from the iemschik's seat, threw a pale glimmer scarcely sufficient to
light the way, but serving as warning lights to prevent any other carriage from
running into them.

It was well that all these precautions were taken, in expectation of a rough
night. The road led them up towards dense masses of clouds, and should the
clouds not soon resolve into rain, the fog would be such that the tarantass would
be unable to advance without danger of falling over some precipice.

The Ural chain does not attain any very great height, the highest summit not
being more than five thousand feet. Eternal snow is there unknown, and what is
piled up by the Siberian winter is soon melted by the summer sun. Shrubs and
trees grow to a considerable height. The iron and copper mines, as well as those
of precious stones, draw a considerable number of workmen to that region. Also,
those villages termed "gavody" are there met with pretty frequently, and the road
through the great passes is easily practicable for post-carriages.

But what is easy enough in fine weather and broad daylight, offers
difficulties and perils when the elements are engaged in fierce warfare, and the
traveler is in the midst of it. Michael Strogoff knew from former experience
what a storm in the mountains was, and perhaps this would be as terrible as the
snowstorms which burst forth with such vehemence in the winter.

Rain was not yet falling, so Michael raised the leathern curtains which
protected the interior of the tarantass and looked out, watching the sides of the
road, peopled with fantastic shadows, caused by the wavering light of the


lanterns. Nadia, motionless, her arms folded, gazed forth also, though without
leaning forward, whilst her companion, his body half out of the carriage,
examined both sky and earth.

The calmness of the atmosphere was very threatening, the air being perfectly
still. It was just as if Nature were half stifled, and could no longer breathe; her
lungs, that is to say those gloomy, dense clouds, not being able to perform their
functions. The silence would have been complete but for the grindings of the
wheels of the tarantass over the road, the creaking of the axles, the snorting of
the horses, and the clattering of their iron hoofs among the pebbles, sparks flying
out on every side.

The road was perfectly deserted. The tarantass encountered neither
pedestrians nor horsemen, nor a vehicle of any description, in the narrow defiles
of the Ural, on this threatening night. Not even the fire of a charcoal-burner was
visible in the woods, not an encampment of miners near the mines, not a hut
among the brushwood.

Under these peculiar circumstances it might have been allowable to postpone
the journey till the morning. Michael Strogoff, however, had not hesitated, he
had no right to stop, but then--and it began to cause him some anxiety--what
possible reason could those travelers in the telga ahead have for being so
imprudent?

Michael remained thus on the look-out for some time. About eleven o'clock
lightning began to blaze continuously in the sky. The shadows of huge pines
appeared and disappeared in the rapid light. Sometimes when the tarantass
neared the side of the road, deep gulfs, lit up by the flashes, could be seen
yawning beneath them. From time to time, on their vehicle giving a worse lurch
than usual, they knew that they were crossing a bridge of roughly-hewn planks
thrown over some chasm, thunder appearing actually to be rumbling below
them. Besides this, a booming sound filled the air, which increased as they
mounted higher. With these different noises rose the shouts of the iemschik,
sometimes scolding, sometimes coaxing his poor beasts, who were suffering
more from the oppression of the air than the roughness of the roads. Even the
bells on the shafts could no longer rouse them, and they stumbled every instant.

"At what time shall we reach the top of the ridge?" asked Michael of the
iemschik.

"At one o'clock in the morning if we ever get there at all," replied he, with a
shake of his head.

"Why, my friend, this will not be your first storm in the mountains, will it?"

"No, and pray God it may not be my last!"

"Are you afraid?"


"No, I'm not afraid, but I repeat that I think you were wrong in starting."

"I should have been still more wrong had I stayed."

"Hold up, my pigeons!" cried the iemschik; it was his business to obey, not
to question.

Just then a distant noise was heard, shrill whistling through the atmosphere,
so calm a minute before. By the light of a dazzling flash, almost immediately
followed by a tremendous clap of thunder, Michael could see huge pines on a
high peak, bending before the blast. The wind was unchained, but as yet it was
the upper air alone which was disturbed. Successive crashes showed that many
of the trees had been unable to resist the burst of the hurricane. An avalanche of
shattered trunks swept across the road and dashed over the precipice on the left,
two hundred feet in front of the tarantass.

The horses stopped short.

"Get up, my pretty doves!" cried the iemschik, adding the cracking of his
whip to the rumbling of the thunder.

Michael took Nadia's hand. "Are you asleep, sister?"

"No, brother."

"Be ready for anything; here comes the storm!"

"T am ready."

Michael Strogoff had only just time to draw the leathern curtains, when the
storm was upon them.

The iemschik leapt from his seat and seized the horses' heads, for terrible
danger threatened the whole party.

The tarantass was at a standstill at a turning of the road, down which swept
the hurricane; it was absolutely necessary to hold the animals' heads to the wind,
for if the carriage was taken broadside it must infallibly capsize and be dashed
over the precipice. The frightened horses reared, and their driver could not
manage to quiet them. His friendly expressions had been succeeded by the most
insulting epithets. Nothing was of any use. The unfortunate animals, blinded by
the lightning, terrified by the incessant peals of thunder, threatened every instant
to break their traces and flee. The iemschik had no longer any control over his
team.

At that moment Michael Strogoff threw himself from the tarantass and
rushed to his assistance. Endowed with more than common strength, he
managed, though not without difficulty, to master the horses.

The storm now raged with redoubled fury. A perfect avalanche of stones and
trunks of trees began to roll down the slope above them.

"We cannot stop here," said Michael.

"We cannot stop anywhere," returned the iemschik, all his energies


apparently overcome by terror. "The storm will soon send us to the bottom of the
mountain, and that by the shortest way."

"Take you that horse, coward," returned Michael, "I'll look after this one."

A fresh burst of the storm interrupted him. The driver and he were obliged to
crouch upon the ground to avoid being blown down. The carriage,
notwithstanding their efforts and those of the horses, was gradually blown back,
and had it not been stopped by the trunk of a tree, it would have gone over the
edge of the precipice.

"Do not be afraid, Nadia!" cried Michael Strogoff.

"I'm not afraid," replied the young Livonian, her voice not betraying the
slightest emotion.

The rumbling of the thunder ceased for an instant, the terrible blast had
swept past into the gorge below.

"Will you go back?" said the iemschik.

"No, we must go on! Once past this turning, we shall have the shelter of the
slope."

"But the horses won't move!"

"Do as I do, and drag them on."

"The storm will come back!"

"Do you mean to obey?"

"Do you order it?"

"The Father orders it!" answered Michael, for the first time invoking the all-
powerful name of the Emperor.

"Forward, my swallows!" cried the iemschik, seizing one horse, while
Michael did the same to the other.

Thus urged, the horses began to struggle onward. They could no longer rear,
and the middle horse not being hampered by the others, could keep in the center
of the road. It was with the greatest difficulty that either man or beasts could
stand against the wind, and for every three steps they took in advance, they lost
one, and even two, by being forced backwards. They slipped, they fell, they got
up again. The vehicle ran a great risk of being smashed. If the hood had not been
securely fastened, it would have been blown away long before. Michael Strogoff
and the iemschik took more than two hours in getting up this bit of road, only
half a verst in length, so directly exposed was it to the lashing of the storm. The
danger was not only from the wind which battered against the travelers, but from
the avalanche of stones and broken trunks which were hurtling through the air.

Suddenly, during a flash of lightning, one of these masses was seen crashing
and rolling down the mountain towards the tarantass. The iemschik uttered a cry.

Michael Strogoff in vain brought his whip down on the team, they refused to


move.

A few feet farther on, and the mass would pass behind them! Michael saw
the tarantass struck, his companion crushed; he saw there was no time to drag
her from the vehicle.

Then, possessed in this hour of peril with superhuman strength, he threw
himself behind it, and planting his feet on the ground, by main force placed it out
of danger.

The enormous mass as it passed grazed his chest, taking away his breath as
though it had been a cannon-ball, then crushing to powder the flints on the road,
it bounded into the abyss below.

"Oh, brother!" cried Nadia, who had seen it all by the light of the flashes.

"Nadia!" replied Michael, "fear nothing!"

"Tt is not on my own account that I fear!"

"God is with us, sister!"

"With me truly, brother, since He has sent thee in my way!" murmured the
young girl.

The impetus the tarantass had received was not to be lost, and the tired
horses once more moved forward. Dragged, so to speak, by Michael and the
iemschik, they toiled on towards a narrow pass, lying north and south, where
they would be protected from the direct sweep of the tempest. At one end a huge
rock jutted out, round the summit of which whirled an eddy. Behind the shelter
of the rock there was a comparative calm; yet once within the circumference of
the cyclone, neither man nor beast could resist its power.

Indeed, some firs which towered above this protection were in a trice shorn
of their tops, as though a gigantic scythe had swept across them. The storm was
now at its height. The lightning filled the defile, and the thunderclaps had
become one continued peal. The ground, struck by the concussion, trembled as
though the whole Ural chain was shaken to its foundations.

Happily, the tarantass could be so placed that the storm might strike it
obliquely. But the counter-currents, directed towards it by the slope, could not be
so well avoided, and so violent were they that every instant it seemed as though
it would be dashed to pieces.

Nadia was obliged to leave her seat, and Michael, by the light of one of the
lanterns, discovered an excavation bearing the marks of a miner's pick, where the
young girl could rest in safety until they could once more start.

Just then--it was one o'clock in the morning--the rain began to fall in torrents,
and this in addition to the wind and lightning, made the storm truly frightful. To
continue the journey at present was utterly impossible. Besides, having reached
this pass, they had only to descend the slopes of the Ural Mountains, and to


descend now, with the road torn up by a thousand mountain torrents, in these
eddies of wind and rain, was utter madness.

"To wait is indeed serious," said Michael, "but it must certainly be done, to
avoid still longer detentions. The very violence of the storm makes me hope that
it will not last long. About three o'clock the day will begin to break, and the
descent, which we cannot risk in the dark, we shall be able, if not with ease, at
least without such danger, to attempt after sunrise."

"Let us wait, brother," replied Nadia; "but if you delay, let it not be to spare
me fatigue or danger."

"Nadia, I know that you are ready to brave everything, but, in exposing both
of us, I risk more than my life, more than yours, I am not fulfilling my task, that
duty which before everything else I must accomplish."

"A duty!" murmured Nadia.

Just then a bright flash lit up the sky; a loud clap followed. The air was filled
with sulphurous suffocating vapor, and a clump of huge pines, struck by the
electric fluid, scarcely twenty feet from the tarantass, flared up like a gigantic
torch.

The iemschik was struck to the ground by a counter-shock, but, regaining his
feet, found himself happily unhurt.

Just as the last growlings of the thunder were lost in the recesses of the
mountain, Michael felt Nadia's hand pressing his, and he heard her whisper these
words in his ear: "Cries, brother! Listen!"


CHAPTER XI TRAVELERS IN DISTRESS


DURING the momentary lull which followed, shouts could be distinctly
heard from farther on, at no great distance from the tarantass. It was an earnest
appeal, evidently from some traveler in distress.

Michael listened attentively. The iemschik also listened, but shook his head,
as though it was impossible to help.

"They are travelers calling for aid," cried Nadia.

"They can expect nothing," replied the iemschik.

"Why not?” cried Michael. "Ought not we do for them what they would for
us under similar circumstances?"

"Surely you will not risk the carriage and horses!"

"I will go on foot," replied Michael, interrupting the iemschik.

"I will go, too, brother," said the young girl.

"No, remain here, Nadia. The iemschik will stay with you. I do not wish to
leave him alone."

"I will stay," replied Nadia.

"Whatever happens, do not leave this spot."

"You will find me where I now am."

Michael pressed her hand, and, turning the corner of the slope, disappeared
in the darkness.

"Your brother is wrong," said the iemschik.

"He is right," replied Nadia simply.

Meanwhile Strogoff strode rapidly on. If he was in a great hurry to aid the
travelers, he was also very anxious to know who it was that had not been
hindered from starting by the storm; for he had no doubt that the cries came from
the telga, which had so long preceded him.

The rain had stopped, but the storm was raging with redoubled fury. The
shouts, borne on the air, became more distinct. Nothing was to be seen of the
pass in which Nadia remained. The road wound along, and the squalls, checked
by the corners, formed eddies highly dangerous, to pass which, without being
taken off his legs, Michael had to use his utmost strength.

He soon perceived that the travelers whose shouts he had heard were at no
great distance. Even then, on account of the darkness, Michael could not see
them, yet he heard distinctly their words.

This is what he heard, and what caused him some surprise: "Are you coming
back, blockhead?"


"You shall have a taste of the knout at the next stage."

"Do you hear, you devil's postillion! Hullo! Below!"

"This is how a carriage takes you in this country!"

"Yes, this is what you call a telga!"

"Oh, that abominable driver! He goes on and does not appear to have
discovered that he has left us behind!"

"To deceive me, too! Me, an honorable Englishman! I will make a complaint
at the chancellor's office and have the fellow hanged."

This was said in a very angry tone, but was suddenly interrupted by a burst
of laughter from his companion, who exclaimed, "Well! this is a good joke, I
must say."

"You venture to laugh!" said the Briton angrily.


"Certainly, my dear confrere, and that most heartily. "Pon my word I never
saw anything to come up to it."

Just then a crashing clap of thunder re-echoed through the defile, and then
died away among the distant peaks. When the sound of the last growl had
ceased, the merry voice went on: "Yes, it undoubtedly is a good joke. This
machine certainly never came from France."

"Nor from England," replied the other.

On the road, by the light of the flashes, Michael saw, twenty yards from him,
two travelers, seated side by side in a most peculiar vehicle, the wheels of which
were deeply imbedded in the ruts formed in the road.

He approached them, the one grinning from ear to ear, and the other
gloomily contemplating his situation, and recognized them as the two reporters
who had been his companions on board the Caucasus.

"Good-morning to you, sir," cried the Frenchman. "Delighted to see you
here. Let me introduce you to my intimate enemy, Mr. Blount."

The English reporter bowed, and was about to introduce in his turn his
companion, Alcide Jolivet, in accordance with the rules of society, when
Michael interrupted him.

"Perfectly unnecessary, sir; we already know each other, for we traveled
together on the Volga."

"Ah, yes! exactly so! Mr.--"

"Nicholas Korpanoff, merchant, of Irkutsk. But may I know what has
happened which, though a misfortune to your companion, amuses you so
much?"

"Certainly, Mr. Korpanoff," replied Alcide. "Fancy! our driver has gone off
with the front part of this confounded carriage, and left us quietly seated in the
back part! So here we are in the worse half of a telga; no driver, no horses. Is it
not a joke?"

"No joke at all," said the Englishman.

"Indeed it is, my dear fellow. You do not know how to look at the bright side
of things."

"How, pray, are we to go on?" asked Blount.

"That is the easiest thing in the world," replied Alcide. "Go and harness
yourself to what remains of our cart; I will take the reins, and call you my little
pigeon, like a true iemschik, and you will trot off like a real post-horse."

"Mr. Jolivet," replied the Englishman, "this joking is going too far, it passes
all limits and--"

"Now do be quiet, my dear sir. When you are done up, I will take your place;
and call me a broken-winded snail and faint-hearted tortoise if I don't take you


over the ground at a rattling pace."

Alcide said all this with such perfect good-humor that Michael could not
help smiling. "Gentlemen," said he, "here is a better plan. We have now reached
the highest ridge of the Ural chain, and thus have merely to descend the slopes of
the mountain. My carriage is close by, only two hundred yards behind. I will
lend you one of my horses, harness it to the remains of the telga, and to-mor-
how, if no accident befalls us, we will arrive together at Ekaterenburg."

"That, Mr. Korpanoff," said Alcide, "is indeed a generous proposal."

"Indeed, sir," replied Michael, "I would willingly offer you places in my
tarantass, but it will only hold two, and my sister and I already fill it."

"Really, sir," answered Alcide, "with your horse and our demi-telga we will
go to the world's end."

"Sir," said Harry Blount, "we most willingly accept your kind offer. And, as
to that iemschik--"

"Oh! I assure you that you are not the first travelers who have met with a
similar misfortune," replied Michael.

"But why should not our driver come back? He knows perfectly well that he
has left us behind, wretch that he is!"

"He! He never suspected such a thing."

"What! the fellow not know that he was leaving the better half of his telga
behind?"

"Not a bit, and in all good faith is driving the fore part into Ekaterenburg."

"Did I not tell you that it was a good joke, confrere?" cried Alcide.

"Then, gentlemen, if you will follow me," said Michael, "we will return to
my carriage, and--"

"But the telga," observed the Englishman.

"There is not the slightest fear that it will fly away, my dear Blount!"
exclaimed Alcide; "it has taken such good root in the ground, that if it were left
here until next spring it would begin to bud."

"Come then, gentlemen," said Michael Strogoff, "and we will bring up the
tarantass."

The Frenchman and the Englishman, descending from their seats, no longer
the hinder one, since the front had taken its departure, followed Michael.

Walking along, Alcide Jolivet chattered away as usual, with his invariable
good-humor. "Faith, Mr. Korpanoff," said he, "you have indeed got us out of a
bad scrape."

"I have only done, sir," replied Michael, "what anyone would have done in
my place."

"Well, sir, you have done us a good turn, and if you are going farther we may


possibly meet again, and--"

Alcide Jolivet did not put any direct question to Michael as to where he was
going, but the latter, not wishing it to be suspected that he had anything to
conceal, at once replied, "I am bound for Omsk, gentlemen."

"Mr. Blount and I," replied Alcide, "go where danger is certainly to be found,
and without doubt news also."

"To the invaded provinces?" asked Michael with some earnestness.

"Exactly so, Mr. Korpanoff; and we may possibly meet there."

"Indeed, sir," replied Michael, "I have little love for cannon-balls or lance
points, and am by nature too great a lover of peace to venture where fighting is
going on."

"I am sorry, sir, extremely sorry; we must only regret that we shall separate
so soon! But on leaving Ekaterenburg it may be our fortunate fate to travel
together, if only for a few days?"

"Do you go on to Omsk?" asked Michael, after a moment's reflection.

"We know nothing as yet," replied Alcide; "but we shall certainly go as far as
Ishim, and once there, our movements must depend on circumstances."

"Well then, gentlemen," said Michael, "we will be fellow-travelers as far as
Ishim."

Michael would certainly have preferred to travel alone, but he could not,
without appearing at least singular, seek to separate himself from the two
reporters, who were taking the same road that he was. Besides, since Alcide and
his companion intended to make some stay at Ishim, he thought it rather
convenient than otherwise to make that part of the journey in their company.

Then in an indifferent tone he asked, "Do you know, with any certainty,
where this Tartar invasion is?"

"Indeed, sir," replied Alcide, "we only know what they said at Perm. Feofar-
Khan's Tartars have invaded the whole province of Semipolatinsk, and for some
days, by forced marches, have been descending the Irtish. You must hurry if you
wish to get to Omsk before them."

"Indeed I must," replied Michael.

"It is reported also that Colonel Ogareff has succeeded in passing the frontier
in disguise, and that he will not be slow in joining the Tartar chief in the revolted
country."

"But how do they know it?" asked Michael, whom this news, more or less
true, so directly concerned.

"Oh! as these things are always known," replied Alcide; "it is in the air."

"Then have you really reason to think that Colonel Ogareff is in Siberia?"

"I myself have heard it said that he was to take the road from Kasan to


Ekaterenburg."

"Ah! you know that, Mr. Jolivet?" said Harry Blount, roused from his
silence.

"I knew it," replied Alcide.

"And do you know that he went disguised as a gypsy!" asked Blount.

"As a gypsy!" exclaimed Michael, almost involuntarily, and he suddenly
remembered the look of the old Bohemian at Nijni-Novgorod, his voyage on
board the Caucasus, and his disembarking at Kasan.

"Just well enough to make a few remarks on the subject in a letter to my
cousin," replied Alcide, smiling.

"You lost no time at Kasan," dryly observed the Englishman.

"No, my dear fellow! and while the Caucasus was laying in her supply of
fuel, I was employed in obtaining a store of information."

Michael no longer listened to the repartee which Harry Blount and Alcide
exchanged. He was thinking of the gypsy troupe, of the old Tsigane, whose face
he had not been able to see, and of the strange woman who accompanied him,
and then of the peculiar glance which she had cast at him. Suddenly, close by he
heard a pistol-shot.

"Ah! forward, sirs!" cried he.

"Hullo!" said Alcide to himself, "this quiet merchant who always avoids
bullets is in a great hurry to go where they are flying about just now!"

Quickly followed by Harry Blount, who was not a man to be behind in
danger, he dashed after Michael. In another instant the three were opposite the
projecting rock which protected the tarantass at the turning of the road.

The clump of pines struck by the lightning was still burning. There was no
one to be seen. However, Michael was not mistaken. Suddenly a dreadful
growling was heard, and then another report.

"A bear;" cried Michael, who could not mistake the growling. "Nadia;
Nadia!" And drawing his cutlass from his belt, Michael bounded round the
buttress behind which the young girl had promised to wait.

The pines, completely enveloped in flames, threw a wild glare on the scene.
As Michael reached the tarantass, a huge animal retreated towards him.

It was a monstrous bear. The tempest had driven it from the woods, and it
had come to seek refuge in this cave, doubtless its habitual retreat, which Nadia
then occupied.

Two of the horses, terrified at the presence of the enormous creature,
breaking their traces, had escaped, and the iemschik, thinking only of his beasts,
leaving Nadia face to face with the bear, had gone in pursuit of them.

But the brave girl had not lost her presence of mind. The animal, which had


not at first seen her, was attacking the remaining horse. Nadia, leaving the shelter
in which she had been crouching, had run to the carriage, taken one of Michael's
revolvers, and, advancing resolutely towards the bear, had fired close to it.

The animal, slightly wounded in the shoulder, turned on the girl, who rushed
for protection behind the tarantass, but then, seeing that the horse was attempting
to break its traces, and knowing that if it did so, and the others were not
recovered, their journey could not be continued, with the most perfect coolness
she again approached the bear, and, as it raised its paws to strike her down, gave
it the contents of the second barrel.

This was the report which Michael had just heard. In an instant he was on the
spot. Another bound and he was between the bear and the girl. His arm made
one movement upwards, and the enormous beast, ripped up by that terrible knife,
fell to the ground a lifeless mass. He had executed in splendid style the famous
blow of the Siberian hunters, who endeavor not to damage the precious fur of the
bear, which fetches a high price.

"You are not wounded, sister?" said Michael, springing to the side of the
young girl.

"No, brother,” replied Nadia.

At that moment the two journalists came up. Alcide seized the horse's head,
and, in an instant, his strong wrist mastered it. His companion and he had seen
Michael's rapid stroke. "Bravo!" cried Alcide; "for a simple merchant, Mr.
Korpanoff, you handle the hunter's knife in a most masterly fashion."

"Most masterly, indeed," added Blount.

"In Siberia," replied Michael, "we are obliged to do a little of everything."

Alcide regarded him attentively. Seen in the bright glare, his knife dripping
with blood, his tall figure, his foot firm on the huge carcass, he was indeed worth
looking at.

"A formidable fellow," said Alcide to himself. Then advancing respectfully,
he saluted the young girl.

Nadia bowed slightly.

Alcide turned towards his companion. "The sister worthy of the brother!"
said he. "Now, were I a bear, I should not meddle with two so brave and so
charming."

Harry Blount, perfectly upright, stood, hat in hand, at some distance. His
companion's easy manners only increased his usual stiffness.

At that moment the iemschik, who had succeeded in recapturing his two
horses, reappeared. He cast a regretful glance at the magnificent animal lying on
the ground, loth to leave it to the birds of prey, and then proceeded once more to
harness his team.


Michael acquainted him with the travelers’ situation, and his intention of
loaning one of the horses.

"As you please," replied the iemschik. "Only, you know, two carriages
instead of one."

"All right, my friend," said Alcide, who understood the insinuation, "we will
pay double."

"Then gee up, my turtle-doves!" cried the iemschik.

Nadia again took her place in the tarantass. Michael and his companions
followed on foot. It was three o'clock. The storm still swept with terrific violence
across the defile. When the first streaks of daybreak appeared the tarantass had
reached the telga, which was still conscientiously imbedded as far as the center
of the wheel. Such being the case, it can be easily understood how a sudden jerk
would separate the front from the hinder part. One of the horses was now
harnessed by means of cords to the remains of the telga, the reporters took their
place on the singular equipage, and the two carriages started off. They had now
only to descend the Ural slopes, in doing which there was not the slightest
difficulty.

Six hours afterwards the two vehicles, the tarantass preceding the telga,
arrived at Ekaterenburg, nothing worthy of note having happened in the descent.

The first person the reporters perceived at the door of the post-house was
their iemschik, who appeared to be waiting for them. This worthy Russian had a
fine open countenance, and he smilingly approached the travelers, and, holding
out his hand, in a quiet tone he demanded the usual "pour-boire."

This very cool request roused Blount's ire to its highest pitch, and had not the
iemschik prudently retreated, a straight-out blow of the fist, in true British
boxing style, would have paid his claim of "na vodkou."

Alcide Jolivet, at this burst of anger, laughed as he had never laughed before.

"But the poor devil is quite right!" he cried. "He is perfectly right, my dear
fellow. It is not his fault if we did not know how to follow him!"

Then drawing several copecks from his pocket, "Here my friend," said he,
handing them to the iemschik; "take them. If you have not earned them, that is
not your fault.”

This redoubled Mr. Blount's irritation. He even began to speak of a lawsuit
against the owner of the telga.

"A lawsuit in Russia, my dear fellow!" cried Alcide. "Things must indeed
change should it ever be brought to a conclusion! Did you never hear the story of
the wet-nurse who claimed payment of twelve months' nursing of some poor
little infant?"

"T never heard it," replied Harry Blount.


"Then you do not know what that suckling had become by the time judgment
was given in favor of the nurse?"

"What was he, pray?"

"Colonel of the Imperial Guard!"

At this reply all burst into a laugh.

Alcide, enchanted with his own joke, drew out his notebook, and in it wrote
the following memorandum, destined to figure in a forthcoming French and
Russian dictionary: "Telga, a Russian carriage with four wheels, that is when it
starts; with two wheels, when it arrives at its destination."


CHAPTER XII PROVOCATION


EKATERENBURG, geographically, is an Asiatic city; for it is situated
beyond the Ural Mountains, on the farthest eastern slopes of the chain.
Nevertheless, it belongs to the government of Perm; and, consequently, is
included in one of the great divisions of European Russia. It is as though a
morsel of Siberia lay in Russian jaws.

Neither Michael nor his companions were likely to experience the slightest
difficulty in obtaining means of continuing their journey in so large a town as
Ekaterenburg. It was founded in 1723, and has since become a place of
considerable size, for in it is the chief mint of the empire. There also are the
headquarters of the officials employed in the management of the mines. Thus the
town is the center of an important district, abounding in manufactories
principally for the working and refining of gold and platina.

Just now the population of Ekaterenburg had greatly increased; many
Russians and Siberians, menaced by the Tartar invasion, having collected there.
Thus, though it had been so troublesome a matter to find horses and vehicles
when going to Ekaterenburg, there was no difficulty in leaving it; for under
present circumstances few travelers cared to venture on the Siberian roads.

So it happened that Blount and Alcide had not the slightest trouble in
replacing, by a sound telga, the famous demi-carriage which had managed to
take them to Ekaterenburg. As to Michael, he retained his tarantass, which was
not much the worse for its journey across the Urals; and he had only to harness
three good horses to it to take him swiftly over the road to Irkutsk.

As far as Tioumen, and even up to Novo-Zaimskoe, this road has slight
inclines, which gentle undulations are the first signs of the slopes of the Ural
Mountains. But after Novo-Zaimskoe begins the immense steppe.

At Ichim, as we have said, the reporters intended to stop, that is at about four
hundred and twenty miles from Ekaterenburg. There they intended to be guided
by circumstances as to their route across the invaded country, either together or
separately, according as their news-hunting instinct set them on one track or
another.

This road from Ekaterenburg to Ichim--which passes through Irkutsk--was
the only one which Michael could take. But, as he did not run after news, and
wished, on the contrary, to avoid the country devastated by the invaders, he
determined to stop nowhere.

"IT am very happy to make part of my journey in your company," said he to


his new companions, "but I must tell you that I am most anxious to reach Omsk;
for my sister and I are going to rejoin our mother. Who can say whether we shall
arrive before the Tartars reach the town! I must therefore stop at the post-houses
only long enough to change horses, and must travel day and night."

"That is exactly what we intend doing," replied Blount.

"Good," replied Michael; "but do not lose an instant. Buy or hire a carriage
whose--"

"Whose hind wheels," added Alcide, "are warranted to arrive at the same
time as its front wheels."

Half an hour afterwards the energetic Frenchman had found a tarantass in
which he and his companion at once seated themselves. Michael and Nadia once
more entered their own carriage, and at twelve o'clock the two vehicles left the
town of Ekaterenburg together.

Nadia was at last in Siberia, on that long road which led to Irkutsk. What
must then have been the thoughts of the young girl? Three strong swift horses
were taking her across that land of exile where her parent was condemned to
live, for how long she knew not, and so far from his native land. But she scarcely
noticed those long steppes over which the tarantass was rolling, and which at one
time she had despaired of ever seeing, for her eyes were gazing at the horizon,
beyond which she knew her banished father was. She saw nothing of the country
across which she was traveling at the rate of fifteen versts an hour; nothing of
these regions of Western Siberia, so different from those of the east. Here,
indeed, were few cultivated fields; the soil was poor, at least at the surface, but in
its bowels lay hid quantities of iron, copper, platina, and gold. How can hands be
found to cultivate the land, when it pays better to burrow beneath the earth? The
pickaxe is everywhere at work; the spade nowhere.

However, Nadia's thoughts sometimes left the provinces of Lake Baikal, and
returned to her present situation. Her father's image faded away, and was
replaced by that of her generous companion as he first appeared on the Vladimir
railroad. She recalled his attentions during that journey, his arrival at the police-
station, the hearty simplicity with which he had called her sister, his kindness to
her in the descent of the Volga, and then all that he did for her on that terrible
night of the storm in the Urals, when he saved her life at the peril of his own.

Thus Nadia thought of Michael. She thanked God for having given her such
a gallant protector, a friend so generous and wise. She knew that she was safe
with him, under his protection. No brother could have done more than he. All
obstacles seemed cleared away; the performance of her journey was but a matter
of time.

Michael remained buried in thought. He also thanked God for having


brought about this meeting with Nadia, which at the same time enabled him to
do a good action, and afforded him additional means for concealing his true
character. He delighted in the young girl's calm intrepidity. Was she not indeed
his sister? His feeling towards his beautiful and brave companion was rather
respect than affection. He felt that hers was one of those pure and rare hearts
which are held by all in high esteem.

However, Michael's dangers were now beginning, since he had reached
Siberian ground. If the reporters were not mistaken, if Ivan Ogareff had really
passed the frontier, all his actions must be made with extreme caution. Things
were now altered; Tartar spies swarmed in the Siberian provinces. His incognito
once discovered, his character as courier of the Czar known, there was an end of
his journey, and probably of his life. Michael felt now more than ever the weight
of his responsibility.

While such were the thoughts of those occupying the first carriage, what was
happening in the second? Nothing out of the way. Alcide spoke in sentences;
Blount replied by monosyllables. Each looked at everything in his own light, and
made notes of such incidents as occurred on the journey--few and but slightly
varied--while they crossed the provinces of Western Siberia.

At each relay the reporters descended from their carriage and found
themselves with Michael. Except when meals were to be taken at the post-
houses, Nadia did not leave the tarantass. When obliged to breakfast or dine, she
sat at table, but was always very reserved, and seldom joined in conversation.

Alcide, without going beyond the limits of strict propriety, showed that he
was greatly struck by the young girl. He admired the silent energy which she
showed in bearing all the fatigues of so difficult a journey.

The forced stoppages were anything but agreeable to Michael; so he
hastened the departure at each relay, roused the innkeepers, urged on the
iemschiks, and expedited the harnessing of the tarantass. Then the hurried meal
over--always much too hurried to agree with Blount, who was a methodical
eater--they started, and were driven as eagles, for they paid like princes.

It need scarcely be said that Blount did not trouble himself about the girl at
table. That gentleman was not in the habit of doing two things at once. She was
also one of the few subjects of conversation which he did not care to discuss
with his companion.

Alcide having asked him, on one occasion, how old he thought the girl,
"What girl?" he replied, quite seriously.

"Why, Nicholas Korpanoff's sister."

"Is she his sister?"

"No; his grandmother!" replied Alcide, angry at his indifference. "What age


should you consider her?"

"Had I been present at her birth I might have known."

Very few of the Siberian peasants were to be seen in the fields. These
peasants are remarkable for their pale, grave faces, which a celebrated traveler
has compared to those of the Castilians, without the haughtiness of the latter.
Here and there some villages already deserted indicated the approach of the
Tartar hordes. The inhabitants, having driven off their flocks of sheep, their
camels, and their horses, were taking refuge in the plains of the north. Some
tribes of the wandering Kirghiz, who remained faithful, had transported their
tents beyond the Irtych, to escape the depredations of the invaders.

Happily, post traveling was as yet uninterrupted; and_ telegraphic
communication could still be effected between places connected with the wire.
At each relay horses were to be had on the usual conditions. At each telegraphic
station the clerks transmitted messages delivered to them, delaying for State
dispatches alone.

Thus far, then, Michael's journey had been accomplished satisfactorily. The
courier of the Czar had in no way been impeded; and, if he could only get on to
Krasnoiarsk, which seemed the farthest point attained by Feofar-Khan's Tartars,
he knew that he could arrive at Irkutsk, before them. The day after the two
carriages had left Ekaterenburg they reached the small town of Toulouguisk at
seven o'clock in the morning, having covered two hundred and twenty versts, no
event worthy of mention having occurred. The same evening, the 22d of July,
they arrived at Tioumen.

Tioumen, whose population is usually ten thousand inhabitants, then
contained double that number. This, the first industrial town established by the
Russians in Siberia, in which may be seen a fine metal-refining factory and a
bell foundry, had never before presented such an animated appearance. The
correspondents immediately went off after news. That brought by Siberian
fugitives from the seat of war was far from reassuring. They said, amongst other
things, that Feofar-Khan's army was rapidly approaching the valley of the Ichim,
and they confirmed the report that the Tartar chief was soon to be joined by
Colonel Ogareff, if he had not been so already. Hence the conclusion was that
operations would be pushed in Eastern Siberia with the greatest activity.
However, the loyal Cossacks of the government of Tobolsk were advancing by
forced marches towards Tomsk, in the hope of cutting off the Tartar columns.

At midnight the town of Novo-Saimsk was reached; and the travelers now
left behind them the country broken by tree-covered hills, the last remains of the
Urals.

Here began the regular Siberian steppe which extends to the neighborhood of


Krasnoiarsk. It is a boundless plain, a vast grassy desert; earth and sky here form
a circle as distinct as that traced by a sweep of the compasses. The steppe
presents nothing to attract notice but the long line of the telegraph posts, their
wires vibrating in the breeze like the strings of a harp. The road could be
distinguished from the rest of the plain only by the clouds of fine dust which
rose under the wheels of the tarantass. Had it not been for this white riband,
which stretched away as far as the eye could reach, the travelers might have
thought themselves in a desert.

Michael and his companions again pressed rapidly forward. The horses,
urged on by the iemschik, seemed to fly over the ground, for there was not the
slightest obstacle to impede them. The tarantass was going straight for Ichim,
where the two correspondents intended to stop, if nothing happened to make
them alter their plans.

A hundred and twenty miles separated Novo-Saimsk from the town of Ichim,
and before eight o'clock the next evening the distance could and should be
accomplished if no time was lost. In the opinion of the iemschiks, should the
travelers not be great lords or high functionaries, they were worthy of being so,
if it was only for their generosity in the matter of "na vodkou."

On the afternoon of the next day, the 23rd of July, the two carriages were not
more than thirty versts from Ichim. Suddenly Michael caught sight of a carriage-
-scarcely visible among the clouds of dust--preceding them along the road. As
his horses were evidently less fatigued than those of the other traveler, he would
not be long in overtaking it. This was neither a tarantass nor a telga, but a post-
berlin, which looked as if it had made a long journey. The postillion was
thrashing his horses with all his might, and only kept them at a gallop by dint of
abuse and blows. The berlin had certainly not passed through Novo-Saimsk, and
could only have struck the Irkutsk road by some less frequented route across the
steppe.

Our travelers’ first thought, on seeing this berlin, was to get in front of it, and
arrive first at the relay, so as to make sure of fresh horses. They said a word to
their iemschiks, who soon brought them up with the berlin.

Michael Strogoff came up first. As he passed, a head was thrust out of the
window of the berlin.

He had not time to see what it was like, but as he dashed by he distinctly
heard this word, uttered in an imperious tone: "Stop!"

But they did not stop; on the contrary, the berlin was soon distanced by the
two tarantasses.

It now became a regular race; for the horses of the berlin--no doubt excited
by the sight and pace of the others--recovered their strength and kept up for


some minutes. The three carriages were hidden in a cloud of dust. From this
cloud issued the cracking of whips mingled with excited shouts and
exclamations of anger.

Nevertheless, the advantage remained with Michael and his companions,
which might be very important to them if the relay was poorly provided with
horses. Two carriages were perhaps more than the postmaster could provide for,
at least in a short space of time.

Half an hour after the berlin was left far behind, looking only a speck on the
horizon of the steppe.

It was eight o'clock in the evening when the two carriages reached Ichim.
The news was worse and worse with regard to the invasion. The town itself was
menaced by the Tartar vanguard; and two days before the authorities had been
obliged to retreat to Tobolsk. There was not an officer nor a soldier left in Ichim.

On arriving at the relay, Michael Strogoff immediately asked for horses. He
had been fortunate in distancing the berlin. Only three horses were fit to be
harnessed. The others had just come in worn out from a long stage.

As the two correspondents intended to stop at Ichim, they had not to trouble
themselves to find transport, and had their carriage put away. In ten minutes
Michael was told that his tarantass was ready to start.

"Good," said he.

Then turning to the two reporters: "Well, gentlemen, the time is come for us
to separate."

"What, Mr. Korpanoff," said Alcide Jolivet, "shall you not stop even for an
hour at Ichim?"

"No, sir; and I also wish to leave the post-house before the arrival of the
berlin which we distanced."

"Are you afraid that the traveler will dispute the horses with you?"

"I particularly wish to avoid any difficulty."

"Then, Mr. Korpanoff," said Jolivet, "it only remains for us to thank you
once more for the service you rendered us, and the pleasure we have had in
traveling with you."

"It is possible that we shall meet you again in a few days at Omsk," added
Blount.

"It is possible," answered Michael, "since I am going straight there."

"Well, I wish you a safe journey, Mr. Korpanoff," said Alcide, "and Heaven
preserve you from telgas."

The two reporters held out their hands to Michael with the intention of
cordially shaking his, when the sound of a carriage was heard outside. Almost
immediately the door was flung open and a man appeared.


It was the traveler of the berlin, a military-looking man, apparently about
forty years of age, tall, robust in figure, broad-shouldered, with a strongly-set
head, and thick mus-taches meeting red whiskers. He wore a plain uniform. A
cavalry saber hung at his side, and in his hand he held a short-handled whip.

"Horses," he demanded, with the air of a man accustomed to command.

"I have no more disposable horses," answered the postmaster, bowing.

"I must have some this moment."

"It is impossible."

"What are those horses which have just been harnessed to the tarantass I saw
at the door?"

"They belong to this traveler," answered the postmaster, pointing to Michael
Strogoff.

"Take them out!" said the traveler in a tone which admitted of no reply.

Michael then advanced.

"These horses are engaged by me," he said.

"What does that matter? I must have them. Come, be quick; I have no time to
lose."

"IT have no time to lose either," replied Michael, restraining himself with
difficulty.

Nadia was near him, calm also, but secretly uneasy at a scene which it would
have been better to avoid.

"Enough!" said the traveler. Then, going up to the postmaster, "Let the horses
be put into my berlin," he exclaimed with a threatening gesture.

The postmaster, much embarrassed, did not know whom to obey, and looked
at Michael, who evidently had the right to resist the unjust demands of the
traveler.

Michael hesitated an instant. He did not wish to make use of his podorojna,
which would have drawn attention to him, and he was most unwilling also, by
giving up his horses, to delay his journey, and yet he must not engage in a
struggle which might compromise his mission.

The two reporters looked at him ready to support him should he appeal to
them.

"My horses will remain in my carriage," said Michael, but without raising his
tone more than would be suitable for a plain Irkutsk merchant.

The traveler advanced towards Michael and laid his hand heavily on his
shoulder. "Is it so?" he said roughly. "You will not give up your horses to me?"

"No," answered Michael.

"Very well, they shall belong to whichever of us is able to start. Defend
yourself; I shall not spare you!"


So saying, the traveler drew his saber from its sheath, and Nadia threw
herself before Michael.

Blount and Alcide Jolivet advanced towards him.

"I shall not fight," said Michael quietly, folding his arms across his chest.

"You will not fight?"

"No."

"Not even after this?" exclaimed the traveler. And before anyone could
prevent him, he struck Michael's shoulder with the handle of the whip. At this
insult Michael turned deadly pale. His hands moved convulsively as if he would
have knocked the brute down. But by a tremendous effort he mastered himself. A
duel! it was more than a delay; it was perhaps the failure of his mission. It would
be better to lose some hours. Yes; but to swallow this affront!

"Will you fight now, coward?" repeated the traveler, adding coarseness to
brutality.

"No," answered Michael, without moving, but looking the other straight in
the face.

"The horses this moment," said the man, and left the room.

The postmaster followed him, after shrugging his shoulders and bestowing
on Michael a glance of anything but approbation.

The effect produced on the reporters by this incident was not to Michael's
advantage. Their discomfiture was visible. How could this strong young man
allow himself to be struck like that and not demand satisfaction for such an
insult? They contented themselves with bowing to him and retired, Jolivet
remarking to Harry Blount

"I could not have believed that of a man who is so skillful in finishing up
Ural Mountain bears. Is it the case that a man can be courageous at one time and
a coward at another? It is quite incomprehensible."

A moment afterwards the noise of wheels and whip showed that the berlin,
drawn by the tarantass' horses, was driving rapidly away from the post-house.

Nadia, unmoved, and Michael, still quivering, remained alone in the room.
The courier of the Czar, his arms crossed over his chest was seated motionless as
a statue. A color, which could not have been the blush of shame, had replaced the
paleness on his countenance.

Nadia did not doubt that powerful reasons alone could have allowed him to
suffer so great a humiliation from such a man. Going up to him as he had come
to her in the police-station at Nijni-Novgorod:

"Your hand, brother," said she.

And at the same time her hand, with an almost maternal gesture, wiped away
a tear which sprang to her companion's eye.


CHAPTER XIII DUTY BEFORE EVERYTHING


NADIA, with the clear perception of a right-minded woman, guessed that
some secret motive directed all Michael Strogoff's actions; that he, for a reason
unknown to her, did not belong to himself; and that in this instance especially he
had heroically sacrificed to duty even his resentment at the gross injury he had
received.

Nadia, therefore, asked no explanation from Michael. Had not the hand
which she had extended to him already replied to all that he might have been
able to tell her?

Michael remained silent all the evening. The postmaster not being able to
supply them with fresh horses until the next morning, a whole night must be
passed at the house. Nadia could profit by it to take some rest, and a room was
therefore prepared for her.

The young girl would no doubt have preferred not to leave her companion,
but she felt that he would rather be alone, and she made ready to go to her room.

Just as she was about to retire she could not refrain from going up to Michael
to say good-night.

"Brother," she whispered. But he checked her with a gesture. The girl sighed
and left the room.

Michael Strogoff did not lie down. He could not have slept even for an hour.
The place on which he had been struck by the brutal traveler felt like a burn.

"For my country and the Father," he muttered as he ended his evening prayer.

He especially felt a great wish to know who was the man who had struck
him, whence he came, and where he was going. As to his face, the features of it
were so deeply engraven on his memory that he had no fear of ever forgetting
them.

Michael Strogoff at last asked for the postmaster. The latter, a Siberian of the
old type, came directly, and looking rather contemptuously at the young man,
waited to be questioned.

"You belong to the country?" asked Michael.

"Yes."

"Do you know that man who took my horses?"

"No."

"Had you never seen him before?"

"Never."

"Who do you think he was?"


"A man who knows how to make himself obeyed."

Michael fixed his piercing gaze upon the Siberian, but the other did not quail
before it.

"Do you dare to judge me?" exclaimed Michael.

"Yes," answered the Siberian, "there are some things even a plain merchant
cannot receive without returning."

"Blows?"

"Blows, young man. I am of an age and strength to tell you so."

Michael went up to the postmaster and laid his two powerful hands on his
shoulders.

Then in a peculiarly calm tone, "Be off, my friend," said he: "be off! I could
kill you."

The postmaster understood. "I like him better for that," he muttered and
retired without another word.

At eight o'clock the next morning, the 24th of July, three strong horses were
harnessed to the tarantass. Michael Strogoff and Nadia took their places, and
Ichim, with its disagreeable remembrances, was soon left far behind.

At the different relays at which they stopped during the day Strogoff
ascertained that the berlin still preceded them on the road to Irkutsk, and that the
traveler, as hurried as they were, never lost a minute in pursuing his way across
the steppe.

At four o'clock in the evening they reached Abatskaia, fifty miles farther on,
where the Ichim, one of the principal affluents of the Irtych, had to be crossed.
This passage was rather more difficult than that of the Tobol. Indeed the current
of the Ichim was very rapid just at that place. During the Siberian winter, the
rivers being all frozen to a thickness of several feet, they are easily practicable,
and the traveler even crosses them without being aware of the fact, for their beds
have disappeared under the snowy sheet spread uniformly over the steppe; but in
summer the difficulties of crossing are sometimes great.

In fact, two hours were taken up in making the passage of the Ichim, which
much exasperated Michael, especially as the boatmen gave them alarming news
of the Tartar invasion. Some of Feofar-Khan's scouts had already appeared on
both banks of the lower Ichim, in the southern parts of the government of
Tobolsk. Omsk was threatened. They spoke of an engagement which had taken
place between the Siberian and Tartar troops on the frontier of the great Kirghese
horde--an engagement not to the advantage of the Russians, who were weak in
numbers. The troops had retreated thence, and in consequence there had been a
general emigration of all the peasants of the province. The boatmen spoke of
horrible atrocities committed by the invaders--pillage, theft, incendiarism,


murder. Such was the system of Tartar warfare.

The people all fled before Feofar-Khan. Michael Strogoff's great fear was
lest, in the depopulation of the towns, he should be unable to obtain the means of
transport. He was therefore extremely anxious to reach Omsk. Perhaps there they
would get the start of the Tartar scouts, who were coming down the valley of the
Irtych, and would find the road open to Irkutsk.

Just at the place where the tarantass crossed the river ended what is called, in
military language, the "Ichim chain"--a chain of towers, or little wooden forts,
extending from the southern frontier of Siberia for a distance of nearly four
hundred versts. Formerly these forts were occupied by detachments of Cossacks,
and they protected the country against the Kirghese, as well as against the
Tartars. But since the Muscovite Government had believed these hordes reduced
to absolute submission, they had been abandoned, and now could not be used;
just at the time when they were needed. Many of these forts had been reduced to
ashes; and the boatmen even pointed out the smoke to Michael, rising in the
southern horizon, and showing the approach of the Tartar advance-guard.

As soon as the ferryboat landed the tarantass on the right bank of the Ichim,
the journey across the steppe was resumed with all speed. Michael Strogoff
remained very silent. He was, however, always attentive to Nadia, helping her to
bear the fatigue of this long journey without break or rest; but the girl never
complained. She longed to give wings to the horses. Something told her that her
companion was even more anxious than herself to reach Irkutsk; and how many
versts were still between!

It also occurred to her that if Omsk was entered by the Tartars, Michael's
mother, who lived there, would be in danger, and that this was sufficient to
explain her son's impatience to get to her.

Nadia at last spoke to him of old Marfa, and of how unprotected she would
be in the midst of all these events.

"Have you received any news of your mother since the beginning of the
invasion?" she asked.

"None, Nadia. The last letter my mother wrote to me contained good news.
Marfa is a brave and energetic Siberian woman. Notwithstanding her age, she
has preserved all her moral strength. She knows how to suffer."

"T shall see her, brother," said Nadia quickly. "Since you give me the name of
sister, | am Marfa's daughter."

And as Michael did not answer she added:

"Perhaps your mother has been able to leave Omsk?"

"It is possible, Nadia," replied Michael; "and I hope she may have reached
Tobolsk. Marfa hates the Tartars. She knows the steppe, and would have no fear


in just taking her staff and going down the banks of the Irtych. There is not a
spot in all the province unknown to her. Many times has she traveled all over the
country with my father; and many times I myself, when a mere child, have
accompanied them across the Siberian desert. Yes, Nadia, I trust that my mother
has left Omsk."

"And when shall you see her?"

"T shall see her--on my return."

"If, however, your mother is still at Omsk, you will be able to spare an hour
to go to her?"

"T shall not go and see her."

"You will not see her?"

"No, Nadia," said Michael, his chest heaving as he felt he could not go on
replying to the girl's questions.

"You say no! Why, brother, if your mother is still at Omsk, for what reason
could you refuse to see her?"

"For what reason, Nadia? You ask me for what reason," exclaimed Michael,
in so changed a voice that the young girl started. "For the same reason as that
which made me patient even to cowardice with the villain who--" He could not
finish his sentence.

"Calm yourself, brother," said Nadia in a gentle voice. "I only know one
thing, or rather I do not know it, I feel it. It is that all your conduct is now
directed by the sentiment of a duty more sacred--if there can be one--than that
which unites the son to the mother."

Nadia was silent, and from that moment avoided every subject which in any
way touched on Michael's peculiar situation. He had a secret motive which she
must respect. She respected it.

The next day, July 25th, at three o'clock in the morning, the tarantass arrived
at Tioukalmsk, having accomplished a distance of eighty miles since it had
crossed the Ichim. They rapidly changed horses. Here, however, for the first
time, the iemschik made difficulties about starting, declaring that detachments of
Tartars were roving across the steppe, and that travelers, horses, and carriages
would be a fine prize for them.

Only by dint of a large bribe could Michael get over the unwillingness of the
iemschik, for in this instance, as in many others, he did not wish to show his
podorojna. The last ukase, having been transmitted by telegraph, was known in
the Siberian provinces; and a Russian specially exempted from obeying these
words would certainly have drawn public attention to himself--a thing above all
to be avoided by the Czar's courier. As to the iemschik's hesitation, either the
rascal traded on the traveler's impatience or he really had good reason to fear.


However, at last the tarantass started, and made such good way that by three
in the afternoon it had reached Koulatsinskoe, fifty miles farther on. An hour
after this it was on the banks of the Irtych. Omsk was now only fourteen miles
distant.

The Irtych is a large river, and one of the principal of those which flow
towards the north of Asia. Rising in the Altai Mountains, it flows from the
southeast to the northwest and empties itself into the Obi, after a course of four
thousand miles.

At this time of year, when all the rivers of the Siberian basin are much
swollen, the waters of the Irtych were very high. In consequence the current was
changed to a regular torrent, rendering the passage difficult enough. A swimmer
could not have crossed, however powerful; and even in a ferryboat there would
be some danger.

But Michael and Nadia, determined to brave all perils whatever they might
be, did not dream of shrinking from this one. Michael proposed to his young
companion that he should cross first, embarking in the ferryboat with the
tarantass and horses, as he feared that the weight of this load would render it less
safe. After landing the carriage he would return and fetch Nadia.

The girl refused. It would be the delay of an hour, and she would not, for her
safety alone, be the cause of it.

The embarkation was made not without difficulty, for the banks were partly
flooded and the boat could not get in near enough. However, after half an hour's
exertion, the boatmen got the tarantass and the three horses on board. The
passengers embarked also, and they shoved off.

For a few minutes all went well. A little way up the river the current was
broken by a long point projecting from the bank, and forming an eddy easily
crossed by the boat. The two boatmen propelled their barge with long poles,
which they handled cleverly; but as they gained the middle of the stream it grew
deeper and deeper, until at last they could only just reach the bottom. The ends
of the poles were only a foot above the water, which rendered their use difficult.
Michael and Nadia, seated in the stern of the boat, and always in dread of a
delay, watched the boatmen with some uneasiness.

"Look out!" cried one of them to his comrade.

The shout was occasioned by the new direction the boat was rapidly taking.
It had got into the direct current and was being swept down the river. By diligent
use of the poles, putting the ends in a series of notches cut below the gunwale,
the boatmen managed to keep the craft against the stream, and slowly urged it in
a slanting direction towards the right bank.

They calculated on reaching it some five or six versts below the landing


place; but, after all, that would not matter so long as men and beasts could
disembark without accident. The two stout boatmen, stimulated moreover by the
promise of double fare, did not doubt of succeeding in this difficult passage of
the Irtych.

But they reckoned without an accident which they were powerless to
prevent, and neither their zeal nor their skillfulness could, under the
circumstances, have done more.

The boat was in the middle of the current, at nearly equal distances from
either shore, and being carried down at the rate of two versts an hour, when
Michael, springing to his feet, bent his gaze up the river.

Several boats, aided by oars as well as by the current, were coming swiftly
down upon them.

Michael's brow contracted, and a cry escaped him.

"What is the matter?" asked the girl.

But before Michael had time to reply one of the boatmen exclaimed in an
accent of terror:

"The Tartars! the Tartars!"

There were indeed boats full of soldiers, and in a few minutes they must
reach the ferryboat, it being too heavily laden to escape from them.

The terrified boatmen uttered exclamations of despair and dropped their
poles.

"Courage, my friends!" cried Michael; "courage! Fifty roubles for you if we
reach the right bank before the boats overtake us."

Incited by these words, the boatmen again worked manfully but it soon
become evident that they could not escape the Tartars.

It was scarcely probable that they would pass without attacking them. On the
contrary, there was everything to be feared from robbers such as these.

"Do not be afraid, Nadia," said Michael; "but be ready for anything."

"T am ready," replied Nadia.

"Even to leap into the water when I tell you?"

"Whenever you tell me."

"Have confidence in me, Nadia."

"T have, indeed!"

The Tartar boats were now only a hundred feet distant. They carried a
detachment of Bokharian soldiers, on their way to reconnoiter around Omsk.

The ferryboat was still two lengths from the shore. The boatmen redoubled
their efforts. Michael himself seized a pole and wielded it with superhuman
strength. If he could land the tarantass and horses, and dash off with them, there
was some chance of escaping the Tartars, who were not mounted.


But all their efforts were in vain. "Saryn na kitchou!" shouted the soldiers
from the first boat.

Michael recognized the Tartar war-cry, which is usually answered by lying
flat on the ground. As neither he nor the boatmen obeyed a volley was let fly,
and two of the horses were mortally wounded.

At the next moment a violent blow was felt. The boats had run into the
ferryboat.

"Come, Nadia!" cried Michael, ready to jump overboard.

The girl was about to follow him, when a blow from a lance struck him, and
he was thrown into the water. The current swept him away, his hand raised for an
instant above the waves, and then he disappeared.

Nadia uttered a cry, but before she had time to throw herself after him she
was seized and dragged into one of the boats. The boatmen were killed, the
ferryboat left to drift away, and the Tartars continued to descend the Irtych.


CHAPTER XIV MOTHER AND SON


OMSK is the official capital of Western Siberia. It is not the most important
city of the government of that name, for Tomsk has more inhabitants and is
larger. But it is at Omsk that the Governor-General of this the first half of Asiatic
Russia resides. Omsk, properly so called, is composed of two distinct towns: one
which is exclusively inhabited by the authorities and officials; the other more
especially devoted to the Siberian merchants, although, indeed, the trade of the
town is of small importance.

This city has about 12,000 to 13,000 inhabitants. It is defended by walls, but
these are merely of earth, and could afford only insufficient protection. The
Tartars, who were well aware of this fact, consequently tried at this period to
carry it by main force, and in this they succeeded, after an investment of a few
days.

The garrison of Omsk, reduced to two thousand men, resisted valiantly. But
driven back, little by little, from the mercantile portion of the place, they were
compelled to take refuge in the upper town.

It was there that the Governor-General, his officers, and soldiers had
entrenched themselves. They had made the upper quarter of Omsk a kind of
citadel, and hitherto they held out well in this species of improvised "kreml," but
without much hope of the promised succor. The Tartar troops, who were
descending the Irtych, received every day fresh reinforcements, and, what was
more serious, they were led by an officer, a traitor to his country, but a man of
much note, and of an audacity equal to any emergency. This man was Colonel
Ivan Ogareff.

Ivan Ogareff, terrible as any of the most savage Tartar chieftains, was an
educated soldier. Possessing on his mother's side some Mongolian blood, he
delighted in deceptive strategy and ambuscades, stopping short of nothing when
he desired to fathom some secret or to set some trap. Deceitful by nature, he
willingly had recourse to the vilest trickery; lying when occasion demanded,
excelling in the adoption of all disguises and in every species of deception.
Further, he was cruel, and had even acted as an executioner. Feofar-Khan
possessed in him a lieutenant well capable of seconding his designs in this
Savage wal.

When Michael Strogoff arrived on the banks of the Irtych, Ivan Ogareff was
already master of Omsk, and was pressing the siege of the upper quarter of the
town all the more eagerly because he must hasten to Tomsk, where the main


body of the Tartar army was concentrated.

Tomsk, in fact, had been taken by Feofar-Khan some days previously, and it
was thence that the invaders, masters of Central Siberia, were to march upon
Irkutsk.

Irkutsk was the real object of Ivan Ogareff. The plan of the traitor was to
reach the Grand Duke under a false name, to gain his confidence, and to deliver
into Tartar hands the town and the Grand Duke himself. With such a town, and
such a hostage, all Asiatic Siberia must necessarily fall into the hands of the
invaders. Now it was known that the Czar was acquainted with this conspiracy,
and that it was for the purpose of baffling it that a courier had been intrusted
with the important warning. Hence, therefore, the very stringent instructions
which had been given to the young courier to pass incognito through the invaded
district.

This mission he had so far faithfully performed, but now could he carry it to
a successful completion?

The blow which had struck Michael Strogoff was not mortal. By swimming
in a manner by which he had effectually concealed himself, he had reached the
right bank, where he fell exhausted among the bushes.

When he recovered his senses, he found himself in the cabin of a mujik, who
had picked him up and cared for him. For how long a time had he been the guest
of this brave Siberian? He could not guess. But when he opened his eyes he saw
the handsome bearded face bending over him, and regarding him with pitying
eyes. "Do not speak, little father," said the mujik, "Do not speak! Thou art still
too weak. I will tell thee where thou art and everything that has passed."

And the mujik related to Michael Strogoff the different incidents of the
struggle which he had witnessed--the attack upon the ferry by the Tartar boats,
the pillage of the tarantass, and the massacre of the boatmen.

But Michael Strogoff listened no longer, and slipping his hand under his
garment he felt the imperial letter still secured in his breast. He breathed a sigh
of relief.

But that was not all. "A young girl accompanied me," said he.

"They have not killed her," replied the mujik, anticipating the anxiety which
he read in the eyes of his guest. "They have carried her off in their boat, and
have continued the descent of Irtych. It is only one prisoner more to join the
many they are taking to Tomsk!"

Michael Strogoff was unable to reply. He pressed his hand upon his heart to
restrain its beating. But, notwithstanding these many trials, the sentiment of duty
mastered his whole soul. "Where am I?" asked he.

"Upon the right bank of the Irtych, only five versts from Omsk," replied the


mujik.

"What wound can I have received which could have thus prostrated me? It
was not a gunshot wound?"

"No; a lance-thrust in the head, now healing," replied the mujik. "After a few
days' rest, little father, thou wilt be able to proceed. Thou didst fall into the river;
but the Tartars neither touched nor searched thee; and thy purse is still in thy
pocket."

Michael Strogoff gripped the mujik's hand. Then, recovering himself with a
sudden effort, "Friend," said he, "how long have I been in thy hut?"

"Three days."

"Three days lost!"

"Three days hast thou lain unconscious."

"Hast thou a horse to sell me?"

"Thou wishest to go?"

"At once."

"I have neither horse nor carriage, little father. Where the Tartar has passed
there remains nothing!"

"Well, I will go on foot to Omsk to find a horse."

"A few more hours of rest, and thou wilt be in a better condition to pursue
thy journey."

"Not an hour!"

"Come now," replied the mujik, recognizing the fact that it was useless to
struggle against the will of his guest, "I will guide thee myself. Besides," he
added, "the Russians are still in great force at Omsk, and thou couldst, perhaps,
pass unperceived."

"Friend," replied Michael Strogoff, "Heaven reward thee for all thou hast
done for me!"

"Only fools expect reward on earth," replied the mujik.

Michael Strogoff went out of the hut. When he tried to walk he was seized
with such faintness that, without the assistance of the mujik, he would have
fallen; but the fresh air quickly revived him. He then felt the wound in his head,
the violence of which his fur cap had lessened. With the energy which he
possessed, he was not a man to succumb under such a trifle. Before his eyes lay
a single goal--far-distant Irkutsk. He must reach it! But he must pass through
Omsk without stopping there.

"God protect my mother and Nadia!" he murmured. "I have no longer the
right to think of them!"

Michael Strogoff and the mujik soon arrived in the mercantile quarter of the
lower town. The surrounding earthwork had been destroyed in many places, and


there were the breaches through which the marauders who followed the armies
of Feofar-Khan had penetrated. Within Omsk, in its streets and squares, the
Tartar soldiers swarmed like ants; but it was easy to see that a hand of iron
imposed upon them a discipline to which they were little accustomed. They
walked nowhere alone, but in armed groups, to defend themselves against
surprise.

In the chief square, transformed into a camp, guarded by many sentries,
2,000 Tartars bivouacked. The horses, picketed but still saddled, were ready to
start at the first order. Omsk could only be a temporary halting-place for this
Tartar cavalry, which preferred the rich plains of Eastern Siberia, where the
towns were more wealthy, and, consequently, pillage more profitable.

Above the mercantile town rose the upper quarter, which Ivan Ogareff,
notwithstanding several assaults vigorously made but bravely repelled, had not
yet been able to reduce. Upon its embattled walls floated the national colors of
Russia.

It was not without a legitimate pride that Michael Strogoff and his guide,
vowing fidelity, saluted them.

Michael Strogoff was perfectly acquainted with the town of Omsk, and he
took care to avoid those streets which were much frequented. This was not from
any fear of being recognized. In the town his old mother only could have called
him by name, but he had sworn not to see her, and he did not. Besides--and he
wished it with his whole heart--she might have fled into some quiet portion of
the steppe.

The mujik very fortunately knew a postmaster who, if well paid, would not
refuse at his request either to let or to sell a carriage or horses. There remained
the difficulty of leaving the town, but the breaches in the fortifications would, of
course, facilitate his departure.

The mujik was accordingly conducting his guest straight to the posting-
house, when, in a narrow street, Michael Strogoff, coming to a sudden stop
sprang behind a jutting wall.

"What is the matter?" asked the astonished mujik.

"Silence!" replied Michael, with his finger on his lips. At this moment a
detachment debouched from the principal square into the street which Michael
Strogoff and his companion had just been following.

At the head of the detachment, composed of twenty horsemen, was an officer
dressed in a very simple uniform. Although he glanced rapidly from one side to
the other he could not have seen Michael Strogoff, owing to his precipitous
retreat.

The detachment went at full trot into the narrow street. Neither the officer


nor his escort concerned themselves about the inhabitants. Several unlucky ones
had scarcely time to make way for their passage. There were a few half-stifled
cries, to which thrusts of the lance gave an instant reply, and the street was
immediately cleared.

When the escort had disappeared, "Who is that officer?" asked Michael
Strogoff. And while putting the question his face was pale as that of a corpse.

"It is Ivan Ogareff," replied the Siberian, in a deep voice which breathed
hatred.

"He!" cried Michael Strogoff, from whom the word escaped with a fury he
could not conquer. He had just recognized in this officer the traveler who had
struck him at the posting-house of Ichim. And, although he had only caught a
glimpse of him, it burst upon his mind, at the same time, that this traveler was
the old Zingari whose words he had overheard in the market place of Nijni-
Novgorod.

Michael Strogoff was not mistaken. The two men were one and the same. It
was under the garb of a Zingari, mingling with the band of Sangarre, that Ivan
Ogareff had been able to leave the town of Nijni-Novgorod, where he had gone
to seek his confidants. Sangarre and her Zingari, well paid spies, were absolutely
devoted to him. It was he who, during the night, on the fair-ground had uttered
that singular sentence, which Michael Strogoff could not understand; it was he
who was voyaging on board the Caucasus, with the whole of the Bohemian
band; it was he who, by this other route, from Kasan to Ichim, across the Urals,
had reached Omsk, where now he held supreme authority.

Ivan Ogareff had been barely three days at Omsk, and had it not been for
their fatal meeting at Ichim, and for the event which had detained him three days
on the banks of the Irtych, Michael Strogoff would have evidently beaten him on
the way to Irkutsk.

And who knows how many misfortunes would have been avoided in the
future! In any case--and now more than ever--Michael Strogoff must avoid Ivan
Ogareff, and contrive not to be seen. When the moment of encountering him face
to face should arrive, he knew how to meet it, even should the traitor be master
of the whole of Siberia.

The mujik and Michael resumed their way and arrived at the posting-house.
To leave Omsk by one of the breaches would not be difficult after nightfall. As
for purchasing a carriage to replace the tarantass, that was impossible. There
were none to be let or sold. But what want had Michael Strogoff now for a
carriage? Was he not alone, alas? A horse would suffice him; and, very
fortunately, a horse could be had. It was an animal of strength and mettle, and
Michael Strogoff, accomplished horseman as he was, could make good use of it.


It was four o'clock in the afternoon. Michael Strogoff, compelled to wait till
nightfall, in order to pass the fortifications, but not desiring to show himself,
remained in the posting-house, and there partook of food.

There was a great crowd in the public room. They were talking of the
expected arrival of a corps of Muscovite troops, not at Omsk, but at Tomsk--a
corps intended to recapture that town from the Tartars of Feofar-Khan.

Michael Strogoff lent an attentive ear, but took no part in the conversation.
Suddenly a cry made him tremble, a cry which penetrated to the depths of his
soul, and these two words rushed into his ear: "My son!"

His mother, the old woman Marfa, was before him! Trembling, she smiled
upon him. She stretched forth her arms to him. Michael Strogoff arose. He was
about to throw himself--

The thought of duty, the serious danger for his mother and himself in this
unfortunate meeting, suddenly stopped him, and such was his command over
himself that not a muscle of his face moved. There were twenty people in the
public room. Among them were, perhaps, spies, and was it not known in the
town that the son of Marfa Strogoff belonged to the corps of the couriers of the
Czar?

Michael Strogoff did not move.

"Michael!" cried his mother.

"Who are you, my good lady?" Michael Strogoff stammered, unable to speak
in his usual firm tone.

"Who am I, thou askest! Dost thou no longer know thy mother?"

"You are mistaken," coldly replied Michael Strogoff. "A resemblance
deceives you."

The old Marfa went up to him, and, looking straight into his eyes, said,
"Thou art not the son of Peter and Marfa Strogoff?"

Michael Strogoff would have given his life to have locked his mother in his
arms; but if he yielded it was all over with him, with her, with his mission, with
his oath! Completely master of himself, he closed his eyes, in order not to see
the inexpressible anguish which agitated the revered countenance of his mother.
He drew back his hands, in order not to touch those trembling hands which
sought him. "I do not know in truth what it is you say, my good woman," he
replied, stepping back.

"Michael!" again cried his aged mother.

"My name is not Michael. I never was your son! I am Nicholas Korpanoff, a
merchant at Irkutsk."

And suddenly he left the public room, whilst for the last time the words re-
echoed, "My son! my son!"


Michael Strogoff, by a desperate effort, had gone. He did not see his old
mother, who had fallen back almost inanimate upon a bench. But when the
postmaster hastened to assist her, the aged woman raised herself. Suddenly a
thought occurred to her. She denied by her son! It was not possible. As for being
herself deceived, and taking another for him, equally impossible. It was certainly
her son whom she had just seen; and if he had not recognized her it was because
he would not, it was because he ought not, it was because he had some cogent
reasons for acting thus! And then, her mother's feelings arising within her, she
had only one thought--"Can I, unwittingly, have ruined him?"

"IT am mad," she said to her interrogators. "My eyes have deceived me! This
young man is not my child. He had not his voice. Let us think no more of it; if
we do I shall end by finding him everywhere."

Less than ten minutes afterwards a Tartar officer appeared in the posting-
house. "Marfa Strogoff?" he asked.

"Tt is I," replied the old woman, in a tone so calm, and with a face so tranquil,
that those who had witnessed the meeting with her son would not have known
her.

"Come," said the officer.

Marfa Strogoff, with firm step, followed the Tartar. Some moments
afterwards she found herself in the chief square in the presence of Ivan Ogareff,
to whom all the details of this scene had been immediately reported.

Ogareff, suspecting the truth, interrogated the old Siberian woman. "Thy
name?" he asked in a rough voice.

"Marfa Strogoff."

"Thou hast a son?"

"Yes."

"He is a courier of the Czar?"

"Yes."

"Where is he?"

"At Moscow."

"Thou hast no news of him?"

"No news."

"Since how long?"

"Since two months."

"Who, then, was that young man whom thou didst call thy son a few
moments ago at the posting-house?"

"A young Siberian whom I took for him," replied Marfa Strogoff. "This is the
tenth man in whom I have thought I recognized my son since the town has been
so full of strangers. I think I see him everywhere."


"So this young man was not Michael Strogoff?"

"Tt was not Michael Strogoff."

"Dost thou know, old woman, that I can torture thee until thou avowest the
truth?"

"I have spoken the truth, and torture will not cause me to alter my words in
any way."

"This Siberian was not Michael Strogoff?" asked a second time Ivan Ogareff.

"No, it was not he," replied a second time Marfa Strogoff. "Do you think that
for anything in the world I would deny a son whom God has given me?"

Ivan Ogareff regarded with an evil eye the old woman who braved him to the
face. He did not doubt but that she had recognized her son in this young
Siberian. Now if this son had first renounced his mother, and if his mother
renounced him in her turn, it could occur only from the most weighty motive.
Ogareff had therefore no doubt that the pretended Nicholas Korpanoff was
Michael Strogoff, courier of the Czar, seeking concealment under a false name,
and charged with some mission which it would have been important for him to
know. He therefore at once gave orders for his pursuit. Then "Let this woman be
conducted to Tomsk," he said.

While the soldiers brutally dragged her off, he added between his teeth,
"When the moment arrives I shall know how to make her speak, this old
sorceress!"


CHAPTER XV THE MARSHES OF THE BARABA

IT was fortunate that Michael Strogoff had left the posting-house so
promptly. The orders of Ivan Ogareff had been immediately transmitted to all the
approaches of the city, and a full description of Michael sent to all the various
commandants, in order to prevent his departure from Omsk. But he had already
passed through one of the breaches in the wall; his horse was galloping over the
steppe, and the chances of escape were in his favor.

It was on the 29th of July, at eight o'clock in the evening, that Michael
Strogoff had left Omsk. This town is situated about halfway between Moscow
and Irkutsk, where it was necessary that he should arrive within ten days if he
wished to get ahead of the Tartar columns. It was evident that the unlucky
chance which had brought him into the presence of his mother had betrayed his
incognito. Ivan Ogareff was no longer ignorant of the fact that a courier of the
Czar had just passed Omsk, taking the direction of Irkutsk. The dispatches which
this courier bore must have been of immense importance. Michael Strogoff
knew, therefore, that every effort would be made to capture him.


But what he did not know, and could not know, was that Marfa Strogoff was
in the hands of Ivan Ogareff, and that she was about to atone, perhaps with her
life, for that natural exhibition of her feelings which she had been unable to
restrain when she suddenly found herself in the presence of her son. And it was
fortunate that he was ignorant of it. Could he have withstood this fresh trial?

Michael Strogoff urged on his horse, imbuing him with all his own feverish
impatience, requiring of him one thing only, namely, to bear him rapidly to the
next posting-house, where he could be exchanged for a quicker conveyance.

At midnight he had cleared fifty miles, and halted at the station of
Koulikovo. But there, as he had feared, he found neither horses nor carriages.
Several Tartar detachments had passed along the highway of the steppe.
Everything had been stolen or requisitioned both in the villages and in the
posting-houses. It was with difficulty that Michael Strogoff was even able to
obtain some refreshment for his horse and himself.

It was of great importance, therefore, to spare his horse, for he could not tell
when or how he might be able to replace it. Desiring, however, to put the
greatest possible distance between himself and the horsemen who had no doubt
been dispatched in pursuit, he resolved to push on. After one hour's rest he
resumed his course across the steppe.

Hitherto the weather had been propitious for his journey. The temperature
was endurable. The nights at this time of the year are very short, and as they are
lighted by the moon, the route over the steppe is practicable. Michael Strogoff,
moreover, was a man certain of his road and devoid of doubt or hesitation, and in
spite of the melancholy thoughts which possessed him he had preserved his
clearness of mind, and made for his destined point as though it were visible upon
the horizon. When he did halt for a moment at some turn in the road it was to
breathe his horse. Now he would dismount to ease his steed for a moment, and
again he would place his ear to the ground to listen for the sound of galloping
horses upon the steppe. Nothing arousing his suspicions, he resumed his way.

On the 30th of July, at nine o'clock in the morning, Michael Strogoff passed
through the station of Touroumoff and entered the swampy district of the Baraba.

There, for a distance of three hundred versts, the natural obstacles would be
extremely great. He knew this, but he also knew that he would certainly
surmount them.

These vast marshes of the Baraba, form the reservoir to all the rain-water
which finds no outlet either towards the Obi or towards the Irtych. The soil of
this vast depression is entirely argillaceous, and therefore impermeable, so that
the waters remain there and make of it a region very difficult to cross during the
hot season. There, however, lies the way to Irkutsk, and it is in the midst of


ponds, pools, lakes, and swamps, from which the sun draws poisonous
exhalations, that the road winds, and entails upon the traveler the greatest fatigue
and danger.

Michael Strogoff spurred his horse into the midst of a grassy prairie,
differing greatly from the close-cropped sod of the steppe, where feed the
immense Siberian herds. The grass here was five or six feet in height, and had
made room for swamp-plants, to which the dampness of the place, assisted by
the heat of summer, had given giant proportions. These were principally canes
and rushes, which formed a tangled network, an impenetrable undergrowth,
sprinkled everywhere with a thousand flowers remarkable for the brightness of
their color.

Michael Strogoff, galloping amongst this undergrowth of cane, was no
longer visible from the swamps which bordered the road. The tall grass rose
above him, and his track was indicated only by the flight of innumerable aquatic
birds, which rose from the side of the road and dispersed into the air in
screaming flocks.

The way, however, was clearly traceable. Now it would lie straight between
the dense thicket of marsh-plants; again it would follow the winding shores of
vast pools, some of which, several versts in length and breadth, deserve the name
of lakes. In other localities the stagnant waters through which the road lay had
been avoided, not by bridges, but by tottering platforms ballasted with thick
layers of clay, whose joists shook like a too weak plank thrown across an abyss.
Some of these platforms extended over three hundred feet, and travelers by
tarantass, when crossing them have experienced a nausea like sea-sickness.

Michael Strogoff, whether the soil beneath his feet was solid or whether it
sank under him, galloped on without halt, leaping the space between the rotten
joists; but however fast they traveled the horse and the horseman were unable to
escape from the sting of the two-winged insects which infest this marshy
country.

Travelers who are obliged to cross the Baraba during the summer take care to
provide themselves with masks of horse-hair, to which is attached a coat of mail
of very fine wire, which covers their shoulders. Notwithstanding these
precautions, there are few who come out of these marshes without having their
faces, necks, and hands covered with red spots. The atmosphere there seems to
bristle with fine needles, and one would almost say that a knight's armor would
not protect him against the darts of these dipterals. It is a dreary region, which
man dearly disputes with tipulae, gnats, mosquitos, horse-flies, and millions of
microscopic insects which are not visible to the naked eye; but, although they are
not seen, they make themselves felt by their intolerable stinging, to which the


most callous Siberian hunters have never been able to inure themselves.

Michael Strogoff's horse, stung by these venomous insects, sprang forward
as if the rowels of a thousand spurs had pierced his flanks. Mad with rage, he
tore along over verst after verst with the speed of an express train, lashing his
sides with his tail, seeking by the rapidity of his pace an alleviation of his
torture.

It required as good a horseman as Michael Strogoff not to be thrown by the
plungings of his horse, and the sudden stops and bounds which he made to
escape from the stings of his persecutors. Having become insensible, so to speak,
to physical suffering, possessed only with the one desire to arrive at his
destination at whatever cost, he saw during this mad race only one thing--that the
road flew rapidly behind him.

Who would have thought that this district of the Baraba, so unhealthy during
the summer, could have afforded an asylum for human beings? Yet it did so.
Several Siberian hamlets appeared from time to time among the giant canes.
Men, women, children, and old men, clad in the skins of beasts, their faces
covered with hardened blisters of skin, pastured their poor herds of sheep. In
order to preserve the animals from the attack of the insects, they drove them to
the leeward of fires of green wood, which were kept burning night and day, and
the pungent smoke of which floated over the vast swamp.

When Michael Strogoff perceived that his horse, tired out, was on the point
of succumbing, he halted at one of these wretched hamlets, and there, forgetting
his own fatigue, he himself rubbed the wounds of the poor animal with hot
grease according to the Siberian custom; then he gave him a good feed; and it
was only after he had well groomed and provided for him that he thought of
himself, and recruited his strength by a hasty meal of bread and meat and a glass
of kwass. One hour afterwards, or at the most two, he resumed with all speed the
interminable road to Irkutsk.

On the 30th of July, at four o'clock in the afternoon, Michael Strogoff,
insensible of every fatigue, arrived at Elamsk. There it became necessary to give
a night's rest to his horse. The brave animal could no longer have continued the
journey. At Elamsk, as indeed elsewhere, there existed no means of transport,--
for the same reasons as at the previous villages, neither carriages nor horses were
to be had.

Michael Strogoff resigned himself therefore to pass the night at Elamsk, to
give his horse twelve hours' rest. He recalled the instructions which had been
given to him at Moscow--to cross Siberia incognito, to arrive at Irkutsk, but not
to sacrifice success to the rapidity of the journey; and consequently it was
necessary that he should husband the sole means of transport which remained to


him.

On the morrow, Michael Strogoff left Elamsk at the moment when the first
Tartar scouts were signaled ten versts behind upon the road to the Baraba, and he
plunged again into the swampy region. The road was level, which made it easy,
but very tortuous, and therefore long. It was impossible, moreover, to leave it,
and to strike a straight line across that impassable network of pools and bogs.

On the next day, the 1st of August, eighty miles farther, Michael Strogoff
arrived at midday at the town of Spaskoe, and at two o'clock he halted at
Pokrowskoe. His horse, jaded since his departure from Elamsk, could not have
taken a single step more.

There Michael Strogoff was again compelled to lose, for necessary rest, the
end of that day and the entire night; but starting again on the following morning,
and still traversing the semi-inundated soil, on the 2nd of August, at four o'clock
in the afternoon, after a stage of fifty miles he reached Kamsk.

The country had changed. This little village of Kamsk lies, like an island,
habitable and healthy, in the midst of the uninhabitable district. It is situated in
the very center of the Baraba. The emigration caused by the Tartar invasion had
not yet depopulated this little town of Kamsk. Its inhabitants probably fancied
themselves safe in the center of the Baraba, whence at least they thought they
would have time to flee if they were directly menaced.

Michael Strogoff, although exceedingly anxious for news, could ascertain
nothing at this place. It would have been rather to him that the Governor would
have addressed himself had he known who the pretended merchant of Irkutsk
really was. Kamsk, in fact, by its very situation seemed to be outside the
Siberian world and the grave events which troubled it.

Besides, Michael Strogoff showed himself little, if at all. To be unperceived
was not now enough for him: he would have wished to be invisible. The
experience of the past made him more and more circumspect in the present and
the future. Therefore he secluded himself, and not caring to traverse the streets
of the village, he would not even leave the inn at which he had halted.

As for his horse, he did not even think of exchanging him for another animal.
He had become accustomed to this brave creature. He knew to what extent he
could rely upon him. In buying him at Omsk he had been lucky, and in taking
him to the postmaster the generous mujik had rendered him a great service.
Besides, if Michael Strogoff had already become attached to his horse, the horse
himself seemed to become inured, by degrees, to the fatigue of such a journey,
and provided that he got several hours of repose daily, his rider might hope that
he would carry him beyond the invaded provinces.

So, during the evening and night of the 2nd of August, Michael Strogoff


remained confined to his inn, at the entrance of the town; which was little
frequented and out of the way of the importunate and curious.

Exhausted with fatigue, he went to bed after having seen that his horse
lacked nothing; but his sleep was broken. What he had seen since his departure
from Moscow showed him the importance of his mission. The rising was an
extremely serious one, and the treachery of Ogareff made it still more
formidable. And when his eyes fell upon the letter bearing upon it the authority
of the imperial seal--the letter which, no doubt, contained the remedy for so
many evils, the safety of all this war-ravaged country--Michael Strogoff felt
within himself a fierce desire to dash on across the steppe, to accomplish the
distance which separated him from Irkutsk as the crow would fly it, to be an
eagle that he might overtop all obstacles, to be a hurricane that he might sweep
through the air at a hundred versts an hour, and to be at last face to face with the
Grand Duke, and to exclaim: "Your highness, from his Majesty the Czar!"

On the next morning at six o'clock, Michael Strogoff started off again.
Thanks to his extreme prudence this part of the journey was signalized by no
incident whatever. At Oubinsk he gave his horse a whole night's rest, for he
wished on the next day to accomplish the hundred versts which lie between
Oubinsk and Ikoulskoe without halting. He started therefore at dawn; but
unfortunately the Baraba proved more detestable than ever.

In fact, between Oubinsk and Kamakore the very heavy rains of some
previous weeks were retained by this shallow depression as in a water-tight
bowl. There was, for a long distance, no break in the succession of swamps,
pools, and lakes. One of these lakes--large enough to warrant its geographical
nomenclature--Tchang, Chinese in name, had to be coasted for more than twenty
versts, and this with the greatest difficulty. Hence certain delays occurred, which
all the impatience of Michael Strogoff could not avoid. He had been well
advised in not taking a carriage at Kamsk, for his horse passed places which
would have been impracticable for a conveyance on wheels.

In the evening, at nine o'clock, Michael Strogoff arrived at Ikoulskoe, and
halted there over night. In this remote village of the Baraba news of the war was
utterly wanting. From its situation, this part of the province, lying in the fork
formed by the two Tartar columns which had bifurcated, one upon Omsk and the
other upon Tomsk, had hitherto escaped the horrors of the invasion.

But the natural obstacles were now about to disappear, for, if he experienced
no delay, Michael Strogoff should on the morrow be free of the Baraba and
arrive at Kolyvan. There he would be within eighty miles of Tomsk. He would
then be guided by circumstances, and very probably he would decide to go
around Tomsk, which, if the news were true, was occupied by Feofar-Khan.


But if the small towns of Ikoulskoe and Karguinsk, which he passed on the
next day, were comparatively quiet, owing to their position in the Baraba, was it
not to be dreaded that, upon the right banks of the Obi, Michael Strogoff would
have much more to fear from man? It was probable. However, should it become
necessary, he would not hesitate to abandon the beaten path to Irkutsk. To
journey then across the steppe he would, no doubt, run the risk of finding
himself without supplies. There would be, in fact, no longer a well-marked road.
Still, there must be no hesitation.

Finally, towards half past three in the afternoon, Michael Strogoff left the last
depressions of the Baraba, and the dry and hard soil of Siberia rang out once
more beneath his horse's hoofs.

He had left Moscow on the 15th of July. Therefore on this day, the 5th of
August, including more than seventy hours lost on the banks of the Irtych,
twenty days had gone by since his departure.

One thousand miles still separated him from Irkutsk.


CHAPTER XVI A FINAL EFFORT


MICHAEL'S fear of meeting the Tartars in the plains beyond the Baraba was
by no means ungrounded. The fields, trodden down by horses' hoofs, afforded
but too clear evidence that their hordes had passed that way; the same, indeed,
might be said of these barbarians as of the Turks: "Where the Turk goes, no grass
gTOWS."

Michael saw at once that in traversing this country the greatest caution was
necessary. Wreaths of smoke curling upwards on the horizon showed that huts
and hamlets were still burning. Had these been fired by the advance guard, or
had the Emir's army already advanced beyond the boundaries of the province?
Was Feofar-Khan himself in the government of Yeniseisk? Michael could settle
on no line of action until these questions were answered. Was the country so
deserted that he could not discover a single Siberian to enlighten him?

Michael rode on for two versts without meeting a human being. He looked
carefully for some house which had not been deserted. Every one was tenantless.

One hut, however, which he could just see between the trees, was still
smoking. As he approached he perceived, at some yards from the ruins of the
building, an old man surrounded by weeping children. A woman still young,
evidently his daughter and the mother of the poor children, kneeling on the
ground, was gazing on the scene of desolation. She had at her breast a baby but a
few months old; shortly she would have not even that nourishment to give it.
Ruin and desolation were all around!

Michael approached the old man.

"Will you answer me a few questions?" he asked.

"Speak," replied the old man.

"Have the Tartars passed this way?"

"Yes, for my house is in flames."

"Was it an army or a detachment?"

"An army, for, as far as eye can reach, our fields are laid waste."

"Commanded by the Emir?"

"By the Emir; for the Obi's waters are red."

"Has Feofar-Khan entered Tomsk?"

"He has."

"Do you know if his men have entered Kolyvan?"

"No; for Kolyvan does not yet burn."

"Thanks, friend. Can I aid you and yours?"


"No."

"Good-by."

"Farewell."

And Michael, having presented five and twenty roubles to the unfortunate
woman, who had not even strength to thank him, put spurs to his horse once
more.

One thing he knew; he must not pass through Tomsk. To go to Kolyvan,
which the Tartars had not yet reached, was possible. Yes, that is what he must
do; there he must prepare himself for another long stage. There was nothing for
it but, having crossed the Obi, to take the Irkutsk road and avoid Tomsk.

This new route decided on, Michael must not delay an instant. Nor did he,
but, putting his horse into a steady gallop, he took the road towards the left bank
of the Obi, which was still forty versts distant. Would there be a ferry boat there,
or should he, finding that the Tartars had destroyed all the boats, be obliged to
swim across?

As to his horse, it was by this time pretty well worn out, and Michael
intended to make it perform this stage only, and then to exchange it for a fresh
one at Kolyvan. Kolyvan would be like a fresh starting point, for on leaving that
town his journey would take a new form. So long as he traversed a devastated
country the difficulties must be very great; but if, having avoided Tomsk, he
could resume the road to Irkutsk across the province of Yeniseisk, which was not
yet laid waste, he would finish his journey in a few days.

Night came on, bringing with it refreshing coolness after the heat of the day.
At midnight the steppe was profoundly dark. The sound of the horses's hoofs
alone was heard on the road, except when, every now and then, its master spoke
a few encouraging words. In such darkness as this great care was necessary lest
he should leave the road, bordered by pools and streams, tributaries of the Obi.
Michael therefore advanced as quickly as was consistent with safety. He trusted
no less to the excellence of his eyes, which penetrated the gloom, than to the
well-proved sagacity of his horse.

Just as Michael dismounted to discover the exact direction of the road, he
heard a confused murmuring sound from the west. It was like the noise of horses'
hoofs at some distance on the parched ground. Michael listened attentively,
putting his ear to the ground.

"It is a detachment of cavalry coming by the road from Omsk," he said to
himself. "They are marching very quickly, for the noise is increasing. Are they
Russians or Tartars?"

Michael again listened. "Yes," said he, "they are at a sharp trot. My horse
cannot outstrip them. If they are Russians I will join them; if Tartars I must avoid


them. But how? Where can I hide in this steppe?"

He gave a look around, and, through the darkness, discovered a confused
mass at a hundred paces before him on the left of the road. "There is a copse!" he
exclaimed. "To take refuge there is to run the risk of being caught, if they are in
search of me; but I have no choice."

In a few moments Michael, dragging his horse by the bridle, reached a little
larch wood, through which the road lay. Beyond this it was destitute of trees, and
wound among bogs and pools, separated by dwarfed bushes, whins, and heather.
The ground on either side was quite impracticable, and the detachment must
necessarily pass through the wood. They were pursuing the high road to Irkutsk.
Plunging in about forty feet, he was stopped by a stream running under the
brushwood. But the shadow was so deep that Michael ran no risk of being seen,
unless the wood should be carefully searched. He therefore led his horse to the
stream and fastened him to a tree, returning to the edge of the road to listen and
ascertain with what sort of people he had to do.

Michael had scarcely taken up his position behind a group of larches when a
confused light appeared, above which glared brighter lights waving about in the
shadow.

"Torches!" said he to himself. And he drew quickly back, gliding like a
savage into the thickest underwood.

As they approached the wood the horses' pace was slackened. The horsemen
were probably lighting up the road with the intention of examining every turn.

Michael feared this, and instinctively drew near to the bank of the stream,
ready to plunge in if necessary.

Arrived at the top of the wood, the detachment halted. The horsemen
dismounted. There were about fifty. A dozen of them carried torches, lighting up
the road.

By watching their preparations Michael found to his joy that the detachment
were not thinking of visiting the copse, but only bivouacking near, to rest their
horses and allow the men to take some refreshment. The horses were soon
unsaddled, and began to graze on the thick grass which carpeted the ground. The
men meantime stretched themselves by the side of the road, and partook of the
provisions they produced from their knapsacks.

Michael's self-possession had never deserted him, and creeping amongst the
high grass he endeavored not only to examine the new-comers, but to hear what
they said. It was a detachment from Omsk, composed of Usbeck horsemen, a
race of the Mongolian type. These men, well built, above the medium height,
rough, and wild-featured, wore on their heads the "talpak," or black sheep-skin
cap, and on their feet yellow high-heeled boots with turned-up toes, like the


shoes of the Middle Ages. Their tunics were close-fitting, and confined at the
waist by a leathern belt braided with red. They were armed defensively with a
shield, and offensively with a curved sword, and a flintlock musket slung at the
saddle-bow. From their shoulders hung gay-colored cloaks.

The horses, which were feeding at liberty at the edge of the wood, were, like
their masters, of the Usbeck race. These animals are rather smaller than the
Turcomanian horses, but are possessed of remarkable strength, and know no
other pace than the gallop.

This detachment was commanded by a "pendja-baschi"; that is to say, a
commander of fifty men, having under him a "deh-baschi," or simple
commander of ten men. These two officers wore helmets and half coats-of-mail;
little trumpets fastened to their saddle-bows were the distinctive signs of their
rank.

The pendja-baschi had been obliged to let his men rest, fatigued with a long
stage. He and the second officer, smoking "beng," the leaf which forms the base
of the "has-chisch," strolled up and down the wood, so that Michael Strogoff
without being seen, could catch and understand their conversation, which was
spoken in the Tartar language.

Michael's attention was singularly excited by their very first words. It was of
him they were speaking.

"This courier cannot be much in advance of us," said the pendja-baschi;
"and, on the other hand, it is absolutely impossible that he can have followed any
other route than that of the Baraba."

"Who knows if he has left Omsk?" replied the deh-baschi. "Perhaps he is still
hidden in the town."

"That is to be wished, certainly. Colonel Ogareff would have no fear then
that the dispatches he bears should ever reach their destination."

"They say that he is a native, a Siberian," resumed the deh-baschi. "If so, he
must be well acquainted with the country, and it is possible that he has left the
Irkutsk road, depending on rejoining it later."

"But then we should be in advance of him," answered the pendja-baschi; "for
we left Omsk within an hour after his departure, and have since followed the
shortest road with all the speed of our horses. He has either remained in Omsk,
or we shall arrive at Tomsk before him, so as to cut him off; in either case he will
not reach Irkutsk."

"A rugged woman, that old Siberian, who is evidently his mother," said the
deh-baschi.

At this remark Michael's heart beat violently.

"Yes," answered the pendja-baschi. "She stuck to it well that the pretended


merchant was not her son, but it was too late. Colonel Ogareff was not to be
taken in; and, as he said, he will know how to make the old witch speak when
the time comes."

These words were so many dagger-thrusts for Michael. He was known to be
a courier of the Czar! A detachment of horsemen on his track could not fail to
cut him off. And, worst of all, his mother was in the hands of the Tartars, and the
cruel Ogareff had undertaken to make her speak when he wished!

Michael well knew that the brave Siberian would sacrifice her life for him.
He had fancied that he could not hate Ivan Ogareff more, yet a fresh tide of hate
now rose in his heart. The wretch who had betrayed his country now threatened
to torture his mother.

The conversation between the two officers continued, and Michael
understood that an engagement was imminent in the neighborhood of Kolyvan,
between the Muscovite troops coming from the north and the Tartars. A small
Russian force of two thousand men, reported to have reached the lower course of
the Obi, were advancing by forced marches towards Tomsk. If such was the
case, this force, which would soon find itself engaged with the main body of
Feofar-Khan's army, would be inevitably overwhelmed, and the Irkutsk road
would be in the entire possession of the invaders.

As to himself, Michael learnt, by some words from the pendja-baschi, that a
price was set on his head, and that orders had been given to take him, dead or
alive.

It was necessary, therefore, to get the start of the Usbeck horsemen on the
Irkutsk road, and put the Obi between himself and them. But to do that, he must
escape before the camp was broken up.

His determination taken, Michael prepared to execute it.

Indeed, the halt would not be prolonged, and the pendja-baschi did not intend
to give his men more than an hour's rest, although their horses could not have
been changed for fresh ones since Omsk, and must be as much fatigued as that of
Michael Strogoff.

There was not a moment to lose. It was within an hour of morning. It was
needful to profit by the darkness to leave the little wood and dash along the road;
but although night favored it the success of such a flight appeared to be almost
impossible.

Not wishing to do anything at random, Michael took time for reflection,
carefully weighing the chances so as to take the best. From the situation of the
place the result was this--that he could not escape through the back of the wood,
the stream which bordered it being not only deep, but very wide and muddy.
Beneath this thick water was a slimy bog, on which the foot could not rest. There


was only one way open, the high-road. To endeavor to reach it by creeping round
the edge of the wood, without attracting attention, and then to gallop at headlong
speed, required all the remaining strength and energy of his noble steed. Too
probably it would fall dead on reaching the banks of the Obi, when, either by
boat or by swimming, he must cross this important river. This was what Michael
had before him.

His energy and courage increased in sight of danger.

His life, his mission, his country, perhaps the safety of his mother, were at
stake. He could not hesitate.

There was not a moment to be lost. Already there was a slight movement
among the men of the detachment. A few horsemen were strolling up and down
the road in front of the wood. The rest were still lying at the foot of the trees, but
their horses were gradually penetrating towards the center of the wood.

Michael had at first thought of seizing one of these horses, but he recollected
that, of course, they would be as fatigued as his own. It was better to trust to his
own brave steed, which had already rendered him such important service. The
good animal, hidden behind a thicket, had escaped the sight of the Usbecks.
They, besides, had not penetrated so far into the wood.

Michael crawled up to his horse through the grass, and found him lying
down. He patted and spoke gently to him, and managed to raise him without
noise. Fortunately, the torches were entirely consumed, and now went out, the
darkness being still profound under shelter of the larches. After replacing the bit,
Michael looked to his girths and stirrups, and began to lead his horse quietly
away. The intelligent animal followed his master without even making the least
neigh.

A few Usbeck horses raised their heads, and began to wander towards the
edge of the wood. Michael held his revolver in his hand, ready to blow out the
brains of the first Tartar who should approach him. But happily the alarm was
not given, and he was able to gain the angle made by the wood where it joined
the road.

To avoid being seen, Michael's intention was not to mount until after turning
a corner some two hundred feet from the wood. Unfortunately, just at the
moment that he was issuing from the wood, an Usbeck's horse, scenting him,
neighed and began to trot along the road. His master ran to catch him, and seeing
a shadowy form moving in the dim light, "Look out!" he shouted.

At the cry, all the men of the bivouac jumped up, and ran to seize their
horses. Michael leaped on his steed, and galloped away. The two officers of the
detachment urged on their men to follow.

Michael heard a report, and felt a ball pass through his tunic. Without turning


his head, without replying, he spurred on, and, clearing the brushwood with a
tremendous bound, he galloped at full speed toward the Obi.

The Usbecks' horses being unsaddled gave him a small start, but in less than
two minutes he heard the tramp of several horses gradually gaining on him.

Day was now beginning to break, and objects at some distance were
becoming visible. Michael turned his head, and perceived a horseman rapidly
approaching him. It was the deh-baschi. Being better mounted, this officer had
distanced his detachment.

Without drawing rein, Michael extended his revolver, and took a moment's
aim. The Usbeck officer, hit in the breast, rolled on the ground.

But the other horsemen followed him closely, and without waiting to assist
the deh-baschi, exciting each other by their shouts, digging their spurs into their
horses' sides, they gradually diminished the distance between themselves and
Michael.

For half an hour only was the latter able to keep out of range of the Tartars,
but he well knew that his horse was becoming weaker, and dreaded every instant
that he would stumble never to rise again.

It was now light, although the sun had not yet risen above the horizon. Two
versts distant could be seen a pale line bordered by a few trees.

This was the Obi, which flows from the southwest to the northeast, the
surface almost level with the ground, its bed being but the steppe itself.

Several times shots were fired at Michael, but without hitting him, and
several times too he discharged his revolver on those of the soldiers who pressed
him too closely. Each time an Usbeck rolled on the ground, midst cries of rage
from his companions. But this pursuit could only terminate to Michael's
disadvantage. His horse was almost exhausted. He managed to reach the bank of
the river. The Usbeck detachment was now not more than fifty paces behind
him.

The Obi was deserted--not a boat of any description which could take him
over the water!

"Courage, my brave horse!" cried Michael. "Come! A last effort!" And he
plunged into the river, which here was half a verst in width.

It would have been difficult to stand against the current--indeed, Michael's
horse could get no footing. He must therefore swim across the river, although it
was rapid as a torrent. Even to attempt it showed Michael's marvelous courage.
The soldiers reached the bank, but hesitated to plunge in.

The pendja-baschi seized his musket and took aim at Michael, whom he
could see in the middle of the stream. The shot was fired, and Michael's horse,
struck in the side, was borne away by the current.


His master, speedily disentangling himself from his stirrups, struck out
boldly for the shore. In the midst of a hailstorm of balls he managed to reach the
opposite side, and disappeared in the rushes.


CHAPTER XVII THE RIVALS


MICHAEL was in comparative safety, though his situation was still terrible.
Now that the faithful animal who had so bravely borne him had met his death in
the waters of the river, how was he to continue his journey?

He was on foot, without provisions, in a country devastated by the invasion,
overrun by the Emir's scouts, and still at a considerable distance from the place
he was striving to reach. "By Heaven, I will get there!" he exclaimed, in reply to
all the reasons for faltering. "God will protect our sacred Russia."

Michael was out of reach of the Usbeck horsemen. They had not dared to
pursue him through the river.

Once more on solid ground Michael stopped to consider what he should do
next. He wished to avoid Tomsk, now occupied by the Tartar troops.
Nevertheless, he must reach some town, or at least a post-house, where he could
procure a horse. A horse once found, he would throw himself out of the beaten
track, and not again take to the Irkutsk road until in the neighborhood of
Krasnoiarsk. From that place, if he were quick, he hoped to find the way still
open, and he intended to go through the Lake Baikal provinces in a southeasterly
direction.

Michael began by going eastward. By following the course of the Obi two
versts further, he reached a picturesque little town lying on a small hill. A few
churches, with Byzantine cupolas colored green and gold, stood up against the
gray sky. This is Kolyvan, where the officers and people employed at Kamsk and
other towns take refuge during the summer from the unhealthy climate of the
Baraba. According to the latest news obtained by the Czar's courier, Kolyvan
could not be yet in the hands of the invaders. The Tartar troops, divided into two
columns, had marched to the left on Omsk, to the right on Tomsk, neglecting the
intermediate country.

Michael Strogoff's plan was simply this--to reach Kolyvan before the arrival
of the Usbeck horsemen, who would ascend the other bank of the Obi to the
ferry. There he would procure clothes and a horse, and resume the road to
Irkutsk across the southern steppe.

It was now three o'clock in the morning. The neighborhood of Kolyvan was
very still, and appeared to have been totally abandoned. The country population
had evidently fled to the northwards, to the province of Yeniseisk, dreading the
invasion, which they could not resist.

Michael was walking at a rapid pace towards Kolyvan when distant firing


struck his ear. He stopped, and clearly distinguished the dull roar of artillery, and
above it a crisp rattle which could not be mistaken.

"It is cannon and musketry!" said he. "The little Russian body is engaged
with the Tartar army! Pray Heaven that I may arrive at Kolyvan before them!"

The firing became gradually louder, and soon to the left of Kolyvan a mist
collected--not smoke, but those great white clouds produced by discharges of
artillery.

The Usbeck horsemen stopped on the left of the Obi, to await the result of
the battle. From them Michael had nothing to fear as he hastened towards the
town.

In the meanwhile the firing increased, and became sensibly nearer. It was no
longer a confused roar, but distinct reports. At the same time the smoke partially
cleared, and it became evident that the combatants were rapidly moving
southwards. It appeared that Kolyvan was to be attacked on the north side. But
were the Russians defending it or the Tartars? It being impossible to decide this,
Michael became greatly perplexed.

He was not more than half a verst from Kolyvan when he observed flames
shooting up among the houses of the town, and the steeple of a church fell in the
midst of clouds of smoke and fire. Was the struggle, then, in Kolyvan? Michael
was compelled to think so. It was evident that Russians and Tartars were fighting
in the streets of the town. Was this a time to seek refuge there? Would he not run
a risk of being taken prisoner? Should he succeed in escaping from Kolyvan, as
he had escaped from Omsk? He hesitated and stopped a moment. Would it not be
better to try, even on foot, to reach some small town, and there procure a horse at
any price? This was the only thing to be done; and Michael, leaving the Obi,
went forward to the right of Kolyvan.

The firing had now increased in violence. Flames soon sprang up on the left
of the town. Fire was devouring one entire quarter of Kolyvan.

Michael was running across the steppe endeavoring to gain the covert of
some trees when a detachment of Tartar cavalry appeared on the right. He dared
not continue in that direction. The horsemen advanced rapidly, and it would have
been difficult to escape them.

Suddenly, in a thick clump of trees, he saw an isolated house, which it would
be possible to reach before he was perceived. Michael had no choice but to run
there, hide himself and ask or take something to recruit his strength, for he was
exhausted with hunger and fatigue.

He accordingly ran on towards this house, still about half a verst distant. As
he approached, he could see that it was a telegraph office. Two wires left it in
westerly and easterly directions, and a third went towards Kolyvan.


It was to be supposed that under the circumstances this station was
abandoned; but even if it was, Michael could take refuge there, and wait till
nightfall, if necessary, to again set out across the steppe covered with Tartar
scouts.

He ran up to the door and pushed it open.

A single person was in the room whence the telegraphic messages were
dispatched. This was a clerk, calm, phlegmatic, indifferent to all that was passing
outside. Faithful to his post, he waited behind his little wicket until the public
claimed his services.

Michael ran up to him, and in a voice broken by fatigue, "What do you
know?" he asked.

"Nothing," answered the clerk, smiling.

"Are the Russians and Tartars engaged?"

"They say so."

"But who are the victors?"

"T don't know."

Such calmness, such indifference, in the midst of these terrible events, was
scarcely credible.

"And is not the wire cut?" said Michael.

"It is cut between Kolyvan and Krasnoiarsk, but it is still working between
Kolyvan and the Russian frontier."

"For the government?"

"For the government, when it thinks proper. For the public, when they pay.
Ten copecks a word, whenever you like, sir!"

Michael was about to reply to this strange clerk that he had no message to
send, that he only implored a little bread and water, when the door of the house
was again thrown open.

Thinking that it was invaded by Tartars, Michael made ready to leap out of
the window, when two men only entered the room who had nothing of the Tartar
soldier about them. One of them held a dispatch, written in pencil, in his hand,
and, passing the other, he hurried up to the wicket of the imperturbable clerk.

In these two men Michael recognized with astonishment, which everyone
will understand, two personages of whom he was not thinking at all, and whom
he had never expected to see again. They were the two reporters, Harry Blount
and Alcide Jolivet, no longer traveling companions, but rivals, enemies, now that
they were working on the field of battle.

They had left Ichim only a few hours after the departure of Michael Strogoff,
and they had arrived at Kolyvan before him, by following the same road, in
consequence of his losing three days on the banks of the Irtych. And now, after


being both present at the engagement between the Russians and Tartars before
the town, they had left just as the struggle broke out in the streets, and ran to the
telegraph office, so as to send off their rival dispatches to Europe, and forestall
each other in their report of events.

Michael stood aside in the shadow, and without being seen himself he could
see and hear all that was going on. He would now hear interesting news, and
would find out whether or not he could enter Kolyvan.

Blount, having distanced his companion, took possession of the wicket,
whilst Alcide Jolivet, contrary to his usual habit, stamped with impatience.

"Ten copecks a word," said the clerk.

Blount deposited a pile of roubles on the shelf, whilst his rival looked on
with a sort of stupefaction.

"Good," said the clerk. And with the greatest coolness in the world he began
to telegraph the following dispatch: "Daily Telegraph, London.

"From Kolyvan, Government of Omsk, Siberia, 6th August.

"Engagement between Russian and Tartar troops."

The reading was in a distinct voice, so that Michael heard all that the English
correspondent was sending to his paper.

"Russians repulsed with great loss. Tartars entered Kolyvan to-day." These
words ended the dispatch.

"My turn now," cried Alcide Jolivet, anxious to send off his dispatch,
addressed to his cousin.

But that was not Blount's idea, who did not intend to give up the wicket, but
have it in his power to send off the news just as the events occurred. He would
therefore not make way for his companion.

"But you have finished!" exclaimed Jolivet.

"T have not finished," returned Harry Blount quietly.

And he proceeded to write some sentences, which he handed in to the clerk,
who read out in his calm voice: "John Gilpin was a citizen of credit and renown;
a train-band captain eke was he of famous London town."

Harry Blount was telegraphing some verses learned in his childhood, in order
to employ the time, and not give up his place to his rival. It would perhaps cost
his paper some thousands of roubles, but it would be the first informed. France
could wait.

Jolivet's fury may be imagined, though under any other circumstances he
would have thought it fair warfare. He even endeavored to force the clerk to take
his dispatch in preference to that of his rival.

"It is that gentleman's right," answered the clerk coolly, pointing to Blount,
and smiling in the most amiable manner. And he continued faithfully to transmit


to the Daily Telegraph the well-known verses of Cowper.

Whilst he was working Blount walked to the window and, his field glass to
his eyes, watched all that was going on in the neighborhood of Kolyvan, so as to
complete his information. In a few minutes he resumed his place at the wicket,
and added to his telegram: "Two churches are in flames. The fire appears to gain
on the right. John Gilpin's spouse said to her dear, Though wedded we have
been these twice ten tedious years, yet we no holiday have seen.""

Alcide Jolivet would have liked to strangle the honorable correspondent of
the Daily Telegraph.

He again interrupted the clerk, who, quite unmoved, merely replied: "It is his
right, sir, it is his right--at ten copecks a word."

And he telegraphed the following news, just brought him by Blount:
"Russian fugitives are escaping from the town. 'Away went Gilpin--who but he?
His fame soon spread around: He carries weight! he rides a race! "Tis for a
thousand pound!" And Blount turned round with a quizzical look at his rival.

Alcide Jolivet fumed.

In the meanwhile Harry Blount had returned to the window, but this time his
attention was diverted by the interest of the scene before him. Therefore, when
the clerk had finished telegraphing the last lines dictated by Blount, Alcide
Jolivet noiselessly took his place at the wicket, and, just as his rival had done,
after quietly depositing a respectable pile of roubles on the shelf, he delivered his
dispatch, which the clerk read aloud: "Madeleine Jolivet, 10, Faubourg
Montmartre, Paris.

"From Kolyvan, Government of Omsk, Siberia, 6th August.

"Fugitives are escaping from the town. Russians defeated. Fiercely pursued
by the Tartar cavalry."

And as Harry Blount returned he heard Jolivet completing his telegram by
singing in a mocking tone:

"II est un petit homme, Tout habille de gris, Dans Paris!"

Imitating his rival, Alcide Jolivet had used a merry refrain of Beranger.

"Hallo!" said Harry Blount.

"Just so," answered Jolivet.

In the meantime the situation at Kolyvan was alarming in the extreme. The
battle was raging nearer, and the firing was incessant.

At that moment the telegraph office shook to its foundations. A shell had
made a hole in the wall, and a cloud of dust filled the office.

Alcide was just finishing writing his lines; but to stop, dart on the shell, seize
it in both hands, throw it out of the window, and return to the wicket, was only
the affair of a moment.


Five seconds later the shell burst outside. Continuing with the greatest
possible coolness, Alcide wrote: "A six-inch shell has just blown up the wall of
the telegraph office. Expecting a few more of the same size."

Michael Strogoff had no doubt that the Russians were driven out of Kolyvan.
His last resource was to set out across the southern steppe.

Just then renewed firing broke out close to the telegraph house, and a perfect
shower of bullets smashed all the glass in the windows. Harry Blount fell to the
ground wounded in the shoulder.

Jolivet even at such a moment, was about to add this postscript to his
dispatch: "Harry Blount, correspondent of the Daily Telegraph, has fallen at my
side struck by--" when the imperturbable clerk said calmly: "Sir, the wire has
broken." And, leaving his wicket, he quietly took his hat, brushed it round with
his sleeve, and, still smiling, disappeared through a little door which Michael
had not before perceived.

The house was surrounded by Tartar soldiers, and neither Michael nor the
reporters could effect their retreat.

Alcide Jolivet, his useless dispatch in his hand, had run to Blount, stretched
on the ground, and had bravely lifted him on his shoulders, with the intention of
flying with him. He was too late!

Both were prisoners; and, at the same time, Michael, taken unawares as he
was about to leap from the window, fell into the hands of the Tartars!

END OF BOOK I


BOOK II


CHAPTER I A TARTAR CAMP


AT a day's march from Kolyvan, several versts beyond the town of
Diachinks, stretches a wide plain, planted here and there with great trees,
principally pines and cedars. This part of the steppe is usually occupied during
the warm season by Siberian shepherds, and their numerous flocks. But now it
might have been searched in vain for one of its nomad inhabitants. Not that the
plain was deserted. It presented a most animated appearance.

There stood the Tartar tents; there Feofar-Khan, the terrible Emir of Bokhara,
was encamped; and there on the following day, the 7th of August, were brought
the prisoners taken at Kolyvan after the annihilation of the Russian force, which
had vainly attempted to oppose the progress of the invaders. Of the two thousand
men who had engaged with the two columns of the enemy, the bases of which
rested on Tomsk and Omsk, only a few hundred remained. Thus events were
going badly, and the imperial government appeared to have lost its power
beyond the frontiers of the Ural--for a time at least, for the Russians could not
fail eventually to defeat the savage hordes of the invaders. But in the meantime
the invasion had reached the center of Siberia, and it was spreading through the
revolted country both to the eastern, and the western provinces. If the troops of
the Amoor and the province of Takutsk did not arrive in time to occupy it,
Irkutsk, the capital of Asiatic Russia, being insufficiently garrisoned, would fall
into the hands of the Tartars, and the Grand Duke, brother of the Emperor, would
be sacrificed to the vengeance of Ivan Ogareff.

What had become of Michael Strogoff? Had he broken down under the
weight of so many trials? Did he consider himself conquered by the series of
disasters which, since the adventure of Ichim, had increased in magnitude? Did
he think his cause lost? that his mission had failed? that his orders could no
longer be obeyed?

Michael was one of those men who never give in while life exists. He was
yet alive; he still had the imperial letter safe; his disguise had been undiscovered.
He was included amongst the numerous prisoners whom the Tartars were
dragging with them like cattle; but by approaching Tomsk he was at the same
time drawing nearer to Irkutsk. Besides, he was still in front of Ivan Ogareff.

"T will get there!" he repeated to himself.

Since the affair of Kolyvan all the powers of his mind were concentrated on
one object--to become free! How should he escape from the Emir's soldiers?

Feofar's camp presented a magnificent spectacle.


Numberless tents, of skin, felt, or silk, glistened in the rays of the sun. The
lofty plumes which surmounted their conical tops waved amidst banners, flags,
and pennons of every color. The richest of these tents belonged to the Seides and
Khodjas, who are the principal personages of the khanat. A special pavilion,
omamented with a horse's tail issuing from a sheaf of red and white sticks
artistically interlaced, indicated the high rank of these Tartar chiefs. Then in the
distance rose several thousand of the Turcoman tents, called "karaoy," which had
been carried on the backs of camels.

The camp contained at least a hundred and fifty thousand soldiers, as many
foot as horse soldiers, collected under the name of Alamanes. Amongst them,
and as the principal types of Turkestan, would have been directly remarked the
Tadjiks, from their regular features, white skin, tall forms, and black eyes and
hair; they formed the bulk of the Tartar army, and of them the khanats of
Khokhand and Koundouge had furnished a contingent nearly equal to that of
Bokhara. With the Tadjiks were mingled specimens of different races who either
reside in Turkestan or whose native countries border on it. There were Usbecks,
red-bearded, small in stature, similar to those who had pursued Michael. Here
were Kirghiz, with flat faces like the Kalmucks, dressed in coats of mail: some
carried the lance, bows, and arrows of Asiatic manufacture; some the saber, a
matchlock gun, and the "tschakane," a little short-handled ax, the wounds from
which invariably prove fatal. There were Mongols--of middle height, with black
hair plaited into pigtails, which hung down their back; round faces, swarthy
complexions, lively deep-set eyes, scanty beards--dressed in blue nankeen
trimmed with black plush, sword-belts of leather with silver buckles, coats gayly
braided, and silk caps edged with fur and three ribbons fluttering behind. Brown-
skinned Afghans, too, might have been seen. Arabs, having the primitive type of
the beautiful Semitic races; and Turcomans, with eyes which looked as if they
had lost the pupil,--all enrolled under the Emir's flag, the flag of incendiaries and
devastators.

Among these free soldiers were a certain number of slave soldiers,
principally Persians, commanded by officers of the same nation, and they were
certainly not the least esteemed of Feofar-Khan's army.
