the horizon, describing an extended arc above the vast plain stretching away to
the south. No one spoke, but awaited the eclipse in solemn silence.

Towards half-past nine the eclipse commenced The disc of the moon seemed
to graze that of the sun. But the moon’s shadow was not to fall completely on the
earth, hiding the sun, until between forty three minutes past eleven and forty-
seven minutes fifty-seven seconds past eleven. That was the time fixed in the
almanacs, and every one knows that no error can creep into them, established,
verified, and controlled as they are by the scientific men of all the observatories
in the world.

The astronomer had brought a good many glasses with him, and he
distributed them amongst his companions, that all might watch the progress of
the phenomenon without injury to the eyes.

The brown disc of the moon gradually advanced, and terrestrial objects
began to assume a peculiar orange hue, whilst the atmosphere on tire zenith
completely changed colour. At a quarter-past ten half the disc of the sun was
darkened, and a few dogs which happened to be at liberty showed signs of
uneasiness and bowled piteously. The wild ducks, thinking night had come,
began to utter sleepy calls -and to seek their nests, and the mothers gathered their
little ones under their wings. The hush of eventide fell upon all animated nature.

At eleven o’clock two-thirds of the sun were covered, and all terrestrial
objects became a kind of vinous red. A gloomy twilight set in, to be succeeded
during the four minutes of totality by absolute darkness. A few planets, amongst
t others Mercury and Venus, began to appear, and some constellations—Caplet,


[symbol] and [symbol] of Taurus, and [symbol] of Orion. The darkness deepened
every moment.

Thomas Black remained motionless with his eye glued to the glass of his
instrument, eagerly watching the progress of the phenomenon. At forty-three
minutes past eleven the discs of the two luminaries ought to be exactly opposite
to each other, that of the moon completely hiding that of the sun.

"Forty-three minutes past eleven,” announced Hobson, who was attentively
watching the minute hand of his chronometer.

Thomas Black remained motionless, stooping over his instrument. Half a
minute passed, and then the astronomer [astonomer] drew himself up, with eyes
distended and eager. Once more he bent over the telescope, and cried in a choked
voice—

"She is going! she is going! The moon, the moon is going! She is
disappearing, running away !"

True enough the disc of the moon was gliding away from that of the sun
without having completely covered it !

The astronomer had fallen backwards, completely overcome. The four
minutes were past. The luminous corona had not appeared !

"What is the matter?" inquired Hobson.

"The matter is," screamed the poor astronomer, "that the eclipse was not
total-not total for this portion of the globe! Do you hear? It was not to-t-a-1! I
say not to-t-a-l! !"

"Then your almanacs are incorrect."

"Incorrect! Don’t tell that to me, if you please, Lieutenant Hobson !"

"But what then?" said Hobson, suddenly changing countenance.

"Why," said Black, "we are not after all on the seventieth parallel !"

"Only fancy !" cried Mrs Barnett.

"We can soon prove it,” said the astronomer whose eyes flashed with rage
and disappointment. "The sun will pass the meridian in a few minutes. ... My
sextant-quick .. . make haste !"

One of the soldiers rushed to the house and fetched the instrument required.

The astronomer pointed it upon the sun; he watched the orb of day pass the
meridian, and rapidly noted down a few calculations.

"What was the situation of Cape Bathurst a year ago when we took the
latitude?" he inquired.

"Seventy degrees, forty-four minutes, and thirty-seven seconds," replied
Hobson.

"Well, sir, it is now seventy-three degrees, seven minutes, and twenty
seconds! You see we are not under the seventieth parallel !


"Or rather we are no longer there !" muttered Hobson.

A sudden light had broken in upon his mind, all the phenomena hitherto so
inexplicable were now explained.

Cape Bathurst had drifted three degrees farther north since the arrival of the
Lieutenant and his companions !


End of Part I


PART IT


CONTENTS.
I.


A Floating Fort
II.


Where Are We?
III.


A Tour Of The Island
IV.


A Night Encampment
V.


From July 25th To August 20th
VI.


Ten Days Of Tempest
VU.


A Fire And A Cry
VII.


Mrs. Paulina Barnett’s Excursion
IX.


Kalumah’s Adventures
X.


The Kamtchatka Current
XI.


A Communication From Lieutenant Hobson
XII.


A Chance To Be Tried
XII.


Across The Ice-Field
XIV.


The Winter Months
XV.


A Last Exploring Expedition
XVI.


The Break-Up Of The Ice
XVII.


The Avalanche
XVII.


All At Work
XIX.


Behring Sea
XX.


In The Offing
XXI.


The Island Becomes An Isle
XXII.


The Four Following Days
XXIII.


On A Piece Of Ice
XXIV.


Conclusion

CHAPTER I.

A FLOATING FORT.

And so Fort Hope, founded by Lieutenant Hobson on the borders of the Polar
Sea, had drifted! Was the courageous agent of the Company to blame for this?
No; any one might have been deceived as he had been. No human prevision
could have foreseen such a calamity. He meant to build upon a rock, and he had
not even built upon sand. The peninsula of Victoria, which the best maps of
English America join to the American continent, had been torn suddenly away
from it. This peninsula was in fact nothing but an immense piece of ice, five
hundred square miles in extent, converted by successive deposits of sand and
earth into apparently solid ground well clothed with vegetation. Connected with
the mainland for thousands of centuries, the earthquake of the 8th of January had
dragged it away from its moorings, and it was now a floating island, at the mercy
of the winds and waves, and had been carried along the Arctic Ocean by
powerful currents for the last three months!

Yes, Fort Hope was built upon ice! Hobson at once understood the
mysterious change in their latitude. The isthmus—that is to say, the neck of land
which connected the peninsula of Victoria with the mainland—had been snapped
in two by a subterranean convulsion connected with the eruption of the volcano
some months before. As long as the northern winter continued, the frozen sea
maintained things as they were; but when the thaw came, when the ice fields,
melted beneath the rays of the sun, and the huge icebergs, driven out into the
offing, drew back to the farthest limits of the horizon—when the sea at last
became open, the whole peninsula drifted away, with its woods, its cliffs, its
promontories, its inland lagoon, and its coast-line, under the influence of a
current about which nothing was known. For months this drifting had been going
on unnoticed by the colonists, who even when hunting did not go far from Fort
Hope. Beach-marks, if they had been made, would have been useless; for heavy
mists obscured everything at a short distance, the ground remained apparently
firm and motionless, and there was, in short, nothing to hint to the Lieutenant
and his men that they had become islanders. The position of the new island with
regard to the rising and setting of the sun was the same as before. Had the
cardinal points changed their position, had the island turned round, the
Lieutenant, the astronomer, or Mrs Barnett, would certainly have noticed and
understood the change; but in its course the island had thus far followed a
parallel of latitude, and its motion, though rapid, had been imperceptible.

Although Hobson had no doubt of the moral and physical courage and
determination of his companions, he determined not to acquaint them with the


truth. It would be time enough to tell them of their altered position when it had
been thoroughly studied. Fortunately the good fellows, soldiers or workmen,
took little notice of the astronomical observations, and not being able to see the
consequences involved, they did not trouble themselves about the change of
latitude just announced.

The Lieutenant determined to conceal his anxiety, and seeing no remedy for
the misfortune, mastered his emotion by a strong effort, and tried to console
Thomas Black, who was lamenting his disappointment and tearing his hair.

The astronomer had no doubt about the misfortune of which he was the
victim. Not having, like the Lieutenant, noticed the peculiarities of the district,
he did not look beyond the one fact in which he was interested: on the day fixed,
at the time named, the moon had not completely eclipsed the sun. And what
could he conclude but that, to the disgrace of observatories, the almanacs were
false, and that the long desired eclipse, his own eclipse, Thomas Black’s, which
he had come so far and through so many dangers to see, had not been "total" for
this particular district under the seventieth parallel! No, no, it was impossible to
believe it; he could not face the terrible certainty, and he was overwhelmed with
disappointment. He was soon to learn the truth, however.

Meanwhile Hobson let his men imagine that the failure of the eclipse could
only interest himself and the astronomer, and they returned to their ordinary
occupations; but as they were leaving, Corporal Joliffe stopped suddenly and
said, touching his cap—

"May I ask you one question, sir?"

"Of course, Corporal; say on," replied the Lieutenant, who wondered what
was coming.

But Joliffe hesitated, and his little wife nudged his elbow.

"Well, Lieutenant," resumed the Corporal, "it’s just about the seventieth
degree of latitude—if we are not where we thought we were."

The Lieutenant frowned.

"Well," he replied evasively, "we made a mistake in our reckoning, ... our
first observation was wrong; ... but what does that concern you?"

"Please, sir, it’s because of the pay," replied Joliffe with a scowl. "You know
well enough that the Company promised us double pay."

Hobson drew a sigh of relief. It will be remembered that the men had been
promised higher pay if they succeeded in settling on or above the seventieth
degree north latitude, and Joliffe, who always had an eye to the main chance, had
looked upon the whole matter from a monetary point of view, and was afraid the
bounty would be withheld.

"You needn’t be afraid," said Hobson with a smile; "and you can tell your


brave comrades that our mistake, which is really inexplicable, will not in the
least prejudice your interests. We are not below, but above the seventieth
parallel, and so you will get your double pay."

"Thank you, sir, thank you," replied Joliffe with a beaming face. "It isn’t that
we think much about money, but that the money sticks to us."

And with this sage remark the men drew off, little dreaming what a strange
and fearful change had taken place in the position of the country.

Sergeant Long was about to follow the others when Hobson stopped him
with the words—

"Remain here, Sergeant Long."

The subordinate officer turned on his heel and waited for the Lieutenant to
address him.

All had now left the cape except Mrs Barnett, Madge, Thomas Black, and the
two officers.

Since the eclipse Mrs Barnett had not uttered a word. She looked inquiringly
at Hobson, who tried to avoid meeting her eyes.

For some time not another word was spoken. All involuntarily turned
towards the south, where the broken isthmus was situated; but from their
position they could only see the sea horizon on the north. Had Cape Bathurst
been situated a few hundred feet more above the level of the ocean, they would
have been able at a glance to ascertain the limits of their island home.

All were deeply moved at the sight of Fort Hope and all its occupants borne
away from all solid ground, and floating at the mercy of winds and waves.

"Then, Lieutenant," said Mrs Barnett at last, "all the strange phenomena you
observed are now explained!"

"Yes, madam," he replied, "everything is explained. The peninsula of
Victoria, now an island, which we thought firm ground with an immovable
foundation, is nothing more than a vast sheet of ice welded for centuries to the
American continent. Gradually the wind has strewn it with earth and sand, and
scattered over them the seeds from which have sprung the trees and mosses with
which it is clothed. Rain-water filled the lagoon, and produced the little river;
vegetation transformed the appearance of the ground; but beneath the lake,
beneath the soil of earth and sand—in a word, beneath our feet is a foundation of
ice, which floats upon the water by reason of its being specifically lighter than it.
Yes, it is a sheet of ice which bears us up, and is carrying us away, and this is
why we have not found a single flint or stone upon its surface. This is why its
shores are perpendicular, this is why we found ice ten feet below the surface
when we dug the reindeer pit—this, in short, is why the tide was not noticeable
on the peninsula, which rose and sank with the ebb and flow of the waves!"


"Everything is indeed explained," said Mrs Barnett, "and your presentiments
did not deceive you; but can you explain why the tides, which do not affect us at
all now, were to a slight extent perceptible on our arrival?"

"Simply because, madam, on our arrival the peninsula was still connected by
means of its flexible isthmus with the American continent. It offered a certain
resistance to the current, and on its northern shores the tide rose two feet beyond
low-water mark, instead of the twenty we reasonably expected. But from the
moment when the earthquake broke the connecting link, from the moment when
the peninsula became an island free from all control, it rose and sank with the
ebb and flow of the tide; and, as we noticed together at full moon a few days
ago, no sensible difference was produced on our shores."

In spite of his despair, Thomas Black listened attentively to Hobson’s
explanations, and could not but see the reasonableness of his deductions, but he
was furious at such a rare, unexpected, and, as he said, "ridiculous" phenomenon
occurring just so as to make him miss the eclipse, and he said not a word, but
maintained a gloomy, even haughty silence.

"Poor Mr Black," said Mrs Barnett, "it must be owned that an astronomer
was never more hardly used than you since the world began!"

"In any case, however," said Hobson, turning to her, "we have neither of us
anything to reproach ourselves with. No one can find fault with us. Nature alone
is to blame. The earthquake cut off our communication with the mainland, and
converted our peninsula into a floating island, and this explains why the furred
and other animals imprisoned like ourselves, have become so numerous round
the fort!"

"This, too, is why the rivals you so much dreaded have not visited us,
Lieutenant!" exclaimed Madge.

"And this," added the Sergeant, "accounts for the non-arrival of the convoy
sent to Cape Bathurst by Captain Craventy."

"And this is why," said Mrs. Barnett, looking at the Lieutenant, "I must give
up all hope of returning to Europe this year at least!"

The tone of voice in which the lady made this last remark showed that she
resigned herself to her fate more readily than could have been expected. She
seemed suddenly to have made up her mind to make the best of the situation,
which would no doubt give her an opportunity of making a great many
interesting observations. And after all, what good would grumbling have done?
Recriminations were worse than useless. They could not have altered their
position, or have checked the course of the wandering island, and there was no
means of reuniting it to a continent. No; God alone could decide the future of
Fort Hope. They must bow to His will.


CHAPTER II.

WHERE ARE WE?

It was necessary carefully to study the unexpected and novel situation in
which the agents of the Company now found themselves, and Hobson did so
with his chart before him.

He could not ascertain the longitude of Victoria Island—the original name
being retained—until the next day, and the latitude had already been taken. For
the longitude, the altitude of the sun must be ascertained before and after noon,
and two hour angles must be measured.

At two o’clock P.M. Hobson and Black took the height of the sun above the
horizon with the sextant, and they hoped to recommence the same operation the
next morming towards ten o’clock A.M., so as to be able to infer from the two
altitudes obtained the exact point of the Arctic Ocean then occupied by their
island.

The party did not, however, at once return to the fort, but remained talking
together for some little time on the promontory. Madge declared she was quite
resigned, and evidently thought only of her mistress, at whom she could not look
without emotion; she could not bear to think of the sufferings and trials her "dear
girl" might have to go through in the future. She was ready to lay down her life
for "Paulina," but what good could that do now. She knew, however, that Mrs
Barnett was not a woman to sink under her misfortunes, and indeed at present
there was really no need for any one to despair.

There was no immediate danger to be dreaded, and a catastrophe might even
yet be avoided. This Hobson carefully explained to his companions.

Two dangers threatened the island floating along the coast of North America,
only two.

It would be drawn by the currents of the open sea to the high Polar latitudes,
from which there is no return.

Or the current would take it to the south, perhaps through the Behring Strait
into the Pacific Ocean.

In the former contingency, the colonists, shut in by ice and surrounded by
impassable icebergs, would have no means of communication with their fellow-
creatures, and would die of cold and hunger in the solitudes of the north.

In the latter contingency, Victoria Island, driven by the currents to the
western waters of the Pacific, would gradually melt and go to pieces beneath the
feet of its inhabitants.

In either case death would await the Lieutenant and his companions, and the
fort, erected at the cost of so much labour and suffering, would be destroyed.

But it was scarcely probable that either of these events would happen. The


season was already considerably advanced, and in less than three months the sea
would again be rendered motion less by the icy hand of the Polar winter. The
ocean would again be converted into an ice-field, and by means of sledges they
might get to the nearest land—the coast of Russian America if the island
remained in the east, or the coast of Asia if it were driven to the west.

"For," added Hobson, "we have absolutely no control over our floating
island. Having no sail to hoist, as in a boat, we cannot guide it in the least.
Where it takes us we must go."

All that Hobson said was clear, concise, and to the point. There could be no
doubt that the bitter cold of winter would solder Victoria Island to the vast ice-
field, and it was highly probable that it would drift neither too far north nor too
far eouth. To have to cross a few hundred miles of ice was no such terrible
prospect for brave and resolute men accustomed to long excursions in the Arctic
regions. It would be necessary, it was true, to abandon Fort Hope—the object of
so many hopes, and to lose the benefit of all their exertions, but what of that?
The factory, built upon a shifting soil, could be of no further use to the Company.
Sooner or later it would be swallowed up by the ocean, and what was the good
of useless regrets? It must, therefore, be deserted as soon as circumstances
should permit.

The only thing against the safety of the colonists was—and the Lieutenant
dwelt long on this point—that during the eight or nine weeks which must elapse
before the solidification of the Arctic Ocean, Victoria Island might be dragged
too far north or south.

Arctic explorers had often told of pieces of ice being drifted an immense
distance without any possibility of stopping them.

Everything then depended on the force and direction of the currents from the
opening of Behring Strait; and it would be necessary carefully to ascertain all
that a chart of the Arctic Ocean could tell. Hobson had such a chart, and invited
all who were with him on the cape to come to his room and look at it; but before
going down to the fort he once more urged upon them the necessity of keeping
their situation a secret.

"It is not yet desperate," he said, "and it is therefore quite unnecessary to
damp the spirits of our comrades, who will perhaps not be able to understand, as
we do, all the chances in our favour."

"Would it not be prudent to build a boat large enough to hold us all, and
strong enough to carry us a few hundred miles over the sea?" observed Mrs
Barnett.

"Tt would be prudent certainly," said Hobson, "and we will do it. I must think
of some pretext for beginning the work at once, and give the necessary orders to


the head carpenter. But taking to a boat can only be a forlorn hope when
everything else has failed. We must try all we can to avoid being on the island
when the ice breaks up, and we must make for the mainland as soon as ever the
sea is frozen over."

Hobson was right. It would take about three months to build a thirty or
thirty-five ton vessel, and the sea would not be open when it was finished. It
would be very dangerous to embark the whole party when the ice was breaking
up all round, and he would be well out of his difficulties if he could get across
the ice to firm ground before the next thaw set in. This was why Hobson thought
a boat a forlorn hope, a desperate makeshift, and every one agreed with him.

Secrecy was once more promised, for it was felt that Hobson was the best
judge of the matter, and a few minutes later the five conspirators were seated
together in the large room of Fort Hope, which was then deserted, eagerly
examining an excellent map of the oceanic and atmospheric currents of the
Arctic Ocean, special attention being naturally given to that part of the Polar Sea
between Cape Bathurst and Behring Strait.

Two principal currents divide the dangerous latitudes comprehended between
the Polar Circle and the imperfectly known zone, called the North-West Passage
since McClure’s daring discovery—at least only two have been hitherto noticed
by marine surveyors.

One is called the Kamtchatka Current. It takes its rise in the offing outside
the peninsula of that name, follows the coast of Asia, and passes through
Behring Strait, touching Cape East, a promontory of Siberia. After running due
north for about six hundred miles from the strait, it turns suddenly to the east,
pretty nearly following the same parallel as McClure’s Passage, and probably
doing much to keep that communication open for a few mouths in the warm
season.

The other current, called Behring Current, flows just the other way. After
running from east to west at about a hundred miles at the most from the coast, it
comes into collision, so to speak, with the Kamtchatka Current at the opening of
the strait, and turning to the south approaches the shores of Russian America,
crosses Behring Sea, and finally breaks on the kind of circular dam formed by
the Aleutian Islands.

Hobson’s map gave a very exact summary of the most recent nautical
observations, so that it could be relied on.

The Lieutenant examined it carefully before speaking, and then pressing his
hand to his head, as if oppressed by some sad presentiment, he observed—

"Let us hope that fate will not take us to remote northern latitudes. Our
wandering island would run a risk of never returning.”


"Why, Lieutenant?” broke in Mrs Barnett.

"Why, madam?" replied Hobson; "look well at this part of the Arctic Ocean,
and you will readily understand why. Two currents, both dangerous for us, run
opposite ways. When they meet, the island must necessarily become stationary,
and that at a great distance from any land. At that point it will have to remain for
the winter, and when the next thaw sets in, it will either follow the Kamtchatka
Current to the deserted regions of the north-west, or it will float down with the
Behring Current to be swallowed up by the Pacific Ocean."

"That will not happen, Lieutenant," said Madge in a tone of earnest
conviction; "God would never permit that."

"T can’t make out," said Mrs Barnett, "whereabouts in the Polar Sea we are at
this moment; for I see but one current from the offing of Cape Bathurst which
bears directly to the north-west, and that is the dangerous Kamtchatka Current.
Are you not afraid that it has us in its fatal embrace, and is carrying us with it to
the shores of North Georgia?"

"T think not," replied Hobson, after a moment’s reflection.

"Why not?"

"Because it is a very rapid current, madam; and if we had been following it
for three months, we should have had some land in sight by this time, and there
is none, absolutely none!"

"Where, then, do you suppose we are?" inquired Mrs Barnett.

"Most likely between the Kamtchatka Current and the coast, perhaps in some
vast eddy unmarked upon the map."

"That cannot be, Lieutenant," replied Mrs Barnett, quickly.

"Why not, madam, why not?"

"Because if Victoria Island were in an eddy, it would have veered round to a
certain extent, and our position with regard to the cardinal points would have
changed in the last three months, which is certainly not the case."

"You are right, madam, you are quite right. The only explanation I can think
of is, that there is some other current, not marked on our map. Oh, that to
morrow were here that I might find out our longitude; really this uncertainty is
terrible!"

"To-morrow will come," observed Madge.

There was nothing to do but to wait. The party therefore separated, all
returning to their ordinary occupations. Sergeant Long informed his comrades
that the departure for Fort Reliance, fixed for the next day, was put off. He gave
as reasons that the season was too far advanced to get to the southern factory
before the great cold set in, that the astronomer was anxious to complete his
meteorological observations, and would therefore submit to another winter in the


north, that game was so plentiful provisions from Fort Reliance were not needed.
&c., &c. But about all these matters the brave fellows cared little.

Lieutenant Hobson ordered his men to spare the furred animals in future, and
only to kill edible game, so as to lay up fresh stores for the coming winter; he
also forbade them to go more than two miles from the fort, not wishing Marbre
and Sabine to come suddenly upon a sea-horizon, where the isthmus connecting
the peninsula of Victoria with the mainland was visible a few months before.
The disappearance of the neck of land would inevitably have betrayed
everything.

The day appeared endless to Lieutenant Hobson. Again and again he
returned to Cape Bathurst either alone, or accompanied by Mrs Barnett. The
latter, inured to danger, showed no fear; she even joked the Lieutenant about his
floating island being perhaps, after all, the proper conveyance for going to the
North Pole. "With a favourable current might they not reach that hitherto
inaccessible point of the globe?"

Lieutenant Hobson shook his head as he listened to his companion’s fancy,
and kept his eyes fixed upon the horizon, hoping to catch a glimpse of some
land, no matter what, in the distance. But no, sea and sky met in an absolutely
unbroken circular line, confirming Hobson’s opinion that Victoria Island was
drifting to the west rather than in any other direction.

"Lieutenant," at last said Mrs Barnett, "don’t you mean to make a tour of our
island as soon as possible?"

"Yes, madam, of course; as soon as I have taken our bearings, I mean to
ascertain the form and extent of our dominions. It seems, however, that the
fracture was made at the isthmus itself, so that the whole peninsula has become
an island."

"A strange destiny is ours, Lieutenant," said Mrs Barnett. "Others return from
their travels to add new districts to geographical maps, but we shall have to
efface the supposed peninsula of Victoria!"

The next day, July 18th, the sky was very clear, and at ten o’clock in the
morning Hobson obtained a satisfactory altitude of the sun, and, comparing it
with that of the observation of the day before, he ascertained exactly the
longitude in which they were.

The island was then in 157° 37’ longitude west from Greenwich.

The latitude obtained the day before at noon almost immediately after the
eclipse was, as we know, 73° 7’ 20" north.

The spot was looked out on the map in the presence of Mrs Barnett and
Sergeant Long.

It was indeed a most anxious moment, and the following result was arrived


at.

The wandering island was moving in a westerly direction, borne along by a
current unmarked on the chart, and unknown to hydrographers, which was
evidently carrying it towards Behring Strait. All the dangers foreseen by Hobson
were then imminent, if Victoria Island did not again touch the mainland before
the winter.

"But how far are we from the American continent? that is the most important
point just at present,” said Mrs Barnett.

Hobson took his compasses, and carefully measured the narrowest part of the
sea between the coast and the seventieth parallel.

"We are actually more than two hundred and fifty miles from Point Barrow,
the northernmost extremity of Russian America," he replied.

"We ought to know, then, how many miles the island has drifted since it left
the mainland," said Sergeant Long.

"Seven hundred miles at least," replied Hobson, after having again consulted
the chart.

"And at about what time do you suppose the drifting commenced?"

"Most likely towards the end of April; the ice-field broke up then, and the
icebergs which escaped melting drew back to the north. We may, therefore,
conclude that Victoria Island has been moving along with the current parallel
with the coast at an average rate of ten miles a day."

"No very rapid pace after all!" exclaimed Mrs Barnett.

"Too fast, madam, when you think where we may be taken during the two
months in which the sea will remain open in this part of the Arctic Ocean."

The three friends remained silent, and looked fixedly at the chart of the
fearful Polar regions, towards which they were being irresistibly drawn, and
which have hitherto successfully resisted all attempts to explore them.

"There is, then, nothing to be done? Nothing to try?" said Mrs Barnett after a
pause.

"Nothing, madam," replied Hobson; "nothing whatever. We must wait; we
must all pray for the speedy arrival of the Arctic winter generally so much
dreaded by sailors, but which alone can save us now. The winter will bring ice,
our only anchor of salvation, the only power which can arrest the course of this
wandering island."

CHAPTER III.

A TOUR OF THE ISLAND.


From that day, July 18th, it was decided that the bearings should be taken as
on board a vessel whenever the state of the atmosphere rendered the operation
possible. Was not the island, in fact, a disabled ship, tossed about without sails or
helm.

The next day after taking the bearings, Hobson announced that without
change of latitude the island had advanced several miles farther west. Mac-Nab
was ordered to commence the construction of a huge boat, Hobson telling him,
in explanation, that he proposed making a reconnaissance of the coast as far as
Russian America next summer. The carpenter asked no further questions, but
proceeded to choose his wood, and fixed upon the beach at the foot of Cape
Bathurst as his dockyard, so that he might easily be able to launch his vessel.

Hobson intended to set out the same day on his excursion round the island in
which he and his comrades were imprisoned. Many changes might take place in
the configuration of this sheet of ice, subject as it was to the influence of the
variable temperature of the waves, and it was important to determine its actual
form at the present time, its area, and its thickness in different parts. The point of
rupture, which was most likely at the isthmus itself, ought to be examined with
special care; the fracture being still fresh, it might be possible to ascertain the
exact arrangement of the stratified layers of ice and earth of which the soil of the
island was composed.

But in the afternoon the sky clouded over suddenly, and a violent squall,
accompanied with thick mists, swept down upon the fort. Presently torrents of
rain fell, and large hailstones rattled on the roof, whilst a few distant claps of
thunder were heard, a phenomenon of exceedingly rare occurrence in such
elevated latitudes.

Hobson was obliged to put off his trip, and wait until the fury of the elements
abated, but during the 20th, 2lst, and 22d July, no change occurred. The storm
raged, the floods of heaven were let loose, and the waves broke upon the beach
with a deafening roar. Liquid avalanches were flung with such force upon Cape
Bathurst, that there was reason to dread that it might give way; its stability was,
in fact, somewhat problematical, as it consisted merely of an aggregation of sand
and earth, without any firm foundation. Vessels at sea might well be pitied in this
fearful gale, but the floating island was of too vast a bulk to be affected by the
agitation of the waves, and remained indifferent to their fury.

During the night of the 22d July the tempest suddenly ceased. A strong
breeze from the northeast dispelled the last mists upon the horizon. The
barometer rose a few degrees, and the weather appeared likely to favour
Hobson’s expedition.

He was to be accompanied by Mrs Barnett and Sergeant Long, and expected


to be absent a day or two. The little party took some salt meat, biscuits, and a
few flasks of rum with them, and there was nothing in their excursion to surprise
the rest of the colonists. The days were just then very long, the sun only
disappearing below the horizon for a few hours.

There were no wild animals to be feared now. The bears seemed to have fled
by instinct from the peninsula whilst it was still connected with the mainland,
but to neglect no precaution each of the three explorers was provided with a gun.
The Lieutenant and his subordinate also carried hatchets and ice-chisels, which a
traveller in the Polar regions should never be without.

During the absence of the Lieutenant and the Sergeant, the command of the
fort fell to Corporal Joliffe, or rather to his little wife, and Hobson knew that he
could trust her. Thomas Black could not be depended on; he would not even join
the exploring party; he promised, however, to watch the northern latitudes very
carefully, and to note any change which should take place in the sea or the
position of the cape during the absence of the Lieutenant.

Mrs Barnett had endeavoured to reason with the unfortunate astronomer, but
he would listen to nothing. He felt that Nature had deceived him, and that he
could never forgive her.

After many a hearty farewell, the Lieutenant and his two companions left the
fort by the postern gate, and, turning to the west, followed the lengthened curve
of the coast between Capes Bathurst and Esquimaux.

It was eight o’clock in the morning; the oblique rays of the sun struck upon
the beach, and touched it with many a brilliant tint, the angry billows of the sea
were sinking to rest, and the birds, ptarmigans, guillemots, puffins, and petrels,
driven away by the storm, were returning by thousands. Troops of ducks were
hastening back to Lake Barnett, flying close, although they knew it not, to Mrs
Joliffe’s saucepan. Polar hares, martens, musk rats, and ermines rose before the
travellers and fled at their approach, but not with any great appearance of haste
or terror. The animals evidently felt drawn towards their old enemies by a
common danger.

"They know well enough that they are hemmed in by the sea and cannot quit
the island," observed Hobson.

"They are all in the habit of seeking warmer climates in the south in the
winter, are they not?” inquired Mrs Barnett.

"Yes, madam, but unless they are presently able to cross the ice-field, they
will have to remain prisoners like ourselves, and I am afraid the greater number
will die of cold or hunger.

"I hope they will be good enough to supply us with food for a long time,"
observed the Sergeant," and I think it is very fortunate that they had not the sense


to run away before the rupture of the isthmus."

"The birds will, however, leave us?" added Mrs Barnett.

"Oh yes, madam, everything with wings will go, they can traverse long
distances without fatigue, and, more fortunate than ourselves, they will regain
terra firma."

"Could we not use them as messengers?" asked Mrs Barnett.

"A good idea, madam, a capital idea," said Hobson. "We might easily catch
some hundreds of these birds, and tie a paper round their necks with our exact
situation written upon it. John Ross in 1848 tried similar means to acquaint the
survivors of the Franklin expedition with the presence of his ships, the
Enterprise and the Investigator in the Polar seas. He caught some hundreds of
white foxes in traps, rivetted a copper collar round the neck of each with all the
necessary information engraved upon it, and then set them free in every
direction."

"Perhaps some of the messengers may have fallen into the hands of the
shipwrecked wanderers."

"Perhaps so," replied Hobson; "I know that an old fox was taken by Captain
Hatteras during his voyage of discovery, wearing a collar half wor away and
hidden beneath his thick white fur. What we cannot do with the quadrupeds, we
will do with the birds."

Chatting thus and laying plans for the future, the three explorers continued to
follow the coast. They noticed no change; the abrupt cliffs covered with earth
and sand showed no signs of a recent alteration in the extent of the island. It was,
however, to be feared that the vast sheet of ice would be worn away at the base
by the action of the warm currents, and on this point Hobson was naturally
anxious.

By eleven o’clock in the morning the eight miles between Capes Bathurst
and Esquimaux had been traversed. A few traces of the encampment of
Kalumah’s party still remained; of course the snow huts had entirely
disappeared, but some cinders and walrus bones marked the spot.

The three explorers halted here for a short time, they intended to pass the few
short hours of the night at Walruses’ Bay, which they hoped to reach In a few
hours. They breakfasted seated on a slightly rising ground covered with a scanty
and stunted herbage. Before their eyes lay the ocean bounded by a clearly-
defined sea-horizon, without a sail or an iceberg to break the monotony of the
vast expanse of water.

"Should you be very much surprised if some vessel came In sight now,
Lieutenant?" inquired Mrs Barnett.

"I should be very agreeably surprised, madam," replied Hobson. "It is not at


all uncommon for whalers to come as far north as this, especially now that the
Arctic Ocean is frequented by whales and chacholots, but you must remember
that it is the 23rd July, and the summer is far advanced. The whole fleet of
whaling vessels is probably now in Gulf Kotzebue, at the entrance to the strait.
Whalers shun the sudden changes in the Arctic Ocean, and with good reason.
They dread being shut in the ice; and the icebergs, avalanches, and, ice-fields
they avoid, are the very things for which we earnestly pray."

"They will come, Lieutenant,” said Long; "have patience, in another two
months the waves will no longer break upon the shores of Cape Esquimaux."

"Cape Esquimaux!" observed Mrs Barnett with a smile. "That name, like
those we gave to the other parts of the peninsula, may turn out unfortunate too.
We have lost Port Barnett and Paulina River; who can tell whether Cape
Esquimaux and Walruses’ Bay may not also disappear in time?"

"They too will disappear, madam," replied Hobson, "and after them the
whole of Victoria Island, for nothing now connects it with a continent, and it is
doomed to destruction. This result is inevitable, and our choice of geographical
names will be thrown away; but fortunately the Royal Society has not yet
adopted them, and Sir Roderick Murchison will have nothing to efface on his
maps."

"One name he will," exclaimed the Sergeant.

"Which?" inquired Hobson.

"Cape Bathurst," replied Long.

"Ah, yes, you are right. Cape Bathurst must now be removed from maps of
the Polar regions."

Two hours’ rest were all the explorers cared for, and at one o’clock they
prepared to resume their journey.

Before starting Hobson once more looked round him from the summit of
Cape Esquimaux; but seeing nothing worthy of notice, he rejoined Mrs Barnett
and Sergeant Long.

"Madam," he said, addressing the lady, "you have not forgotten the family of
natives we met here last winter?"

"Oh no, I have always held dear little Kalumah in friendly remembrance. She
promised to come and see us again at Fort Hope, but she will not be able to do
so. But why do you ask me about the natives now?"

"Because I remember something to which, much to my regret, I did not at the
time attach sufficient importance."

"What was that?"

"You remember the uneasy surprise the men manifested at finding a big a
factory at the foot of Cape Bathurst."


"Oh yes, perfectly."

"You remember that I tried to make out what the natives meant, and that I
could not do so?"

"Yes, I remember."

"Well," added Hobsou, "I know now why they shook their heads. From
tradition, experience, or something, the Esquimaux knew what the peninsula
really was, they knew we had not built on firm ground. But as things had
probably remained as they were for centuries, they thought there was no
immediate danger, and that it was not worth while to explain themselves."

"Very likely you are right," replied Mrs Barnett; "but I feel sure that
Kalumah had no suspicion of her companion’s fears, or she would have warned
us."

Hobson quite agreed with Mrs Barnett, and Sergeant Long observed—

"It really seems to have been by a kind of fatality that we settled ourselves
upon this peninsula just before it was torn away from the mainland. I suppose,
Lieutenant, that it had been connected for a very long time, perhaps for
centuries."

"You might say for thousands and thousands of years, Sergeant," replied
Hobson. "Remember that the soil on which we are treading has been brought
here by the wind, little by little, that the sand has accumulated grain by grain!
Think of the time it must have taken for the seeds of firs, willows, and arbutus to
become shrubs and trees! Perhaps the sheet of ice on which we float was welded
to the continent before the creation of man!"

"Well," cried Long, "it really might have waited a few centuries longer
before it drifted. How much anxiety and how many dangers we might then have
been spared!"

Sergeant Long’s most sensible remark closed the conversation, and the
journey was resumed.

From Cape Esquimaux to Walruses’ Bay the coast ran almost due south,
following the one hundred and twenty-seventh meridian. Looking behind them
they could see one corner of the lagoon, its waters sparkling in the sunbeams,
and a little beyond the wooded heights in which it was framed. Large eagles
soared above their heads, their cries and the loud flapping of their wings
breaking the stillness, and furred animals of many kinds, martens, polecats,
ermines, &c., crouching behind some rising ground, or hiding amongst the
stunted bushes and willows, gazed inquiringly at the intruders. They seemed to
understand that they had nothing to fear. Hobson caught a glimpse of a few
beavers wandering about, evidently ill at ease, and puzzled at the disappearance
of the little river. With no ledges to shelter them, and no stream by which to


build a new home, they were doomed to die of cold when the severe frost set in.
Sergeant Long also saw a troop of wolves crossing the plain.

It was evident that specimens of the whole Arctic Fauna were imprisoned on
the island, and there was every reason to fear that, when famished with hunger,
all the carnivorous beasts would be formidable enemies to the occupants of Fort
Hope.

Fortunately, however, one race of animals appeared to be quite
unrepresented. Not a single white bear was seen! Once the Sergeant thought he
Saw an enormous white mass moving about on the other side of a clump of
willows, but on close examination decided that he was mistaken.

The coast near Walruses’ Bay was, on the whole, only slightly elevated
above the sea-level, and in the distance the waves broke into running foam as
they do upon a sloping beach. It was to be feared that the soil had little stability,
but there was no means of judging of the modifications which had taken place
since their last visit, and Hobson much regretted that he had not made bench
marks about Cape Bathurst before he left, that he might judge of the amount of
sinking or depression which took place. He determined, however, to take this
precaution on his return.

It will be understood that, under the circumstances, the party did not advance
very rapidly. A pause was often made to examine the soil, or to see if there were
any sign of an approaching fracture on the coast, and sometimes the explorers
wandered inland for half a mile. Here and there the Sergeant planted branches of
willow or birch to serve as landmarks for the future, especially wherever
undermining seemed to be going on rapidly and the solidity of the ground was
doubtful. By this means it would be easy to ascertain the changes which might
take place.

They did advance, however, and at three o’clock in the afternoon they were
only three miles from Walruses’ Bay, and Hobson called Mrs Barnett’s attention
to the important changes which had been effected by the rupture of the isthmus.

Formerly the south-western horizon was shut in by a long slightly curved
coast-line, formed by the shores of Liverpool Bay. Now a sea-line bounded the
view, the continent having disappeared. Victoria Island ended in an abrupt angle
where it had broken off, and all felt sure that on turning round that angle the
ocean would be spread out before them, and that its waves would bathe the
whole of the southern side of the island, which was once the connecting-link
between Walruses’ Bay and Washburn Bay.

Mrs Barnett could not look at the changed aspect of the scene without
emotion. She had expected it, and yet her heart beat almost audibly. She gazed
across the sea for the missing continent, which was now left several hundred


miles behind, and it rushed upon her mind with a fresh shock that she would
never set foot on America again. Her agitation was indeed excusable, and it was
shared by the Lieutenant and the Sergeant.

All quickened their steps, eager to reach the abrupt angle in the south. The
ground rose slightly as they advanced, and the layers of earth and sand became
thicker; this of course was explained by the former proximity of this part of the
coast to the true continent. The thickness of the crust of ice and of the layer of
earth at the point of junction increasing, as it probably did, every century,
explained the long resistance of the isthmus, which nothing but some
extraordinary convulsion could have overcome. Such a convulsion was the
earthquake of the 8th January, which, although it had only affected the continent
of North America, had sufficed to break the connecting-link, and to launch
Victoria Island upon the wide ocean.

At four o’clock P.M., the angle was reached. Walruses’ Bay, formed by an
indentation of the firm ground, had disappeared! It had remained behind with the
continent

"By my faith, madam!" exclaimed the Sergeant, "it’s lucky for you we didn’t
call it Paulina Barnett Bay!"

"Yes," replied the lady, "I begin to think I am an unlucky godmother for
newly-discovered places."

CHAPTER IV.

A NIGHT ENCAMPMENT.

And so Hobson had not been mistaken about the point of rupture. It was the
isthmus which had yielded in the shock of the earthquake. Not a trace was to be
seen of the American continent, not a single cliff, even the volcano on the west
had disappeared. Nothing but the sea everywhere.

The island on this side ended in a cape, coming to an almost sharp point, and
it was evident that the substratum of ice, fretted by the warmer waters of the
current and exposed to all the fury of the elements, must rapidly dissolve.

The explorers resumed their march, following the course of the fracture,
which ran from west to east in an almost straight line. Its edges were not jagged
or broken, but clear cut, as if the division had been made with a sharp
instrument, and here and there the conformation of the soil could be easily
examined. The banks-half ice, half sand and earth-rose some ten feet from the
water. They were perfectly perpendicular, without the slightest slope, and in
some places there were traces of recent landslips. Sergeant Long pointed to
several small blocks of ice floating in the offing, and rapidly melting, which had
evidently been broken off from their island. The action of the warm surf would,
of course, soon eat away the new coast-line, which time had not yet clothed with


a kind of cement of snow and sand, such as covered the rest of the beach, and
altogether the state of things was very far from reassuring.

Before taking any rest, Mrs Barnett, Hobson, and Long, were anxious to
finish their examination of the southern edge of the island. There would be
plenty of daylight, for the sun would not set until eleven o’clock P.M. The
briliant orb of day was slowly advancing along the western horizon, and its
oblique rays cast long shadows of themselves before the explorers, who
conversed at intervals after long silent pauses, during which they gazed at the sea
and thought of the dark future before them.

Hobson intended to encamp for the night at Washburn Bay. When there
eighteen miles would have been traversed, and, if he were not mistaken, half his
circular journey would be accomplished. After a few hours’ repose he meant to
return to Fort Hope along the western coast.

No fresh incident marked the exploration of the short distance between
Walruses’ Bay and Washburn Bay, and at seven o’clock in the evening the spot
chosen for the encampment was reached. A similar change had taken place here.
Of Washburn Bay, nothing remained but the curve formed by the coast-line of
the island, and which was once its northern boundary. It stretched away without
a break for seven miles to the cape they had named Cape Michael. This side of
the island did not appear to have suffered at all in consequence of the rupture.
The thickets of pine and birch, massed a little behind the cape, were in their
fullest beauty at this time of year, and a good many furred animals were
disporting themselves on the plain.

A halt was made at Washburn Bay, and the explorers were able to enjoy an
extended view on the south, although they could not see any great distance on
the north. The sun was so low on the horizon, that its rays were intercepted by
the rising ground on the west, and did not reach the little bay. It was not,
however, yet night, nor could it be called twilight, as the sun had not set.

"Lieutenant," said Long, "if by some miracle a bell were now to ring, what
do you suppose it would mean?"

"That it was supper-time," replied Hobson. "Don’t you agree with me, Mrs
Barnett?"

"Indeed I do," replied the lady addressed, "and as our cloth is spread for us,
let us sit down. This moss, although slightly worn, will suit us admirably, and
was evidently intended for us by Providence."

The bag of provisions was opened; some salt meat, a hare paté from Mrs
Joliffe’s larder, with a few biscuits, formed their frugal supper.

The meal was quickly over, and Hobson returned to the southwest angle of
the island, whilst Mrs Barnett rested at the foot of a low fir tree, and Sergeant


Long made ready the night quarters.

The Lieutenant was anxious to examine the piece of ice which formed the
island, to ascertain, if possible, something of its structure. A little bank, produced
by a landslip, enabled him to step down to the level of the sea, and from there he
was able to look closely at the steep wall which formed the coast. Where he
stood the soil rose scarcely three feet above the water. The upper part consisted
of a thin layer of earth and sand mixed with crushed shells; and the lower of
hard, compact, and, if we may so express it, "metallic" ice, strong enough to
support the upper soil of the island.

This layer of ice was not more than one foot above the sea-level. In
consequence of the recent fracture, it was easy to see the regular disposition of
the sheets of ice piled up horizontally, and which had evidently been produced
by successive frosts in comparatively quieter waters.

We know that freezing commences on the surface of liquids, and as the cold
increases, the thickness of the crust becomes greater, the solidification
proceeding from the top downwards. That at least is the case in waters that are at
rest; it has, however, been observed that the very reverse is the case in running
waters-the ice forming at the bottom, and subsequently rising to the surface.

It was evident, then, that the floe which formed the foundation of Victoria
Island had been formed in calm waters on the shores of the North American
continent. The freezing had evidently commenced on the surface, and the thaw
would begin at the bottom, according to a well-known law; so that the ice-field
would gradually decrease in weight as it became thawed by the warmer waters
through which it was passing, and the general level of the island would sink in
proportion.

This was the great danger.

As we have just stated, Hobson noticed that the solid ice, the ice-field
properly so called, was only about one foot above the sea-level! We know that
four-fifths of a floating mass of ice are always submerged. For one foot of an
iceberg or ice-field above the water, there are four below it. It must, however, be
remarked that the density, or rather specific weight of floating ice, varies
considerably according to its mode of formation or origin. The ice-masses which
proceed from sea water, porous, opaque, and tinged with blue or green,
according as they are struck by the rays of the sun, are lighter than ice formed
from fresh water. All things considered, and making due allowance for the
weight of the mineral and vegetable layer above the ice. Hobson concluded it to
be about four or five feet thick below the sea-level. The different declivities of
the island, the little hills and rising ground, would of course only affect the upper
soil, and it might reasonably be supposed that the wandering island was not


immersed more than five feet.

This made Hobson very anxious. Only five feet! Setting aside the causes of
dissolution to which the ice-field might be subjected, would not the slightest
shock cause a rupture of the surface? Might not a rough sea or a gale of wind
cause a dislocation of the ice-field, which would lead to its breaking up into
small portions, and to its final decomposition? Oh for the speedy arrival of the
winter, with its bitter cold! Would that the column of mercury were frozen in its
cistern! Nothing but the rigour of an Arctic winter could consolidate and thicken
the foundation of their island, and establish a means of communication between
it and the continent.

Hobson returmmed to the halting-place little cheered by his discoveries, and
found Long busy making arrangements for the night; for he had no idea of
sleeping beneath the open sky, although Mrs Barnett declared herself quite ready
to do so. He told the Lieutenant that he intended to dig a hole in the ice big
enough to hold three persons—in fact to make a kind of snow-hut, in which they
would be protected from the cold night air.

"In the land of the Esquimaux," he said, "nothing is wiser than to do as the
Esquimaux do."

Hobson approved, but advised the Sergeant not to dig too deeply, as the ice
was not more than five feet thick.

Long set to work. With the aid of his hatchet and ice-chisel he had soon
cleared away the earth, and hollowed out a kind of passage sloping gently down
to the crust of ice.

He next attacked the brittle mass, which had been covered over with sand
and earth for so many centuries. It would not take more than an hour to hollow
out a subterranean retreat, or rather a burrow with walls of ice, which would
keep in the heat, and therefore serve well for a resting-place during the short
night.

Whilst Long was working away like a white ant, Hobson communicated the
result of his observations to Mrs Barnett. He did not disguise from her that the
construction of Victoria Island rendered him very uneasy. He felt sure that the
thinness of the ice would lead to the opening of ravines on the surface before
long; where, it would be impossible to foresee, and of course it would be equally
impossible to prevent them. The wandering Island might at any moment settle
down in consequence of a change in its specific gravity, or break up into more or
less numerous islets, the duration of which must necessarily be ephemeral. He
judged, therefore, that it would be best for the members of the colony to keep
together as much as possible, and not to leave the fort, that they might all share
the same chances.


Hobson was proceeding further to unfold his views when cries for help were
heard.

Mrs Barnett started to her feet, and both looked round in every direction, but
nothing was to be seen.

The cries were now redoubled, and Hobson exclaimed—

"The Sergeant! the Sergeant!"

And followed by Mrs Barnett, he rushed towards the burrow, and he had
scarcely reached the opening of the snow-house before he saw Sergeant Long
clutching with both hands at his knife, which he had stuck in the wall of ice, and
calling out loudly, although with the most perfect self-possession.

His head and arms alone were visible. Whilst he was digging, the ice had
given way suddenly beneath him, and he was plunged into water up to his waist.

Hobson merely said—

"Keep hold!"

And creeping through the passage, he was soon at the edge of the hole. The
poor Sergeant seized his hand, and he was soon rescued from his perilous
position.

"Good God! Sergeant!" exclaimed Mrs Barnett; "what has happened?"

"Nothing," replied Long, shaking himself like a wet spaniel, "except that the
ice gave way under me, and I took a compulsory bath."

"You forgot what I told you about not digging too deeply, then," said
Hobson.

"Beg pardon, sir; I hadn’t cut through fifteen inches of the ice, and I expect
there was a kind of cavern where I was working-the ice did not touch the water.
It was just like going through a ceiling. If I hadn’t been able to hang on by my
knife, I should have slipped under the island like a fool, and that would have
been a pity, wouldn’t it, madam?"

"A very great pity, my brave fellow," said Mrs Barnett, pressing his hand.

Long’s explanation was correct; for some reason or another—most likely
from an accumulation of air-the ice had formed a kind of vault above the water,
and of course it soon gave way under the weight of the Sergeant and the blows
of his chisel.

The same thing might happen in other parts of the island, which was
anything but reassuring. Where could they be certain of treading on firm
ground? Might not the earth give way beneath their feet at any minute? What
heart, however brave, would not have sunk at the thought of the thin partition
between them and the awful gulf of the ocean?

Sergeant Long, however, thought but little of his bath, and was ready to
begin mining in some other place. This Mrs Barnett would not allow. A night in


the open air would do her no harm; the shelter of the coppice near would be
protection enough for them all; and Sergeant Long was obliged to submit.

The camp was, therefore, moved back some thirty yards from the beach, to a
rising ground on which grew a few clumps of pines and willows which could
scarcely be called a wood. Towards ten o’clock the disc of the sun began to dip
below the horizon, and before it disappeared for the few hours of the night a
crackling fire of dead branches was blazing at the camp.

Long had now a fine opportunity of drying his legs, of which he gladly
availed himself. He and Hobson talked together earnestly until twilight set in,
and Mrs Barnett occasionally joined in the conversation, doing the best she
could to cheer the disheartened Lieutenant. The sky was bright with stars, and
the holy influence of the night could not fail to calm his troubled spirit. The wind
murmured softly amongst the pines; even the sea appeared to be wrapt in
slumber, its bosom slightly heaving with the swell, which died away upon the
beach with a faint rippling sound. All creation was hushed, not even the wail of a
sea bird broke upon the ear, the crisp crackling of the dead branches was
exchanged for a steady flame, and nothing but the voices of the wanderers broke
the sublime, the awful silence of the night.

"Who would imagine,” said Mrs Barnett, "that we were floating on the
surface of the ocean! It really requires an effort to realise it, for the sea which is
carrying us along in its fatal grasp appears to be absolutely motionless!"

"Yes, madam," replied Hobson;" and if the floor of our carriage were solid, if
I did not know that sooner or later the keel of our boat will be missing, that some
day its hull will burst open, and finally, if I knew where we are going, I should
rather enjoy floating on the ocean like this."

"Well, Lieutenant," rejoined Mrs Barnett, "could there be a pleasanter mode
of travelling than ours? We feel no motion. Our island has exactly the same
speed as the current which is bearing it away. Is it not like a balloon voyage in
the air? What could be more delightful than advancing with one’s house, garden,
park, &c.? A wandering island, with a solid insubmersible foundation, would
really be the most comfortable and wonderful conveyance that could possibly be
imagined. I have heard of hanging gardens. Perhaps some day floating parks will
be invented which will carry us all over the globe! Their size will render them
insensible to the action of the waves, they will have nothing to fear from storms,
and perhaps with a favourable wind they might be guided by means of immense
sails! What marvels of vegetation would be spread before the eyes of the
passengers when they passed from temperate to torrid zones! With skilful pilots,
well acquainted with the currents, it might be possible to remain in one latitude,
and enjoy a perpetual spring."


Hobson could not help smiling at Mrs Barnett’s fancies. The brave woman
ran on with such an easy flow of words, she talked with as little effort as Victoria
Island moved. And was she not right? It would have been a very pleasant mode
of travelling if there had been no danger of their conveyance melting and being
swallowed up by the sea.

The night passed on, and the explorers slept a few hours. At daybreak they
breakfasted, and thoroughly enjoyed their meal. The warmth and rest had
refreshed them, and they resumed their journey at about six o’clock A.M.

From Cape Michael to the former Port Barnett the coast ran in an almost
straight line from south to north for about eleven miles. There was nothing
worthy of note about it; the shores were low and pretty even all the way, and
seemed to have suffered no alteration since the breaking of the isthmus. Long, in
obedience to the Lieutenant, made bench marks along the beach, that any future
change might be easily noted.

Hobson was naturally anxious to get back to Fort Hope the same day, and
Mrs Barnett was also eager to return to her friends. It was of course desirable
under the circumstances that the commanding officer should not be long absent
from the fort

All haste was therefore made, and by taking a short cut they arrived at noon
at the little promontory which formerly protected Port Barnett from the east
winds.

It was not more than eight miles from this point to Fort Hope, and before
four o’clock P.M the shouts of Corporal Joliffe welcomed their return to the
factory.

CHAPTER V.

FROM JULY 25TH TO AUGUST 20TH.

Hobson’s first care on his return to the fort, was to make inquiries of Thomas
Black as to the situation of the little colony. No change had taken place for the
last twenty-four hours, but, as subsequently appeared, the island had floated one
degree of latitude further south, whilst still retaining its motion towards the west.
It was now at the same distance from the equator as Icy Cape, a little promontory
of western Alaska, and two hundred miles from the American coast. The speed
of the current seemed to be less here than in the eastern part of the Arctic Ocean,
but the island continued to advance, and, much to Hobson’s annoyance, towards
the dreaded Behring Strait. It was now only the 24th July, and a current of
average speed would carry it in another month through the strait and into the
heated waves of the Pacific, where it would melt "like a lump of sugar in a glass
of water."

Mrs Barnett acquainted Madge with the result of the exploration of the


island. She explained to her the arrangement of the layers of earth and ice at the
part where the isthmus had been broken off; told her that the thickness of the ice
below the sea level was estimated at five feet; related the accident to Sergeant
Long—in short, she made her fully understand the reasons there were to fear the
breaking up or sinking of the ice field.

The rest of the colony had, however, no suspicion of the truth; a feeling of
perfect security prevailed. It never occurred to any of the brave fellows that Fort
Hope was floating above an awful abyss, and that the lives of all its inhabitants
were in danger. All were in good health, the weather was fine, and the climate
pleasant and bracing. The baby Michael got on wonderfully; he was beginning to
toddle about between the house and the palisade; and Corporal Joliffe, who was
extremely fond of him, was already beginning to teach him to hold a gun, and to
understand the first duties of a soldier. Oh, if Mrs Joliffe would but present him
with such a son! but, alas! the blessing of children, for which he and his wife
prayed every day, was as yet denied to them.


Meanwhile the soldiers had plenty to do.

Mac-Nab and his men—Petersen, Belcher, Garry, Pond, and Hope—worked
zealously at the construction of a boat, a difficult task, likely to occupy them for
several months. But as their vessel would be of no use until next year after the
thaw, they neglected none of their duties at the factory on its account. Hobson let
things go on as if the future of the factory were not compromised, and
persevered in keeping the men in ignorance. This serious question was often
discussed by the officer and his "staff," and Mrs Barnett and Madge differed
from their chief on the subject. They thought it would be better to tell the whole
truth; the men were brave and energetic, not likely to yield to despair, and the
shock would not be great if they heard of it now, instead of only when their
situation was so hopeless that it could not be concealed. But in spite of the
justice of these remarks, Hobson would not yield, and he was supported by
Sergeant Long. Perhaps, after all, they were right; they were both men of long
experience, and knew the temper of their men.

And so the work of provisioning and strengthening the fort proceeded. The
palisaded enceinte was repaired with new stakes, and made higher in many
places, so that it really formed a very strong fortification. Mac-Nab also put into
execution, with his chief’s approval, a plan he had long had at heart. At the
corners abutting on the lake he built two little pointed sentry-boxes, which
completed the defences; and Corporal Joliffe anticipated with delight the time
when he should be sent to relieve guard: he felt that they gave a military look to
the buildings, and made them really imposing.


The palisade was now completely finished, and Mac-Nab, remembering the
sufferings of the last winter, built a new wood shed close up against the house
itself, with a door of communication inside, so that there would be no need to go
outside at all. By this contrivance the fuel would always be ready to hand. On
the left side of the house, opposite the shed, Mac-Nab constructed a large
sleeping-room for the soldiers, so that the camp-bed could be removed from the
common room. This room was also to be used for meals, and work. The three
married couples had private rooms walled off, so that the large house was
relieved of them as well as of all the other soldiers. A magazine for furs only was
also erected behind the house near the powder-magazine, leaving the loft free for
stores; and the rafters and ribs of the latter were bound with iron cramps, that
they might be able to resist all attacks. Mac-Nab also intended to build a little
wooden chapel, which had been included in Hobson’s original plan of the
factory; but its erection was put off until the next summer.

With what eager interest would the Lieutenant have once watched the
progress of his establishment! Had he been building on firm ground, with what
delight would he have watched the houses, sheds, and magazines rising around
him! He remembered the scheme of crowning Cape Bathurst with a redoubt for
the protection of Fort Hope with a sigh. The very name of the factory, "Fort
Hope," made his heart sink within him; for should it not more truly be called
"Fort Despair?"

These various works took up the whole summer, and there was no time for
ennui. The construction of the boat proceeded rapidly. Mac-Nab meant it to be of
about thirty tons measurement, which would make it large enough to carry some
twenty passengers several hundred miles in the fine season. The carpenter had
been fortunate enough to find some bent pieces of wood, so that he was able
quickly to form the first ribs of the vessel, and soon the stern and sternpost, fixed
to the keel, were upon the dockyard at the foot of Cape Bathurst.

Whilst the carpenters were busy with hatchets, saws, and adzes, the hunters
were eagerly hunting the reindeer and Polar hares, which abounded near the fort.
The Lieutenant, however, told Marbre and Sabine not to go far away, stating as a
reason, that until the buildings were completed he did not wish to attract the
notice of rivals. The truth was, he did not wish the changes which had taken
place to be noticed.

One day Marbre inquired if it was not now time to go to Walruses’ Bay, and
get a fresh supply of morse-oil for burning, and Hobson replied rather hastily—

"No, Marbre; it would be useless."

The Lieutenant knew only too well that Walruses’ Bay was two hundred
miles away, and that there were no morses to be hunted on the island.


It must not be supposed that Hobson considered the situation desperate even
now. He often assured Mrs Barnett, Madge, and Long that he was convinced the
island would hold together until the bitter cold of winter should thicken its
foundation and arrest its course at one and the same time.

After his journey of discovery, Hobson estimated exactly the area of his new
dominions. The island measured more than forty miles round, from which its
superficial area[r] would appear to be about one hundred and forty miles at the
least. By way of comparison, we may say that Victoria Island was rather larger
than St Helena, and its area was about the same as that of Paris within the line of
fortifications. If then it should break up into fragments, the separate parts might
still be of sufficient size to be habitable for some time.

When Mrs Barnett expressed her surprise that a floating ice-field could be so
large, Hobson replied by reminding her of the observations of Arctic navigators.
Parry, Penny, and Franklin had met with ice-fields in the Polar seas one hundred
miles long and fifty broad. Captain Kellet abandoned his boat on an ice-field
measuring at least three hundred square miles, and what was Victoria Island
compared to it?

Its size was, however, sufficient to justify a hope that it would resist the
action of the warm currents until the cold weather set in. Hobson would not
allow himself to doubt; his despair arose rather from the knowledge that the fruit
of all his cares, anxieties, and dangers must eventually be swallowed up by the
deep, and it was no wonder that he could take no interest in the works that were
going on.

Mrs Barnett kept up a good heart through it all; she encouraged her comrades
in their work, and took her share in it, as if she had still a future to look forward
to. Seeing what an interest Mrs Joliffe took in her plants, she joined her every
day in the garden. There was now a fine crop of sorrel and scurvy-grass—thanks
to the Corporal’s unwearying exertions to keep off the birds of every kind, which
congregated by hundreds.

The taming of the reindeer had been quite successful; there were now a good
many young, and little Michael had been partly brought up on the milk of the
mothers. There were now some thirty head in the herd which grazed near the
fort, and a supply of the herbage on which they feed was dried and laid up for
the winter. These useful animals, which are easily domesticated, were already
quite familiar with all the colonists, and did not go far from the enceinte. Some
of them were used in sledges to carry timber backwards and forwards. A good
many reindeer, still wild, now fell into the trap half way between the fort and
Port Barnett. It will be remembered that a large bear was once taken in it; but
nothing of the kind occurred this season—none fell victims but the reindeer,


whose flesh was salted and laid by for future use. Twenty at least were taken,
which in the ordinary course of things would have gone down to the south in the
winter.

One day, however, the reindeer-trap suddenly became useless in consequence
of the conformation of the soil. After visiting it as usual, the hunter Marbre
approached Hobson, and said to him in a significant tone

"I have just paid my daily visit to the reindeer-trap, sir."

"Well, Marbre, I hope you have been as successful to-day as yesterday, and
have caught a couple of reindeer," replied Hobson.

"No, sir, no," replied Marbre, with some embarrassment.

"Your trap has not yielded its ordinary contingent then?"

"No, sir; and if any animal had fallen in, it would certainly have been
drowned!"

"Drowned!" cried the Lieutenant, looking at the hunter with an anxious
expression.

"Yes, sir," replied Marbre, looking attentively at his superior, "the pit is full
of water."

"Ah!" said Hobson, in the tone of a man who attached no importance to that,
"you know your pit was partly hollowed out of ice; its walls have melted with
the heat of the sun, and then "

"Beg pardon for interrupting you, sir," said Marbre; "but the water cannot
have been produced by the melting of ice."

"Why not, Marbre?" "Because if it came from ice it would be sweet, as you
explained to me once before. Now the water in our pit is salt!"

Master of himself as he was, Hobson could not help changing countenance
slightly, and he had not a word to say.

"Besides," added Marbre, "I wanted to sound the trench, to see how deep the
water was, and to my great surprise, I can tell you, I could not find the bottom."

"Well, Marbre," replied Hobson hastily, "there is nothing so wonderful in
that. Some fracture of the soil has established a communication between the sea
and the trap. So don’t be uneasy about it, my brave fellow, but leave the trap
alone for the present, and be content with setting snares near the fort."

Marbre touched his cap respectfully, and turned on his heel, but not before he
had given his chief a searching glance.

Hobson remained very thoughtful for a few moments. Marbre’s tidings were
of grave importance. It was evident that the bottom of the trench, gradually
melted by the warm waters of the sea, had given way.

Hobson at once called the Sergeant, and having acquainted him with the
incident, they went together, unnoticed by their companions, to the beach at the








foot of Cape Bathurst, where they had made the bench-marks.

They examined them carefully, and found that since they last did so, the
floating island had sunk six inches.

"We are sinking gradually," murmured Sergeant Long. "The ice is wearing
away."

"Oh for the winter! the winter!" cried Hobson, stamping his foot upon the
ground.

But as yet, alas! there was no sign of the approach of the cold season. The
thermometer maintained a mean height of 59° Fahrenheit, and during the few
hours of the night the column of mercury scarcely went down three degrees.

Preparations for the approaching winter went on apace, and there was really
nothing wanting to Fort Hope, although it had not been revictualled by Captain
Craventy’s detachment. The long hours of the Arctic night might be awaited in
perfect security. The stores were of course carefully husbanded. There still
remained plenty of spirits, only small quantities having been consumed; and
there was a good stock of biscuits, which, once gone, could not be replaced.
Fresh venison and salt meat were to be had in abundance, and with some
antiscorbutic vegetables, the diet was most healthy; and all the members of the
little colony were well.

A good deal of timber was cut in the woods clothing the eastern slopes of
Lake Barnett. Many were the birch-trees, pines, and firs which fell beneath the
axe of Mac-Nab, and were dragged to the house by the tamed reindeer. The
carpenter did not spare the little forest, although he cut his wood judiciously; for
he never dreamt that timber might fail him, imagining, as he did, Victoria Island
to be a peninsula, and knowing the districts near Cape Michael to be rich in
different species of trees.

Many a time did the unconscious carpenter congratulate his Lieutenant on
having chosen a spot so favoured by Heaven. Woods, game, furred animals, a
lagoon teeming with fish, plenty of herbs for the animals, and, as Corporal
Joliffe would have added, double pay for the men. Was not Cape Bathurst a
corner of a privileged land, the like of which was not to be found in the whole
Arctic regions? Truly Hobson was a favourite of Heaven, and ought to return
thanks to Providence every day for the discovery of this unique spot.

Ah, Mac-Nab, you little knew how you wrung the heart of your master when
you talked in that strain!

The manufacture of winter garments was not neglected in the factory. Mrs
Barnett, Madge, Mrs Mac-Nab, Mrs Rae, and Mrs Joliffe—when she could leave
her fires—were alike indefatigable. Mrs Barnett knew that they would all have
to leave the fort in the depth of winter, and was determined that every one should


be warmly clothed. They would have to face the bitterest cold for a good many
days during the Polar night, if Victoria Island should halt far from the continent.
Boots and clothes ought indeed to be strong and well made, for crossing some
hundreds of miles under such circumstances. Mrs Barnett and Madge devoted all
their energies to the matter in hand, and the furs, which they knew it would be
impossible to save, were turned to good account. They were used double, so that
the soft hair was both inside and outside of the clothes; and when wearing them,
the whole party would be as richly attired as the grandest princesses, or the most
wealthy ladies. Those not in the secret were rather surprised at the free use made
of the Company’s property; but Hobson’s authority was not to be questioned,
and really martens, polecats, musk-rats, beavers, and foxes multiplied with such
rapidity near the fort, that all the furs used could easily be replaced by a few
shots, or the setting of a few traps; and when Mrs Mac-Nab saw the beautiful
ermine coat which had been made for her baby, her delight was unbounded, and
she no longer wondered at anything.

So passed the days until the middle of the month of August. The weather
continued fine, and any mists which gathered on the horizon were quickly
dispersed by the sunbeams.

Every day Hobson took the bearings, taking care, however, to go some
distance from the fort, that suspicions might not be aroused, and he also visited
different parts of the island, and was reassured by finding that no important
changes appeared to be taking place.

On the 16th August Victoria Island was situated in 167° 27’ west longitude,
and 70° 49’ north latitude. It had, therefore, drifted slightly to the south, but
without getting any nearer to the American coast, which curved considerably.

The distance traversed by the island since the fracture of the isthmus, or
rather since the last thaw, could not be less than eleven or twelve hundred miles
to the west.

But what was this distance compared to the vast extent of the ocean? Had not
boats been known to be drifted several thousands of miles by currents? Was not
this the case with the English ship Resolute, the American brig Advance, and
with the Fox, all of which were carried along upon ice-fields until the winter
arrested their advance?

CHAPTER VI.


TEN DAYS OF TEMPEST

From the 17th to the 20th August the weather continued fine, and the
temperature moderate. The mists on the horizon were not resolved into clouds,
and altogether the weather was exceptionally beautiful for such an elevated
position. It will be readily understood, however, that Hobson could take no
pleasure in the fineness of the climate.

On the 21st August, however, the barometer gave notice of an approaching
change. The column of mercury suddenly fell considerably, the sun was
completely hidden at the moment of culmination, and Hobson was unable to take
his bearings.

The next day the wind changed and blew strongly from the northwest,
torrents of rain falling at intervals. Meanwhile, however, the temperature did not
change to any sensible extent, the thermometer remaining at 54° Fahrenheit.

Fortunately the proposed works were now all finished, and MacNab had
completed the carcass of his boat, which was planked and ribbed. Hunting might
now be neglected a little, as the stores were complete, which was fortunate, for
the weather became very bad. The wind was high, the rain incessant, and thick
fogs rendered it impossible to go beyond the enceinte of the fort.

"What do you think of this change in the weather, Lieutenant?” inquired Mrs
Barnett on the morning of the 27th August; "might it not be in our favour?"

"I should not like to be sure of it, madam," replied Hobson; "but anything is
better for us than the magnificent weather we have lately had, during which the
sun made the waters warmer and warmer. Then, too, the wind from the
northwest is so very strong that it may perhaps drive us nearer to the American
continent."

"Unfortunately," observed Long, "we can’t take our bearings every day now.
It’s impossible to see either sun, moon, or stars in this fog. Fancy attempting to
take an altitude now!"

"We shall see well enough to recognise America, if we get anywhere near it,"
said Mrs Barnett. "Whatever land we approach will be welcome. It will most
likely be some part of Russian America—probably Western Alaska."

"You are right, madam," said Hobson; "for, unfortunately, in the whole
Arctic Ocean there is not an island, an islet, or even a rock to which we could
fasten our vessel!"

"Well," rejoined Mrs Barnett, "why should not our conveyance take us
straight to the coasts of Asia? Might not the currents carry us past the opening of
Bearing Strait and land us on the shores of Siberia?"

"No, madam, no," replied Hobson; "our ice-field would soon meet the
Kamtchatka current, and be carried by it to the northwest. It is more likely,


however, that this wind will drive us towards the shores of Russian America."

"We must keep watch, then," said Mrs Barnett, "and ascertain our position as
soon as possible."

"We shall indeed keep watch," replied Hobson, "although this fog is very
much against us If we should be driven on to the coast, the shock will be felt
even if we cannot see. Let’s hope the island will not fall to pieces in this storm!
That is at present our principal danger. Well, when it comes we shall see what
there is to be done, and meanwhile we must wait patiently."

Of course this conversation was not held in the public room, where the
soldiers and women worked together. It was in her own room, with the window
looking out on the court, that Mrs Barnett received visitors. It was almost
impossible to see indoors even in the daytime, and the wind could be heard
rushing by outside like an avalanche. Fortunately, Cape Bathurst protected the
house from the northeast winds, but the sand and earth from its summit were
hurled down upon the roof with a noise like the pattering of hail. Mac Nab began
to feel fresh uneasiness about his chimneys, which it was absolutely necessary to
keep in good order. With the roaring of the wind was mingled that of the sea, as
its huge waves broke upon the beach. The storm had become a hurricane.

In spite of the fury of the gale, Hobson determined on the morning of the
28th of August to climb to the summit of Cape Bathurst, in order to examine the
state of the horizon, the sea, and the sky. He therefore wrapped himself up,
taking care to have nothing about him likely to give hold the wind, and set out.

He got to the foot of the cape without much difficulty. The sand and earth
blinded him, it is true, but protected by the cliff he had not as yet actually faced
the wind. The fatigue began when he attempted to climb the almost
perpendicular sides of the promontory; but by clutching at the tufts of herbs with
which they were covered, he managed to get to the top, but there the fury of the
gale was such that he could neither remain standing nor seated; he was therefore
forced to fling himself upon his face behind the little coppice and cling to some
shrubs, only raising his head and shoulders above the ground.

The appearance of sea and sky was indeed terrible. The spray dashed over
the Lieutenant’s head, and half-a-mile from the cape water and clouds were
confounded together in a thick mist. Low jagged rain-clouds were chased along
the heavens with giddy rapidity, and heavy masses of vapour were piled upon the
zenith. Every now and then an awful stillness fell upon the land, and the only
sounds were the breaking of the surf upon the beach and the roaring of the angry
billows; but then the tempest recommenced with redoubled fury, and Hobson felt
the cape tremble to its foundations. Sometimes the rain poured down with such
violence that it resembled grape-shot.


It was indeed a terrible hurricane from the very worst quarter of the heavens.
This northeast wind might blow for a long time and cause all manner of havoc.
Yet Hobson, who would generally have grieved over the destruction around him,
did not complain,—on the contrary, he rejoiced; for if, as he hoped, the island
held together, it must be driven to the southwest by this wind, so much more
powerful than the currents. And the southwest meant land—hope—safety! Yes,
for his own sake, and for that of all with him, he hoped that the hurricane would
last until it had flung them upon the laud, no matter where. That which would
have been fatal to a ship was the best thing that could happen to the floating
island.

For a quarter of an hour Hobson remained crouching upon the ground,
clutching at the shrubs like a drowning man at a spar, lashed by the wind,
drenched by the rain and the spray, struggling to estimate all the chances of
safety the storm might afford him. At the end of that time he let himself slide
down the cape, and fought his way to Fort Hope.

Hobson’s first care was to tell his comrades that the hurricane was not yet at
its height, and that it would probably last a long time yet. He announced these
tidings with the manner of one bringing good news, and every one looked at him
in astonishment. Their chief officer really seemed to take a delight in the fury of
the elements.

On the 30th Hobson again braved the tempest, not this time climbing the
cape, but going down to the beach. What was his joy at noticing some long
weeds floating on the top of the waves, of a kind which did not grow on Victoria
Island. Christopher Columbus’ delight was not greater when he saw the sea-
weed which told him of the proximity of land.

The Lieutenant hurried back to the fort, and told Mrs Barnett and Sergeant
Long of his discovery. He had a good mind to tell every one the whole truth now,
but a strange presentiment kept him silent.

The occupants of the fort had plenty to amuse them in the long days of
compulsory confinement. They went on improving the inside of the various
buildings, and dug trenches in the court to carry away the rain-water. Mac-Nab, a
hammer in one hand and a nail in the other, was always busy at a job in some
comer or another, and nobody took much note of the tempest outside in the
daytime; but at night it was impossible to sleep, the wind beat upon the buildings
like a battering-ram; between the house and the cape sometimes whirled a huge
waterspout of extraordinary dimensions; the planks cracked, the beams seemed
about to separate, and there was danger of the whole structure tumbling down.
Mac-Nab and his men lived in a state of perpetual dread, and had to be
continually on the watch.


Meanwhile, Hobson was uneasy about the stability of the island itself, rather
than that of the house upon it. The tempest became so violent, and the sea so
rough, that there was really a danger of the dislocation of the ice-field. It seemed
impossible for it to resist much longer, diminished as it was in thickness and
subject to the perpetual action of the waves. It is true that its inhabitants did not
feel any motion, on account of its vast extent, but it suffered from it none the
less. The point at issue was simply:—Would the island last until it was flung
upon the coast, or would it fall to pieces before it touched firm ground?

There could be no doubt that thus far it had resisted. As the Lieutenant
explained to Mrs Barnett, had it already been broken, had the ice-field already
divided into a number of islets, the occupants of the fort must have noticed it, for
the different pieces would have been small enough to be affected by the motion
of the sea, and the people on any one of them would have been pitched about
like passengers on a boat. This was not the case, and in his daily observations
Lieutenant Hobson had noticed no movement whatever, not so much as a
trembling of the island, which appeared as firm and motionless as when it was
still connected by its isthmus with the mainland.

But the breaking up, which had not yet taken place, might happen at any
minute.

Hobson was most anxious to ascertain whether Victoria Island, driven by the
northwest wind out of the current, had approached the continent. Everything, in
fact, depended upon this, which was their last chance of safety. But without sun,
moon, or stars, instruments were of course useless, as no observations could be
taken, and the exact position of the island could not be determined. If, then, they
were approaching the land, they would only know it when the land came in
sight, and Hobson’s only means of ascertaining anything in time to be of any
service, was to get to the south of his dangerous dominions. The position of
Victoria Island with regard to the cardinal points had not sensibly altered all the
time. Cape Bathurst still pointed to the north, as it did when it was the advanced
post of North America. It was, therefore, evident that if Victoria Island should
come alongside of the continent, it would touch it with its southern side,—the
communication would, in a word, be re-established by means of the broken
isthmus; it was, therefore, imperative to ascertain what was going on in that
direction.

Hobson determined to go to Cape Michael, however terrible the storm might
be, but he meant to keep the real motive of his reconnaissance a secret from his
companions. Sergeant Long was to accompany him.

About four o’clock P.M., on the 31st August, Hobson sent for the Sergeant in
his own room, that they might arrange together for all eventualities.


"Sergeant Long,” he began, "it is necessary that we should, without delay,
ascertain the position of Victoria Island, and above all whether this wind has, as I
hope, driven it near to the American continent."

"I quite agree with you, sir," replied Long, "and the sooner we find out the
better"

"But it will necessitate our going down to the south of the island."

"T am ready, sir."

"I know, Sergeant, that you are always ready to do your duty, but you will
not go alone. Two of us ought to go, that we may be able to let our comrades
know if any land is in sight; and besides I must see for myself ... we will go
together."

"When you like, Lieutenant, just when you think best."

"We will start this evening at nine o’clock, when everybody else has gone to
bed"

"Yes, they would all want to come with us," said Long, "and they must not
know why we go so far from the factory."

"No, they must not know," replied Hobson, "and if I can, I will keep the
knowledge of our awful situation from them until the end."

"It is agreed then, sir?"

"Yes. You will take a tinder-box and some touchwood [Footnote: A fungus
used as tinder (Polyporous igniarius).] with you, so that we can make a signal if
necessary—if land is in sight in the south, for instance"

"Yes, sir."

"We shall have a rough journey, Sergeant."

"What does that matter, sir, but by the way—the lady?"

"T don’t think I shall tell her. She would want to go with us."

"And she could not," said the Sergeant, "a woman could not battle with such
a gale. Just see how its fury is increasing at this moment!"

Indeed the house was rocking to such an extent that it seemed likely to be
torn from its foundations.

"No," said Hobson, "courageous as she is, she could not, she ought not to
accompany us. But on second thought, it will be best to tell her of our project.
She ought to know in case any accident should befall us"

"Yes," replied Long, "we ought not to keep anything from her, and if we do
not come back"...

"At nine o’clock then, Sergeant."

"At nine o’clock."

And with a military salute Sergeant Long retired.

A few minutes later Hobson was telling Mrs Barnett of his scheme. As he


expected the brave woman insisted on accompanying him, and was quite ready
to face the tempest. Hobson did not dissuade her by dwelling on the dangers of
the expedition, he merely said that her presence was necessary at the fort during
his absence, and that her remaining would set his mind at ease. If any accident
happened to him it would be a comfort to know that she would take his place.

Mrs Barnett understood and said no more about going; but only urged
Hobson not to risk himself unnecessarily. To remember that he was the chief
officer, that his life was not his own, but necessary to the safety of all. The
Lieutenant promised to be as prudent as possible; but added that the examination
of the south of the island must be made at once, and he would make it. The next
day Mrs Barnett merely told her companions that the Lieutenant and the
Sergeant had gone to make a final reconnaissance before the winter set in.

CHAPTER VII.

A FIRE AND A CRY.

The Lieutenant and the Sergeant spent the evening in the large room of the
fort, where all were assembled except the astronomer, who still remained shut up
in his cabin. The men were busy over their various occupations, some cleaning
their arms, others mending or sharpening their tools. The women were stitching
away industriously, and Mrs Paulina Barnett was reading aloud; but she was
often interrupted not only by the noise of the wind, which shook the walls of the
house like a battering-ram, but by the cries of the baby. Corporal Joliffe, who
had undertaken to amuse him, had enough to do. The young gentleman had
ridden upon his playmate’s knees until they were worn out, and the Corporal at
last put the indefatigable little cavalier on the large table, where he rolled about
to his heart’s content until he fell asleep.

At eight o’clock prayers were read as usual, the lamps were extinguished,
and all retired to rest.

When every one was asleep, Hobson and Long crept cautiously across the
large room and gained the passage, where they found Mrs Barnett, who wished
to press their hands once more.

"Till to-morrow," she said to the Lieutenant.

"Yes," replied Hobson, "to-morrow, madam, without fail."

"But if you are delayed?"

"You must wait patiently for us," replied the Lieutenant, "for if in examining
the southern horizon we should see a fire, which is not unlikely this dark night,
we should know that we were near the coasts of New Georgia, and then it would
be desirable for me to ascertain our position by daylight. In fact, we may be
away forty eight hours. If, however, we can get to Cape Michael before
midnight, we shall be back at the fort to-morrow evening. So wait patiently,


madam, and believe that we shall incur no unnecessary risk."

"But," added the lady, "suppose you don’t get back to morrow, suppose you
are away more than two days?"

"Then we shall not return at all," replied Hobson simply.

The door was opened, Mrs Barnett closed it behind the Lieutenant and his
companion and went back to her own room, where Madge awaited her, feeling
anxious and thoughtful.

Hobson and Long made their way across the inner court through a whirlwind
which nearly knocked them down; but clinging to each other, and leaning on
their iron-bound staffs, they reached the postern gates, and set out [beween]
between the hills and the eastern bank of the lagoon.

A faint twilight enabled them to see their way. The moon, which was new the
night before, would not appear above the horizon, and there was nothing to
lessen the gloom of the darkness, which would, however, last but a few hours
longer.

The wind and rain were as violent as ever. The Lieutenant and his companion
wore impervious boots and water-proof cloaks well pulled in at the waist, and
the hood completely covering their heads. Thus protected they got along at a
rapid pace, for the wind was behind them, and sometimes drove them on rather
faster than they cared to go. Talking was quite out of the question, and they did
not attempt it, for they were deafened by the hurricane, and out of breath with
the buffeting they received.

Hobson did not mean to follow the coast, the windings of which would have
taken him a long way round, and have brought him face to face with the wind,
which swept over the sea with nothing to break its fury. His idea was to cut
across in a Straight line from Cape Bathurst to Cape Michael, and he was
provided with a pocket compass with which to ascertain his bearings. He hoped
by this means to cross the ten or eleven miles between him and his goal, just
before the twilight faded and gave place to the two hours of real darkness.

Bent almost double, with rounded shoulders and stooping heads, the two
pressed on. As long as they kept near the lake they did not meet the gale full
face, the little hills crowned with trees afforded them some protection, the wind
howled fearfully as it bent and distorted the branches, almost tearing the trunks
up by the roots; but it partly exhausted its strength, and even the rain when it
reached the explorers was converted into impalpable mist, so that for about four
miles they did not suffer half as much as they expected to.

But when they reached the southern skirts of the wood, where the hills
disappeared, and there were neither trees nor rising ground, the wind swept
along with awful force, and involuntarily they paused for a moment. They were


still six miles from Cape Michael.

"We are going to have a bad time of it," shouted Lieutenant Hobson in the
Sergeant’s ear.

"Yes, the wind and rain will conspire to give us a good beating," answered
Long.

"T am afraid that now and then we shall have hail as well," added Hobson.

"Tt won’t be as deadly as grape-shot," replied Long coolly, "and we have both
been through that, and so forwards!"

"Forwards, my brave comrade!"

It was then ten o’clock. The twilight was fading away, dying as if drowned in
the mists or quenched by the wind and the rain. There was still, however, some
light, and the Lieutenant struck his flint, and consulted his compass, passing a
piece of burning touchwood over it, and then, drawing his cloak more closely
around him, he plunged after the Sergeant across the unprotected plain.

At the first step, both were flung violently to the ground, but they managed
to scramble up, and clinging to each other with their backs bent like two old
crippled peasants, they struck into a kind of ambling trot.

There was a kind of awful grandeur in the storm to which neither was
insensible. Jagged masses of mist and ragged rain-clouds swept along the
ground. The loose earth and sand were whirled into the air and flung down again
like grape-shot, and the lips of Hobson and his companion were wet with salt
spray, although the sea was two or three miles distant at least.

During the rare brief pauses in the gale, they stopped and took breath, whilst
the Lieutenant ascertained their position as accurately as possible.

The tempest increased as the night advanced, the air and water seemed to be
absolutely confounded together, and low down on the horizon was formed one of
those fearful waterspouts which can overthrow houses, tear up forests, and
which the vessels whose safety they threaten attack with artillery. It really
seemed as if the ocean itself was being tom from its bed and flung over the
devoted little island.

Hobson could not help wondering how it was that the ice-field which
supported it was not broken in a hundred places in this violent convulsion of the
sea, the roaring of which could be distinctly heard where he stood. Presently
Long, who was a few steps in advance, stopped suddenly, and turning round
managed to make the Lieutenant hear the broken words—

"Not that way!"

"Why not?"

"The sea!"

"What, the sea! We cannot possibly have got to the southeast coast!"


"Look, look, Lieutenant!"

It was true, a vast sheet of water was indistinctly visible before them, and
large waves were rolling up and breaking at the Lieutenant’s feet.

Hobson again had recourse to his flint, and with the aid of some lighted
touchwood consulted the needle of his compass very carefully.

"No," he said, "the sea is farther to the left, we have not yet passed the wood
between us and Cape Michael."

"Then it is"——

"It is a fracture of the island!" cried Hobson, as both were compelled to fling
themselves to the ground before the wind, "either a large portion of our land has
been broken off and drifted away, or a gulf has been made, which we can go
round. Forwards!"

They struggled to their feet and turned to the right towards the centre of the
island. For about ten minutes they pressed on in silence, fearing, not without
reason, that all communication with the south of the island would be found to be
cut off. Presently, however, they no longer heard the noise of the breakers.

"It is only a gulf." screamed Hobson in the Sergeant’s ear. "Let us turn
round."

And they resumed their original direction towards the south, but both knew
only too well that they had a fearful danger to face, for that portion of the island
on which they were was evidently cracked for a long distance, and might at any
moment separate entirely; should it do so under the influence of the waves, they
would inevitably be drifted away, whither they knew not. Yet they did not
hesitate, but plunged into the mist, not even pausing to wonder if they should
ever get back.

What anxious forebodings must, however, have pressed upon the heart of the
Lieutenant. Could he now hope that the island would hold together until the
winter? had not the inevitable breaking up already commenced? If the wind
should not drive them on to the coast, were they not doomed to perish very soon,
to be swallowed up by the deep, leaving no trace behind them? What a fearful
prospect for all the unconscious inhabitants of the fort!

But through it all the two men, upheld by the consciousness of a duty to
perform, bravely struggled on against the gale, which nearly tore them to pieces,
along the new beach, the foam sometimes bathing their feet, and presently
gained the large wood which shut in Cape Michael. This they would have to
cross to get to the coast by the shortest route, and they entered it in complete
darkness, the wind thundering among the branches over their heads. Everything
seemed to be breaking to pieces around them, the dislocated branches
intercepted their passage, and every moment they ran a risk of being crushed


beneath a falling tree, or they stumbled over a stump they had not been able to
see in the gloom. The noise of the waves on the other side of the wood was a
sufficient guide to their steps, and sometimes the furious breakers shook the
weakened ground beneath their feet. Holding each other’s hands lest they should
lose each other, supporting each other, and the one helping the other up when he
fell over some obstacle, they at last reached the point for which they were bound.

But the instant they quitted the shelter of the wood a perfect whirlwind tore
them asunder, and flung them upon the ground.

"Sergeant, Sergeant! Where are you?" cried Hobson with all the strength of
his lungs.

"Here, here!" roared Long in reply.

And creeping on the ground they struggled to reach each other; but it seemed
as if a powerful hand rivetted them to the spot on which they had fallen, and it
was only after many futile efforts that they managed to reach each other. Having
done so, they tied their belts together to prevent another separation, and crept
along the sand to a little rising ground crowned by a small clump of pines. Once
there they were a little more protected, and they proceeded to dig themselves a
hole, in which they crouched in a state of absolute exhaustion and prostration.

It was half-past eleven o’clock P.M.

For some minutes neither spoke. With eyes half closed they lay in a kind of
torpor, whilst the trees above them bent beneath the wind, and their branches
rattled like the bones of a skeleton. But yet again they roused themselves from
this fatal lethargy, and a few mouthfuls of rum from the Sergeant’s flask revived
them.

"Let us hope these trees will hold," at last observed Hobson.

"And that our hole will not blow away with them," added the Sergeant,
crouching in the soft sand.

"Well!" said Hobson, "here we are at last, a few feet from Cape Michael, and
as we came to make observations, let us make them. I have a presentiment,
Sergeant, only a presentiment, remember, that we are not far from firm ground!"

Had the southern horizon been visible the two adventurers would have been
able to see two-thirds of it from their position; but it was too dark to make out
anything, and if the hurricane had indeed driven them within sight of land, they
would not be able to see it until daylight, unless a fire should be lighted on the
continent.

As the Lieutenant had told Mrs Barnett, fishermen often visited that part of
North America, which is called New Georgia, and there are a good many small
native colonies, the members of which collect the teeth of mammoths, these
fossil elephants being very numerous in these latitudes. A few degrees farther


south, on the island of Sitka, rises New-Archangel, the principal settlement in
Russian America, and the head-quarters of the Russian Fur Company, whose
jurisdiction once extended over the whole of the Aleutian Islands. The shores of
the Arctic Ocean are, however, the favourite resort of hunters, especially since
the Hudson’s Bay Company took a lease of the districts formerly in the hands of
the Russians; and Hobson, although he knew nothing of the country, was well
acquainted with the habits of those who were likely to visit it at this time of the
year, and was justified in thinking that he might meet fellow-countrymen,
perhaps even members of his own Company, or, failing them, some native
Indians, scouring the coasts.

But could the Lieutenant reasonably hope that Victoria Island had been
driven towards the coast?

"Yes, a hundred times yes," he repeated to the Sergeant again and again. "For
seven days a hurricane has been blowing from the northeast, and although I
know that the island is very flat, and there is not much for the wind to take hold
of, still all these little hills and woods spread out like sails must have felt the
influence of the wind to a certain extent. Moreover, the sea which bears us along
feels its power, and large waves are certainly running in shore. It is impossible
for us to have remained in the current which was dragging us to the west, we
must have been driven out of it, and towards the south. Last time we took our
bearings we were two hundred miles from the coast, and in seven days "

"Your reasonings are very just, Lieutenant," replied the Sergeant, "and I feel
that whether the wind helps us or not, God will not forsake us. It cannot be His
will that so many unfortunate creatures should perish, and I put my trust in
Him!"

The two talked on in broken sentences, making each other hear above the
roaring of the storm, and struggling to pierce the gloom which closed them in on
every side; but they could see nothing, not a ray of light broke the thick
darkness.

About half past one A.M. the hurricane ceased for a few minutes, whilst the
fury of the sea seemed to be redoubled, and the large waves, lashed into foam,
broke over each other with a roar like thunder.

Suddenly Hobson seizing his companion’s arm shouted—

"Sergeant, do you hear?"

"What?"

"The noise of the sea?"

"Of course I do, sir," replied Long, listening more attentively, "and the sound
of the breakers seems to me not"———

"Not exactly the same... isn’t it Sergeant; listen, listen, it is like the sound of





surf!... it seems as if the waves were breaking against rocks!"

Hobson and the Sergeant now listened intently, the monotonous sound of the
waves dashing against each other in the offing was certainly exchanged for the
regular rolling sound produced by the breaking of water against a hard body;
they heard the reverberating echoes which told of the neighbourhood of rocks,
and they knew that along the whole of the coast of their island there was not a
single stone, and nothing more sonorous than the earth and sand of which it was
composed!

Could they have been deceived? The Sergeant tried to rise to listen better, but
he was immediately flung down by the hurricane, which recommenced with
renewed violence. The lull was over, and again the noise of the waves was
drowned in the shrill whistling of the wind, and the peculiar echo could no
longer be made out.

The anxiety of the two explorers will readily be imagined. They again
crouched down in their hole, doubting whether it would not perhaps be prudent
to leave even this shelter, for they felt the sand giving way beneath them, and the
pines cracking at their very roots. They persevered, however, in gazing towards
the south, every nerve strained to the utmost, in the effort to distinguish objects
through the darkness.

The first grey twilight of the dawn might soon be expected to appear, and a
little before half-past two A.M. Long suddenly exclaimed:

"T see it!"

"What?"

"A fire!"

"A fire?"

"Yes, there—over there!"

And he pointed to the southwest. Was he mistaken? No, for Hobson also
made out a faint glimmer in the direction indicated.

"Yes!" he cried, "yes, Sergeant, a fire; there is land there!"

"Unless it is a fire on board ship," replied Long.

"A ship at sea in this weather!" exclaimed Hobson, "impossible! No, no,
there is land there, land I tell you, a few miles from us!"

"Well, let us make a signal!"

"Yes, Sergeant, we will reply to the fire on the mainland by a fire on our
island!"

Of course neither Hobson nor Long had a torch, but above their heads rose
resinous pines distorted by the hurricane.

"Your flint, Sergeant," said Hobson.

Long at once struck his flint, lighted the touchwood, and creeping along the


sand climbed to the foot of the thicket of firs, where he was soon joined by the
Lieutenant. There was plenty of deadwood about, and they piled it up at the
stems of the trees, set fire to it, and soon, the wind helping them, they had the
satisfaction of seeing the whole thicket in a blaze

"Ah!" said Hobson, "as we saw their fire, they will see ours!"

The firs burnt with a lurid glare like a large torch. The dried resin in the old
trunks aided the conflagration, and they were rapidly consumed. At last the
crackling ceased, the flames died away, and all was darkness.

Hobson and Long looked in vain for an answering fire—nothing was to be
seen. For ten minutes they watched, hoping against hope, and were just
beginning to despair, when suddenly a cry was heard, a distinct cry for help. It
was a human voice, and it came from the sea.

Hobson and Long, wild with eager anxiety, let themselves slide down to the
shore.

The cry was not, however, repeated.

The daylight was now gradually beginning to appear, and the violence of the
tempest seemed to be decreasing. Soon it was light enough for the horizon to be
examined.

But there was no land in sight, sea and sky were still blended in one
unbroken circle.

CHAPTER VIII.

MRS. PAULINA BARNETT’S EXCURSION.

The whole morning Hobson and Sergeant Long wandered about the coast.
The weather was much improved, the rain had ceased, and the wind had veered
round to the southeast with extraordinary suddenness, without unfortunately
decreasing in violence, causing fresh anxiety to the Lieutenant, who could no
longer hope to reach the mainland.

The southeast wind would drive the wandering island farther from the
continent, and fling it into the dangerous currents, which must drift it to the north
of the Arctic Ocean.

How could they even be sure that they had really approached the coast
during the awful night just over. Might it not have been merely a fancy of the
Lieutenant’s? The air was now clear, and they could look round a radius of
several miles; yet there was nothing in the least resembling land within sight.
Might they not adopt the Sergeant’s suggestion, that a ship had passed the island
during the night, that the fire and cry were alike signals of sailors in distress?
And if it had been a vessel, must it not have foundered in such a storm?

Whatever the explanation there was no sign of a wreck to be seen either in
the offing or on the beach, and the waves, now driven along by the wind from


the land, were large enough to have overwhelmed any vessel.

"Well, Lieutenant," said Sergeant Long, "what is to be done?’"

"We must remain upon our island," replied the Lieutenant, pressing his hand
to his brow; "we must remain on our island and wait for winter; it alone can save
us."

It was now mid-day, and Hobson, anxious to get back to Fort Hope before
the evening, at once turned towards Cape Bathurst.

The wind, being now on their backs, helped them along as it had done
before. They could not help feeling very uneasy, as they were naturally afraid
that the island might have separated into two parts in the storm. The gulf
observed the night before might have spread farther, and if so they would be cut
off from their friends.

They soon reached the wood they had crossed the night before. Numbers of
trees were lying on the ground, some with broken stems, others torn up by the
roots from the soft soil, which had not afforded them sufficient support. The few
which remained erect were stripped of their leaves, and their naked branches
creaked and moaned as the southeast wind swept over them.

Two miles beyond this desolated forest the wanderers arrived at the edge of
the gulf they had seen the night before without being able to judge of its extent.
They examined it carefully, and found that it was about fifty feet wide, cutting
the coast line straight across near Cape Michael and what was formerly Fort
Barnett, forming a kind of estuary running more than a mile and a half inland. If
the sea should again become rough in a fresh storm, this gulf would widen more
and more.

Just as Hobson approached the beach, he saw a large piece of ice separate
from the island and float away!

"Ah!" murmured Long, "that is the danger!"

Both then turned hurriedly to the west, and walked as fast as they could
round the huge gulf, making direct for Fort Hope.

They noticed no other changes by the way, and towards four o’clock they
crossed the court and found all their comrades at their usual occupations.

Hobson told his men that he had wished once more before the winter to see if
there were any signs of the approach of Captain Craventy’s convoy, and that his
expedition had been fruitless.

"Then, sir," observed Marbre, "I suppose we must give up all idea of seeing
our comrades from Fort Reliance for this year at least?"

"IT think you must," replied Hobson simply, re-entering the public room.

Mrs Barnett and Madge were told of the two chief events of the exploration:
the fire and the cry. Hobson was quite sure that neither lib nor the Sergeant were


mistaken. The fire had really been seen, the cry had really been heard; and after
a long consultation every one came to the conclusion that a ship in distress had
passed within sight during the night, and that the island had not approached the
American coast.

The southeast wind quickly chased away the clouds and mists, so that
Hobson hoped to be able to take his bearings the next day. The night was colder
and a fine snow fell, which quickly covered the ground. This first sign of winter
was hailed with delight by all who knew of the peril of their situation.

On the 2nd September the sky gradually became free from vapours of all
kinds, and the sun again appeared. Patiently the Lieutenant awaited its
culmination; at noon he took the latitude, and two hours later a calculation of
hour-angles gave him the longitude.

The following were the results obtained: Latitude, 70° 57’; longitude, 170°
30’.

So that, in spite of the violence of the hurricane, the island had remained in
much the same latitude, although it had been drifted somewhat farther west.
They were now abreast of Behring Strait, but four hundred miles at least north of
Capes East and Prince of Wales, which jut out on either side at the narrowest
part of the passage.

The situation was, therefore, more dangerous than ever, as the island was
daily getting nearer to the dangerous Kamtchatka Current, which, if it once
seized it in its rapid waters, might carry it far away to the north. Its fate would
now soon be decided. It would either stop where the two currents met, and there
be shut in by the ice of the approaching winter, or it would be drifted away and
lost in the solitudes of the remote hyperborean regions.

Hobson was painfully moved on ascertaining the true state of things, and
being anxious to conceal his emotion, he shut himself up in his own room and
did not appear again that day. With his chart before him, he racked his brains to
find some way out of the difficulties with which be was beset.

The temperature fell some degrees farther the same day, and the mists, which
had collected above the south-eastern horizon the day before, resolved
themselves into snow during the night, so that the next day the white carpet was
two inches thick. Winter was coming at last.

On September 3rd Mrs Barnett resolved to go a few miles along the coast
towards Cape Esquimaux. She wished to see for herself the changes lately
produced. If she had mentioned her project to the Lieutenant, he would certainly
have offered to accompany her; but she did not wish to disturb him, and decided
to go without him, taking Madge with her. There was really nothing to fear, the
only formidable animals, the bears, seemed to have quite deserted the island


after the earthquake; and two women might, without danger, venture on a walk
of a few hours without an escort.

Madge agreed at once to Mrs Barnett’s proposal, and without a word to any
one they set out at eight o’clock A.M., provided with an ice-chisel, a flask of
spirits, and a wallet of provisions.

After leaving Cape Bathurst they turned to the west. The sun was already
dragging its slow course along the horizon, for at this time of year it would only
be a few degrees above it at its culmination. But its oblique rays were clear and
powerful, and the snow was already melting here and there beneath their
influence.

The coast was alive with flocks of birds of many kinds; ptarmigans,
guillemots, puffins, wild geese, and ducks of every variety fluttered about,
uttering their various cries, skimming the surface of the sea or of the lagoon,
according as their tastes led them to prefer salt or fresh water.

Mrs Barnett had now a capital opportunity of seeing how many furred
animals haunted the neighbourhood of Fort Hope. Martens, ermines, musk-rats,
and foxes were numerous, and the magazines of the factory might easily have
been filled with their skins, but what good would that be now? The inoffensive
creatures, knowing that hunting was suspended, went and came fearlessly,
venturing close up to the palisade, and becoming tamer every day. Their instinct
doubtless told them that they and their old enemies were alike prisoners on the
island, and a common danger bound them together. It struck Mrs Barnett as
strange that the two enthusiastic hunters—Marbre and Sabine—should obey the
Lieutenant’s orders to spare the furred animals without remonstrance or
complaint, and appeared not even to wish to shoot the valuable game around
them. It was true the foxes and others had not yet assumed their winter robes, but
this was not enough to explain the strange indifference of the two hunters.

Whilst walking at a good pace and talking over their strange situation, Mrs
Barnett and Madge carefully noted the peculiarities of the sandy coast. The
ravages recently made by the sea were distinctly visible. Fresh landslips enabled
them to see new fractures in the ice distinctly. The strand, fretted away in many
places, had sunk to an enormous extent, and the waves washed along a level
beach when the perpendicular shores had once checked their advance. It was
evident that parts of the island were now only on a level with the ocean.

"O Madge!" exclaimed Mrs Barnett, pointing to the long smooth tracts on
which the curling waves broke in rapid succession, "our situation has indeed
become aggravated by the awful storm! It is evident that the level of the whole
island is gradually becoming lower. It is now only a question of time. Will the
winter come soon enough to save us? Everything depends upon that."


"The winter will come, my dear girl," replied Madge with her usual
unshaken confidence. "We have already had two falls of snow. Ice is [begininng |
beginning to accumulate, and God will send it us in time, I feel sure."

"You are right. Madge, we must have faith!" said Mrs Barnett. "We women
who do not trouble ourselves about the scientific reasons for physical
phenomena can hope, when men who are better informed, perhaps, despair. That
is one of our blessings, which our Lieutenant unfortunately does not share. He
sees the significance of facts, he reflects, he calculates, he reckons up the time
still remaining to us, and I see that he is beginning to lose all hope."

"He is a brave, energetic man, for all that," replied Madge.

"Yes," added Mrs Barnett, "and if it be in the power of man to save us, he
will do it."

By nine o’clock the two women had walked four miles. They were often
obliged to go inland for some little distance, to avoid parts of the coast already
invaded by the sea. Here and there the waves had encroached half-a-mile beyond
the former high-water line, and the thickness of the ice-field had been
considerably reduced. There was danger that it would soon yield in many places,
and that new bays would be formed all along the coast.

As they got farther from the fort Mrs Barnett noticed that the number of
furred animals decreased considerably. The poor creatures evidently felt more
secure near a human habitation. The only formidable animals which had not
been led by instinct to escape in time from the dangerous island were a few
wolves, savage beasts which even a common danger did not conciliate. Mrs
Barnett and Madge saw several wandering about on the plains, but they did not
approach, and soon disappeared behind the hills on the south of the lagoon.

"What will become of all these imprisoned animals," said Madge, "when all
food fails them, and they are famished with hunger in the winter?"

"They will not be famished in a hurry, Madge," replied Mrs Barnett, "and we
shall have nothing to fear from them; all the martens, ermines, and Polar hares,
which we spare will fall an easy prey to them. That is not our danger; the brittle
ground beneath our feet, which may at any moment give way, is our real peril.
Only look how the sea is advancing here. It already covers half the plain, and the
waves, still comparatively warm, are eating away our island above and below at
the same time! If the cold does not stop it very soon, the sea will shortly join the
lake, and we shall lose our lagoon as we lost our river and our port!"

"Well, if that should happen it will indeed be an irreparable misfortune!"
exclaimed Madge.

"Why?" asked Mrs Barnett, looking inquiringly at her companion.

"Because we shall have no more fresh water,” replied Madge.


"Oh, we shall not want for fresh water, Madge," said Mrs Barnett; "the rain,
the snow, the ice, the icebergs of the ocean, the very ice-field on which we float,
will supply us with that; no, no, that is not our danger."

About ten o’clock Mrs Bamett and Madge had readied the rising ground
above Cape Esquimaux, but at least two miles inland, for they had found it
impossible to follow the coast, worn away as it was by the sea. Being rather tired
with the many détours they had had to make, they decided to rest a few minutes
before setting off on their return to Fort Hope. A little hill crowned by a clump of
birch trees and a few shrubs afforded a pleasant shelter, and a bank covered with
yellow moss, from which the snow had melted, served them as a seat. The little
wallet was opened, and they shared their simple repast like sisters.

Half an hour later, Mrs Barnett proposed that they should climb along the
promontory to the sea, and find out the exact state of Cape Esquimaux. She was
anxious to know if the point of it had resisted the storm, and Madge declared
herself ready to follow "her dear girl" wherever she went, but at the same time
reminded her that they were eight or nine miles from Cape Bathurst already, and
that they must not make Lieutenant Hobson uneasy by too long an absence.

But some presentiment made Mrs Barnett insist upon doing as she proposed,
and she was right, as the event proved. It would only delay them half an hour
after all.

They had not gone a quarter of a mile before Mrs Barnett stopped suddenly,
and pointed to some clear and regular impressions upon the snow. These marks
must have been made within the last nine or ten hours, or the last fall of snow
would have covered them over.

"What animal has passed along here, I wonder?" said Madge.

"It was not an animal," said Mrs Barnett, bending down to examine the
marks more closely, "not a quadruped certainly, for its four feet would have left
impressions very different from these. Look, Madge, they are the footprints of a
human person!"

"But who could have been here?" inquired Madge; "none of the soldiers or
women have left the fort, and we are on an island, remember. You must be
mistaken, my dear; but we will follow the marks, and see where they lead us."

They did so, and fifty paces farther on both again paused.

"Look, Madge, look!" cried Mrs Barnett, seizing her companion’s arm, "and
then say if I am mistaken."

Near the footprints there were marks of a heavy body having been dragged
along the snow, and the impression of a hand.

"Tt is the hand of a woman or a child!" cried Madge.

"Yes!" replied Mrs Barnett; "a woman or a child has fallen here exhausted,


and risen again to stumble farther on; look, the footprints again, and father on
more falls!"

"Who, who could it have been?" exclaimed Madge.

"How can I tell?" replied Mrs Barnett. "Some unfortunate creature
imprisoned like ourselves for three or four months perhaps. Or some
shipwrecked wretch flung upon the coast in the storm. You remember the fire
and the cry of which Sergeant Long and Lieutenant Hobson spoke. Come, come,
Madge, there may be some one in danger for us to save!

And Mrs Barnett, dragging Madge with her, ran along following the traces,
and further on found that they were stained with blood.

The brave, tender-hearted woman, had spoken of saving some one in danger;
had she then forgotten that there was no safety for any upon the island, doomed
sooner or later to be swallowed up by the ocean?

The impressions on the ground led towards Cape Esquimaux. And the two
carefully traced them, but the footprints presently disappeared, whilst the blood-
stains increased, making an irregular pathway along the snow. It was evident the
poor wretch had been unable to walk farther, and had crept along on hands and
knees; here and there fragments of torn clothes were scattered about, bits of
sealskin and fur.

"Come, come," cried Mrs Barnett, whose heart beat violently.

Madge followed her, they were only a few yards from Cape Esquimaux,
which now rose only a few feet upon the sea-level against the background of the
sky, and was quite deserted.

The impressions now led them to the right of the cape, and running along
they soon climbed to the top, but there was still nothing, absolutely nothing, to
be seen. At the foot of the cape, where the slight ascent began, the traces turned
to the right, and led straight to the sea.

Mrs Barnett was turning to the right also, but just as she was stepping on to
the beach, Madge, who had been following her and looking about uneasily,
caught hold of her hand, and exclaimed—

"Stop! stop!" "No, Madge, no!" cried Mrs Barnett, who was drawn along by
a kind of instinct in spite of herself.

"Stop, stop, and look!" cried Madge, tightening her hold on her mistress’s
hand.

On the beach, about fifty paces from Cape Esquimaux, a large white mass
was moving about and growling angrily.

It was an immense Polar bear, and the two women watched it with beating
hearts. It was pacing round and round a bundle of fur on the ground, which it
smelt at every now and then, lifting it up and letting it fall again. The bundle of


fur looked like the dead body of a walrus.

Mrs Barnett and Madge did not know what to think, whether to advance or to
retreat, but presently as the body was moved about a kind of hood fell back from
the head, and some long locks of brown hair were thrown over the snow.

"Tt is a woman! a woman!" cried Mrs Barnett, eager to rush to her assistance
and find out if she were dead or alive!

"Stop!" repeated Madge, holding her back; "the bear won’t harm her."

And, indeed, the formidable creature merely turned the body over, and
showed no inclination of tearing it with its dreadful claws. It went away and
came back apparently uncertain what to do. It had not yet perceived the two
women who were so anxiously watching it.

Suddenly a loud crack was heard. The earth shook, and it seemed as if the
whole of Cape Esquimaux were about to be plunged into the sea.

A large piece of the island had broken away, and a huge piece of ice, the
centre of gravity of which had been displaced by the alteration in its specific
weight, drifted away, carrying with it the bear and the body of the woman.

Mrs Barnett screamed, and would have flung herself upon the broken ice
before it floated away, if Madge had not clutched her hand firmly, saying quietly





"Stop! stop!"

At the noise produced by the breaking off of the piece of ice, the bear started
back with a fearful growl, and, leaving the body, rushed to the side where the
fracture had taken place; but he was already some forty feet from the coast, and
in his terror he ran round and round the islet, tearing up the ground with his
claws, and stamping the sand and snow about him.

Presently he returned to the motionless body, and, to the horror of the two
women, seized it by the clothes with his teeth, and carrying it to the edge of the
ice, plunged with it into the sea.

Being a powerful swimmer, like the whole race of Arctic bears, he soon
gained the shores of the island. With a great exertion of strength he managed to
climb up the ice, and having reached the surface of the island he quietly laid
down the body he had brought with him.

Mrs Barnett could no longer be held back, and, shaking off Madge’s hold,
she rushed to the beach, never thinking of the danger she ran in facing a
formidable carnivorous creature.

The bear, seeing her approach, reared upon his hind legs, and came towards
her, but at about ten paces off he paused, shook his great head, and turning round
with a low growl, quietly walked away towards the centre of the island, without
once looking behind him. He, too, was evidently affected by the mysterious fear


which had tamed all the wild animals on the island.

Mrs Barnett was soon bending over the body stretched about the snow.

A cry of astonishment burst from her lips:

"Madge, Madge, come!" she exclaimed.

Madge approached and looked long and fixedly at the inanimate body. It was
the young Esquimaux girl Kalumah!

CHAPTER IX.

KALUMAH’S ADVENTURES.

Kalumah on the floating island, two hundred miles from the American coast.
It was almost incredible!

The first thing to be ascertained was whether the poor creature still breathed.
Was it possible to restore her to life? Mrs Barnett loosened her clothes, and
found that her body was not yet quite cold. Her heart beat very feebly, but it did
beat. The blood they had seen came from a slight wound in her hand; Madge
bound it up with her handkerchief, and the bleeding soon ceased.

At the same time Mrs Barnett raised the poor girl’s head, and managed to
pour a few drops of rum between her parted lips. She then bathed her forehead
and temples with cold water, and waited.

A few minutes passed by, and neither of the watchers were able to utter a
word, so anxious were they lest the faint spark of life remaining to the young
Esquimaux should be quenched.

But at last Kalumah’s breast heaved with a faint sigh, her hands moved
feebly, and presently she opened her eyes, and recognising her preserver she
murmured—

"Mrs Barnett! Mrs Barnett!"

The lady was not a little surprised at hearing her own name. Had Kalumah
voluntarily sought the floating island, and did she expect to find her old
European friends on it? If so, how had she come to know it, and how had she
managed to reach the island, two hundred miles from the mainland? How could
she have guessed that the ice-field as bearing Mrs Barnett and all the occupants
of Fort Hope away from the American coast? Really it all seemed quite
inexplicable.

"She lives—she will recover!" exclaimed Madge, who felt the vital heat and
pulsation returning to the poor bruised body.

"Poor child, poor child’" said Mrs Barnett, much affected; "she murmured
my name when she was at the point of death."

But now Kalumah again half opened her eyes, and looked about her with a
dreamy unsatisfied expression, presently, however, seeing Mrs Barnett, her face
brightened, the same name again burst from her lips, and painfully raising her


hand she let it fall on that of her friend.

The anxious care of the two women soon revived Kalumah, whose extreme
exhaustion arose not only from fatigue but also from hunger. She had eaten
nothing for forty-eight hours. Some pieces of cold venison and a little rum
refreshed her, and she soon felt able to accompany her newly-found friends to
the fort.

Before starting, however, Kalumah, seated on the sand between Mrs Barnett
and Madge, overwhelmed them with thanks and expressions of attachment. Then
she told her story: she had not forgotten the Europeans of Fort Hope, and the
thought of Mrs Paulina Barnett had been ever present with her. It was not by
chance, as we shall see, that she had come to Victoria Island.

The following is a brief summary of what Kalumah related to Mrs Barnett:—

Our readers will remember the young Esquimaux’s promise to come and see
her friends at Fort Hope again in the fine season of the next year. The long Polar
night being over, and the month of May having come round, Kalumah set out to
fulfil her pledge. She left Russian America, where she had wintered, and
accompanied by one of her brothers-in-law, started for the peninsula of Victoria.

Six weeks later, towards the middle of June, she got to that part of British
America which is near Cape Bathurst. She at once recognised the volcanic
mountains shutting in Liverpool Bay, and twenty miles farther east she came to
Walruses’ Bay, where her people had so often hunted morses and seals.

But beyond the bay on the north, there was nothing to be seen. The coast
suddenly sank to the southeast in an almost straight line. Cape Esquimaux and
Cape Bathurst had alike disappeared.

Kalumah understood what had happened. Either the whole of the peninsula
had been swallowed up by the waves, or it was floating away as an island, no
one knew whither!

Kalumah’s tears flowed fast at the loss of those whom she had come so far to
see.

Her brother-in-law, however, had not appeared surprised at the catastrophe. A
kind of legend or tradition had been handed down amongst the nomad tribes of
North America, that Cape Bathurst did not form part of the mainland, but had
been joined on to it thousands of years before, and would sooner or later be torn
away in some convulsion of nature. Hence the surprise at finding the factory
founded by Hobson at the foot of the cape. But with the unfortunate reserve
characteristic of their race, and perhaps also under the influence of that enmity
which all natives feel for those who settle in their country, they said nothing to
the Lieutenant, whose fort was already finished. Kalumah knew nothing of this
tradition, which after all rested on no trustworthy evidence, and probably


belonged to the many northern legends relating to the creation. This was how it
was that the colonists of Fort Hope were not warned of the danger they ran in
settling on such a spot.

Had a word in season been spoken to Hobson he would certainly have gone
farther in search of some firmer foundation for his fort than this soil, certain
peculiarities of which he had noticed at the first.

When Kalumah had made quite sure that all trace of Cape Bathurst was
gone, she explored the coast as far as the further side of Washburn Bay, but
without finding any sign of those she sought, and at last there was nothing left
for her to do but to return to the fisheries of Russian America.

She and her brother-in-law left Walruses’ Bay at the end of June, and
following the coast got back to New Georgia towards the end of July, after an
absolutely fruitless journey.

Kalumah now gave up all hope of again seeing Mrs Barnett and the other
colonists of Fort Hope. She concluded that they had all been swallowed up by
the ocean long ago.

At this part of her tale the young Esquimaux looked at Mrs Barnett with eyes
full of tears, and pressed her hand [affectionaly] affectionately, and then she
murmured her thanks to God for her own preservation through the means of her
friend.

Kalumah on her return home resumed her customary occupations, and
worked with the rest of her tribe at the fisheries near Icy Cape, a point a little
above the seventieth parallel, and more than six hundred miles from Cape
Bathurst.

Nothing worthy of note happened during the first half of the month of April;
but towards the end the storm began which had caused Hobson so much
uneasiness, and which had apparently extended its ravages over the whole of the
Arctic Ocean and beyond Behring Strait. It was equally violent at Icy Cape and
on Victoria Island, and, as the Lieutenant ascertained in taking his bearings, the
latter was then not more than two hundred miles from the coast.

As Mrs Barnett listened to Kalumah, her previous information enabled her
rapidly to find the key to the strange events which had taken place, and to
account for the arrival of the young native on the island.

During the first days of the storm the Esquimaux of Icy Cape were confined
to their huts. They could neither get out nor fish. But during the night of the 31st
August a kind of presentiment led Kalumah to venture down to the beach, and,
braving the wind and rain in all their fury, she peered anxiously through the
darkness at the waves rising mountains high.

Presently she thought she saw a huge mass driven along by the hurricane


parallel with the coast. Gifted with extremely keen sight—as are all these
wandering tribes accustomed to the long dark Polar nights—she felt sure that she
was not mistaken.

Something of vast bulk was passing two miles from the coast, and that
something could be neither a whale, a boat, nor, at this time of the year, even an
iceberg.

But Kalumah did not stop to reason. The truth flashed upon her like a
revelation. Before her excited imagination rose the images of her friends. She
saw them all once more, Mrs Barnett, Madge, Lieutenant Hobson, the baby she
had covered with kisses at Fort Hope. Yes, they were passing, borne along in the
storm on a floating ice-field!

Kalumah did not doubt or hesitate a moment. She felt that she must tell the
poor shipwrecked people, which she was sure they were, of the close vicinity of
the land. She ran to her hut, seized a torch of tow and resin, such as the
Esquimaux use when fishing at night, lit it and waved it on the beach at the
summit of Icy Cape.

This was the fire which Hobson and Long had seen when crouching on Cape
Michael on the night of the 31st August.

Imagine the delight and excitement of the young Esquimaux when a signal
replied to hers, when she saw the huge fire lit by Lieutenant Hobson, the
reflection of which reached the American coast, although he did not dream that
he was so near it.

But it quickly went out, the lull in the storm only lasted a few minutes, and
the fearful gale, veering round to the southeast, swept along with redoubled
violence.

Kalumah feared that her "prey," so she called the floating island, was about
to escape her, and that it would not be driven on to the shore. She saw it fading
away, and knew that it would soon disappear in the darkness and be lost to her
on the boundless ocean.

It was indeed a terrible moment for the young native, and she determined at
all hazards to let her friends know of their situation. There might yet be time for
them to take some steps for their deliverance, although every hour took them
farther from the continent.

She did not hesitate a moment, her kayak was at hand, the frail bark in which
she had more than once braved the storms of the Arctic Ocean, she pushed it
down to the sea, hastily laced on the sealskin jacket fastened to the canoe, and,
the long paddle in her hand, she plunged into the darkness.

Mrs Barnett here pressed the brave child to her heart, and Madge shed tears
of sympathy.


When launched upon the roaring ocean, Kalumah found the change of wind
in her favour. The waves dashed over her kayak, it is true, but they were
powerless to harm the light boat, which floated on their crests like a straw. It was
capsized several times, but a stroke of the paddle righted it at once.

After about an hour’s hard work, Kalumah could see the wandering island
more distinctly, and had no longer any doubt of effecting her purpose, as she was
but a quarter of a mile from the beach.

It was then that she uttered the cry which Hobson and Long had heard.

But, alas! Kalumah now felt herself being carried away towards the west by
a powerful current, which could take firmer hold of her kayak than of the
floating island!

In vain she struggled to beat back with her paddle, the light boat shot along
like an arrow. She uttered scream after scream, but she was unheard, for she was
already far away, and when the day broke the coasts of Alaska and the island she
had wished to reach, were but two distant masses on the horizon.

Did she despair? Not yet. It was impossible to get back to the American
continent in the teeth of the terrible wind which was driving the island before it
at a rapid pace, taking it out two hundred miles in thirty-six hours, and assisted
by the current from the coast.

There was but one thing left to do. To get to the island by keeping in the
same current which was drifting it away.

But, alas! the poor girl’s strength was not equal to her courage, she was faint
from want of food, and, exhausted as she was, she could no longer wield her
paddle.

For some hours she struggled on, and seemed to be approaching the island,
although those on it could not see her, as she was but a speck upon the ocean.
She struggled on until her stiffened arms and bleeding hands fell powerless, and,
losing consciousness, she was floated along in her frail kayak at the mercy of
winds and waves.

She did not know how long this lasted, she remembered nothing more, until
a sudden shock roused her, her kayak had struck against something, it opened
beneath her, and she was plunged into cold water, the freshness of which revived
her. A few moments later, she was flung upon the sand in a dying state by a large
wave.

This had taken place the night before, just before dawn—that is to say, about
two or three o’clock in the morning. Kalumah had then been seventy hours at sea
since she embarked!

The young native had no idea where she had been thrown, whether on the
continent or on the floating island, which she had so bravely sought, but she


hoped the latter. Yes, hoped that she had reached her friends, although she knew
that the wind and current had driven them into the open sea, and not towards the
coast!

The thought revived her, and, shattered as she was, she struggled to her feet,
and tried to follow the coast.

She had, in fact, been providentially thrown on that portion of Victoria Island
which was formerly the upper corner of Walruses’ Bay. But, worn away as it was
by the waves, she did not recognise the land with which she had once been
familiar.

She tottered on, stopped, and again struggled to advance; the beach before
her appeared endless, she had so often to go round where the sea had encroached
upon the sand. And so dragging herself along, stumbling and scrambling up
again, she at last approached the little wood where Mrs. Barnett and Madge had
halted that very morning. We know that the two women found the footprints left
by Kalumah in the snow not far from this very spot, and it was at a short distance
farther on that the poor girl fell for the last time. Exhausted by fatigue and
hunger, she still managed to creep along on hands and knees for a few minutes
longer.

A great hope kept her from despair, for she had at last recognised Cape
Esquimaux, at the foot of which she and her people had encamped the year
before. She knew now that she was but eight miles from the factory, and that she
had only to follow the path she had so often traversed when she went to visit her
friends at Fort Hope.

Yes, this hope sustained her, but she had scarcely reached the beach when her
forces entirely failed her, and she again lost all consciousness. But for Mrs
Barnett she would have died.

"But, dear lady," she added, "I knew that you would come to my rescue, and
that God would save me by your means."

We know the rest. We know the providential instinct which led Mrs Barnett
and Madge to explore this part of the coast on this very day, and the
presentiment which made them visit Cape Esquimaux after they had rested, and
before returning to Fort Hope. We know too—as Mrs Barnett related to Kalumah
— how the piece of ice had floated away, and how the bear had acted under the
circumstances.

"And after all," added Mrs Barnett with a smile, "it was not I who saved you,
but the good creature without whose aid you would never have come back to us,
and if ever we see him again we will treat him with the respect due to your
preserver."

During this long conversation Kalumah was rested and refreshed, and Mrs


Barnett proposed that they should return to the fort at once, as she had already
been too long away. The young girl immediately rose ready to start.

Mrs Barnett was indeed most anxious to tell the Lieutenant of all that had
happened during the night of the storm, when the wandering island had neared
the American continent, but she urged Kalumah to keep her adventures secret,
and to say nothing about the situation of the island. She would naturally be
supposed to have come along the coast, in fulfilment of the promise she had
made to visit her friends in the fine season. Her arrival would tend only to
strengthen the belief of the colonists that no changes had taken place in the
country around Cape Bathurst, and to set at rest the doubts any of them might
have entertained.

It was about three o’clock when Madge and Mrs Barnett, with Kalumah
hanging on her arm, set out towards the east, and before five o’clock in the
afternoon they all arrived at the postern of the fort.

CHAPTER X.

THE KAMTCHATKA CURRENT.

We can readily imagine the reception given to Kalumah by all at the fort. It
seemed to them that the communication with the outer world was reopened. Mrs
Mac-Nab, Mrs Rae and Mrs Joliffe overwhelmed her with caresses, but
Kalumah’s first thought was for the little child, she caught sight of him
immediately, and running to him covered him with kisses.

The young native was charmed and touched with the hospitality of her
European hosts. A positive féte was held in her honour and every one was
delighted that she would have to remain at the fort for the winter, the season
being too far advanced for her to get back to the settlements of Russian America
before the cold set in.

But if all the settlers were agreeably surprised at the appearance of Kalumah,
what must Lieutenant Hobson have thought when he saw her leaning on Mrs
Barnett’s arm. A sudden hope flashed across his mind like lightning, and as
quickly died away: perhaps in spite of the evidence of his daily observations
Victoria Island had run aground somewhere on the continent unnoticed by any of
them.

Mrs Barnett read the Lieutenant’s thoughts in his face, and shook her head
sadly.

He saw that no change had taken place in their situation, and waited until
Mrs Barnett was able to explain Kalumah’s appearance.

A few minutes later he was walking along the beach with the lady, listening
with great interest to her account of Kalumah’s adventures.

So he had been right in all his conjectures. The northeast hurricane had


driven the island out of the current. The ice-field had approached within a mile
at least of the American continent. It had not been a fire on board ship which
they had seen, or the cry of a shipwrecked mariner which they had heard. The
mainland had been close at hand, and had the northeast wind blown hard for
another hour Victoria Island would have struck against the coast of Russian
America. And then at this critical moment a fatal, a terrible wind had driven the
island away from the mainland back to the open sea, and it was again in the
grasp of the irresistible current, and was being carried along with a speed which
nothing could check, the mighty southeast wind aiding its headlong course, to
that terribly dangerous spot where it would be exposed to contrary attractions,
either of which might lead to its destruction and that of all the unfortunate people
dragged along with it.

For the hundredth time the Lieutenant and Mrs Barnett discussed all the
bearings of the case, and then Hobson inquired if any important changes had
taken place in the appearance of the districts between Cape Bathurst and
Walruses’ Bay?

Mrs Barnett replied that in some places the level of the coast appeared to be
lowered, and that the waves now covered tracts of sand which were formerly out
of their reach. She related what had happened at Cape Esquimaux, and the
important fracture which had taken place at that part of the coast.

Nothing could have been less satisfactory. It was evident that the ice-field
forming the foundation of the island was breaking up. What had happened at
Cape Esquimaux might at any moment be reproduced at Cape Bathurst. At any
hour of the day or night the houses of the factory might be swallowed up by the
deep, and the only thing which could save them was the winter, the bitter winter
which was fortunately rapidly approaching.

The next day, September 4th, when Hobson took his bearings, he found that
the position of Victoria Island had not sensibly changed since the day before. It
had remained motionless between the two contrary currents, which was on the
whole the very best thing that could have happened.

"If only the cold would fix us where we are, if the ice wall would shut us in,
and the sea become petrified around us," exclaimed Hobson, "I should feel that
our safety was assured. We are but two hundred miles from the coast at this
moment, and by venturing across the frozen ice fields we might perhaps reach
either Russian America or Kamtchatka. Winter, winter at any price, let the winter
set in, no matter how rapidly."

Meanwhile, according to the Lieutenant’s orders, the preparations for the
winter were completed. Enough forage to last the dogs the whole of the Polar
night was stored up. They were all in good health, but getting rather fat with


having nothing to do. They could not be taken too much care of, as they would
have to work terribly hard in the journey across the ice after the abandonment of
Fort Hope. It was most important to keep up their strength, and they were fed on
raw reindeer venison, plenty of which was easily attainable.

The tame reindeer also prospered, their stable was comfortable, and a good
supply of moss was laid by for them in the magazines of the fort. The females
provided Mrs Joliffe with plenty of milk for her daily culinary needs.

The Corporal and his little wife had also sown fresh seeds, encouraged by the
success of the last in the warm season. The ground had been prepared
beforehand for the planting of scurvy-grass and Labrador Tea. It was important
that there should be no lack of these valuable antiscorbutics.


The sheds were filled with wood up to the very roof. Winter might come as
soon as it liked now, and freeze the mercury in the cistern of the thermometer,
there was no fear that they would again be reduced to burn their furniture as they
had the year before. Mac-Nab and his men had become wise by experience, and
the chips left from the boat-building added considerably to their stock of fuel.

About this time a few animals were taken which had already assumed their
winter furs, such as martens, polecats, blue foxes, and ermines. Marbre and
Sabine had obtained leave from the Lieutenant to set some traps outside the
enceinte. He did not like to refuse them this permission, lest they should become
discontented, as he had really no reason to assign for putting a stop to the
collecting of furs, although he knew full well that the destination of these
harmless creatures could do nobody any good. Their flesh was, however, useful
for feeding the dogs, and enabled them to economise the reindeer venison.

All was now prepared for the winter, and the soldiers worked with an energy
which they would certainly not have shown if they had been told the secret of
their situation.

During the next few days the bearings were taken with the greatest care, but
no change was noticeable in the situation of Victoria Island; and Hobson, finding
that it was motionless, began to have fresh hope. Although there were as yet no
symptoms of winter in inorganic nature, the temperature maintaining a mean
height of 49° Fahrenheit, some swans flying to the south in search of a warmer
climate was a good omen. Other birds capable of a long-sustained flight over
vast tracts of the ocean began to desert the island. They knew full well that the
continent of America and of Asia, with their less severe climates and their
plentiful resources of every kind, were not far off, and that their wings were
strong enough to carry them there. A good many of these birds were caught; and
by Mrs Barnett’s advice the Lieutenant tied round their necks a stiff cloth ticket,
on which was inscribed the position of the wandering island, and the names of
its inhabitants. The birds were then set free, and their captors watched them wing
their way to the south with envious eyes.

Of course none were in the secret of the sending forth of these messengers,
except Mrs Barnett, Madge, Kalumah, Hobson, and Long.

The poor quadrupeds were unable to seek their usual winter refuges in the
south. Under ordinary circumstances the reindeer, Polar hares, and even the
wolves would have left early in September for the shores of the Great Bear and
Slave Lakes, a good many degrees farther south; but now the sea was an
insurmountable barrier, and they, too, would have to wait until the winter should
render it passable. Led by instinct they had doubtless tried to leave the island,
but, turned back by the water, the instinct of self-preservation had brought them


to the neighbourhood of Fort Hope, to be near the men who were once their
hunters and most formidable enemies, but were now, like themselves, rendered
comparatively inoffensive by their imprisonment.

The observations of the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th September, revealed no
alteration in the position of Victoria Island. The large eddy between the two
currents kept it stationary. Another fifteen days, another three weeks of this state
of things, and Hobson felt that they might be saved.

But they were not yet out of danger, and many terrible, almost supernatural,
trials still awaited the inhabitants of Fort Hope.

On the 10th of September observations showed a displacement of Victoria
Island. Only a slight displacement, but in a northerly direction.

Hobson was in dismay; the island was finally in the grasp of the Kamtchatka
Current, and was drifting towards the unknown latitudes where the large icebergs
come into being; it was on its way to the vast solitudes of the Arctic Ocean,
interdicted to the human race, from which there is no return.

Hobson did not hide this new danger from those who were in the secret of
the situation. Mrs Barnett, Madge, Kalumah, and Sergeant Long received this
fresh blow with courage and resignation.

"Perhaps," said Mrs Barnett, "the island may stop even yet. Perhaps it will
move slowly. Let us hope on ... and wait! The winter is not far off, and we are
going to meet it. In any case God’s will be done!" "My friends," said Hobson
earnestly, "do you not think I ought now to tell our comrades. You see in what a
terrible position we are and all that may await us! Is it not taking too great a
responsibility to keep them in ignorance of the peril they are in?"

"IT should wait a little longer," replied Mrs Barnett without hesitation; "I
would not give them all over to despair until the last chance is gone."

"That is my opinion also," said Long.

Hobson had thought the same, and was glad to find that his companions
agreed with him in the matter.

On the 11th and 12th September, the motion towards the north was more
noticeable. Victoria Island was drifting at a rate of from twelve to thirteen miles
a day, so that each day took them the same distance farther from the land and
nearer to the north. They were, in short, following the decided course made by
the Kamtchatka Current, and would quickly pass that seventieth degree which
once cut across the extremity of Cape Bathurst, and beyond which no land of
any kind was to be met with in this part of the Arctic Ocean.

Every day Hobson looked out their position on the map, and saw only too
clearly to what awful solitudes the wandering island was drifting.

The only hope left consisted, as Mrs Barnett had said, in the fact that they


were going to meet the winter. In thus drifting towards the north they would
soon encounter those ice-cold waters, which would consolidate and strengthen
the foundations of the island. But if the danger of being swallowed up by the
waves was decreased, would not the unfortunate colonists have an immense
distance to traverse to get back from these remote northern regions? Had the
boat been finished, Lieutenant Hobson would not have hesitated to embark the
whole party in it, but in spite of the zealous efforts of the carpenter it was not
nearly ready, and indeed it taxed Mac-Nab’s powers to the uttermost to construct
a vessel on which to trust the lives of twenty persons in such a dangerous sea

By the 16th September Victoria Island was between seventy-three and eighty
miles north of the spot where its course had been arrested for a few days
between the Behring and Kamtchatka Cur rents There were now, however, many
signs of the approach of winter Snow fell frequently and in large flakes The
column of mercury fell gradually The mean temperature was still 44° Fahrenheit
during the day, but at night it fell to 32°. The sun described an extremely
lengthened curve above the horizon, not rising more than a few degrees even at
noon, and disappearing for eleven hours out of every twenty four.

At last, on the night of the 16th September, the first signs of ice appeared
upon the sea in the shape of small isolated crystals like snow, which stained the
clear surface of the water As was noticed by the famous explorer Scoresby, these
crystals immediately calmed the waves, like the oil which sailors pour upon the
sea to produce a momentary cessation of its agitation These crystals showed a
tendency to weld themselves together, but they were broken and separated by the
motion of the water as soon as they had combined to any extent.

Hobson watched the appearance of the "young ice" with extreme attention.
He knew that twenty four hours would suffice to make the ice-crust two or three
inches thick, strong enough in fact to bear the weight of a man He therefore
expected that Victoria Island would shortly be arrested in its course to the north.

But the day ended the work of the night, and if the speed of the island
slackened during the darkness in consequence of the obstacles in its path, they
were removed in the next twelve hours, and the island was carried rapidly along
again by the powerful current.

The distance from the northern regions became daily less, and nothing could
be done to lessen the evil.

At the autumnal equinox on the 21st of September, the day and night were of
equal length, and from that date the night gradually became longer and longer.
The winter was coming at last, but it did not set in rapidly or with any rigour
Victoria Island was now nearly a degree farther north than the seventieth
parallel, and on this 21st September, a rotating motion was for the first time


noticed, a motion estimated by Hobson at about a quarter of the circumference.

Imagine the anxiety of the unfortunate Lieutenant. The secret he had so long
carefully kept was now about to be betrayed by nature to the least clear sighted.
Of course the rotation altered the cardinal points of the island. Cape Bathurst no
longer pointed to the north, but to the east. The sun, moon, and stars rose and set
on a different horizon, and it was impossible that men like Mac-Nab, Rae,
Marbre and others, accustomed to note the signs of the heavens, could fail to be
struck by the change, and understand its meaning.

To Hobson’s great satisfaction, however, the brave soldiers appeared to
notice nothing, the displacement with regard to the cardinal points was not, it
was true, very considerable, and it was often too foggy for the rising and setting
of the heavenly bodies to be accurately observed.

Unfortunately the rotation appeared to be accompanied by an increase of
speed. From that date Victoria Island drifted at the rate of a mile an hour. It
advanced farther and farther north, farther and farther away from all land.
Hobson did not even yet despair, for it was not in his nature to do so, but he felt
confused and astray, and longed for the winter with all his heart.

At last the temperature began to fall still lower. Snow fell plentifully on the
23d and 24th September, and increased the thickness of the coating of ice on the
sea. Gradually the vast ice-field was formed on every side, the island in its
advance continually broke it up, but each day it became firmer and better able to
resist. The sea succumbed to the petrifying hand of winter, and became frozen as
far as the eye could reach, and on September 27th, when the bearings were
taken, it was found that Victoria Island had not moved since the day before. It
was imprisoned in a vast ice-field, it was motionless in longitude 177° 22’, and
latitude 77° 57’—more than six hundred miles from any continent.


CHAPTER XI


A COMMUNICATION FROM LIEUTENANT HOBSON.

Such was the situation. To use Sergeant Long’s expression, the island had
"cast anchor," and was as stationary as when the isthmus connected it with the
mainland. But six hundred miles now separated it from inhabited countries, six
hundred miles which would have to be traversed in sledges across the solidified
surface of the sea, amongst the icebergs which the cold would build up, in the
bitterest months of the Arctic winter.

It would be a fearful undertaking, but hesitation was impossible. The winter,
for which Lieutenant Hobson had so ardently longed, had come at last, and
arrested the fatal march of the island to the north. It would throw a bridge six
hundred miles long from their desolate home to the continents on the south, and
the new chances of safety must not be neglected, every effort must be made to
restore the colonists, so long lost in the hyperborean regions, to their friends.

As Hobson explained to his companions, it would be madness to linger till
the spring should again thaw the ice, which would be to abandon themselves
once more to the capricious Behring currents. They must wait until the sea was
quite firmly frozen over, which at the most would be in another three or four
weeks. Meanwhile the Lieutenant proposed making frequent excursions on the
ice-field encircling the island, in order to ascertain its thickness, its suitability for
the passage of sledges, and the best route to take across it so as to reach the
shores of Asia or America.

"Of course," observed Hobson to Mrs Barnett and Sergeant Long, "we would
all rather make for Russian America than Asia, if a choice is open to us."

"Kalumah will be very useful to us," said Mrs Barnett, "for as a native she
will be thoroughly acquainted with the whole of Alaska."

"Yes, indeed," replied Hobson, "her arrival was most fortunate for us. Thanks
to her, we shall be easily able to get to the settlement of Fort Michael on Norton
Sound, perhaps even to New Archangel, a good deal farther south, where we can
pass the rest of the winter."

"Poor Fort Hope!" exclaimed Mrs Barnett, "it goes to my heart to think of
abandoning it on this island. It has been built at the cost of so much trouble and
fatigue, everything about it has been so admirably arranged by you, Lieutenant! I
feel as if my heart would break when we leave it finally."

"You will not suffer more than I shall, madam," replied Hobson, "and
perhaps not so much. It is the chief work of my life; I have devoted all my


powers to the foundation of Fort Hope, so unfortunately named, and I shall never
cease to regret having to leave it. And what will the Company say which
confided this task to me, for after all I am* but its humble agent."

"Tt will say," cried Mrs Barnett with enthusiasm, "it will say that you have
done your duty, that you are not responsible for the caprices of nature, which is
ever more powerful than man. It will understand that you could not foresee what
has happened, for it was beyond the penetration of the most far-sighted man, and
it will know that it owes the preservation of the whole party to your prudence
and moral courage."

"Thank you, madam," replied the Lieutenant, pressing Mrs Barnett’s hand,
"thank you for your warm-hearted words. But I have had some experience of
men, and I know that success is always admired and failure condemned. But the
will of Heaven be done!"

Sergeant Long, anxious to turn the Lieutenant from his melancholy thoughts,
now began to talk about the preparations for the approaching departure, and
asked if it was not time to tell his comrades the truth.

"Let us wait a little longer," replied Hobson. "We have saved the poor
fellows much anxiety and worry already, let us keep silent until the day is fixed
for the start, and then we will reveal the whole truth."

This point being decided, the ordinary occupations of the factory went on for
a few weeks longer.

How different was the situation of the colonists a year ago, when they were
all looking forward to the future in happy unconsciousness!

A year ago the first symptoms of the cold season were appearing, even as
they were now. The "young ice" was gradually forming along the coast. The
lagoon, its waters being quieter than those of the sea, was the first to freeze over.
The temperature remained about one or two degrees above freezing point in the
day, and fell to three or four degrees below in the night. Hobson again made his
men assume their winter garments, the linen vests and furs before described. The
condensers were again set up inside the house, the air vessel and air-pumps were
cleaned, the traps were set round the palisades on different parts of Cape
Bathurst, and Marbre and Sabine got plenty of game, and finally the last touches
were given to the inner rooms of the principal house.

Although Fort Hope was now about two degrees farther north than at the
same time the year before, there was no sensible difference in the state of the
temperature. The fact is, the distance between the seventieth and seventy-second
parallels is not great enough to affect the mean height of the thermometer, on the
contrary, it really seemed to be less cold than at the beginning of the winter
before. Perhaps, however, that was because the colonists were now, to a certain


extent, acclimatised.

Certainly the winter did not set in so abruptly as last time. The weather was
very damp, and the atmosphere was always charged with vapour, which fell now
as rain now as snow. In Lieutenant Hobson’s opinion, at least, it was not nearly
cold enough.

The sea froze all round the island, it is true, but not in a regular or continuous
sheet of ice. Large blackish patches here and there showed that the icicles were
not thoroughly cemented together. Loud resonant noises were constantly heard,
produced by the breaking of the ice field when the rain melted the imperfectly
welded edges of the blocks composing it. There was no rapid accumulation of
lump upon lump such as is generally seen in intense cold. Icebergs and
hummocks were few and scattered, and no ice-wall as yet shut in the horizon.

"This season would have been just the thing for the explorers of the North
West Passage, or the seekers of the North Pole," repeated Sergeant Long again
and again, "but it is most unfavourable for us, and very much against our ever
getting back to our own land!"

This went on throughout October, and Hobson announced that the mean
temperature was no lower than 32° Fahrenheit, and it is well known that several
days of cold, 7° or 8° below zero, are required for the sea to freeze hard.

Had proof been needed that the ice-field was impassable, a fact noticed by
Mrs Barnett and Hobson would have sufficed.

The animals imprisoned in the island, the furred animals, reindeer, wolves,
&c., would have left the island had it been possible to cross the sea, but they
continued to gather in large numbers round the factory, and to seek the vicinity
of man. The wolves came actually within musket-range of the enceinte to devour
the martens and Polar hares, which were their only food. The famished reindeer
having neither moss nor herbs on which to browse, roved about Cape Bathurst in
herds. A solitary bear, no doubt the one to which Mrs Barnett and Kalumah felt
they owed a debt of gratitude, often passed to and fro amongst the trees of the
woods, on the banks of the lagoon, and the presence of all these animals,
especially of the ruminants, which require an exclusively vegetable diet, proved
that flight was impossible.

We have said that the thermometer remained at freezing point, and Hobson
found on consulting his journal that at the same time the year before, it had
already marked 20° Fahrenheit below zero, proving how unequally cold is
distributed in the capricious Polar regions.

The colonists therefore did not suffer much, and were not confined to the
house at all. It was, however, very damp indeed, rain mixed with snow fell
constantly, and the falling of the barometer proved that the atmosphere was


charged with vapour.

Throughout October the Lieutenant and Long made many excursions to
ascertain the state of the ice-field in the offing; one day they went to Cape
Michael, another to the edge of the former Walruses’ Bay, anxious to see if it
would be possible to cross to the continent of America or Asia, or if the start
would have to be put off.

But the surface of the ice-field was covered with puddles of water, and in
some parts riddled with holes, which would certainly have been impassable for
sledges. It seemed as if it would be scarcely safe for a single traveller to venture
across the half-liquid, half-solid masses. It was easy to see that the cold had been
neither severe nor equally maintained, for the ice consisted of an accumulation
of sharp points, crystals, prisms, polyhedrons, and figures of every variety, like
an aggregation of stalactites. It was more like a glacier than a "field," and even if
it had been practicable, walking on it would have been very tiring.

Hobson and Long managed with great difficulty to scramble over a mile or
two towards the south, but at the expense of a vast amount of time, so that they
were compelled to admit that they must wait some time yet, and they returned to
Fort Hope disappointed and disheartened.

The first days of November came, and the temperature fell a little, but only a
very few degrees, which was not nearly enough. Victoria Island was wrapped in
damp fogs, and the lamps had to be lit during the day. It was necessary, however,
to economise the oil as much as possible, as the supply was running short. No
fresh stores had been brought by Captain Craventy’s promised convoy, and there
were no more walruses to be hunted. Should the dark winter be prolonged, the
colonists would be compelled to have recourse to the fat of animals, perhaps
even to the resin of the firs, to get a little light. The days were already very short,
and the pale disc of the sun, yielding no warmth, and deprived of all its
brightness, only appeared above the horizon for a few hours at a time. Yes,
winter had come with its mists, its rain, and its snow, but without the long
desired cold.

On the 11th November something of a féte was held at Fort Hope. Mrs
Joliffe served up a few extras at dinner, for it was the anniversary of the birth of
little Michael Mac-Nab. He was now a year old, and was the delight of
everybody. He had large blue eyes and fair curly hair, like his father, the head
carpenter, who was very proud of the resemblance. At dessert the baby was
solemnly weighed. It was worth something to see him struggling in the scales,
and to hear his astonished cries! He actually weighed thirty-four pounds! The
announcement of this wonderful weight was greeted with loud cheers, and Mrs
Mac-Nab was congratulated by everybody on her fine boy. Why Corporal Joliffe


felt that he ought to share the compliments it is difficult to imagine, unless it was
as a kind of foster-father or nurse to the baby. He had carried the child about,
dandled and rocked him so often, that he felt he had something to do with his
specific weight!

The next day, November 12th, the sun did not appear above the horizon. The
long Polar night was beginning nine days sooner than it had done the year
before, in consequence of the difference in the latitude of Victoria Island then
and now.

The disappearance of the sun did not, however, produce any change in the
state of the atmosphere. The temperature was as changeable as ever. The
thermometer fell one day and rose the next. Rain and snow succeeded each
other. The wind was soft, and did not settle in any quarter, but often veered
round to every point of the compass in the course of a single day. The constant
damp was very unhealthy, and likely to lead to scorbutic affections amongst the
colonists, but fortunately, although the lime juice and lime lozenges were
running short, and no fresh stock had been obtained, the scurvy-grass and sorrel
had yielded a very good crop, and, by the advice of Lieutenant Hobson, a portion
of them was eaten daily.

Every effort must, however, be made to get away from Fort Hope. Under the
circumstances, three months would scarcely be long enough for them all to get to
the nearest continent. It was impossible to risk being overtaken by the thaw on
the ice-field, and therefore if they started at all it must be at the end of
November.

The journey would have been difficult enough, even if the ice had been
rendered solid everywhere by a severe winter, and in this uncertain weather it
was a most serious matter.

On the 13th November, Hobson, Mrs Barnett, and the Sergeant met to decide
on the day of departure. The Sergeant was of opinion that they ought to leave the
island as soon as possible.

"For," he said, "we must make allowance for all the possible delays during a
march of six hundred miles. We ought to reach the continent before March, or
we may be surprised by the thaw, and then we shall be in a worse predicament
than we are on our island."

"But," said Mrs Barnett, "is the sea firm enough for us to cross it?"

"T think it is," said Long, "and the ice gets thicker every day. The barometer,
too, is gradually rising, and by the time our preparations are completed, which
will be in about another week, I think, I hope that the really cold weather will
have set in."

"The winter has begun very badly," said Hobson, "in fact everything seems


to combine against us. Strange seasons have often been experienced on these
seas, I have heard of whalers being able to navigate in places where, even in the
summer at another time they would not have had an inch of water beneath their
keels. In my opinion there is not a day to be lost, and I cannot sufficiently regret
that the ordinary temperature of these regions does not assist us."

"Tt will later," said Mrs Barnett, "and we must be ready to take advantage of
every chance in our favour. When do you propose starting, Lieutenant?"

"At the end of November at the latest," replied Hobson, "but if in a week
hence our preparations are finished, and the route appears practicable, we will
start then."

"Very well," said Long, "we will get ready without losing an instant."

"Then," said Mrs Barnett, "you will now tell our companions of the situation
in which they are placed?"

"Yes, madam, the moment to speak and the time for action have alike
arrived."

"And when do you propose enlightening them?"

"At once. Sergeant Long," he added, turning to his subordinate, who at once
drew himself up in a military attitude, "call all your men together in the large
room to receive a communication."

Sergeant Long touched his cap, and turning on his heel left the room without
a word.

For some minutes Mrs Barnett and Hobson were left alone, but neither of
them spoke.

The Sergeant quickly returned, and told Hobson that his orders were
executed.

The Lieutenant and the lady at once went into the large room. All the
members of the colony, men and women, were assembled in the dimly lighted
room.

Hobson came forward, and standing in the centre of the group said very
gravely—

"My friends, until to-day I have felt it my duty, in order to spare you useless
anxiety, to conceal from you the situation of our fort. An earthquake separated us
from the continent. Cape Bathurst has broken away from the mainland. Our
peninsula is but an island of ice, a wandering island"——

At this moment Marbre stepped forward, and said quietly.

"We knew it, sir!"

CHAPTER XII.

A CHANCE TO BE TRIED.

The brave fellows knew it then! And that they might not add to the cares of


their chief, they had pretended to know nothing, and had worked away at the
preparations for the winter with the same zeal as the year before.

Tears of emotion stood in Hobson’s eyes, and he made no attempt to conceal
them, but seizing Marbre’s outstretched hand, he pressed it in his own.

Yes, the soldiers all knew it, for Marbre had guessed it long ago. The filling
of the reindeer trap with salt water, the non-arrival of the detachment from Fort
Reliance, the observations of latitude and longitude taken every day, which
would have been useless on firm ground, the precautions observed by Hobson to
prevent any one seeing him take the bearings, the fact of the animals remaining
on the island after winter had set in, and the change in the position of the
cardinal points during the last few days, which they had noticed at once, had all
been tokens easily interpreted by the inhabitants of Fort Hope. The arrival of
Kalumah had puzzled them, but they had concluded that she had been thrown
upon the island in the storm, and they were right, as we are aware.

Marbre, upon whom the truth had first dawned, confided his suspicions to
Mac-Nab the carpenter and Rae the blacksmith. All three faced the situation
calmly enough, and agreed that they ought to tell their comrades and wives, but
decided to let the Lieutenant think they knew nothing, and to obey him without
question as before.

"You are indeed brave fellows, my friends," exclaimed Mrs Barnett, who was
much touched by this delicate feeling, "you are true soldiers!"

"Our Lieutenant may depend upon us," said Mac-Nab, "he has done his duty,
and we will do ours."

"I know you will, dear comrades," said Hobson, "and if only Heaven will
help and not forsake us, we will help ourselves."

The Lieutenant then related all that had happened since the time when the
earthquake broke the isthmus, and converted the districts round Cape Bathurst
into an island. He told how, when the sea became free from ice in the spring, the
new island had been drifted more than two hundred miles away from the coast
by an unknown current, how the hurricane had driven it back within sight of
land, how it had again been carried away in the night of the 31st August, and,
lastly, how Kalumah had bravely risked her life to come to the aid of her
European friends. Then he enumerated the changes the island had undergone,
explaining how the warmer waters had worn it away, and his fear that it might be
carried to the Pacific, or seized by the Kamtchatka Current, concluding his
narrative by stating that the wandering island had finally stopped on the 27th of
last September.

The chart of the Arctic seas was then brought, and Hobson pointed out the
position occupied by the island—six hundred miles from all land.


He ended by saying that the situation was extremely dangerous, that the
island would inevitably be crushed when the ice broke up, and that, before
having recourse to the boat—which could not be used until the next summer—
they must try to get back to the American continent by crossing the ice-field.

"We shall have six hundred miles to go in the cold and darkness of the Polar
night. It will be hard work, my friends, but you know as well as I do that there
can be no shrinking from the task."

"When you give the signal to start, Lieutenant, we will follow you," said
Mac-Nab.

All being of one mind, the preparations for departure were from that date
rapidly pushed forward. The men bravely faced the fact that they would have six
hundred miles to travel under very trying circumstances. Sergeant Long
superintended the works, whilst Hobson, the two hunters, and Mrs Barnett, often
went to test the firmness of the ice-field. Kalumah frequently accompanied them,
and her remarks, founded on experience, might possibly be of great use to the
Lieutenant. Unless they were prevented they were to start on the 20th November,
and there was not a moment to lose.

As Hobson had foreseen, the wind having risen, the temperature fell slightly,
and the column of mercury marked 24° Fahrenheit.

Snow, which soon became hardened, replaced the rain of the preceding days.
A few more days of such cold and sledges could be used. The little bay hollowed
out of the cliffs of Cape Michael was partly filled with ice and snow; but it must
not be forgotten that its calmer waters froze more quickly than those of the open
sea, which were not yet in a satisfactory condition.

The wind continued to blow almost incessantly, and with considerable
violence, but the motion of waves interfered with the regular formation and
consolidation of the ice. Large pools of water occurred here and there between
the pieces of ice, and it was impossible to attempt to cross it.

"The weather is certainly getting colder," observed Mrs Barnett to Lieutenant
Hobson, as they were exploring the south of the island together on the 10th
November, "the temperature is becoming lower and lower, and these liquid
spaces will soon freeze over."

"I think you are right, madam," replied Hobson, "but the way in which they
will freeze over will not be very favourable to our plans. The pieces of ice are
small, and their jagged edges will stick up all over the surface, making it very
rough, so that if our sledges get over it at all, it will only be with very great
difficulty."

"But," resumed Mrs Barnett, "if I am not mistaken, a heavy fall of snow,
lasting a few days or even a few hours, would suffice to level the entire surface!"


"Yes, yes," replied Hobson, "but if snow should fall, it will be because the
temperature has risen; and if it rises, the ice-field will break up again, so that
either contingency will be against us!"

"It really would be a strange freak of fortune if we should experience a
temperate instead of an Arctic winter in the midst of the Polar Sea!" observed
Mrs Barnett.

"It has happened before, madam, it has happened before. Let me remind you
of the great severity of last cold season; now it has been noticed that two long
bitter winters seldom succeed each other, and the whalers of the northern seas
know it well. A bitter winter when we should have been glad of a mild one, and
a mild one when we so sorely need the reverse. It must be owned, we have been
strangely unfortunate thus far! And when I think of six hundred miles to cross
with women and a child!"...

And Hobson pointed to the vast white plain, with strange irregular markings
like guipure work, stretching away into the infinite

"I know you will, dear comrades," said Hobson, "and if only Heaven will
help and not forsake us, we will help ourselves."

The Lieutenant then related all that had happened since the time when the
earthquake broke the isthmus, and converted the districts round Cape Bathurst
into an island. He told how, when the sea became free from ice in the spring, the
new island had been drifted more than two hundred miles away from the coast
by an unknown current, how the hurricane had driven it luck within sight of
land, how it had again been carried away in the night of the 31st August, and,
lastly, how Kalumah had bravely risked her life to come to the aid of her
European friends. Then he enumerated the changes the island had undergone,
explaining how the warmer waters had worn it away, and his fear that it might be
carried to the Pacific, or seized by the Kamtchatka Current, concluding his
narrative by stating that the wandering island had finally stopped on the 27th of
last September.

The chart of the Arctic seas was then brought, and Hobson pointed out the
position occupied by the island—six hundred miles from all land.

He ended by saying that the situation was extremely dangerous, that the
island would inevitably be crushed when the ice broke up, and that, before
having recourse to the boat—which could not be used until the next summer—
they must try to get back to the American continent by crossing the ice-field.

"We shall have six hundred miles to go in the cold and darkness of the Polar
night. It will be hard work, my friends but you know as well as I do that there
can be no shirking from the task" "When you give the signal to start, Lieutenant,
we will follow you," said Mac-Nab.


All being of one mind, the preparations for departure were from that date
rapidly pushed forward. The men bravely faced the fact that they would have six
hundred miles to travel under very trying circumstances. Sergeant Long
superintended the works, whilst Hobson, the two hunters, and Mrs Barnett, often
went to test the firmness of the ice-field Kalumah frequently accompanied them,
and her remarks, founded on experience, might possibly be of great use to the
Lieutenant. Unless they were prevented they were to start on the 20th November,
and there was not a moment to lose.

As Hobson had foreseen, the wind having risen, the temperature fell slightly,
and the column of mercury marked 24° Fahrenheit.

Snow, which soon became hardened, replaced the rain of the preceding days.
A few more days of such cold and sledges could be used The little bay hollowed
out of the cliffs of Cape Michael was partly filled with ice and snow, but it must
not be forgotten that its calmer waters froze more quickly than those of the open
sea, which were not yet in a satisfactory condition.

The wind continued to blow almost incessantly, and with considerable
violence, but the motion of waves interfered with the regular formation and
consolidation of the ice. Large pools of water occurred here and there between
the pieces of ice, and it was impossible to attempt to cross it.

"The weather is certainly getting colder," observed Mrs Barnett to Lieutenant
Hobson, as they were exploring the south of the island together on the 10th
November, "the temperature is becoming lower and lower, and these liquid
spaces will soon freeze over."

"IT think you are right, madam," replied Hobson, "but the way in which they
will freeze over will not be very favourable to our plans. The pieces of ice are
small, and their jagged edges will stick up all over the surface, making it very
rough, so that if our sledges get over it at all, it will only be with very great
difficulty."

"But," resumed Mrs Barnett, "if I am not mistaken, a heavy fall of snow,
lasting a few days or even a few hours, would suffice to level the entire surface!"

"Yes, yes," replied Hobson, "but if snow should fall, it will be because the
temperature has risen; and if it rises, the ice-field will break up again, so that
either contingency will be against us!"

"It really would be a strange freak of fortune if we should experience a
temperate instead of an Arctic winter in the midst of the Polar Sea!" observed
Mrs Barnett.

"It has happened before, madam, it has happened before. Let me remind you
of the great severity of last cold season; now it has been noticed that two long
bitter winters seldom succeed each other, and the whalers of the northern seas


know it well. A bitter winter when we should have been glad of a mild one, and
a mild one when we so sorely need the reverse. It must be owned, we have been
strangely unfortunate thus far! And when I think of six hundred miles to cross
with women and a child!"...

And Hobson pointed to the vast white plain, with strange irregular markings
like guipure work, stretching away into the infinite distance. Sad and desolate
enough it looked, the imperfectly frozen surface cracking every now and then
with an ominous sound. A pale moon, its light half quenched in the damp mists,
rose but a few degrees above the gloomy horizon and shot a few faint beams
upon the melancholy scene. The half-darkness and the refraction combined
doubled the size of every object. Icebergs of moderate height assumed gigantic
proportions, and were in some cases distorted into the forms of fabulous
monsters. Birds passed overhead with loud flapping of wings, and in
consequence of this optical illusion the smallest of them appeared as large as a
condor or a vulture. In the midst of the icebergs yawned apparently huge black
tunnels, into which the boldest man would scarcely dare to venture, and now and
then sudden convulsions took place, as the icebergs, worn away at the base,
heeled over with a crash, the sonorous echoes taking up the sounds and carrying
them along. The rapid changes resembled the transformation scenes of fairyland,
and terrible indeed must all those phenomena have appeared to the luckless
colonists who were about to venture across the ice-field!

In spite of her moral and physical courage Mrs Barnett could not control an
involuntary shudder. Soul and body alike shrunk from the awful prospect, and
she was tempted to shut her eyes and stop her ears that she might see and hear no
more. When the moon was for a moment veiled behind a heavy cloud, the gloom
of the Polar landscape became still more awe-inspiring, and before her mind’s
eye rose a vision of the caravan of men and women struggling across these vast
solitudes in the midst of hurricanes, snow-storms, avalanches, and in the thick
darkness of the Arctic night!

Mrs Barnett, however, forced herself to look; she wished to accustom her
eyes to these scenes, and to teach herself not to shrink from facing their terrors.
But as she gazed a cry suddenly burst from her lips, and seizing Hobson’s hand,
she pointed to a huge object, of ill-defined dimensions, moving about in the
uncertain light, scarcely a hundred paces from where they stood.

It was a white monster of immense size, more than a hundred feet high. It
was pacing slowly along over the broken ice, bounding from one piece to
another, and beating the air with its huge feet, between which it could have held
ten large dogs at least. It, too, seemed to be seeking a practicable path across the
ice—it, too, seemed anxious to fly from the doomed island. The ice gave way


beneath its weight, and it had often considerable difficulty in regaining its feet.

The monster made its way thus for about a quarter of a mile across the ice,
and then, its farther progress being barred, it turned round and advanced towards
the spot where Mrs Barnett and the Lieutenant stood.

Hobson seized the gun which was slung over his shoulder and presented it at
the animal, but almost immediately lowering the weapon, he said to Mrs Barnett

"A bear, madam, only a bear, the size of which has been greatly magnified by
refraction."

It was, in fact, a Polar bear, and Mrs Barnett drew a long breath of relief as
she understood the optical illusion of which she had been the victim. Then an
idea struck her.

"It is my bear!" she exclaimed, "the bear with the devotion of a
Newfoundland dog! Probably the only one still on the island. But what is he
doing here?"

"He is trying to get away," replied Hobson, shaking his head. "He is trying to
escape from this doomed island, and he cannot do so! He is proving to us that we
cannot pass where he has had to turn back!"

Hobson was right, the imprisoned animal had tried to leave the island and to
get to the continent, and having failed it was returning to the coast. Shaking its
head and growling, it passed some twenty paces from the two watchers, and,
either not seeing them or disdaining to take any notice of them, it walked heavily
on towards Cape Michael, and soon disappeared behind the rising ground.

Lieutenant Hobson and Mrs Barnett returned sadly and silently to the fort.

The preparations for departure went on as rapidly, however, as if it were
possible to leave the island. Nothing was neglected to promote the success of the
undertaking, every possible danger had to be foreseen, and not only had the
ordinary difficulties and dangers of a journey across the ice to be allowed for,
but also the sudden changes of weather peculiar to the Polar regions, which so
obstinately resist every attempt to explore them.

The teams of dogs required special attention. They were allowed to run about
near the fort, that they might regain the activity of which too long a rest had, to
some extent, deprived them, and they were soon in a condition to make a long
march.

The sledges were carefully examined and repaired. The rough surface of the
ice-field would give them many violent shocks, and they were therefore
thoroughly overhauled by Mac-Nab and his men, the inner framework and the
curved fronts being carefully repaired and strengthened.

Two large waggon sledges were built, one for the transport of provisions, the


other for the peltries. These were to be drawn by the tamed reindeer, which had
been well trained for the service. The peltries or furs were articles of luxury with
which it was not perhaps quite prudent to burden the travellers, but Hobson was
anxious to consider the interests of the Company as much as possible, although
he was resolved to abandon them, en route, if they harassed or impeded his
march. No fresh risk was run of injury of the furs, for of course they would have
been lost if left at the factory.

It was of course quite another matter with the provisions, of which a good
and plentiful supply was absolutely necessary. It was of no use to count on the
product of the chase this time. As soon as the passage of the ice-field became
practicable, all the edible game would get on ahead and reach the mainland
before the caravan. One waggon sledge was therefore packed with salt meat,
comed beef, hare patés, dried fish, biscuits—the stock of which was
unfortunately getting low—and an ample reserve of sorrel, scurvy-grass, rum,
spirits of wine, for making warm drinks, &c. &c. Hobson would have been glad
to take some fuel with him, as he would not meet with a tree, a shrub, or a bit of
moss throughout the march of six hundred miles, nor could he hope for pieces of
wreck or timber cast up by the sea, but he did not dare to overload his sledges
with wood. Fortunately there was no lack of warm comfortable garments, and in
case of need they could draw upon the reserve of peltries in the waggon.

Thomas Black, who since his misfortune had altogether retired from the
world, shunning his companions, taking part in none of the consultations, and
remaining shut up in his own room, reappeared as soon as the day of departure
was definitely fixed. But even then he attended to nothing but the sledge which
was to carry his person, his instruments, and his registers. Always very silent, it
was now impossible to get a word out of him. He had forgotten everything, even
that he was a scientific man, and since he had been deceived about the eclipse,
since the solution of the problem of the red prominences of the moon had
escaped him, he had taken no notice of any of the peculiar phenomena of the
high latitudes, such as the Aurora Borealis, halos, parhelia, &c.

During the last few days every one worked so hard that all was ready for the
start on the morning of the 18th November.

But, alas! the ice-field was still impassable. Although the thermometer had
fallen slightly, the cold had not been severe enough to freeze the surface of the
sea, with any uniformity, and the snow which fell was fine and intermittent.
Hobson, Marbre, and Sabine went along the coast every day from Cape Michael
to what was once the corner of the old Walruses’ Bay. They even ventured out
about a mile and a half upon the ice-field, but were compelled to admit that it
was broken by rents, crevasses, and fissures in every direction. Not only would it


be impossible for sledges to cross it, it was dangerous for unencumbered
pedestrians. Hobson and his two men underwent the greatest fatigue in these
short excursions, and more than once they ran a risk of being unable to get back
to Victoria Island across the ever-changing, ever-moving blocks of ice.

Really all nature seemed to be in league against the luckless colonists.

On the 18th and 19th November, the thermometer rose, whilst the barometer
fell. Fatal results were to be feared from this change in the state of the
atmosphere. Whilst the cold decreased the sky became covered with clouds,
which presently resolved themselves into heavy rain instead of the sadly-needed
snow, the column of mercury standing at 34° Fahrenheit. These showers of
comparatively warm water melted the snow and ice in many places, and the
result can easily be imagined. It really seemed as if a thaw were setting in, and
there were symptoms of a general breaking up of the ice-field. In spite of the
dreadful weather, however, Hobson went to the south of the island every day,
and every day returned more disheartened than before.

On the 20th, a tempest resembling in violence that of the month before,
broke upon the gloomy Arctic solitudes, compelling the colonists to give up
going out, and to remain shut up in Fort Hope for two days.

CHAPTER XIII.

ACROSS THE ICE-FIELD.

At last, on the 22d of November, the weather moderated. In a few hours the
storm suddenly ceased. The wind veered round to the north, and the thermometer
fell several degrees. A few birds capable of a long-sustained flight took wing and
disappeared. There really seemed to be a likelihood that the temperature was at
last going to become what it ought to be at this time of the year in such an
elevated latitude. The colonists might well regret that it was not now what it had
been during the last cold season, when the column of mercury fell to 72°
Fahrenheit below zero.

Hobson determined no longer to delay leaving Victoria Island, and on the
morning of the 22d the whole of the little colony was ready to leave the island,
which was now firmly welded to the ice-field, and by its means connected with
the American continent, six hundred miles away.

At half-past eleven A.M., Hobson gave the signal of departure. The sky was
grey but clear, and lighted up from the horizon to the zenith by a magnificent
Aurora Borealis. The dogs were harnessed to the sledges, and three couple of
reindeer to the waggon sledges. Silently they wended their way towards Cape
Michael, where they would quit the island, properly so called, for the ice-field.

The caravan at first skirted along the wooded hill on the east of Lake Barnett,
but as they were rounding the coiner all paused to look round for the last time at


Cape Bathurst, which they were leaving never to return. A few snow-encrusted
rafters stood out in the light of the Aurora Borealis, a few white lines marked the
boundaries of the enceinte of the factory, a—white mass here and there, a few
blue wreaths of smoke from the expiring fire never to be rekindled; this was all
that could be seen of Fort Hope, now useless and deserted, but erected at the cost
of so much labour and so much anxiety.

"Farewell, farewell, to our poor Arctic home!" exclaimed Mrs. Barnett,
waving her hand for the last time; and all sadly and silently resumed their
journey.

At one o’clock the detachment arrived at Cape Michael, after having rounded
the gulf which the cold had imperfectly frozen over. Thus far the difficulties of
the journey had not been very great, for the ground of the island was smooth
compared to the ice-field, which was strewn with icebergs, hummocks, and
packs, between which, practicable passes had to be found at the cost of an
immense amount of fatigue.

Towards the evening of the same day the party had advanced several miles
on the ice-field, and a halt for the night was ordered; the encampment was to be
formed by hollowing out snow-houses in the Esquimaux style. The work was
quickly accomplished with the ice-chisels, and at eight o’clock, after a salt meat
supper, every one had crept into the holes, which are much warmer than anybody
would imagine.

Before retiring, however, Mrs. Barnett asked the Lieutenant how far he
thought they had come.

"Not more than ten miles, I think," replied Hobson.

"Ten from six hundred!" exclaimed Mrs Barnett. "At this rate, it will take us
three months to get to the American continent!"

"Perhaps more, madam," replied Hobson, "for we shall not be able to get on
faster than this. We are not travelling as we were last year over the frozen plains
between Fort Reliance and Cape Bathurst; but on a distorted ice-field crushed by
the pressure of the icebergs across which there is no easy route. I expect to meet
with almost insurmountable difficulties on the way; may we be able to conquer
them! It is not of so much importance, however, to march quickly as to preserve
our health, and I shall indeed think myself fortunate if all my comrades answer
to their names in the roll-call on our arrival at Fort Reliance. Heaven grant we
may have all landed at some point, no matter where, of the American continent
in three months’ time; if so, we shall never be able to return thanks enough."

The night passed without incident; but during the long vigil which he kept,
Hobson fancied he noticed certain ill-omened tremblings on the spot he had
chosen for his encampment, and could not but fear that the vast ice-field was


insufficiently cemented, and that there would be numerous rents in the surface
which would greatly impede his progress, and render communication with firm
ground very uncertain. Moreover, before he started, he had observed that none of
the animals had left the vicinity of the fort, and they would certainly have sought
a warmer climate had not their instinct warned them of obstacles in their way.
Yet the Lieutenant felt that he had only done his duty in making this attempt to
restore his little colony to an inhabited land, before the setting in of the thaw, and
whether he succeeded or had to turn back he would have no reason to reproach
himself.

The next day, November 23d, the detachment could not even advance ten
miles towards the east, so great were the difficulties met with. The ice-field was
fearfully distorted, and here and there many layers of ice were piled one upon
another, doubtless driven along by the irresistible force of the ice-wall into the
vast funnel of the Arctic Ocean. Hence a confusion of masses of ice, which
looked as if they had been suddenly dropped by a hand incapable of holding
them, and strewn about in every direction.

It was clear that a caravan of sledges, drawn by dogs and reindeer, could not
possibly get over these blocks; and it was equally clear that a path could not be
cut through them with the hatchet or ice-chisel. Some of the icebergs assumed
extraordinary forms, and there were groups which looked like towns falling into
ruins. Some towered three or four hundred feet above the level of the ice-field,
and were capped with tottering masses of debris, which the slightest shake or
shock or gust of wind would bring down in avalanches.

The greatest precautions were, therefore, necessary in rounding these ice-
mountains, and orders were given not to speak above a whisper, and not to excite
the dogs by cracking the whips in these dangerous passes.

But an immense amount of time was lost in looking for practicable passages,
and the travellers were worn out with fatigue, often going ten miles round before
they could advance one in the required direction towards the east. The only
comfort was that the ground still remained firm beneath their feet.

On the 24th November, however, fresh obstacles arose, which Hobson really
feared, with considerable reason, would be insurmountable.

After getting over one wall of ice which rose some twenty miles from
Victoria Island, the party found themselves on a much less undulating ice-field,
the different portions of which had evidently not been subjected to any great
pressure. It was clear that in consequence of the direction of the currents the
influence of the masses of permanent ice in the north had not here been felt, and
Hobson and his comrades soon found that this ice-field was intersected with
wide and deep crevasses not yet frozen over. The temperature here was


comparatively warm, and the thermometer maintained a mean height of more
than 34° Fahrenheit. Salt water, as is well known, does not freeze so readily as
fresh, but requires several degrees of cold below freezing point before it
becomes solidified, and the sea was therefore still liquid. All the icebergs and
floes here had come from latitudes farther north, and, if we may so express it,
lived upon the cold they had brought with them. The whole of the southern
portion of the Arctic Ocean was most imperfectly frozen, and a warm rain was
falling, which hastened the dissolution of what ice there was.

On the 24th November the advance of the travellers was absolutely arrested
by a crevasse full of rough water strewn with small icicles—a crevasse not more
than a hundred feet wide, it is true, but probably many miles long.

For two whole hours the party skirted along the western edge of this gap, in
the hope of coming to the end of it and getting to the other side, so as to resume
their march to the east, but it was all in vain, they were obliged to give it up and
encamp on the wrong side.

Hobson and Long, however, proceeded for another quarter of a mile along
the interminable crevasse, mentally cursing the mildness of the winter which had
brought them into such a strait.

"We must pass somehow," said Long, "for we can’t stay where we are."

"Yes, yes," replied the Lieutenant, "and we shall pass it, either by going up to
the north, or down to the south, it must end somewhere. But after we have got
round this we shall come to others, and so it will go on perhaps for hundred of
miles, as long as this uncertain and most unfortunate weather continues!"

"Well, Lieutenant, we must ascertain the truth once for all before we resume
our journey," said the Sergeant.

"We must indeed, Sergeant," replied Hobson firmly, "or we shall run a risk of
not having crossed half the distance between us and America after travelling five
or six hundred miles out of our way. Yes, before going farther, I must make quite
sure of the state of the ice-field, and that is what I am about to do."

And without another word Hobson stripped himself, plunged into the half-
frozen water, and being a powerful swimmer a few strokes soon brought him to
the other side of the crevasse, when he disappeared amongst the icebergs.

A few hours later the Lieutenant reached the encampment, to which Long
had already returned, in an exhausted condition. He took Mrs Barnett and the
Sergeant aside, and told them that the ice-field was impracticable, adding—

"Perhaps one man on foot without a sledge or any encumbrances might get
across, but for a caravan it is impossible. The crevasses increase towards the
east, and a boat would really be of more use than a sledge if we wish to reach the
American coast"


"Well," said Long, "if one man could cross, ought not one of us to attempt it,
and go and seek assistance for the rest."

"T thought of trying it myself," replied Hobson.

"You, Lieutenant!"

"You, sir!" cried Mrs Barnett and Long in one breath.

These two exclamations showed Hobson how unexpected and inopportune
his proposal appeared. How could he, the chief of the expedition, think of
deserting those confided to him, even although it was in their interests and at
great risk to himself. It was quite impossible, and the Lieutenant did not insist
upon it.

"Yes," he said, "I understand how it appears to you, my friends, and I will not
abandon you. It would, indeed, be quite useless for any one to attempt the
passage; he would not succeed, he would fall by the way, and find a watery
grave when the thaw sets in. And even suppose he reached New Archangel, how
could he come to our rescue? Would he charter a vessel to seek for us? Suppose
he did, it could not start until after the thaw. And who can tell where the currents
will then have taken Victoria Island, either yet farther north or to the Behring
Sea!

"Yes, Lieutenant, you are right," replied Long; "let us remain together, and if
we are to be saved in a boat, there is Mac-Nab’s on Victoria Island, and for it at
least we shall not have to wait!"

Mrs Barnett had listened without saying a word, but she understood that the
ice-field being impassible. they had now nothing to depend on but the
carpenter’s boat, and that they would have to wait bravely for the thaw.

"What are you going to do, then?" she inquired at last.

"Return to Victoria Island."

"Let us return then, and God be with us!"

The rest of the travellers had now gathered round the Lieutenant, and he laid
his plans before them.

At first all were disposed to rebel, the poor creatures had been counting on
getting back to their homes, and felt absolutely crushed at the disappointment,
but they soon recovered their dejection and declared themselves ready to obey.

Hobson then told them the results of the examination he had just made. They
learnt that the obstacles in their way on the east were so numerous that it would
be absolutely impossible to pass with the sledges and their contents, and as the
journey would last several months, the provisions, &c., could not be dispensed
with.

"We are now," added the Lieutenant, "cut off from all communication with
the mainland, and by going farther towards the east we run a risk, after enduring


great fatigues, of finding it impossible to get back to the island, now our only
refuge. If the thaw should overtake us on the ice-field, we are lost. I have not
disguised nor have I exaggerated the truth, and I know, my friends, that I am
speaking to men who have found that I am not a man to turn back from
difficulties. But I repeat, the task we have set ourselves is impossible!"

The men trusted their chief implicitly. They knew his courage and energy,
and felt as they listened to his words that it was indeed impossible to cross the
ice. It was decided to start on the return journey to Fort Hope the next day, and it
was accomplished under most distressing circumstances. The weather was
dreadful, squalls swept down upon the ice-field, and rain fell in torrents. The
difficulty of finding the way in the darkness through the labyrinth of icebergs
can well be imagined!

It took no less than four days and four nights to get back to the island.
Several teams of dogs with their sledges fell into the crevasses, but thanks to
Hobson’s skill, prudence, and devotion, he lost not one of his party. But what
terrible dangers and fatigues they had to go through, and how awful was the
prospect of another winter on the wandering island to the unfortunate colonists!

CHAPTER XIV.

THE WINTER MONTHS.

The party did not arrive at Fort Hope until the 28th, after a most arduous
journey. They had now nothing to depend on but the boat, and that they could
not use until the sea was open, which would not be for six months.

Preparations for another winter were therefore made. The sledges were
unloaded, the provisions put back in the pantry, and the clothes, arms, furs, &c.,
in the magazines. The dogs returned to their dog-house, and the reindeer to their
stable.

Great was the despair of Thomas Black at this return to seclusion. The poor
astronomer carried his instruments, his books, and his MSS. back to his room,
and more angry than ever with "the evil fate which pursued him," he held
himself aloof from everything which went on in the factory.

All were again settled at their usual winter avocations the day after their
arrival, and the monotonous winter life once more commenced. Needlework,
mending the clothes, taking care of the furs, some of which might yet be saved,
the observation of the weather, the examination of the ice-field, and reading
aloud, were the daily occupations. Mrs Barnett was, as before, the leader in
everything, and her influence was everywhere felt. If, as sometimes happened,
now that all were uneasy about the future, a slight disagreement occurred
between any of the soldiers, a few words from Mrs Barnett soon set matters
straight, for she had acquired wonderful power over the little world in which she


moved, and she always used it for the good of the community.

Kalumah had become a great favourite with everybody, for she was always
pleasant and obliging. Mrs Barnett had undertaken her education, and she got on
quickly, for she was both intelligent and eager to learn. She improved her
English speaking, and also taught her to read and write in that language. There
were, however, twelve masters for Kalumah, all eager to assist in this branch of
her education, as the soldiers had all been taught reading, writing, and arithmetic
either in England or in English colonies.

The building of the boat proceeded rapidly, and it was to be planked and
decked before the end of the month. Mac-Nab and some of his men worked hard
in the darkness outside, with no light but the flames of burning resin, whilst
others were busy making the rigging in the magazines of the factory. Although
the season was now far advanced, the weather still remained very undecided.
The cold was sometimes intense, but owing to the prevalence of west winds it
never lasted long.

Thus passed the whole of December, rain and intermittent falls of snow
succeeded each other, the temperature meanwhile varying from 26° to 34°
Fahrenheit. The consumption of fuel was moderate, although there was no need
to economise it, the reserves being considerable. It was otherwise with the oil,
upon which they depended for light, for the stock was getting so low that the
Lieutenant could at last only allow the lamps to be lit for a few hours every day.
He tried using reindeer fat for lighting the house, but the smell of it was so
unbearable that every one preferred being in the dark. All work had of course to
be given up for the time, and very tedious did the long dark hours appear.

Some Aurore Borealis and two or three lunar halos appeared at full moon,
and Thomas Black might now have minutely observed all these phenomenon,
and have made precise calculations on their intensity, their coloration,
connection with the electric state of the atmosphere, and their influence upon the
magnetic needle, &c. But the astronomer did not even leave his room. His spirit
was completely crushed.

On the 30th December the light of the moon revealed a long circular line of
icebergs shutting in the horizon on the north and east of Victoria Island. This was
the ice-wall, the frozen masses of which were piled up to a height of some three
or four hundred feet. Two-thirds of the island were hemmed in by this mighty
barrier, and it seemed probable that the blockade would become yet more
complete.

The sky was clear for the first week of January. The new year, 1861, opened
with very cold weather, and the column of mercury fell to 8° Fahrenheit. It was
the lowest temperature that had yet been experienced in this singular winter,


although it was anything but low for such a high latitude.

The Lieutenant felt it his duty once more to take the latitude and longitude of
the island by means of stellar observations, and found that its position had not
changed at all.

About this time, in spite of all their economy, the oil seemed likely to fail
altogether. The sun would not appear above the horizon before early in February,
so that there was a month to wait, during which there was a danger of the
colonists having to remain in complete darkness. Thanks to the young
Esquimaux, however, a fresh supply of oil for the lamps was obtained.

On the 3rd January Kalumah walked to Cape Bathurst to examine the state of
the ice. All along the south of the island the ice-field was very compact, the
icicles of which it was composed were more firmly welded together, there were
no liquid spaces between them, and the surface of the floe, though rough, was
perfectly firm everywhere. This was no doubt caused by the pressure of the
chain of icebergs on the horizon, which drove the ice towards the north, and
squeezed it against the island.

Although she saw no crevasses or rents, the young native noticed many
circular holes neatly cut in the ice, the use of which she knew perfectly well.
They were the holes kept open by seals imprisoned beneath the solid crust of ice,
and by which they came to the surface to breathe and look for mosses under the
snow on the coast.

Kalumah knew that in the winter bears will crouch patiently near these holes,
and watching for the moment when the seal comes out of the water, they rush
upon it, hug it to death in their paws, and carry it off. She knew, too, that the
Esquimaux, not less patient than the bears, also watch for the appearance of
these animals, and throwing a running noose over their heads when they push
them up, drag them to the surface.

What bears and Esquimaux could do might certainly also be done by skilful
hunters, and Kalumah hastened back to the fort to tell the Lieutenant of what she
had seen, feeling sure that where these holes were seals were not far off.

Hobson sent for the hunters, and the young native described to them the way
in which the Esquimaux capture these animals in the winter, and begged them to
try.

She had not finished speaking before Sabine had a strong rope with a
running noose ready in his hand and accompanied by Hobson, Mrs Barnett,
Kalumah, and two or three soldiers, the hunters hurried to Cape Bathurst, and
whilst the women remained on the beach, the men made their way to the holes
pointed out by Kalumah. Each one was provided with a rope, and stationed
himself at a different hole.


A long time of waiting ensued—no sign of the seals, but at last the water in
the hole Marbre had chosen began to bubble, and a head with long tusks
appeared. It was that of a walrus. Marbre flung his running noose skilfully over
its neck and pulled it tightly. His comrades rushed to his assistance, and with
some difficulty the huge beast was dragged upon the ice, and despatched with
hatchets.

It was a great success, and the colonists were delighted with this novel
fishing. Other walruses were taken in the same way, and furnished plenty of oil,
which, though not strictly of the right sort, did very well for the lamps, and there
was no longer any lack of light in any of the rooms of Fort Hope.

The cold was even now not very severe, and had the colonists been on the
American mainland they could only have rejoiced in the mildness of the winter.
They were sheltered by the chain of icebergs from the north and west winds, and
the month of January passed on with the thermometer never many degrees below
freezing point, so that the sea round Victoria Island was never frozen hard.
Fissures of more or less extent broke the regularity of the surface in the offing,
as was proved by the continued presence of the ruminants and furred animals
near the factory, all of which had become strangely tame, forming in fact part of
the menagerie of the colony.

According to Hobson’s orders, all these creatures were unmolested. It would
have been useless to kill them, and a reindeer was only occasionally slaughtered
to obtain a fresh supply of venison. Some of the furred animals even ventured
into the enceinte, and they were not driven away. The martens and foxes were in
all the splendour of their winter clothing, and under ordinary circumstances
would have been of immense value. These rodents found plenty of moss under
the snow, thanks to the mildness of the season, and did not therefore live upon
the reserves of the factory.

It was with some apprehensions for the future that the end of the winter was
awaited, but Mrs Barnett did all in her power to brighten the monotonous
existence of her companions in exile.

Only one incident occurred in the month of January, and that one was
distressing enough. On the 7th, Michael Mac-Nab was taken ill—severe
headache, great thirst and alternations of shivering and fever, soon reduced the
poor little fellow to a sad state. His mother and father, and indeed all his friends,
were in very great trouble. No one knew what to do, as it was impossible to say
what his illness was, but Madge, who retained her senses about her, advised
cooling drinks and poultices. Kalumah was indefatigable, remaining day and
night by her favourite’s bedside, and refusing to take any rest.

About the third day there was no longer any doubt as to the nature of the


malady. A rash came out all over the child’s body, and it was evident that he had
malignant scarlatina, which would certainly produce internal inflammation.

Children of a year old are rarely attacked with this terrible disease, but cases
do occasionally occur. The medicine-chest of the factory was necessarily
insufficiently stocked, but Madge, who had nursed several patients through
scarlet lever, remembered that tincture of belladonna was recommended, and
administered one or two drops to the little invalid every day. The greatest care
was taken lest he should catch cold; he was at once removed to his parents’
room, and the rash soon came out freely. Tiny red points appeared on his tongue,
his lips, and even on the globes of his eyes. Two days later his skin assumed a
violet hue, then it became white and fell off in scales.

It was now that double care was required to combat the great internal
inflammation, which proved the severity of the attack, Nothing was neglected,
the boy was, in fact, admirably nursed, and on the 20th January, twelve days
after he was taken ill, he was pronounced out of danger.

Great was the joy in the factory. The baby was the child of the fort, of the
regiment! He was born in the terrible northern latitudes, in the colony itself, he
had been named Michael Hope, and he had come to be regarded as a kind of
talisman in the dangers and difficulties around, and all felt sure that God would
not take him from them.

Poor Kalumah would certainly not have survived him had he died, but he
gradually recovered, and fresh hope seemed to come back when he was restored
to the little circle.

The 23d of January was now reached, after all these distressing alternations
of hope and fear. The situation of Victoria Island had not changed in the least,
and it was still wrapped in the gloom of the apparently interminable Polar night.
Snow fell abundantly for some days, and was piled up on the ground to the
height of two feet.

On the 27th a somewhat alarming visit was received at the fort. The soldiers
Belcher and Pond, when on guard in front of the enceinte in the moming, saw a
huge bear quietly advancing towards the fort. They hurried into the large room,
and told Mrs Barnett of the approach of the formidable carnivorous beast.

"Perhaps it is only our bear again," observed Mrs Barnett to Hobson, and
accompanied by him, and followed by the Sergeant, Sabine, and some soldiers
provided with guns,—he fearlessly walked to the postern.

The bear was now about two hundred paces off, and was walking along
without hesitation, as if he had some settled plan in view.

"I know him!" cried Mrs Barnett, "it is your bear, Kalumah, your preserver!"

"Oh, don’t kill my bear!" exclaimed the young Esquimaux.


"He shall not be killed," said the Lieutenant, "don’t injure him, my good
fellows," he added to the men, "he will probably return as he came."

"But suppose he intends coming into the enceinte?" said Long, who had his
doubts as to the friendly propensities of Polar bears.

"Let him come, Sergeant," said Mrs Barnett, "he is a prisoner like ourselves,
and you know prisoners"—

"Don’t eat each other," added Hobson. "True, but only when they belong to
the same species For your sake, however, we will spare this fellow-sufferer, and
only defend ourselves if he attack us. I think, however, it will be as prudent to go
back to the House. We must not put too strong a temptation in the way of our
carnivorous friend!"

This was certainly good advice, and all returned to the large room, the
windows were closed, but not the shutters.

Through the panes the movements of the visitor were watched. The bear,
finding the postern unfastened, quietly pushed open the door, looked in, carefully
examined the premises, and finally entered the enceinte. Having reached the
centre, he examined the buildings around him, went towards the reindeer stable
and dog-house, listened for a moment to the howlings of the dogs and the uneasy
noises made by the reindeer, then continued his walk round the palisade, and at
last came and leant his great head against one of the windows of the large room.

To own the truth everybody started back, several of the soldiers seized their
guns, and Sergeant Long began to fear he had let the joke go too far.

But Kalumah came forward, and looked through the thin partition with her
sweet eyes. The bear seemed to recognise her, at least so she thought, and
doubtless satisfied with his inspection, he gave a hearty growl, and turning away
left the enceinte, as Hobson had prophesied, as he entered it.

This was the bear’s first and last visit to the fort, and on his departure
everything went on as quietly as before.

The little boy’s recovery progressed favourably, and at the end of the month
he was as rosy and as bright as ever.

At noon on the 3rd of February, the northern horizon was touched with a
faint glimmer of light which did not fade away for an hour, and the yellow disc
of the sun appeared for an instant for the first time since the commencement of
the long Polar night.

CHAPTER XV.

THE LAST EXPLORING EXPEDITION.

From this date, February 3rd, the sun rose each day higher above the horizon,
the nights were, however, still very long, and, as is often the case in February,
the cold increased, the thermometer marking only 1° Fahrenheit, the lowest


temperature experienced throughout this extraordinary winter.

"When does the thaw commence in these northern seas?" inquired Mrs
Barnett of the Lieutenant.

"In ordinary seasons," replied Hobson, "the ice does not break up until early
in May; but the winter has been so mild that unless a very hard frost should now
set in, the thaw may commence at the beginning of April. At least that is my
opinion." "We shall still have two months to wait then?"

"Yes, two months, for it would not be prudent to launch our boat too soon
amongst the floating ice; and I think our best plan will be to wait until our island
has leached the narrowest part of Behring Strait, which is not more than two
hundred miles wide."

"What do you mean?" exclaimed Mrs Barnett, considerably surprised at the
Lieutenant’s reply. "Have you forgotten that it was the Kamtchatka Current
which brought us where we now are, and which may seize us again when the
thaw sets in and carry us yet farther north?"

"I do not think it will, madam; indeed I feel quite sure that that will not
happen. The thaw always takes place in from north to south, and although the
Kamtchatka Current runs the other way, the ice always goes down the Behring
Current. Other reasons there are for my opinion which I cannot now enumerate.
But the icebergs invariably drift towards the Pacific, and are there melted by its
warmer waters. Ask Kalumah if I am not right. She knows these latitudes well,
and will tell you that the thaw always proceeds from the north to the south."

Kalumah when questioned confirmed all that the Lieutenant had said, so that
it appeared probable that the island would be drifted to the south like a huge ice-
floe, that is to say, to the narrowest part of Behring Strait, which is much
frequented in the summer by the fishermen of New Archangel, who are the most
experienced mariners of those waters. Making allowance for all delays they
might then hope to set foot on the continent before May, and although the cold
had not been very intense there was every reason to believe that the foundations
of Victoria Island had been thickened and strengthened by a fresh accumulation
of ice at the base, and that it would hold together for several months to come.

There was then nothing for the colonists to do but to wait patiently,—still to
wait!

The convalescence of little Michael continued to progress favourably. On the
20th of February he went out for the first time, forty days after he was taken ill.
By this we mean that he went from his bedroom into the large room, where he
was petted and made much of. His mother, acting by Madge’s advice, put off
weaning him for some little time, and he soon got back his strength. The soldiers
had made many little toys for him during his illness, and he was now as happy as


any child in the wide world.

The last week of February was very wet, rain and snow falling alternately. A
strong wind blew from the north-west, and the temperature was low enough for
large quantities of snow to fall; the gale, however, increased in violence, and on
the side of Cape Bathurst and the chain of icebergs the noise of the tempest was
deafening. The huge ice-masses were flung against each other, and fell with a
roar like that of thunder. The ice on the north was compressed and piled up on
the shores of the island. There really seemed to be a danger that the cape itself-
which was but a kind of iceberg capped with earth and sand-would be flung
down.

Some large pieces of ice, in spite of their weight, were driven to the very foot
of the palisaded enceinte; but fortunately for the factory the cape retained its
position; had it given way all the buildings must inevitably have been crushed
beneath it.

It will be easily understood that the position of Victoria Island, at the opening
of a narrow strait about which the ice accumulated in large quantities, was
extremely perilous, for it might at any time be swept by a horizontal avalanche,
or crushed beneath the huge blocks of ice driven inland from the offing, and so
become engulfed before the thaw. This was a new danger to be added to all the
others already threatening the little band. Mrs Barnett, seeing the awful power of
the pressure in the offing, and the violence with which the moving masses of ice
crushed upon each other, realised the full magnitude of the peril they would all
be in when the thaw commenced. She often mentioned her fears to the
Lieutenant, and he shook his head like a man who had no reply to make.

Early in March the squall ceased, and the full extent of the transformation of
the ice-field was revealed. It seemed as if by a kind of glissade the chain of
icebergs had drawn nearer to the island. In some parts it was not two miles
distant, and it advanced like a glacier on the move, with the difference that the
latter has a descending and the ice-wall a horizontal motion. Between the lofty
chain of ice-mountains the ice-field was fearfully distorted: strewn with
hummocks, broken obelisks, shattered blocks, overturned pyramids, it resembled
a tempest-tossed sea or a ruined town, in which not a building or a monument
had remained standing, and above it all the mighty icebergs reared their snowy
crests, standing out against the sky with their pointed peaks, their rugged cones,
and solid buttresses, forming a fitting frame for the weird fantastic landscape at
their feet.

At this date the little vessel was quite finished. This boat was rather heavy in
shape, as might have been expected, but she did credit to Mac-Nab, and shaped
as she was like a barge at the bows, she ought the better to withstand the shocks


of the floating ice. She might have been taken for one of those Dutch boats
which venture upon the northern waters. Her rig, which was completed,
consisted, like that of a cutter, of a mainsail and a jib carried on a single mast.
The tent canvass of the factory had been made use of for sailcloth.

This boat would carry the whole colony, and if, as the Lieutenant hoped, the
island were drifted to Behring Strait, the vessel would easily make her way to
land, even from the widest part of the passage. There was then nothing to be
done but wait for the thaw.

Hobson now decided to make a long excursion to the south to ascertain the
state of the ice-field, to see whether there were any signs of its breaking up, to
examine the chain of icebergs by which it was hemmed in, to make sure, in
short, whether it would really be useless to attempt to cross to the American
continent. Many incidents might occur, many fresh dangers might arise before
the thaw, and it would therefore be but prudent to make a reconnaissance on the
ice-field.

The expedition was organised and the start fixed for March 7th. Hobson, Mrs
Barnett, Kalumah, Marbre, and Sabine were to go, and, if the route should be
practicable, they would try and find a passage across the chain of icebergs. In
any case, however, they were not to be absent for more than forty-eight hours.

A good stock of provisions was prepared, and, well provided for every
contingency, the little party left Fort Hope on the morning of the 7th March aid
turned towards Cape Michael.

The thermometer then marked 32° Fahrenheit. The atmosphere was misty,
but the weather was perfectly calm. The sun was now above the horizon for
seven or eight hours a day, and its oblique rays afforded plenty of light.

At nine o’clock, after a short halt, the party descended the slope of Cape
Michael and made their way across the ice-fields in a southeasterly direction. On
this side the ice wall rose not three miles from the cape.

The march was of course very slow. Every minute a crevasse had to be
turned, or a hummock too high to be climbed. It was evident that a sledge could
not have got over the rough distorted surface, which consisted of an
accumulation of blocks of ice of every shape and size, some of which really
seemed to retain their equilibrium by a miracle. Others had been but recently
overturned, as could be seen from the clearly cut fractures and sharp comers.
Not a sign was to be seen of any living creature, no footprints told of the passage
of man or beast, and the very birds had deserted these awful solitudes.

Mrs Barnett was astonished at the scene before her, and asked the Lieutenant
how they could possibly have crossed the ice-fields if they had started in
December, and he replied by reminding her that it was then in a very different


condition; the enormous pressure of the advancing icebergs had not then
commenced, the surface of the sea was comparatively even, and the only danger
was from its insufficient solidification. The irregularities which now barred their
passage did not exist early in the winter.

They managed, however, to advance towards the mighty ice-wall, Kalumah
generally leading the way. Like a chamois on the Alpine rocks, the young girl
firmly treaded the ice-masses with a swiftness of foot and an absence of
hesitation which was really marvellous. She knew by instinct the best way
through the labyrinth of icebergs, and was an unerring guide to her companions.

About noon the base of the ice-wall was reached, but it had taken three hours
to get over three miles.

The icy barrier presented a truly imposing appearance, rising as it did more
than four hundred feet above the ice-field. The various strata of which it was
formed were clearly defined, and the glistening surface was tinged with many a
delicately-shaded hue. Jasper-like ribbons of green and blue alternated with
streaks and dashes of all the colours of the rainbow, strewn with enamelled
arabesques, sparkling crystals, and delicate ice-flowers. No cliff, however
strangely distorted, could give any idea of this marvellous half opaque, half
transparent ice-wall, and no description could do justice to the wonderful effects
of chiara-oscuro produced upon it.

It would not do, however, to approach too near to these beetling cliffs, the
solidity of which was very doubtful. Internal fractures and rents were already
commencing, the work of destruction and decomposition was proceeding
rapidly, aided by the imprisoned air-bubbles; and the fragility of the huge
structure, built up by the cold, was manifest to every eye. It could not survive the
Arctic winter, it was doomed to melt beneath the sunbeams, and it contained
material enough to feed large rivers.

Lieutenant Hobson had warned his companions of the danger of the
avalanches which constantly fall from the summits of the icebergs, and they did
not therefore go far along their base. That this prudence was necessary was
proved by the falling of a huge block, at two o’clock, at the entrance to a kind of
valley which they were about to cross. It must have weighed more than a
hundred tons, and it was dashed upon the ice-field with a fearful crash, bursting
like a bomb-shell. Fortunately no one was hurt by the splinters.

From two to five o’clock the explorers followed a narrow winding path
leading down amongst the icebergs; they were anxious to know if it led right
through them, but could not at once ascertain. In this valley, as it might be called,
they were able to examine the internal structure of the icy barrier. The blocks of
which it was built up were here arranged with greater symmetry than outside. In


some places trunks of trees were seen embedded in the ice, all, however, of
Tropical not Polar species, which had evidently been brought to Arctic regions
by the Gulf Stream, and would be taken back to the ocean when the thaw should
have converted into water the ice which now held them in its chill embrace.

At five o’clock it became too dark to go any further. The travellers had not
gone more than about two miles in the valley, but it was so sinuous, that it was
impossible to estimate exactly the distance traversed.

The signal to halt was given by the Lieutenant, and Marbre and Sabine
quickly dug out a grotto in the ice with their chisels, into which the whole party
crept, and after a good supper all were soon asleep.

Every one was up at eight o’clock the next morning, and Hobson decided to
follow the valley for another mile, in the hope of finding out whether it went
right through the ice-wall. The direction of the pass, judging from the position of
the sun, had now changed from north to south east, and as early as eleven
o’clock the party came out on the opposite side of the chain of icebergs. The
passage was therefore proved to run completely through the barrier.

The aspect of the ice-field on the eastern side was exactly similar to that on
the west. The same confusion of ice-masses, the same accumulation of
hummocks and icebergs, as far as the eye could reach, with occasional
alternations of smooth surfaces of small extent, intersected by numerous
crevasses, the edges of which were already melting fast. The same complete
solitude, the same desertion, not a bird, not an animal to be seen.

Mrs Barnett climbed to the top of the hummock, and there remained for an
hour, gazing upon the sad and desolate Polar landscape before her. Her thoughts
involuntarily flew back to the miserable attempt to escape that had been made
five months before. Once more she saw the men and women of the hapless
caravan encamped in the darkness of these frozen solitudes, or struggling against
insurmountable difficulties to reach the mainland.

At last the Lieutenant broke in upon her reverie, and said—

"Madam, it is more than twenty-four hours since we left the fort. We now
know the thickness of the ice-wall, and as we promised not to be away longer
than forty-eight hours, I think it is time to retrace our steps."

Mrs Barnett saw the justice of the Lieutenant’s remark. They had ascertained
that the barrier of ice was of moderate thickness, that it would melt away quickly
enough to allow of the passage of Mac-Nab’s boat after the thaw, and it would
therefore be well to hasten back lest a snow-storm or change in the weather of
any kind should render return through the winding valley difficult.

The party breakfasted and set out on the return journey about one o’clock
P.M.


The night was passed as before in an ice-cavern, and the route resumed at
eight o’clock the next morning, March 9th.

The travellers now turned their backs upon the sun, as they were making for
the west, but the weather was fine, and the orb of day, already high in the
heavens, flung some of its rays across the valley and lit up the glittering ice-
walls on either side.

Mrs Barnett and Kalumah were a little behind the rest of the party chatting
together, and looking about them as they wound through the narrow passages
pointed out by Marbre and Sabine. They expected to get out of the valley
quickly, and be back at the fort before sunset, as they had only two or three miles
of the island to cross after leaving the ice. This would be a few hours after the
time fixed, but not long enough to cause any serious anxiety to their friends at
home.

They made their calculation without allowing for an incident which no
human perspicacity could possibly have foreseen.

It was about ten o’clock when Marbre and Sabine, who were some twenty
paces in advance of the rest, suddenly stopped and appeared to be debating some
point. When the others came up, Sabine was holding out his compass to Marbre,
who was staring at it with an expression of the utmost astonishment.

"What an extraordinary thing!" he exclaimed, and added, turning to the
Lieutenant—

"Will you tell me, sir, the position of the island with regard to the ice-wall, is
it on the east or west?"

"On the west," replied Hobson, not a little surprised at the question, "you
know that well enough, Marbre"

"I know it well enough! I know it well enough!" repeated Marbre, shaking
his head, "and if it is on the west, we are going wrong, and away from the
inland!"

"What, away from the island!" exclaimed the Lieutenant, struck with the
hunter’s air of conviction.

"We are indeed, sir," said Marbre; "look at the compass; my name is not
Marbre if it does not show that we are walking towards the east not the west!"

"Impossible!" exclaimed Mrs Barnett.

"Look, madam," said Sabine.

It was true. The needle pointed in exactly the opposite direction to that
expected. Hobson looked thoughtful and said nothing.

"We must have made a mistake when we left the ice cavern this morning,"
observed Sabine, "we ought to have turned to the left instead of to the right."

"No, no," said Mrs Barnett, "I am sure we did not make a mistake!"


"But"——-said Marbre.

"But," interrupted Mrs Barnett, "look at the sun. Does it no longer rise in the
east? Now as we turned our backs on it this morning, and it is still behind us, we
must be walking towards the west, so that when we get out of the valley on the
western side of the chain of icebergs, we must come to the island we left there."

Marbre, struck dumb by this irrefutable argument, crossed his arms and said
no more.

"Then if so," said Sabine, "the sun and the compass are in complete
contradiction of each other?"

"At this moment they are," said Hobson, "and the reason is simple enough; in
these high northern latitudes, and in latitudes in the neighbourhood of the
magnetic pole, the compasses are sometimes disturbed, and the deviation of their
needles is so great as entirely to mislead travellers."

"All right then," said Marbre, "we have only to go on keeping our backs to
the sun."

"Certainly," replied Lieutenant Hobson, "there can be no hesitation which to
choose, the sun or our compass, nothing disturbs the sun."

The march was resumed, the sun was still behind them, and there was really
no objection to be made to Hobson’s theory, founded, as it was, upon the
position then occupied by the radiant orb of day.

The little troop marched on, but they did not get out of the valley as soon as
they expected. Hobson had counted on leaving the ice-wall before noon, and it
was past two when they reached the opening of the narrow pass.

Strange as was this delay, it had not made any one uneasy, and the
astonishment of all can readily be imagined when, on stepping on to the ice field,
at the base of the chain of icebergs, no sign was to be seen of Victoria Island,
which ought to have been opposite to them.

Yes!—The island, which on this side had been such a conspicuous object,
owing to the height of Cape Michael crowned with trees, had disappeared. In its
place stretched a vast ice-field lit up by the sunbeams.

All looked around them, and then at each other in amazement.

"The island ought to be there!" cried Sabine.

"But it is not there," said Marbre. "Oh, sir—Lieutenant—where is it? what
has become of it?"

But Hobson had not a word to say in reply, and Mrs Barnett was equally
dumfounded.

Kalumah now approached Lieutenant Hobson, and touching his arm, she said


"We went wrong in the valley, we went up it instead of down it, we shall


only get back to where we were yesterday by crossing the chain of icebergs.
Come, come!"

Hobson and the others mechanically followed Kalumah, and trusting in the
young native’s sagacity, retraced their steps. Appearances were, however,
certainly against her, for they were now walking towards the sun in an easterly
direction.

Kalumah did not explain her motives, but muttered as she went along—

"Let us make haste!"

All were quite exhausted, and could scarcely get along, when they found
themselves on the other side of the ice-wall, after a walk of three hours. The
night had now fallen, and it was too dark to see if the island was there, but they
were not long left in doubt.

At about a hundred paces off, burning torches were moving about, whilst
reports of guns and shouts were heard.

The explorers replied, and were soon joined by Sergeant Long and others,
amongst them Thomas Black, whose anxiety as to the fate of his friends had at
last roused him from his torpor. The poor fellows left on the island had been in a
terrible state of uneasiness, thinking that Hobson and his party had lost their way.
They were right, but what was it that had made them think so?

Twenty-four hours before, the immense ice-field and the island had turned
half round, and in consequence of this displacement they were no longer on the
west, but on the east of the ice-wall!


CHAPTER XVI


THE BREAK-UP OF THE ICE


Two hours later all had returned to Fort Hope, and the next day the sun for
the first time shone upon that part of the coast which was formerly on the west of
the island. Kalumah, to whom this phenomenon was familiar, had been right, and
if the sun had not been the guilty party neither had the compass!

The position of Victoria Island with regard to the cardinal points was again
completely changed. Since it had broken loose from the mainland the island—
and not only the island, but the vast ice field in which it was enclosed—had
turned half round. This displacement proved that the ice-field was not connected
with the continent, and that the thaw would soon set in.

"Well, Lieutenant,” said Mrs. Barnett, "this change of front is certainly in our
favour. Cape Bathurst and Fort Hope are now turned towards the north-east, in
other words towards the point nearest to the continent, and the ice-wall, through
which our boat could only have made its way by a difficult and dangerous
passage, is no longer between us and America. And so all is for the best, is it
not?" added Mrs. Barnett with a smile.

"Indeed it is," replied Hobson, who fully realised all that was involved in this
change of the position of Victoria Island.

No incident occurred between the 10th and 21st March, but there were
indications of the approaching change of season. The temperature varied from
43° to 50° Fahrenheit, and it appeared likely that the breaking up of the ice
would commence suddenly. Fresh crevasses opened, and the unfrozen water
flooded the surface of the ice. As the whalers poetically express it, the "wounds
of the ice-field bled copiously," and the opening of these "wounds" was
accompanied by a sound like the roar of artillery. A warm rain fell for several
hours, and accelerated the dissolution of the solid coating of the ocean.

The birds, ptarmigans, puffins, ducks, &c., which had deserted the island in
the beginning of the winter, now returned in large numbers. Marbre and Sabine
killed a few of them, and on some were found the tickets tied round their necks
by the Lieutenant several months before. Flocks of white trumpeter swans also
reappeared, and filled the air with their loud clarion tones; whilst the
quadrupeds, rodents, and carnivora alike continued to frequent the vicinity of the
fort like tame domestic animals.

Whenever the state of the sky permitted, which was almost every day,


Hobson took the altitude of the sun. Sometimes Mrs Barnett, who had become
quite expert in handling the sextant, assisted him, or took the observation in his
stead. It was now most important to note the very slightest changes in the
latitude and longitude of the island. It was still doubtful to which current it
would be subject after the thaw, and the question whether it would be drifted
north or south was the chief subject of the discussions between the Lieutenant
and Mrs Barnett.

The brave lady had always given proof of an energy superior to that of most
of her sex, and now she was to be seen every day braving fatigue, and venturing
on to the half decomposed, or "pancake" ice, in all weathers, through snow or
rain, and on her return to the factory ready to cheer and help everybody, and to
superintend all that was going on. We must add that her efforts were ably
seconded by the faithful Madge.

Mrs Barnett had compelled herself to look the future firmly in the face, and
although she could not fail to fear for the safety of all, and sad presentiments
haunted her, she never allowed herself to betray any uneasiness. Her courage and
confidence never seemed to waver, she was as ever the kind encouraging friend
of each and all, and none could have dreamt of the conflict of spirit going on
beneath her quiet exterior demeanour. Lieutenant Hobson’s admiration of her
character was unbounded, and he had also entire confidence in Kalumah, often
trusting to her natural instinct as implicitly as a hunter to that of his dog.

The young Esquimaux was, in fact, very intelligent, and familiar from
babyhood with the phenomena of the Polar regions. On board a whaler she might
have advantageously replaced many an ice-master or pilot whose business it is to
guide a boat amongst the ice.

Every day Kalumah went to examine the state of the ice-field.

The nature of the noise produced by the breaking of the icebergs in the
distance was enough to tell her how far the decomposition had advanced. No
foot was surer than hers upon the ice, no one could spring more lightly forwards
than she when her instinct told her that the smooth surface was rotten
underneath, and she would scud across an ice-field riddled with fissures without
a moment’s hesitation.

From the 20th to the 30th March, the thaw made rapid progress. Rain fell
abundantly and accelerated the dissolution of the ice. It was to be hoped that the
ice-field would soon open right across, and that in about fifteen days Hobson
would be able to steer his boat into the open sea. He was determined to lose no
time, as he did not know but that the Kamtchatka Current might sweep the island
to the north before it could come under the influence of the Behring Current.

"But," Kalumah repeated again and again, "there is no fear of that, the


breaking up of the ice does not proceed upwards but downwards. The danger is
there!" she added, pointing to the south in the direction of the vast Pacific Ocean.

The young girl’s confidence on this point reassured Hobson, for he had no
reason now to dread the falling to pieces of the island in the warm waters of the
Pacific. He meant everybody to be on board the boat before that could happen,
and they would not have far to go to get to one or the other continent, as the
Strait is in reality a kind of funnel through which the waters flow between Cape
East on the Asiatic side and Cape Prince of Wales on the American.

This will explain the eager attention with which the slightest change in the
position of the island was noticed. The bearings were taken every day, and
everything was prepared for an approaching and perhaps sudden and hurried
embarkation.

Of course all the ordinary avocations of the factory were now discontinued.
There was no hunting or setting of traps. The magazines were already piled up
with furs, most of which would be lost. The hunters and trappers had literally
nothing to do; but Mac-Nab and his men, having finished their boat, employed
their leisure time in strengthening the principal house of the fort, which would
probably be subjected to considerable pressure from the accumulation of ice on
the coast during the further progress of the thaw, unless indeed Cape Bathurst
should prove a sufficient protection. Strong struts were fixed against the outside
walls, vertical props were placed inside the rooms to afford additional support to
the beams of the ceiling, and the roof was strengthened so that it could bear a
considerable weight. These various works were completed early in April, and
their utility, or rather their vital importance, was very soon manifested.

Each day brought fresh symptoms of returning spring, which seemed likely
to set in early after this strangely mild Polar winter. A few tender shoots
appeared upon the trees, and the newly-thawed sap swelled the bark of beeches,
willows, and arbutus. Tiny mosses tinged with pale green the slopes under the
direct influence of the sunbeams; but they were not likely to spread much, as the
greedy rodents collected about the fort pounced upon and devoured them almost
before they were above the ground.

Great were the sufferings of Corporal Joliffe at this time. We know that he
had undertaken to protect the plot of ground cultivated by his wife. Under
ordinary circumstances he would merely have had to drive away feathered
pilferers, such as guillemots or puffins, from his sorrel and scurvy grass. A
scarecrow would have been enough to get rid of them, still more the Corporal in
person. But now all the rodents and ruminants of the Arctic fauna combined to
lay siege to his territory; reindeer, Polar hares, musk-rats, shrews, martens, &c.,
braved all the threatening gestures of the Corporal, and the poor man was in


despair, for whilst he was defending one end of his field the enemy was preying
upon the other.

It would certainly have been wiser to let the poor creatures enjoy unmolested
the crops which could be of no use to the colonists, as the fort was to be so soon
abandoned, and Mrs Barnett tried to persuade the angry Corporal to do so, when
he came to her twenty times a day with the same wearisome tale, but he would
not listen to her:

"To lose the fruit of all our trouble!" he repeated; "to leave an establishment
which was prospering so well! To give up the plants Mrs Joliffe and I sowed so
carefully!...O madam, sometimes I feel disposed to let you all go, and stay here
with my wife! I am sure the Company would give up all claim on the island to
us"





Mrs Barnett could not help laughing at this absurd speech, and sent the
Corporal to his little wife, who had long ago resigned herself to the loss of her
sorrel, scurvy grass, and other medicinal herbs.

We must here remark, that the health of all the colonists remained good, they
had at least escaped illness; the baby, too, was now quite well again, and throve
admirably in the mild weather of the early spring.

The thaw continued to proceed rapidly from the 2nd to the 5th April. The
weather was warm but cloudy, and rain fell frequently in large drops. The wind
blew from the south west, and was laden with the heated dust of the continent.
Unfortunately the sky was so hazy, that it was quite impossible to take
observations, neither sun, moon, nor stars could be seen through the heavy mists,
and this was the more provoking, as it was of the greatest importance to note the
slightest movements of the island.

It was on the night of the 7th April that the actual breaking up of the ice
commenced. In the morning the Lieutenant, Mrs Barnett, Kalumah, and Sergeant
Long, had climbed to the summit of Cape Bathurst, and saw that a great change
had taken place in the chain of icebergs. The huge barrier had parted nearly in
the middle, and now formed two separate masses, the larger of which seemed to
be moving northwards.

Was it the Kamtchatka Current which produced this motion? Would the
floating island take the same direction? The intense anxiety of the Lieutenant
and his companions can easily be imagined. Their fate might now be decided in
a few hours, and if they should be drifted some hundred miles to the north, it
would be very difficult to reach the continent in a vessel so small as theirs.

Unfortunately it was impossible to ascertain the nature or extent of the
displacement which was going on. One thing was, however, evident, the island
was not yet moving, at least not in the same direction as the ice-wall. It therefore


seemed probable that whilst part of the ice field was floating to the north, that
portion immediately surrounding the island still remained stationary.

This displacement of the icebergs did not in the least alter the opinion of the
young Esquimaux. Kalumah still maintained that the thaw would proceed from
north to south, and that the ice wall would shortly feel the influence of the
Behring Current. To make herself more easily understood, she traced the
direction of the current on the sand with a little piece of wood, and made signs
that in following it the island must approach the American continent. No
argument could shake her conviction on this point, and it was almost impossible
not to feel reassured when listening to the confident expressions of the intelligent
native girl.

The events of the 8th, 9th, and 10th April, seemed, however, to prove
Kalumah to be in the wrong. The northern portion of the chain of icebergs
drifted farther and farther north. The breaking up of the ice proceeded rapidly
and with a great noise, and the ice field opened all round the island with a
deafening crash. Out of doors it was impossible to hear one’s self speak, a
ceaseless roar like that of artillery drowned every other sound.

About half a mile from the coast on that part of the island overlooked by
Cape Bathurst, the blocks of ice were already beginning to crowd together, and
to pile themselves upon each other. The ice-wall had broken up into numerous
separate icebergs, which were drifting towards the north. At least it seemed as if
they were moving in that direction. Hobson became more and more uneasy, and
nothing that Kalumah could say reassured him. He replied by counter-arguments,
which could not shake her faith in her own belief.

At last, on the morning of the 11th April, Hobson showed Kalumah the last
icebergs disappearing in the north, and again endeavoured to prove to her that
facts were against her.

"No, no!" replied Kalumah, with an air of greater conviction than ever, "no,
the icebergs are not going to the north, but our island is going to the south!"

She might perhaps be right after all, and Hobson was much struck by this last
reply. It was really possible that the motion of the icebergs towards the north was
only apparent, and that Victoria Island, dragged along with the ice-field, was
drifting towards the strait. But it was impossible to ascertain whether this were
really the case, as neither the latitude nor longitude could be taken.

The situation was aggravated by a phenomenon peculiar to the Polar regions,
which rendered it still darker and more impossible to take observations of any
kind.

At the very time of the breaking up of the ice, the temperature fell several
degrees. A dense mist presently enveloped the Arctic latitudes, but not an


ordinary mist. The soil was covered with a white crust, totally distinct from hoar-
frost—it was, in fact, a watery vapour which congeals on its precipitation. The
minute particles of which this mist was composed formed a thick layer on trees,
shrubs, the walls of the fort, and any projecting surface which bristled with
pyramidal or prismatic crystals, the apexes of which pointed to the wind.

Hobson at once understood the nature of this atmospheric phenomenon,
which whalers and explorers have often noticed in the spring in the Polar
regions.

"It is not a mist or fog," he said to his companions, "it is a ‘frost-rime’, a
dense vapour which remains in a state of complete congelation."

But whether a fog or a frozen mist this phenomenon was none the less to be
regretted, for it rose a hundred feet at least above the level of the sea, and it was
so opaque that the colonists could not see each other when only two or three
Paces apart.

Every one’s disappointment was very great. Nature really seemed determined
to try them to the uttermost. When the break up of the ice had come at last, when
the wandering island was to leave the spot in which it had so long been
imprisoned, and its movements ought to be watched with the greatest care, this
fog prevented all observations.

This state of things continued for four days. The frost-rime did not disappear
until the 15th April, but on the morning of that date a strong wind from the south
rent it open and dispersed it.

The sun shone brightly once more, and Hobson eagerly seized his
instruments. He took the altitude, and found that the exact position of Victoria
Island was then: Latitude, 69° 57’; longitude, 179° 33’.

Kalumah was right, Victoria Island, in the grasp of the Behring Current, was
drifting towards the south.

CHAPTER XVII.

THE AVALANCHE.

The colonists were then at last approaching the more frequented latitudes of
Behring Sea. There was no longer any danger that they would be drifted to the
north, and all they had to do was to watch the displacement of the island, and to
estimate the speed of its motion, which would probably be very unequal, on
account of the obstacles in its path. Hobson most carefully noted every incident,
taking alternately solar and stellar altitudes, and the next day, April 16th, after
ascertaining the bearings, he calculated that if its present speed were maintained,
Victoria Island would reach the Arctic Circle, from which it was now separated
at the most by four degrees of latitude, towards the beginning of May.

It was probable that, when the island reached the narrowest portion of the


Strait, it would remain stationary until the thaw broke it up, the boat would then
be launched, and the colonists would set sail for the American continent.

Everything was ready for an immediate embarkation, and the inhabitants of
the island waited with greater patience and confidence than ever. They felt, poor
things, that the end of their trials was surely near at last, and that nothing could
prevent their landing on one side or the other of the strait in a few days.

This prospect cheered them up wonderfully, and the gaiety natural to them
all, which they had lost in the terrible anxiety they had so long endured, was
restored. The common meals were quite festal, as there was no need for
economising the stores under present circumstances. The influence of the spring
became more and more sensibly felt, and every one enjoyed the balmy air, and
breathed more freely than before.

During the next few days, several excursions were made to the interior of the
island and along the coast. Everywhere the furred animals, &c., still abounded,
for even now they could not cross to the continent, the connection between it and
the ice-field being broken, and their continued presence was a fresh proof that
the island was no longer stationary.

No change had taken place on the island at Cape Esquimaux, Cape Michael,
along the coast, or on the wooded heights of the interior, and the banks of the
lagoon. The large gulf which had opened near Cape Michael during the storm
had closed in the winter, and there was no other fissure on the surface of the soil.

During these excursions, bands of wolves were seen scudding across parts of
the island. Of all the animals these fierce carnivorous beasts were the only ones
which the feeling of a common danger had not tamed.

Kalumah’s preserver was seen several times. This worthy bear paced to and
fro on the deserted plains in melancholy mood, pausing in his walk as the
explorers passed, and sometimes following them to the fort, knowing well that
he had nothing to fear from them.

On the 20th April Lieutenant Hobson ascertained that the wandering island
was still drifting to the south. All that remained of the ice-wall, that is to say, the
southern portion of the icebergs, followed it, but as there were no bench marks,
the changes of position could only be estimated by astronomical observations.

Hobson took several soundings in different parts of the ground, especially at
the foot of Cape Bathurst, and on the shores of the lagoon. He was anxious to
ascertain the thickness of the layer of ice supporting the earth and sand, and
found that it had not increased during the winter, and that the general level of the
island did not appear to have risen higher above that of the sea. The conclusion
he drew from these facts was, that no time should be lost in getting away from
the fragile island, which would rapidly break up and dissolve in the warmer


waters of the Pacific.

About the 25th April the bearing of the island was again changed, the whole
ice-field had moved round from east to west twelve points, so that Cape Bathurst
pointed to the north-west. The last remains of the ice-wall now shut in the
northern horizon, so that there could be no doubt that the ice-field was moving
freely in the strait, and that it nowhere touched any land.

The fatal moment was approaching. Diurnal or nocturnal observations gave
the exact position of the island, and consequently of the ice-field. On the 30th of
April, both were together drifting across Kotzebue Sound, a large triangular gulf
running some distance inland on the American coast, and bounded on the south
by Cape Prince of Wales, which might, perhaps, arrest the course of the island if
it should deviate in the very least from the middle of the narrow pass.

The weather was now pretty fine, and the column of mercury often marked
50° Fahrenheit. The colonists had left off their winter garments some weeks
before, and held themselves in constant readiness to leave the island. Thomas
Black had already transported his instruments and books into the boat, which
was waiting on the beach. A good many provisions had also been embarked and
some of the most valuable furs.

On the 2d of May a very carefully taken observation showed that Victoria
Island had a tendency to drift towards the east, and consequently to reach the
American continent. This was fortunate, as they were now out of danger of being
taken any farther by the Kamtchatka Current, which, as is well known, runs
along the coast of Asia. At last the tide was turning in favour of the colonists!

"T think our bad fortune is at last at an end," observed Sergeant Long to Mrs
Barnett, "and that our misfortunes are really over; I don’t suppose there are any
more dangers to be feared now."

"I quite agree with you,” replied Mrs Barnett, "and it is very fortunate that
we had to give up our journey across the ice-field a few months ago; we ought to
be very thankful that it was impassible!"

Mrs Barnett was certainly justified in speaking as she did, for what fearful
fatigues and sufferings they would all have had to undergo in crossing five
hundred miles of ice in the darkness of the Polar night!

On the 5th May, Hobson announced that Victoria Island had just crossed the
Arctic Circle. It had at last re-entered that zone of the terrestrial sphere in which
at one period of the year the sun does not set. The poor people all felt that they
were returning to the inhabited globe.

The event of crossing the Arctic Circle was celebrated in much the same way
as crossing the Equator for the first time would be on board ship, and many a
glass of spirits was drank in honour of the event.


There was now nothing left to do but to wait till the broken and half-melted
ice should allow of the passage of the boat, which was to bear the whole colony
to the land.

During the 7th May the island turned round to the extent of another quarter
of its circumference. Cape Bathurst now pointed due north, and those masses of
the old chain of icebergs which still remained standing were now above it, so
that it occupied much the same position as that assigned to it in maps when it vas
united to the American continent. The island had gradually turned completely
round, and the sun had risen successively on every point of its shores.

The observations of the 8th May showed that the island had become
stationary near the middle of the passage, at least forty miles from Cape Prince
of Wales, so that land was now at a comparatively short distance from it, and the
safety of all seemed to be secured.

In the evening a good supper was served in the large room, and the healths of
Mrs Barnett and of Lieutenant Hobson were proposed.

The same night the Lieutenant determined to go and see if any changes had
taken place in the ice-field on the south, hoping that a practicable passage might
have been opened.

Mrs Barnett was anxious to accompany him, but he persuaded her to rest a
little instead, and started off, accompanied only by Sergeant Long.

Mrs Barnett, Madge, and Kalumah returned to the principal house after
seeing them off, and the soldiers and women had already gone to bed in the
different apartments assigned to them.

It was a fine night, there was no moon, but the stars shone very brightly, and
as the ice-field vividly reflected their light, it was possible to see for a
considerable distance.

It was nine o’clock when the two explorers left the fort and turned towards
that part of the coast between Port Barnett and Cape Michael. They followed the
beach for about two miles, and found the ice-field in a state of positive chaos.
The sea was one vast aggregation of crystals of every size, it looked as if it had
been petrified suddenly when tossing in a tempest, and, alas, there was even now
no free passage between the ice-masses—it would be impossible for a boat to
pass yet.

Hobson and Long remained on the ice-field talking and looking about them
until midnight, and then seeing that there was still nothing to do but to wait, they
decided to go back to Fort Hope and rest for a few hours.

They had gone some hundred paces, and had reached the dried-up bed of
Paulina River, when an unexpected noise arrested them. It was a distant
rumbling from the northern part of the ice-field, and it became louder and louder


until it was almost deafening. Something dreadful was going on in the quarter
from which it came, and Hobson fancied he felt the ice beneath his feet
trembling, which was certainly far from reassuring.

"The noise comes from the chain of icebergs," exclaimed Long, "what can be
going on there?"

Hobson did not answer, but feeling dreadfully anxious he rushed towards the
fort dragging his companion after him.

"To the fort! to the fort." he cried at last, "the ice may have opened, we may
be able to launch our boat on the sea!"

And the two ran as fast as ever they could towards Fort Hope by the shortest
way.

A thousand conjectures crowded upon them. From what new phenomenon
did the unexpected noise proceed? Did the sleeping inhabitants of the fort know
what was going on? They must certainly have heard the noise, for, in vulgar
language, it was loud enough to wake the dead.

Hobson and Long crossed the two miles between them and Fort Hope in
twenty minutes, but before they reached the enceinte they saw the men and
women they had left asleep hurrying away in terrified disorder, uttering cries of
despair.

The carpenter Mac-Nab, seeing the Lieutenant, ran towards him with his
little boy in his arms.

"Look, sir, look!" he cried, drawing his master towards a little hill which rose
a few yards behind the fort.

Hobson obeyed, and saw that part of the ice-wall, which, when he left, was
two or three miles off in the offing, had fallen upon the coast of the island. Cape
Bathurst no longer existed, the mass of earth and sand of which it was composed
had been swept away by the icebergs and scattered over the palisades. The
principal house and all the buildings connected with it on the north were buried
beneath the avalanche. Masses of ice were crowding upon each other and
tumbling over with an awful crash, crushing everything beneath them. It was like
an army of icebergs taking possession of the island.

The boat which had been built at the foot of the cape was completely
destroyed. The last hope of the unfortunate colonists was gone!

As they stood watching the awful scene, the buildings, formerly occupied by
the soldiers and women, and from which they had escaped in time, gave way
beneath an immense block of ice which fell upon them. A cry of despair burst
from the lips of the houseless outcasts.

"And the others, where are they?" cried the Lieutenant in heart-rending
tones.


"There!" replied Mac-Nab, pointing to the heap of sand, earth, and ice,
beneath which the principal house had entirely disappeared.

Yes, the illustrious lady traveller, Madge, Kalumah, and Thomas Black, were
buried beneath the avalanche which had surprised them in their sleep!

CHAPTER XVIII.

ALL AT WORK.

Fearful catastrophe had occurred. The ice-wall had been flung upon the
wandering island, the volume below the water being five times that of the
projecting part, it had come under the influence of the submarine currents, and,
opening a way for itself between the broken ice-masses, it had fallen bodily upon
Victoria Island, which, driven along by this mighty propelling force, was drifting
rapidly to the south.

Mac-Nab and his companions, aroused by the noise of the avalanche dashing
down upon the dog-house, stable, and principal house, had been able to escape in
time, but now the work of destruction was complete. Not a trace remained of the
buildings in which they had slept, and the island was bearing all its inhabitants
with it to the unfathomable depths of the ocean! Perhaps, however, Mrs Barnett,
Madge, Kalumah, and the astronomer, were still living! Dead or alive they must
be dug out.

At this thought Hobson recovered his composure and shouted—

"Get shovels and pickaxes! The house is strong! it may have held together!
Let us set to work!"

There were plenty of tools and pickaxes, but it was really impossible to
approach the enceinte. The masses of ice were rolling down from the summits of
the icebergs, and some parts of the ice-wall still towered amongst the ruins two
hundred feet above the island. The force with which the tossing masses, which
seemed to be surging all along the northern horizon, were overthrown can be
imagined; the whole coast between the former Cape Bathurst and Cape
Esquimaux was not only hemmed in, but literally invaded by these moving
mountains, which, impelled by a force they could not resist, had already
advanced more than a quarter of a mile inland.

Every moment the trembling of the ground and a loud report gave notice that
another of these masses had rolled over, and there was a danger that the island
would sink beneath the weight thrown upon it. A very apparent lowering of the
level had taken place all along that part of the coast near Cape Bathurst, it was
evidently gradually sinking down, and the sea had already encroached nearly as
far as the lagoon.

The situation of the colonists was truly terrible, unable as they were to
attempt to save their companions, and driven from the enceinte by the crashing


avalanches, over which they had no power whatever. They could only wait, a
prey to the most awful forebodings.

Day dawned at last, and how fearful a scene was presented by the districts
around Cape Bathurst! The horizon was shut in on every side by ice-masses, but
their advance appeared to be checked for the moment at least. The ruins of the
ice-wall were at rest, and it was only now and then that a few blocks rolled down
from the still tottering crests of the remaining icebergs. But the whole mass—a
great part of its volume being sunk beneath the surface of the sea—was in the
grasp of a powerful current, and was driving the island along with it to the south,
that is to say, to the ocean, in the depths of which they would alike be engulfed.

Those who were thus borne along upon the island were not fully conscious
of the peril in which they stood. They had their comrades to save, and amongst
them the brave woman who had so won all their hearts, and for whom they
would gladly have laid down their lives. The time for action had come, they
could again approach the palisades, and there was not a moment to lose, as the
poor creatures had already been buried beneath the avalanche for six hours.

We have already said that Cape Bathurst no longer existed. Struck by a huge
iceberg it had fallen bodily upon the factory, breaking the boat and crushing the
dog-house and stable with the poor creatures in them. The principal house next
disappeared beneath the masses of earth and sand, upon which rolled blocks of
ice to a height of fifty or sixty feet. The court of the fort was filled up, of the
palisade not a post was to be seen, and it was from beneath this accumulation of
earth, sand, and ice, that the victims were to be dug out.

Before beginning to work Hobson called the head carpenter to him, and
asked if he thought the house could bear the weight of the avalanche.

"I think so, sir," replied Mac-Nab; "in fact, I may almost say I am sure of it.
You remember how we strengthened it, it has been ‘casemated,’ and the vertical
beams between the ceilings and floors must have offered great resistance;
moreover, the layer of earth and sand with which the roof was first covered must
have broken the shock of the fall of the blocks of ice from the icebergs." "God
grant you may be right, Mac-Nab," replied Hobson, "and that we may be spared
the great grief of losing our friends!"

The Lieutenant then sent for Mrs Joliffe, and asked her if plenty of
provisions had been left in the house.

"Oh, yes," replied Mrs Joliffe, "there was plenty to eat in the pantry and
kitchen."

"And any water?"

"Yes, water and rum too."

"All right, then," said Hobson, "they will not be starved—but how about


air?”

To this question Mac-Nab could make no reply, and if, as he hoped, the
house had not given way, the want of air would be the chief danger of the four
victims. By prompt measures, however, they might yet be saved, and the first
thing to be done was to open a communication with the outer air.

All set to work zealously, men and women alike seizing shovels and
pickaxes. The masses of ice, sand, and earth, were vigorously attacked at the risk
of provoking fresh downfalls; but the proceedings were ably directed by Mac-
Nab.

It appeared to him best to begin at the top of the accumulated masses, so as
to roll down loose blocks on the side of the lagoon. The smaller pieces were
easily dealt with, with pick and crowbar, but the large blocks had to be broken
up. Some of great size were melted with the aid of a large fire of resinous wood,
and every means was tried to destroy or get rid of the ice in the shortest possible
time.

But so great was the accumulation, that although all worked without pause,
except when they snatched a little food, there was no sensible diminution in its
amount when the sun disappeared below the horizon. It was not, however, really
of quite so great a height as before, and it was determined to go on working from
above through the night, and when there was no longer any danger of fresh falls
Mac-Nab hoped to be able to sink a vertical shaft in the compact mass, so as to
admit the outer air to the house as soon as possible.

All night long the party worked at the excavation, attacking the masses with
iron and heat, as the one or the other seemed more likely to be effective. The
men wielded the pickaxe whilst the women kept up the fires; but all were
animated by one purpose—the saving of the lives of Mrs Barnett, Madge,
Kalumah, and the astronomer.

When morning dawned the poor creatures had been buried for thirty hours in
air necessarily very impure under so thick a cover.

The progress made in the night had been so great that Mac-Nab prepared to
sink his shaft, which he meant to go straight down to the top of the house; and
which, according to his calculation, would not have to be more than fifty feet
deep. It would be easy enough to sink this shaft through the twenty feet of ice;
but great difficulty would be experienced when the earth and sand were reached,
as, being very brittle, they would of course constantly fill in the shaft, and its
sides would therefore have to be lined. Long pieces of wood were prepared for
this purpose, and the boring proceeded. Only three men could work at it together,
and the soldiers relieved each other constantly, so that the excavation seemed
likely to proceed rapidly.


As might be supposed the poor fellows alternated between hope and fear
when some obstacle delayed them. When a sudden fall undid their work they felt
discouraged, and nothing but Mac-Nab’s steady voice could have rallied them.
As the men toiled in turn at their weary task the women stood watching them
from the foot of a hill, saying little, but often praying silently. They had now
nothing to do but to prepare the food, which the men devoured in their short
intervals of repose.

The boring proceeded without any very great difficulty, but the ice was so
hard that the progress was but slow. At the end of the second day Mac-Nab had
nearly reached the layer of earth and sand, and could not hope to get to the top of
the house before the end of the next day.

Night fell, but the work was continued by the light of torches. A "snow-
house" was hastily dug out in one of the hummocks on the shore as a temporary
shelter for the women and the little boy. The wind had veered to the south-west,
and a cold rain began to fall, accompanied with occasional squalls; but neither
the Lieutenant nor his men dreamt of leaving off work.

Now began the worst part of the task. It was really impossible to bore in the
shifting masses of sand and earth, and it became necessary to prop up the sides
of the shaft with wood, the loose earth being drawn to the surface in a bucket
hung on a rope. Of course under the circumstances the work could not proceed
rapidly, falls might occur at any moment, and the miners were in danger of being
buried in their turn.

Mac-Nab was generally the one to remain at the bottom of the narrow shaft,
directing the excavation, and frequently sounding with a long pick, but as it met
with no resistance, it was evident that it did not reach the roof of the house.

When the morning once more dawned, only ten feet had been excavated in
the mass of earth and sand, so that twenty remained to be bored through before
the roof of the house could be reached, that is to say, if it had not given way, and
still occupied the position it did before the fall of the avalanche.

It was now fifty-four hours since Mrs Barnett and her companions were
buried!

Mac-Nab and the Lieutenant often wondered if they on their side had made
any effort to open a communication with the outer air. They felt sure that with
her usual courage, Mrs Barnett would have tried to find some way out if her
movements were free. Some tools had been left in the house, and Kellet, one of
the carpenter’s men, remembered leaving his pickaxe in the kitchen. The
prisoners might have broken open one of the doors and begun to pierce a gallery
across the layer of earth. But such a gallery could only be driven in a horizontal
direction, and would be a much longer business than the sinking of a shaft from


above, for the masses flung down by the avalanche, although only sixty feet
deep, covered a space more than five hundred feet in diameter. Of course the
prisoners could not be aware of this fact, and if they should succeed in boring
their horizontal gallery, it would be eight days at least before they could cut
through the last layer of ice, and by that time they would be totally deprived of
air, if not of food.

Nevertheless the Lieutenant carefully went over every portion of the
accumulation himself, and listened intently for any sounds of subterranean
digging, but he heard nothing.

On the return of day the men toiled with fresh energy, bucket after bucket
was drawn to the surface of the shaft loaded with earth. The clumsy wooden
props answered admirably in keeping the earth from filling in the pit, a few falls
occurred, but they were rapidly checked, and no fresh misfortunes occurred
throughout the day, except that the soldier Garry received a blow on the head
from a falling block of ice. The wound was not however severe, and he would
not leave his work.

At four o’clock the shaft was fifty feet deep altogether, having been sunk
through twenty feet of ice and thirty of sand and earth.

It was at this depth that Mac-Nab had expected to reach the roof of the
house, if it had resisted the pressure of the avalanche.

He was then at the bottom of the shaft, and his disappointment and dismay
can be imagined when, on driving his pickaxe into the ground as far as it would
go, it met with no resistance whatever.

Sabine was with him, and for a few moments he remained with his arms
crossed, silently looking at his companion.

"No roof then?" inquired the hunter.

"Nothing whatever,” replied the carpenter, "but let us work on, the roof has
bent of course, but the floor of the loft cannot have given way. Another ten feet
and we shall come to that floor, or else"———

Mac-Nab did not finish his sentence, and the two resumed their work with
the strength of despair.

At six o’clock in the evening, another ten or twelve feet had been dug out.

Mac-Nab sounded again, nothing yet, his pick still sunk in the shifting earth,
and flinging it from him, he buried his face in his hands and muttered—

"Poor things, poor things!" He then climbed to the opening of the shaft by
means of the wood-work.

The Lieutenant and the Sergeant were together in greater anxiety than ever,
and taking them aside, the carpenter told them of his dreadful disappointment.

"Then," observed Hobson, "the house must have been crushed by the





avalanche, and the poor people in it"

"No!" cried the head-carpenter with earnest conviction, "no, it cannot have
been crushed, it must have resisted, strengthened as it was. It cannot—it cannot
have been crushed!"

"Well, then, what has happened?" said the Lieutenant in a broken voice, his
eyes filling with tears.

"Simply this," replied Mac Nab, "the house itself has remained intact, but the
ground on which it was built must have sunk. The house has gone through the
crust of ice which forma the foundation of the island. It has not been crushed,
but engulfed, and the poor creatures in it"

"Are drowned!" cried Long.

"Yes, Sergeant, drowned without a moment’s notice—drowned like
passengers on a foundered vessel!"

For some minutes the three men remained silent. Mac-Nab’s idea was
probably correct. Nothing was more likely than that the ice forming the
foundation of the island had given way under such enormous pressure. The
vertical props which supported the beams of the ceiling, and rested on those of
the floor, had evidently aided the catastrophe by their weight, and the whole
house had been engulfed.

"Well, Mac-Nab," said Hobson at last, "if we cannot find them alive"

"We must recover their bodies," added the head carpenter.

"And with these words Mac-Nab, accompanied by the Lieutenant, went back
to his work at the bottom of the shaft without a word to any of his comrades of
the terrible form his anxiety had now assumed.

The excavation continued throughout the night, the men relieving each other
every hour, and Hobson and Mac-Nab watched them at work without a
moment’s rest.

At three o’clock in the morning Kellet’s pickaxe struck against something
hard, which gave out a ringing sound. The head carpenter felt it almost before he
heard it.

"We have reached them!" cried the soldier, "they are saved."

"Hold your tongue, and go on working," replied the Lieutenant in a choked
voice.

It was now seventy-six hours since the avalanche fell upon the house!

Kellet and his companion Pond resumed their work. The shaft must have
nearly reached the level of the sea, and Mac Nab therefore felt that all hope was
gone.

In less than twenty minutes the hard body which Kellet had struck was
uncovered, and proved to be one of the rafters of the roof. The carpenter flung








himself to the bottom of the shaft, and seizing a pickaxe sent the laths of the roof
flying on every side. In a few moments a large aperture was made, and a figure
appeared at it which it was difficult to recognise in the darkness.

It was Kalumah!

"Help! help!" she murmured feebly.

Hobson let himself down through the opening, and found himself up to the
waist in ice-cold water. Strange to say, the roof had not given way, but as Mac-
Nab had supposed, the house had sunk, and was full of water. The water did not,
however, yet fill the loft, and was not more than a foot above the floor. There
was still a faint hope!

The Lieutenant, feeling his way in the darkness, came across a motionless
body, and dragging it to the opening he consigned it to Pond and Kellet. It was
Thomas Black.

Madge, also senseless, was next found; and she and the astronomer were
drawn up to the surface of the ground with ropes, where the open air gradually
restored them to consciousness.

Mrs Barnett was still missing, but Kalumah led Hobson to the very end of
the loft, and there he found the unhappy lady motionless and insensible, with her
head scarcely out of the water.

The Lieutenant lifted her in his arms and carried her to the opening, and a
few moments later he had reached the outer air with his burden, followed by
Mac-Nab with Kalumah.

Every one gathered round Mrs Barnett in silent anxiety, and poor Kalumah,
exhausted as she was, flung herself across her friend’s body.

Mrs Barnett still breathed, her heart still beat feebly, and revived by the pure
fresh air she at last opened her eyes.

A cry of joy burst from every lip, a cry of gratitude to Heaven for the great
mercy vouchsafed, which was doubtless heard above.

Day was now breaking in the east, the sun was rising above the horizon,
lighting up the ocean with its brilliant beams, and Mrs Barnett painfully
staggered to her feet. Looking round her from the summit of the new mountain
formed by the avalanche, which overlooked the whole island, she murmured in a
changed and hollow voice

"The sea! the sea!"





Yes, the ocean now encircled the wandering island, the sea was open at last,
and a true sea-horizon shut in the view from east to west.

CHAPTER XIX.

BEHRING SEA.

The island, driven by the ice-wall, had then drifted at a great speed into
Behring Sea, after crossing the strait without running aground on its shores! It
was still hurrying on before the icy barrier, which was in the grasp of a powerful
submarine current, hastening onwards on to its inevitable dissolution in the
warmer waters of the Pacific, and the boat on which all had depended was
useless!

As soon as Mrs Barnett had entirely recovered consciousness, she related in
a few words the history of the seventy-four hours spent in the house now in the
water. Thomas Black, Madge, and Kalumah had been aroused by the crash of the
avalanche, and had rushed to the doors or windows. There was no longer any
possibility of getting out, the mass of earth and sand, which was but a moment
before Cape Bathurst, completely covered the house, and almost immediately
afterwards the prisoners heard the crash of the huge ice-masses which were flung
upon the factory.

In another quarter of an hour all felt that the house, whilst resisting the
enormous pressure, was sinking through the soil of the island. They knew that
the crust of the ice must have given way, and that the house would fill with
water!

To seize a few provisions remaining in the pantry, and to take refuge in the
loft, was the work of a moment. This the poor creatures did from a dim instinct
of self-preservation, but what hope could they really have of being saved!
However, the loft seemed likely to resist, and two blocks of ice abutting from the
roof saved it from being immediately crushed.

Whilst thus imprisoned the poor creatures could hear the constant falls from
the icebergs, whilst the sea was gradually rising through the lower rooms. They
must either be crushed or drowned!

But by little short of a miracle, the roof of the house, with its strong
framework, resisted the pressure, and after sinking a certain depth the house
remained stationary, with the water rather above the floor of the loft. The
prisoners were obliged to take refuge amongst the rafters of the roof, and there
they remained for many hours. Kalumah devoted herself to the service of the
others, and carried food to them through the water. They could make no attempt
to save themselves, succour could only come from without.

It was a terrible situation, for breathing was difficult in the vitiated air
deficient as it was in oxygen, and charged with a great excess of carbonic acid...


A few hours later Hobson would only have found the corpses of his friends!

The horror of the position was increased by the gushing of the water through
the lower rooms, which convinced Mrs Barnett that the island was drifting to the
south. She had, in fact, guessed the whole truth; she knew that the ice-wall had
heeled over and fallen upon the island, and concluded that the boat was
destroyed. It was this last fact which gave such terrible significance to her first
words when she looked around her after her swoon—

"The sea! the sea!"

Those about her, however, could think of nothing yet but the fact, that they
had saved her for whom they would have died, and with her Madge, Kalumah,
and Thomas Black. Thus far not one of those who had joined the Lieutenant in
his disastrous expedition had succumbed to any of the fearful dangers through
which they had passed.

But matters were not yet at their worst, and fresh troubles were soon to
hasten the final catastrophe.

Hobson’s first care after Mrs Barnett’s recovery was to take the bearings of
the inland. It was listless now to think of quitting it, as the sea was open and
their boat destroyed. A few ruins alone remained of the mighty ice-wall, the
upper portion of which had crushed Cape Bathurst whilst the submerged base
was driving the island to the south.

The instruments and maps belonging to the astronomer were found in the
ruins of the house, and were fortunately uninjured. The weather was cloudy, but
Hobson succeeded in taking the altitude of the sun with sufficient accuracy for
his purpose.

We give the result obtained at noon on the 12th May. Victoria Island was
then situated in longitude 168°12’ west of Greenwich, and in latitude 63°37’ N.
The exact spot was looked out on the chart, and proved to be in Norton Sound,
between Cape Tchaplin on the Asiatic and Cape Stephens on the American coast,
but a hundred miles from either.

"We must give up all hope of making the land of the continent then!" said
Mrs Barnett.

"Yes, madam," replied Hobson; "all hope of that is at an end; the current is
carrying us with great rapidity out into the offing, and our only chance is, that we
may pass within sight of a whaler."

"Well, but," added Mrs Barnett, "if we cannot make the land of either
continent, might not the current drive us on to one of the islands of Behring
Sea?"

There was, in fact, a slight possibility that such a thing might happen, and all
eagerly clutched at the hope, like a drowning man at a plank. There are plenty of


islands in Behring Sea, St Lawrence, St Matthew, Nunivak, St Paul, George
island, &c. The wandering island was in fact at that moment not far from St
Lawrence, which is of a considerable size, and surrounded with islets; and
should it pass it without stopping, there was yet a hope that the cluster of the
Aleutian Islands, bounding Behring Sea on the south, might arrest its course.

Yes! St Lawrence might be a harbour of refuge for the colonists, and if it
failed them, St Matthew, and the group of islets of which it is the centre, would
still be left. It would not do, however, to count upon the Aleutian Islands, which
were more than eight hundred miles away, and which they might never reach.
Long, long before they got so far, Victoria Island, worn away by the warm sea-
waves, and melted by the rays of the sun, which was already in the sign of
Gemini, would most likely have sunk to the bottom of the ocean.

There is, however, no fixed point beyond which floating ice does not
advance. It approaches nearer to the equator in the southern than in the northern
hemisphere. Icebergs have been seen off the Cape of Good Hope, at about thirty-
six degrees south latitude, but those which come down from the Arctic Ocean
have never passed forty degrees north latitude. The weather conditions, which
are of course variable, determine the exact locality where ice will melt; in severe
and prolonged winters it remains solid in comparatively low latitudes, and vice
versa in early springs.

Now the warm season of 1861 had set in very early, and this would hasten
the dissolution of Victoria Island. The waters of Behring Sea had already
changed from blue to green, as the great navigator Hudson observed they always
do on the approach of icebergs, so that a catastrophe might be expected at any
moment.

Hobson determined to do his best to avert the coming misfortune, and
ordered a raft to be constructed which would carry the whole colony, and might
be guided to the continent somehow or other. There was every chance of meeting
vessels now that the whaling season had commenced, and Mac-Nab was
commissioned to make a large solid raft which would float when Victoria Island
was engulfed.

But first of all, it was necessary to construct some shelter for the homeless
inhabitants of the island. The simple plan appeared to be to dig out the old
barracks, which had been built on to the principal house, and the walls of which
were still standing. Every one set to work with a hearty good-will, and in a few
days a shelter was provided from the inclemencies of the fickle weather.

Search was also made in the ruins of the large house, and a good many
articles of more or less value were saved from the submerged rooms—tools,
arms, furniture, the air pumps, and the air vessel, &c.


On the 13th May all hope of drifting on to the island of St Lawrence had to
be abandoned. When the bearings were taken, it was found that they were
passing at a considerable distance to the east of that island; and, as Hobson was
well aware, currents do not run against natural obstacles, but turn them, so that
little hope could be entertained of thus making the land. It is true the network of
islands in the Catherine Archipelago, scattered over several degrees of latitude,
might stop the island if it ever got so far. But, as we have before stated, that was
not probable, although it was advancing at great speed; for this speed must
decrease considerably when the ice-wall which was driving it along should be
broken away or dissolved, unprotected as it was from the heat of the sun by any
covering of earth or sand.

Lieutenant Hobson, Mrs Barnett, Sergeant Long, and the head carpenter
often discussed these matters, and came to the conclusion that the island could
certainly never reach the Aleutian group with so many chances against it.

On the 14th May, Mac-Nab and his men commenced the construction of a
huge raft. It had to be as high as possible above the water, to prevent the waves
from breaking over it, so that it was really a formidable undertaking. The
blacksmith, Rae, had fortunately found a large number of the iron bolts which
had been brought from Fort Reliance, and they were invaluable for firmly
fastening together the different portions of the framework of the raft.

We must describe the novel site for the building of the raft suggested by
Lieutenant Hobson. Instead of joining the timbers and planks together on the
ground, they were joined on the surface of the lake. The different pieces of wood
were prepared on the banks, and launched separately. They were then easily
fitted together on the water. This mode of proceeding had two advantages: —

1. The carpenter would be able at once to judge of the point of flotation, and
the stability which should be given to the raft. 2. When Victoria Island melted,
the raft would already be floating, and would not be liable to the shocks it would
receive if on land when the inevitable break-up came.

Whilst these works were going on, Hobson would wander about on the
beach, either alone or with Mrs Barnett, examining the state of the sea, and the
ever-changing windings of the coast-line, worn by the constant action of the
waves. He would gaze upon the vast deserted ocean, from which the very
icebergs had now disappeared, watching, ever watching, like a shipwrecked
mariner, for the vessel which never came. The ocean solitudes were only
frequented by cetacea, which came to feed upon the microscopic anima[l]culae
which form their principal food, and abound in the green waters. Now and then
floating trees of different kinds, which had been brought by the great ocean
currents from warm latitudes, passed the island on their way to the north.


On the 16th May, Mrs Barnett and Madge were walking together on that part
of the island between the former Cape Bathurst and Port Barnett. It was a fine
warm day, and there had been no traces of snow on the ground for some time; all
that recalled the bitter cold of the Polar regions were the relics left by the ice-
wall on the northern part of the island; but even these were rapidly melting, and
every day fresh waterfalls poured from their summits and bathed their sides.
Very soon the sun would have completely dissolved every atom of ice.

Strange indeed was the aspect of Victoria Island. But for their terrible
anxiety, the colonists must have gazed at it with eager interest. The ground was
more prolific than it could have been in any former spring, transferred as it was
to milder latitudes. The little mosses and tender flowers grew rapidly, and Mrs
Joliffe’s garden was wonderfully successful. The vegetation of every kind,
hitherto checked by the rigour of the Arctic winter, was not only more abundant,
but more brilliantly coloured. The hues of leaves and flowers were no longer
pale and watery, but warm and glowing, like the sunbeams which called them
forth. The arbutus, willow, birch, fir, and pine trees were clothed with dark
verdure; the sap—sometimes heated in a temperature of 68° Fahrenheit—burst
open the young buds; in a word, the Arctic landscape was completely
transformed, for the island was now beneath the same parallel of latitude as
Christiania or Stockholm, that is to say, in one of the finest districts of the
temperate zones.

But Mrs Barnett had now no eyes for these wonderful phenomena of nature.
The shadow of the coming doom clouded her spirit. She shared the feeling of
depression manifested by the hundreds of animals now collected round the
factory. The foxes, martens, ermines, lynxes, beavers, musk-rats, gluttons, and
even the wolves, rendered less savage by their instinctive knowledge of a
common danger, approached nearer and nearer to their old enemy man, as if man
could save them. It was a tacit, a touching acknowledgment of human
superiority, under circumstances in which that superiority could be of absolutely
no avail.

No! Mrs Barnett cared no longer for the beauties of nature, and gazed
without ceasing upon the boundless, pitiless, infinite ocean with its unbroken
horizon.

"Poor Madge!" she said at last to her faithful companion; "it was I who
brought you to this terrible pass—you who have followed me everywhere, and
whose fidelity deserved a far different recompense! Can you forgive me?"

"There is but one thing I could never have forgiven you," replied Madge,
—"a death I did not share!"

"Ah, Madge!" cried Mrs Barnett, "if my death could save the lives of all


these poor people, how gladly would I die!"

"My dear girl," replied Madge, "have you lost all hope at last?"

"I have indeed," murmured Mrs Barnett, hiding her face on Madge’s
shoulder.

The strong masculine nature had given way at last, and Mrs Barnett was for a
moment a feeble woman. Was not her emotion excusable in so awful a situation?

Mrs Barnett sobbed aloud, and large tears rolled down her cheeks.

Madge kissed and caressed her, and tried all she could to reassure her; and
presently, raising her head, her poor mistress said—

"Do not tell them, Madge, how I have given way—do not betray that I have
wept."

"Of course not," said Madge, "and they would not believe me if I did. It was
but a moment’s weakness. Be yourself, dear girl; cheer up, and take fresh
courage."

"Do you mean to say you still hope yourself!" exclaimed Mrs Barnett,
looking anxiously into her companion’s face.

"T still hope!" said Madge simply.

But a few days afterwards, every chance of safety seemed to be indeed gone,
when the wandering island passed outside the St Matthew group, and drifted
away from the last land in Behring Sea!

CHAPTER XX.

IN THE OFFING.

Victoria Island was now floating in the widest part of Behring Sea, six
hundred miles from the nearest of the Aleutian Islands, and two hundred miles
from the nearest land, which was on the east. Supposing no accident happened, it
would be three weeks at least before this southern boundary of Behring Sea
could be reached.

Could the island last so long? Might it not burst open at any moment, subject
as it was even now to the constant action of tepid water, the mean temperature of
which was more than 50° Fahrenheit?

Lieutenant Hobson pressed on the construction of the raft as rapidly as
possible, and the lower framework was already floating on the lagoon. Mac-Nab
wished to make it as strong as possible, for it would have a considerable distance
to go to reach the Aleutian Islands, unless they were fortunate enough to meet
with a whaler.

No important alteration had lately taken place in the general configuration of
the island. Reconaissances were taken everyday, but great caution was necessary,
as a fracture of the ground might at any moment cut off the explorers from the
rest of the party.


The wide gulf near Cape Michael, which the winter had closed, had reopened
gradually, and now ran a mile inland, as far as the dried-up bed of the little river.
It was probable that it was soon to extend to the bed itself, which was of course
of little thickness, having been hollowed out by the stream. Should it do so, the
whole district between Cape Michael and Port Barnett, bounded on the west by
the river bed, would disappear—that is to say, the colonists would lose a good
many square miles of their domain. On this account Hobson warned every one
not to wander far, as a rough sea would be enough to bring about the dreaded
catastrophe.

Soundings were, however, taken, in several places with a view to
ascertaining where the ice was thickest, and it was found that, near Cape
Bathurst, not only was the layer of earth and sand of greater extent—which was
of little importance—but the crust of ice was thicker than anywhere else. This
was a most fortunate circumstance, and the holes made in sounding were kept
open, so that the amount of diminution in the base of the island could be
estimated every day. This diminution was slow but sure, and, making allowance
for the unfortunate fact that the island was drifting into warmer waters, it was
decided that it was impossible for it to last another three weeks.

The next week, from the 19th to the 25th May, the weather was very bad. A
fearful storm broke over the island, accompanied by flash after flash of lightning
and peals of thunder. The sea rose high, lashed by a powerful northwest wind,
and its waves broke over the doomed island, making it tremble ominously. The
little colony were on the watch, ready on an emergency to embark in the raft, the
scaffolding of which was nearly finished, and some provisions and fresh water
were taken on board.

Rain heavy enough to penetrate to the ice-crust fell in large quantities during
this storm, and melted it in many places. On the slopes of some of the hills the
earth was washed away, leaving the white foundations bare. These ravines were
hastily filled up with soil to protect the ice from the action of the warm air and
rain, and but for this precaution the soil would have been everywhere perforated.

Great havoc was caused amongst the woods by this storm; the earth and sand
were washed away from the roots of the trees, which fell in large numbers. In a
single night the aspect of the country between the lake and the former Port
Barnett was completely changed. A few groups of birch trees and thickets of firs
alone remained—a fact significant of approaching decomposition, which no
human skill could prevent! Every one knew and felt that the ephemeral inland
was gradually succumbing—every one, except perhaps Thomas Black, who was
still gloomily indifferent to all that was going on.

On the 23d of May, during the storm, the hunter Sabine left the house in the


thick fog, and was nearly drowned in a large hole which had opened during the
night on the site formerly occupied by the principal house of the factory.

Hitherto, as we are aware, the house, three quarters submerged, and buried
beneath a mass of earth and sand, had remained fixed in the ice-crust beneath the
island; but now the sea had evidently enlarged the crevasse, and the house with
all it contained had sunk to rise no more. Earth and sand were pouring through
this fissure, at the bottom of which surged the tempest-tossed waves

Sabine’s comrades, hearing his cries, rushed to his assistance, and were just
in time to save him as he was still clinging to the slippery walls of the abyss. He
escaped with a ducking which might have had tragic consequences.

A little later the beams and planks of the house, which had slid under the
island, were seen floating about in the offing like the spars of a wrecked vessel.
This was the worst evil the storm had wrought, and would compromise the
solidity of the island yet more, as the waves would now eat away the ice all
round the crevasse.

In the course of the 25th May, the wind veered to the northeast, and although
it blew strongly, it was no longer a hurricane; the rain ceased, and the sea
became calmer. After a quiet night the sun rose upon the desolate scene, the
Lieutenant was able to take the bearings accurately, and obtained the following
result:—

At noon on the 25th May, Victoria Island was in latitude 56° 13’, and
longitude 170° 23’.

It had therefore advanced at great speed, having drifted nearly eight hundred
miles since the breaking up of the ice set it free in Behring Strait two months
before.

This great speed made the Lieutenant once more entertain a slight hope. He
pointed out the Aleutian Islands on the map to his comrades, and said—

"Look at these islands; they are not now two hundred miles from us, and we
may reach them in eight days."

"Eight days!" repeated Long, shaking his head; "eight days is a long time."

"T must add," continued Hobson, "that if our island had followed the hundred
and sixty-eighth meridian, it would already have reached the parallel of these
islands, but in consequence of a deviation of the Behring current, it is bearing in
a south-westerly direction."

The Lieutenant was right, the current seemed likely to drag the island away
from all land, even out of sight of the Aleutian Islands, which only extend as far
as the hundred and seventieth meridian.

Mrs Barnett examined the map in silence. She saw the pencil-mark which
denoted the exact spot then occupied by the island.


The map was made on a large scale, and the point representing the island
looked but a speck upon the vast expanse of the Behring Sea. She traced back
the route by which the island had come to its present position, marvelling at the
fatality, or rather the immutable law, by which the currents which had borne it
along had avoided all land, sheering clear of islands, and never touching either
continent; and she saw the boundless Pacific Ocean, towards which she and all
with her were hurrying.

She mused long upon this melancholy subject, and at last exclaimed
suddenly—

"Could not the course of the island be controlled? Eight days at this pace
would bring us to the last island of the Aleutian group."

"Those eight days are in the hands of God," replied Lieutenant Hobson
gravely; "we can exercise no control upon them. Help can only come to us from
above; there is nothing left for us to try."

"I know, I know!" said Mrs Barnett; "but Heaven helps those who help
themselves. Is there really nothing we can do?"

Hobson shook his head doubtfully. His only hope was in the raft, and he was
undecided whether to embark every one on it at once, contrive some sort of a sail
with clothes, &c., and try to reach the nearest land, or to wait yet a little longer.

He consulted Sergeant Long, Mac-Nab, Rae, Marbre, and Sabine, in whom
he had great confidence, and all agreed that it would be unwise to abandon the
island before they were obliged. The raft, constantly swept as it would be by the
waves, could only be a last resource, and would not move at half the pace of the
island, still driven towards the south by the remains of the ice-wall. The wind
generally blew from the east, and would be likely to drift the raft out into the
offing away from all land. They must still wait then, always wait; for the island
was drifting rapidly towards the Aleutians. When they really approached the
group they would be able to see what it would be best to do.

This was certainly the wisest course to take. In eight days, if the present
speed were maintained, the island would either stop at the southern boundary of
Behring Sea, or be dragged to the south west to the waters of the Pacific Ocean,
where certain destruction awaited it.

But the adverse fate which seemed all along to have followed the hapless
colonists had yet another blow in store for them: the speed on which they
counted was now to fail them, as everything else had done.

During the night of the 26th May, the orientation of the island changed once
more; and this time the results of the displacement were extremely serious. The
island turned half round, and the icebergs still remaining of the huge ice-wall,
which had shut in the northern horizon, were now on the south.


In the morning the shipwrecked travellers—what name could be more
appropriate?—-saw the sun rise above Cape Esquimaux instead of above Port
Barnett.

Hardly a hundred yards off rose the icebergs, rapidly melting, but still of a
considerable size, which till then had driven the island before them. The
southern horizon was now partly shut in by them.

What would be the consequences of this fresh change of position? Would not
the icebergs now float away from the island, with which they were no longer
connected?

All were oppressed with a presentiment of some new misfortune, and
understood only too well what Kellet meant when he exclaimed—

"This evening we shall have lost our screw!"

By this Kellet meant that the icebergs, being before instead of behind the
island, would soon leave it, and as it was they which imparted to it its rapid
motion, in consequence of their very great draught of water—their volume being
six or seven feet below the sea level for every one above—they would now go
on without it, impelled by the submarine current, whilst Victoria Island, not deep
enough in the water to come under the influence of the current, would be left
floating helplessly on the waves.

Yes! Kellet was right; the island would then be like a vessel with disabled
masts and a broken screw.

No one answered the soldier’s remark, and a quarter of an hour had not
elapsed before a loud cracking sound was heard. The summits of the icebergs
trembled, large masses broke away, and the icebergs, irresistibly drawn along by
the submarine current, drifted rapidly to the south.

CHAPTER XXI.

THE ISLAND BECOMES AN ISLET.

Three hours later the last relics of the ice-wall had disappeared, proving that
the island now remained stationary, and that all the force of the current was deep
down below the waves, not on the surface of the sea.

The bearings were taken at noon with the greatest care and twenty-four hours
later it was found that Victoria Island had not advanced one mile.

The only remaining hope was that some vessel should sight the poor
shipwrecked creatures, either whilst still on the island, or after they had taken to
their raft.

The island was now in 54° 33’ latitude, and 177° 19’ longitude, several
hundred miles from the nearest land, namely, the Aleutian Islands.

Hobson once more called his comrades together, and asked them what they
thought it would be best to do.


All agreed that they should remain on the island until it broke up, as it was
too large to be affected by the state of the sea, and only take to the raft when the
dissolution actually commenced. Once on the frail vessel, they must wait.

Still wait!

The raft was now finished. Mac-Nab had made one large shed or cabin big
enough to hold every one, and to afford some little shelter from the weather. A
mast had been prepared, which could be put up if necessary, and the sails
intended for the boat had long been ready. The whole structure was strong,
although clumsy; and if the wind were favourable, and the sea not too rough, this
rude assortment of planks and timbers might save the lives of the whole party.

"Nothing," observed Mrs Barnett,—"nothing is impossible to Him who rules
the winds and waves."

Hobson carefully looked over the stores of provisions. The reserves had been
much damaged by the avalanche, but there were plenty of animals still on the
island, and the abundant shrubs and mosses supplied them with food. A few
reindeer and hares were slaughtered by the hunters, and their flesh salted for
future needs.

The health of the colonists was on the whole good. They had suffered little in
the preceding mild winter, and all the mental trials they had gone through had
not affected their physical well-being. They were, however, looking forward
with something of a shrinking horror to the moment when they would have to
abandon their island home, or, to speak more correctly, when it abandoned them.
It was no wonder that they did not like the thought of floating on the ocean in a
rude structure of wood subject to all the caprices of winds and waves. Even in
tolerably fine weather seas would be shipped and every one constantly drenched
with saltwater. Moreover, it must be remembered that the men were none of
them sailors, accustomed to navigation, and ready to risk their lives on a few
planks, but soldiers, trained for service on land. Their island was fragile, it is
true, and rested on a thin crust of ice; but then it was covered with a productive
soil, trees and shrubs flourished upon it, its huge bulk rendered it insensible to
the motion of the waves, and it might have been supposed to be stationary. They
had, in fact, become attached to Victoria Island, on which they had lived nearly
two years; every inch of the ground had become familiar to them; they had tilled
the soil, and had come safely through so many perils in their wandering home,
that in leaving it they felt as if they were parting from an old and sorely-tried
friend.

Hobson fully sympathised with the feelings of his men, and understood their
repugnance to embarking on the raft; but then he also knew that the catastrophe
could not now be deferred much longer, and ominous symptoms already gave


warning of its rapid approach.

We will now describe this raft. It was thirty feet square, and its deck rose two
feet above the water. Its bulwarks would therefore keep out the small but not the
large waves. In the centre the carpenter had built a regular deck-house, which
would hold some twenty people. Round it were large lockers for the provisions
and water-casks, all firmly fixed to the deck with iron bolts. The mast, thirty feet
high, was fastened to the deck-house, and strengthened with stays attached to the
comers of the raft. This mast was to have a square sail, which would only be
useful when the wind was aft. A sort of rudder was fixed to this rough structure,
the fittings of which were necessarily incomplete.

Such was the raft constructed by the head carpenter, on which twenty-one
persons were to embark. It was floating peacefully on the little lake, strongly
moored to the shore.

It was certainly constructed with more care than if it had been put together in
haste on a vessel at sea doomed to immediate destruction. It was stronger and
better fitted up; but, after all, it was but a raft.

On the ist June a new incident occurred. Hope, one of the soldiers, went to
fetch some water from the lake for culinary purposes, and when Mrs Joliffe
tasted it, she found that it was salt. She called Hope, and said she wanted fresh,
not salt water.

The man replied that he had brought it from the lake as usual, and as he and
Mrs Joliffe were disputing about it, the Lieutenant happened to come in. Hearing
Hope’s repeated [asertions] assertions that he had fetched the water from the
lake, he turned pale and hurried to the lagoon.

The waters were quite salt; the bottom of the lake had evidently given way,
and the sea had flowed in.

The fact quickly became known, and every one was seized with a terrible
dread.

"No more fresh water!" exclaimed all the poor creatures together.

Lake Barnett had in fact disappeared, as Paulina River had done before.

Lieutenant Hobson hastened to reassure his comrades about drinkable water.

"There will be plenty of ice, my friends," he said. "We can always melt a
piece of our island, and," he added, with a ghastly attempt at a smile, "I don’t
suppose we shall drink it all."

It is, in fact, well known that salt separates from sea-water in freezing and
evaporation. A few blocks of ice were therefore "disinterred," if we may so
express it, and melted for daily use, and to fill the casks on board the raft.

It would not do, however, to neglect this fresh warning given by nature. The
invasion of the lake by the sea proved that the base of the island was rapidly


melting. At any moment the ground might give way, and Hobson forbade his
men to leave the factory, as they might be drifted away before they were aware
of it.

The animals seemed more keenly alive than ever to approaching danger; they
gathered yet more closely round the firmer part, and after the disappearance of
the fresh water lake, they came to lick the blocks of ice. They were all uneasy,
and some seemed to be seized with madness, especially the wolves, who rushed
wildly towards the factory, and dashed away again howling piteously. The furred
animals remained huddled together round the large well where the principal
house had formerly stood. There were several hundreds of them, of different
species, and the solitary bear roamed backwards and forwards, showing no more
hostility to the quadrupeds than to men.

The number of birds, which had hitherto been considerable, now decreased.
During the last few days all those capable of long-sustained flight—such as
swans, &c, migrated towards the Aleutian Islands in the south, where they would
find a sure refuge. This significant and ominous fact was noticed by Mrs Barnett
and Madge, who were walking together on the beach.

"There is plenty of food for these birds on the island," observed Mrs Barnett,
"and yet they leave it—they have a good reason, no doubt."

"Yes," replied Madge; "their instinct of self-preservation makes them take
flight, and they give us a warming by which we ought to profit. The animals also
appear more uneasy than usual."

Hobson now decided to take the greater part of the provisions and all the
camping apparatus on board the raft, and when that was done, to embark with
the whole party.

The sea was, however, very rough, and the waters of the former lake—now a
kind of Mediterranean in miniature—were greatly agitated. The waves, confined
in the narrow space, dashed mountains high, and broke violently upon the steep
banks. The raft tossed up and down, and shipped sea after sea. The embarkation
of provisions, &c., had to be put off.

Every one wished to pass one more quiet night on land, and Hobson yielded
against his better judgment, determined, if it were calmer the next day, to
proceed with the embarkation.

The night was more peaceful than had been expected; the wind went down,
and the sea became calmer; it had but been swept by one of those sudden and
brief hurricanes peculiar to these latitudes.

At eight o’clock in the evening the tumult ceased, and a slight surface
agitation of the waters of lake and sea alone remained.

It was some slight comfort that the island would not now be broken up


suddenly, as it must have done had the storm continued. Its dissolution was, of
course, still close at hand, but would not, it was hoped, be sudden and abrupt.

The storm was succeeded by a slight fog, which seemed likely to thicken
during the night. It came from the north, and owing to the changed position of
the island, would probably cover the greater part of it.

Before going to bed, Hobson went down and examined the moorings of the
raft, which were fastened to some strong birch-trees. To make security doubly
sure, he tightened them, and the worst that could now happen would be, that the
raft would drift out on to the lagoon, which was not large enough to be lost upon
it.

CHAPTER XXII.

THE FOUR FOLLOWING DAYS.

The night was calm, and in the morning the Lieutenant resolved to order the
embarkation of everything and everybody that very day. He, therefore, went
down to the lake to look at the raft.

The fog was still thick, but the sunbeams were beginning to struggle through
it. The clouds had been swept away by the hurricane of the preceding day, and it
seemed likely to be hot.

When Hobson reached the banks of the lake, the fog was still too dense for
him to make out anything on its surface, and he was waiting for it to clear away,
when he was joined by Mrs Barnett, Madge, and several others.

The fog gradually cleared off, drawing back to the end of the lake, but the
raft was nowhere to be seen.

Presently a gust of wind completely swept away the fog.

The raft was gone! There was no longer a lake! The boundless ocean
stretched away before the astonished colonists!

Hobson could not check a cry of despair; and when he and his companions
turned round and saw the sea on every side, they realised with a shock of horror
that their island was now nothing more than an islet!

During the night six-sevenths of the district once belonging to Cape Bathurst
had silently floated away, without producing a shock of any kind, so completely
had the ice been worn away by the constant action of the waves, the raft had
drifted out into the offing, and those whose last hope it had been could not see a
sign of it on the desolate sea.

The unfortunate colonists were now overwhelmed with despair; their last
hope gone, they were hanging above an awful abyss ready to swallow them up;
and some of the soldiers in a fit of madness were about to throw themselves into
the sea, when Mrs Barnett flung herself before them, entreating them to desist.
They yielded, some of them weeping like children.


The awful situation of the colonists was indeed manifest enough, and we
may well pity the Lieutenant surrounded by the miserable despairing creatures.
Twenty-one persons on an islet of ice which must quickly melt beneath their
feet! The wooded hills had disappeared with the mass of the island now
engulfed; not a tree was left. There was no wood remaining but the planks of the
rough lodging, which would not be nearly enough to build a raft to hold so
many. A few days of life were all the colonists could now hope for; June had set
in, the mean temperature exceeded 68° Fahrenheit, and the islet must rapidly
melt.

As a forlorn hope, Hobson thought he would make a reconaissance of his
limited domain, and see if any part of it was thicker than where they were all
now encamped. In this excursion he was accompanied by Mrs Barnett and
Madge.

"Do you still hope!" inquired the lady of her faithful companion.

"I hope ever!" replied Madge.

Mrs Barnett did not answer, but walked rapidly along the coast at the
Lieutenant’s side. No alteration had taken place between Cape Bathurst and
Cape Esquimaux, that is to say, for a distance of eight miles. It was at Cape
Esquimaux that the fracture had taken place, and running inland, it followed a
curved line as far as the beginning of the lagoon, from which point the shores of
the lake, now bathed by the waves of the sea, formed the new coast-line.
Towards the upper part of the lagoon there was another fracture, running as far
as the coast, between Cape Bathurst and what was once Port Barnett, so that the
islet was merely an oblong strip, not more than a mile wide anywhere.

Of the hundred and forty square miles which once formed the total
superficial area of the island, only twenty remained.

Hobson most carefully examined the new conformation of the islet, and
found that its thickest part was still at the site of the former factory. He decided,
therefore, to retain the encampment where it was, and, strange to say, the instinct
of the quadrupeds still led them to congregate about it.

A great many of the animals had, however, disappeared with the rest of the
island, amongst them many of the dogs which had escaped the former
catastrophe. Most of the quadrupeds remaining were rodents; and the bear,
which seemed terribly puzzled, paced round and round the islet like a caged
animal.

About five o’clock in the evening the three explorers returned to the camp.
The men and women were gathered together in gloomy silence in the rough
shelter still remaining to them, and Mrs Joliffe was preparing some food. Sabine,
who was less overcome than his comrades, was wandering about in the hope of


getting some fresh venison, and the astronomer was sitting apart from every one,
gazing at the sea in an absent indifferent manner, as if nothing could ever rouse
or astonish him again.

The Lieutenant imparted the results of his excursion to the whole patty. He
told them that they were safer where they were than they would be on any other
spot, and he urged them not to wander about, as there were signs of another
approaching fracture half way between the camp and Cape Esquimaux. The
superficial area of the islet would soon be yet further reduced, and they could do
nothing, absolutely nothing.

The day was really quite hot. The ice which had been "disinterred" for
drinkable water melted before it was brought near the fire. Thin pieces of the ice
crust of the steep beach fell off into the sea, and it was evident that the general
level of the islet was being lowered by the constant wearing away of its base in
the tepid waters.

No one slept the next night. Who could have closed his eyes with the
knowledge that the abyss beneath might open at any moment?—who but the
little unconscious child who still smiled in his mother’s arms, and was never for
one instant out of them?

The next morning, June 4th, the sun rose in a cloudless sky. No change had
taken place in the conformation of the islet during the night.

In the course of this day a terrified blue fox rushed into the shed, and could
not be induced to leave it. The martens, ermines, polar hares, musk-rats, and
beavers literally swarmed upon the site of the former factory. The wolves alone
were unrepresented, and had probably all been swallowed up with the rest of the
island. The bear no longer wandered from Cape Bathurst, and the furred animals
seemed quite unconscious of its presence; nor did the colonists notice it much,
absorbed as they were in the contemplation of the approaching doom, which had
broken down all the ordinary distinctions of race.

A little before noon a sudden hope—too soon to end in disappointment—
revived the drooping spirits of the colonists.

Sabine, who had been standing for some time on the highest part of the islet
looking at the sea, suddenly cried—

"A boat! a boat!"

It was as if an electric shock had suddenly ran through the group, for all
started up and rushed towards the hunter.

The Lieutenant looked at him inquiringly, and the man pointed to a white
vapour on the horizon. Not a word was spoken, but all watched in breathless
silence as the form of a vessel gradually rose against the sky.

It was indeed a ship, and most likely a whaler. There was no doubt about it,


and at the end of an hour even the keel was visible.

Unfortunately this vessel appeared on the east of the islet, that is to say, on
the opposite side to that from which the raft had drifted, so that there could be no
hope that it was coming to their rescue after meeting with the raft, which would
have suggested the fact of fellow-creatures being in danger.

The question now was, would those in this vessel perceive the islet? Would
they be able to make out signals on it? Alas! in broad daylight, with a bright sun
shining, it was not likely they would. Had it been night some of the planks of the
remaining shed might have made a fire large enough to be seen at a considerable
distance, but the boat would probably have disappeared before the darkness set
in; and, although it seemed of little use, signals were made, and guns fired on the
islet.

The vessel was certainly approaching, and seemed to be a large three-master,
evidently a whaler from New Archangel, which was on its way to Behring Strait
after having doubled the peninsula of Alaska. It was to the windward of the islet,
and tacking to starboard with its lower sails, top sails, and top-gallant sails all
set. It was steadily advancing to the north. A sailor would have seen at a glance
that it was not bearing towards the islet, but it might even yet perceive it, and
alter its course.

"If it does see us," whispered Hobson in Long’s ear, "it is more likely to
avoid us than to come nearer."

The Lieutenant was right, for there is nothing vessels dread more in these
latitudes than the approach of icebergs and ice-floes; they look upon them as
floating rocks, against which there is a danger of striking, especially in the night,
and they therefore hasten to change their course when ice is sighted; and this
vessel would most likely do the same, if it noticed the islet at all.

The alternations of hope and despair through which the anxious watchers
passed may be imagined, but cannot be described. Until two o’clock in the
afternoon they were able to believe that Heaven had at last taken pity on them—
that help was coming—that their safety was assured. The vessel continued to
approach in an oblique direction, and was presently not more than six miles from
the islet. Signal after signal was tried, gun after gun fired, and some of the planks
of the shed were burnt.

All in vain—either they were not seen, or the vessel was anxious to avoid the
islet.

At half-past two it luffed slightly, and bore away to the northeast.

In another hour a white vapour was all that was visible, and that soon
disappeared.

On this the soldier Kellet burst into a roar of hysterical laughter, and flinging


himself on the ground, rolled over and over like a madman.

Mrs Barnett turned and looked Madge full in the face, as if to ask her if she
still hoped, and Madge turned away her head.

On this same illfated day a crackling noise was heard, and the greater part of
the islet broke off, and plunged into the sea. The cries of the drowning animals
rent the air, and the islet was reduced to the narrow strip between the site of the
engulfed house and Cape Bathurst. It was now merely a piece of ice.

CHAPTER XXIII.

ON A PIECE OF ICE.

A piece of ice, a jagged triangular strip of ice, measuring one hundred feet at
its base, and scarcely five hundred in its greatest extent; and on it twenty-one
human beings, some hundred furred animals, a few dogs, and a large bear, which
was at this moment crouching at the very edge!

Yes! all the luckless colonists were there. Not one had yet been swallowed
up. The last rupture had occurred when they were all in the shed. Thus far fate
had spared them, probably that they might all perish together.

A silent sleepless night ensued. No one spoke or moved, for the slightest
shake or blow might suffice to break the ice.

No one would touch the salt-meat served round by Mrs Joliffe. What would
be the good of eating?

Nearly every one remained in the open air, feeling that it would be better to
be drowned in the open sea than in a narrow wooden shed.

The next day, June 5th, the sun shone brightly down upon the heads of the
doomed band of wanderers. All were still silent, and seemed anxious to avoid
each other. Many gazed with troubled anxious eyes at the perfect circle of the
horizon, of which the miserable little strip of ice formed the centre. But the sea
was absolutely deserted—not a sail, not an ice-floe, not an islet! Their own piece
of ice was probably the very last floating on the Behring Sea.

The temperature continued to rise. The wind had gone down, and a terrible
calm had set in, a gentle swell heaved the surface of the sea, and the morsel of
earth and ice, which was all that was left of Victoria Island, rose and sank
without change of position, like a wreck—and what was it but a wreck?

But a wreck, a piece of woodwork, a broken mast, or a few planks, remain
floating; they offer some resistance to the waves, they will not melt; but this bit
of ice, this solidified water, must dissolve with the heat of the sun!

This piece of ice had formed the thickest part of the island, and this will
explain its having lasted so long. A layer of earth and plenty of vegetation
covered it, and the base of ice must have been of considerable thickness. The
long bitter Polar winters must have "fed it with fresh ice," in the countless


centuries during which it was connected with the mainland. Even now its mean
height was five or six feet above the sea level, and its base was probably of
about the same thickness. Although in these quiet waters it was not likely to be
broken, it could not fail gradually to melt, and the rapid dissolution could
actually be watched at the edges, for as the long waves licked the sides, piece
after piece of ground with its verdant covering sank to rise no more.

On this 5th June a fall of this nature occurred at about one o’clock P.M., on
the site of the shed itself, which was very near the edge of the ice. There was
fortunately no one in it at the time, and all that was saved was a few planks, and
two or three of the timbers of the roofs. Most of the cooking utensils and all the
astronomical instruments were lost. The colonists were now obliged to take
refuge on the highest part of the islet, where nothing protected them from the
weather, but fortunately a few tools had been left there, with the air pumps and
the air-vessel, which Hobson had employed for catching a little of the rain-water
for drinking purposes, as he no longer dared to draw for a supply upon the ice,
every atom of which was of value.

At about four o’clock P.M., the soldier Kellet, the same who had already
given signs of insanity, came to Mrs Barnett and said quietly—

"I am going to drown myself, ma’am."

"What, Kellet?" exclaimed the lady.

"T tell you I am going to drown myself," replied the soldier. "I have thought
the matter well over: there is no escape for us, and I prefer dying at once to
waiting to be killed."

"Kellet!" said Mrs Barnett, taking the man’s hand and looking into his face,
which was strangely composed, "you will not do that?"

"Yes, I will, ma’am; and as you have always been very good to us all, I
wanted to wish you good-bye. Good-bye, ma’am!"

And Kellet turned towards the sea. Mrs Barnett, terrified at his manner,
threw herself upon him and held him back. Her cries brought Hobson and Long
to her assistance, and they did all in their power to dissuade the unhappy man
from carrying out his purpose, but he was not to be moved, and merely shook his
head.

His mind was evidently disordered, and it was useless to reason with him. It
was a terrible moment, as his example might lead some of his comrades to
commit suicide also. At all hazards he must be prevented from doing as he
threatened.

"Kellet," said Mrs Barnett gently, with a half smile, "we have always been
very good friends, have we not?"

"Yes, ma’am," replied Kellet calmly.


"Well, Kellet, if you like we will die together, but not to-day."

"What, ma’am?"

"No, my brave fellow, I am not ready; but tomorrow, tomorrow if you like."

The soldier looked more fixedly than ever at the courageous woman, and
seemed to hesitate an instant; then he cast a glance of fierce longing at the sea,
and passing his hand over his eyes, said—

"Tomorrow!"

And without another word he quietly tumed away and went back to his
comrades.

"Poor fellow." murmured Mrs Barnett; "I have asked him to wait till
tomorrow, and who can say whether we shall not all be drowned by that time!"

Throughout that night Hobson remained motionless upon the beach,
pondering whether there might not yet be some means to check the dissolution
of the islet—if it might not yet be possible to preserve it until they came in sight
of land of some sort.

Mrs Bamett and Madge did not leave each other for an instant. Kalumah
crouched like a dog at the feet of her mistress, and tried to keep her warm. Mrs
Mac-Nab, wrapped in a few furs, the remains of the rich stores of Fort Hope, had
fallen into a kind of torpor, with her baby clasped in her arms.

The stars shone with extraordinary brilliancy, and no sounds broke the
stillness of the night but the rippling of the waves and the splash of pieces of ice
as they fell into the sea. The colonists, stretched upon the ground in scattered
groups, were as motionless as corpses on an abandoned wreck.

Sometimes Sergeant Long rose and peered into the night-mists, bat seeing
nothing, he resumed his horizontal position. The bear, looking like a great white
snowball, cowered motionless at the very edge of the strip of ice.

This night also passed away without any incident to modify the situation.
The grey morning dawned in the east, and the sun rose and dispersed the
shadows of the night.

The Lieutenant’s first care, as soon as it was light, was to examine the piece
of ice. Its perimeter was still more reduced, and, alas! its mean height above the
sea level had sensibly diminished. The waves, quiet as they were, washed over
the greater part of it; the summit of the little hill alone was still beyond their
reach.

Long, too, saw the changes which had taken place during the night, and felt
that all hope was gone.

Mrs Barnett joined Lieutenant Hobson, and said to him—

"Tt will be to-day then!"

"Yes, madam, and you will keep your promise to Kellet!"


"Lieutenant Hobson," said the lady solemnly, "have we done all in our
power!"

"We have, madam."

"Then God’s will be done!"

One last attempt was, however, made during the day. A strong breeze set in
from the offing, that is to say, a wind bearing to the south-east, the direction in
which were situated the nearest of the Aleutian Islands. How far off no one could
say, aS without instruments the bearings of the island could not be taken. It was
not likely to have drifted far, however, unless under the influence of the current,
as it gave no hold to the wind.

Still it was just possible that they might be nearer land than they thought. If
only a current, the direction of which it was impossible to ascertain, had taken
them nearer to the much-longed-for Aleutian Islands, then, as the wind was
bearing down upon those very islands, it might drive the strip of ice before it if a
sail of some kind could be concocted. The ice had still several hours to float, and
in several hours the land might come in sight, or, if not the land, some coasting
or fishing vessel.

A forlorn hope truly, but it suggested an idea to the Lieutenant which he
resolved to carry out. Could not a sail be contrived on the islet as on an ordinary
raft? There could be no difficulty in that; and when Hobson suggested it to Mac-
Nab, he exclaimed—

"You are quite right, sir;" adding to his men, "bring out all the canvas there
is!"

Every one was quite revived by this plan, slight as was the chance it
afforded, and all lent a helping hand, even Kellet, who had not yet reminded Mrs
Barnett of her promise.

A beam, which had once formed part of the roof of the barracks, was sunk
deep into the earth and sand of which the little hill was composed, and firmly
fixed with ropes arranged like shrouds and a stay. A sail made of all the clothes
and coverlets still remaining fastened on to a strong pole for a yard, was hoisted
on the mast This sail, or rather collection of sails, suitably set, swelled in the
breeze, and by the wake it left, it was evident that the strip of ice was rapidly
moving towards the south-east.

It was a success, and every one was cheered with newly-awakened hope.
They were no longer stationary; they were advancing slowly, it was true, but still
they were advancing. The carpenter was particularly elated; all eagerly scanned
the horizon, and had they been told that no land could be sighted, they would
have refused to believe it.

So it appeared, however; for the strip of ice floated along on the waves for


three hours in the centre of an absolutely circular and unbroken horizon. The
poor colonists still hoped on.

Towards three o’clock, the Lieutenant took the Sergeant aside, and said to
him—

"We are advancing at the cost of the solidity and duration of our islet."

"What do you mean, sir?"

"I mean that the ice is being rapidly fretted away as it moves along. Its speed
is hastening its dissolution, and since we set sail it has diminished one-third."

"Are you quite sure?”

"Absolutely certain. The ice is longer and flatter. Look, the sea la not more
than ten feet from the hill!"

It was true, and the result was what might naturally have been expected from
the motion of the ice.

"Sergeant," resumed Hobson, "do you think we ought to take down our sail?"

"I think," replied Long, after a moment’s reflection, "that we should consult
our comrades. We ought all to share the responsibility of a decision now."

The Lieutenant bent his head in assent, and the two returned to their old
position on the little hill.

Hobson put the case before the whole party.

"The speed we have given to the ice," he said, "is causing it to wear away
rapidly, and will perhaps hasten the inevitable catastrophe by a few hours. My
friends, you must decide whether we shall still go on."

"Forwards!" cried all with one voice.

So it was decided, and, as it turned out, the decision was fraught with
consequences of incalculable importance.

At six o’clock P.M. Madge rose, and pointing to a point on the south-east,
cried—

"Land!"

Every one started up as if struck by lightning. Land there was indeed, on the
south-east, twelve miles from the island.

"More sail! more sail!" shouted Hobson.

He was understood, and fresh materials were hastily brought. On the shrouds
a sort of studding sail was rigged up of clothes, furs, everything, in short, that
could give hold to the wind.

The speed increased as the wind freshened, but the ice was melting
everywhere; it trembled beneath the feet of the anxious watchers, and might
open at any moment. But they would not think of that; they were buoyed up with
hope; safety was at hand, on the land they were rapidly nearing. They shouted—
they made signals—they were in a delirium of excitement.


At half-past seven the ice was much nearer the land, but it was visibly
melting, and sinking rapidly; water was gushing from it, and the waves were
washing over it, sweeping off the terrified quadrupeds before the eyes of the
colonists. Every instant they expected the whole mass to be engulfed, and it was
necessary to lighten it like a sinking vessel. Every means was tried to check the
dissolution; the earth and sand were carefully spread about, especially at the
edges of the ice, to protect it from the direct influence of the sunbeams; and furs
were laid here and there, as being bad conductors of heat. But it was all of no
avail; the lower portion of the ice began to crack, and several fissures opened in
the surface. It was now but a question of moments!

Night set in, and there was nothing left for the poor colonists to do to
quicken the speed of the islet. Some of them tried to paddle about on planks. The
coast was still four miles to windward.

It was a dark gloomy night, without any moon, and Hobson, whose heroic
courage did not even now fail him, shouted—

"A signal, my friends! a signal!" A pile was made of all the remaining
combustibles—two or three planks and a beam. It was set fire to, and bright
flames soon shot up, but the strip of ice continued to melt and sink. Presently the
little hill alone remained above water, and on it the despairing wretches, with the
few animals left alive, huddled together, the bear growling fiercely.

The water was still rising, and there was no sign that any one on land had
seen the signal. In less than a quarter of an hour they must all be swallowed up.

Could nothing be done to make the ice last longer? In three hours, three short
hours, they might reach the land, which was now but three miles to windward.

"Oh!" cried Hobson, "if only I could stop the ice from melting! I would give
my life to know how! Yes, I would give my life!"

"There is one way," suddenly replied a voice.

It was Thomas Black who spoke, the astronomer, who had not opened his
lips for so long, and who had long since appeared dead to all that was going on.

"Yes," he continued, "there is one way of checking the dissolution of the ice
—there is one way of saving us all."

All gathered eagerly round the speaker, and looked at him inquiringly. They
thought they must have misheard what he said.

"Well!" asked Hobson, "what way do you mean?"

"To the pumps!" replied Black simply.

Was he mad? Did he take the ice for a sinking vessel, with ten feet of water
in the hold?

The air pumps were at hand, together with the air vessel, which Hobson had
been using as a reservoir for drinking water, but of what use could they be?


Could they harden the ice, which was melting all over?

"He is mad!" exclaimed Long.

"To the pumps!" repeated the astronomer; "fill the reservoir with air!"

"Do as he tells you!" cried Mrs Barnett.

The pumps were attached to the reservoir, the cover of which was closed and
bolted. The pumps were then at once set to work, and the air was condensed
under the pressure of several atmospheres. Then Black, taking one of the leather
pipes connected with the reservoir, and opening the cock, let the condensed air
escape, walking round the ice wherever it was melting.

Every one was astonished at the effect produced. Wherever the air was
projected by the astronomer, the fissures filled up, and the surface re-froze.

"Hurrah! hurrah!" shouted all with one voice.

It was tiring enough to work the pumps, but there were plenty of volunteers.
The edges of the ice were again solidified, as if under the influence of intense
cold.

"You have saved us, Mr Black," said Lieutenant Hobson.

"Nothing could be more natural," replied the astronomer quietly.

Nothing, in fact, could have been more natural; and the physical effect
produced may be described as follows:—

There were two reasons for the relegation:—First, under the pressure of the
air, the water vaporised on the surface of the ice produced intense cold, and the
compressed air in expanding abstracted the heat from the thawed surface, which
immediately re-froze. Wherever the ice was opening the cold cemented the
edges, so that it gradually regained its original solidity.

This went on for several hours, and the colonists, buoyed up by hope, toiled
on with unwearying zeal.

They were nearing the coast, and when they were about a quarter of a mile
from it, the bear plunged into the sea, and swimming to the shore, soon
disappeared.

A few minutes afterwards the ice ran aground upon a beach, and the few
animals still upon it hurried away in the darkness. The colonists "disembarked,"
and falling on their knees, returned thanks to God for their miraculous
deliverance.


CHAPTER XXIV


CONCLUSION.


It was on the island of Blejinie, the last of the Aleutian group, at the extreme
south of Behring Sea, that all the colonists of Fort Hope at last landed, after
having traversed eighteen hundred miles since the breaking-up of the ice. They
were hospitably received by some Aleutian fishermen who had hurried to their
assistance, and were soon able to communicate with some English agents of the
Hudson’s Bay Company.

After all the details we have given, it is needless to dwell on the courage and
energy of the brave little band, which had proved itself worthy of its noble
leader. We know how all struggled with their misfortunes, and how patiently
they had submitted to the will of God. We have seen Mrs Barnett cheering every
one by her example and sympathy; and we know that neither she nor those with
her yielded to despair when the peninsula on which Fort Hope had been built
was converted into a wandering island, when that island became an islet, and the
islet a strip of ice, nor even when that strip of ice was melting beneath the
combined influence of sun and waves. If the scheme of the Company was a
failure, if the new fort had perished, no one could possibly blame Hobson or his
companions, who had gone through such extraordinary and unexpected trials. Of
the nineteen persons under the Lieutenant’s charge, not one was missing, and he
had even two new members in his little colony, Kalumah and Mrs Barnett’s
godson, Michael Mac-Nab.

Six days after their rescue the shipwrecked mariners arrived at New
Archangel, the capital of Russian America.

Here the friends, bound together by so many dangers shared, must part,
probably for ever! Hobson and his men were to return to Fort Reliance across
English America, whilst Mrs Barnett, accompanied by Kalumah, who would not
leave her, Madge, and Thomas Black, intended to go back to Europe via San
Francisco and the United States.

But whilst they were still altogether, the Lieutenant, addressing Mrs Barnett,
said with considerable emotion—

"God bless you, madam, for all you have been to us. You have been our
comforter, our consoler, the very soul of our little world; and I thank you in the
name of all."

Three cheers for Mrs Barnett greeted this speech, and each soldier begged to


shake her by the hand, whilst the women embraced her affectionately.

The Lieutenant himself had conceived so warm an affection for the lady who
had so long been his friend and counsellor, that he could not bid her good-bye
without great emotion.

"Can it be that we shall never meet again?" he exclaimed.

"No, Lieutenant," replied Mrs Barnett;" we must, we shall meet again. If you
do not come and see me in Europe, I will come back to you at Fort Reliance, or
to the new factory you will found some day yet."

On hearing this, Thomas Black, who had regained the use of his tongue since
he had landed on terra firma, came forward and said, with an air of the greatest
conviction—

"Yes, we shall meet again in thirty-six years. My friends, I missed the eclipse
of 1860, but I will not miss that which will take place under exactly similar
conditions in the same latitudes in 1896. And therefore I appoint a meeting with
you, Lieutenant, and with you, my dear madam, on the confines of the Arctic
Ocean thirty six years hence."

End of Part IT


THE MASTER OF THE WORLD
By
Jules Verne


Chapter 1


WHAT HAPPENED IN THE MOUNTAINS


If I speak of myself in this story, it is because I have been deeply involved in
its startling events, events doubtless among the most extraordinary which this
twentieth century will witness. Sometimes I even ask myself if all this has really
happened, if its pictures dwell in truth in my memory, and not merely in my
imagination. In my position as head inspector in the federal police department at
Washington, urged on moreover by the desire, which has always been very
strong in me, to investigate and understand everything which is mysterious, I
naturally became much interested in these remarkable occurrences. And as I
have been employed by the government in various important affairs and secret
missions since I was a mere lad, it also happened very naturally that the head of
my department placed In my charge this astonishing investigation, wherein I
found myself wrestling with so many impenetrable mysteries.

In the remarkable passages of the recital, it is important that you should
believe my word. For some of the facts I can bring no other testimony than my
own. If you do not wish to believe me, so be it. I can scarce believe it all myself.

The strange occurrences began in the western part of our great American
State of North Carolina. There, deep amid the Blueridge Mountains rises the
crest called the Great Eyrie. Its huge rounded form is distinctly seen from the
little town of Morganton on the Catawba River, and still more clearly as one
approaches the mountains by way of the village of Pleasant Garden.

Why the name of Great Eyrie was originally given this mountain by the
people of the surrounding region, I am not quite Sure It rises rocky and grim and
inaccessible, and under certain atmospheric conditions has a peculiarly blue and
distant effect. But the idea one would naturally get from the name is of a refuge
for birds of prey, eagles condors, vultures; the home of vast numbers of the
feathered tribes, wheeling and screaming above peaks beyond the reach of man.
Now, the Great Eyrie did not seem particularly attractive to birds; on the
contrary, the people of the neighborhood began to remark that on some days
when birds approached its summit they mounted still further, circled high above
the crest, and then flew swiftly away, troubling the air with harsh cries.

Why then the name Great Eyrie? Perhaps the mount might better have been
called a crater, for in the center of those steep and rounded walls there might
well be a huge deep basin. Perhaps there might even lie within their circuit a


mountain lake, such as exists in other parts of the Appalachian mountain system,
a lagoon fed by the rain and the winter snows.

In brief was not this the site of an ancient volcano, one which had slept
through ages, but whose inner fires might yet reawake? Might not the Great
Eyrie reproduce in its neighborhood the violence of Mount Krakatoa or the
terrible disaster of Mont Pelee? If there were indeed a central lake, was there not
danger that its waters, penetrating the strata beneath, would be turned to steam
by the volcanic fires and tear their way forth in a tremendous explosion,
deluging the fair plains of Carolina with an eruption such as that of 1902 in
Martinique?

Indeed, with regard to this last possibility there had been certain symptoms
recently observed which might well be due to volcanic action. Smoke had
floated above the mountain and once the country folk passing near had heard
subterranean noises, unexplainable rumblings. A glow in the sky had crowned
the height at night.

When the wind blew the smoky cloud eastward toward Pleasant Garden, a
few cinders and ashes drifted down from it. And finally one stormy night pale
flames, reflected from the clouds above the summit, cast upon the district below
a sinister, warning light.

In presence of these strange phenomena, it is not astonishing that the people
of the surrounding district became seriously disquieted. And to the disquiet was
joined an imperious need of knowing the true condition of the mountain. The
Carolina newspapers had flaring headlines, "The Mystery of Great Eyrie!" They
asked if it was not dangerous to dwell in such a region. Their articles aroused
curiosity and fear--curiosity among those who being in no danger themselves
were interested in the disturbance merely as a strange phenomenon of nature,
fear in those who were likely to be the victims if a catastrophe actually occurred.
Those more immediately threatened were the citizens of Morganton, and even
more the good folk of Pleasant Garden and the hamlets and farms yet closer to
the mountain.

Assuredly it was regrettable that mountain climbers had not previously
attempted to ascend to the summit of the Great Eyrie. The cliffs of rock which
surrounded it had never been scaled. Perhaps they might offer no path by which
even the most daring climber could penetrate to the interior. Yet, if a volcanic
eruption menaced all the western region of the Carolinas, then a complete
examination of the mountain was become absolutely necessary.

Now before the actual ascent of the crater, with its many serious difficulties,
was attempted, there was one way which offered an opportunity of
reconnoitering the interior, with out clambering up the precipices. In the first


days of September of that memorable year, a well-known aeronaut named
Wilker came to Morganton with his balloon. By waiting for a breeze from the
east, he could easily rise in his balloon and drift over the Great Eyrie. There
from a safe height above he could search with a powerful glass into its deeps.
Thus he would know if the mouth of a volcano really opened amid the mighty
rocks. This was the principal question. If this were settled, it would be known if
the surrounding country must fear an eruption at some period more or less
distant.

The ascension was begun according to the programme suggested. The wind
was fair and steady; the sky clear; the morning clouds were disappearing under
the vigorous rays of the sun. If the interior of the Great Eyrie was not filled with
smoke, the aeronaut would be able to search with his glass its entire extent. If the
vapors were rising, he, no doubt, could detect their source.

The balloon rose at once to a height of fifteen hundred feet, and there rested
almost motionless for a quarter of an hour. Evidently the east wind, which was
brisk upon the Surface of the earth, did not make itself felt at that height. Then,
unlucky chance, the balloon was caught in an adverse current, and began to drift
toward the east. Its distance from the mountain chain rapidly increased. Despite
all the efforts of the aeronaut, the citizens of Morganton saw the balloon
disappear on the wrong horizon. Later, they learned that it had landed in the
neighborhood of Raleigh, the capital of North Carolina.

This attempt having failed, it was agreed that it should be tried again under
better conditions. Indeed, fresh rumblings were heard from the mountain,
accompanied by heavy clouds and wavering glimmerings of light at night. Folk
began to realize that the Great Eyrie was a serious and perhaps imminent source
of danger. Yes, the entire country lay under the threat of some seismic or
volcanic disaster.

During the first days of April of that year, these more or less vague
apprehensions turned to actual panic. The newspapers gave prompt echo to the
public terror. The entire district between the mountains and Morganton was sure
that an eruption was at hand.

The night of the fourth of April, the good folk of Pleasant Garden were
awakened by a sudden uproar. They thought that the mountains were falling
upon them. They rushed from their houses, ready for instant flight, fearing to see
open before them some immense abyss, engulfing the farms and villages for
miles around.

The night was very dark. A weight of heavy clouds pressed down upon the
plain. Even had it been day the crest of the mountains would have been invisible.

In the midst of this impenetrable obscurity, there was no response to the cries


which arose from every side. Frightened groups of men, women, and children
groped their way along the black roads in wild confusion. From every quarter
came the screaming voices: "It is an earthquake!" "It is an eruption!" "Whence
comes it?" "From the Great Eyrie!"

Into Morganton sped the news that stones, lava, ashes, were raining down
upon the country.

Shrewd citizens of the town, however, observed that if there were an eruption
the noise would have continued and increased, the flames would have appeared
above the crater; or at least their lurid reflections would have penetrated the
clouds. Now, even these reflections were no longer seen. If there had been an
earthquake, the terrified people saw that at least their houses had not crumbled
beneath the shock. It was possible that the uproar had been caused by an
avalanche, the fall of some mighty rock from the summit of the mountains.

An hour passed without other incident. A wind from the west sweeping over
the long chain of the Blueridge, set the pines and hemlocks wailing on the higher
slopes. There seemed no new cause for panic; and folk began to return to their
houses. All, however, awaited impatiently the return of day.

Then suddenly, toward three o'clock in the morning, another alarm! Flames
leaped up above the rocky wall of the Great Eyrie. Reflected from the clouds,
they illuminated the atmosphere for a great distance. A crackling, as if of many
burning trees, was heard.

Had a fire spontaneously broken out? And to what cause was it due?
Lightning could not have started the conflagration; for no thunder had been
heard. True, there was plenty of material for fire; at this height the chain of the
Blueridge is well wooded. But these flames were too sudden for any ordinary
cause.

"An eruption! An eruption!"

The cry resounded from all sides. An eruption! The Great Eyrie was then
indeed the crater of a volcano buried in the bowels of the mountains. And after
sO Many years, So many ages even, had it reawakened? Added to the flames, was
a rain of stones and ashes about to follow? Were the lavas going to pour down
torrents of molten fire, destroying everything in their passage, annihilating the
towns, the villages, the farms, all this beautiful world of meadows, fields and
forests, even as far as Pleasant Garden and Morganton?

This time the panic was overwhelming; nothing could stop it. Women
carrying their infants, crazed with terror, rushed along the eastward roads. Men,
deserting their homes, made hurried bundles of their most precious belongings
and set free their livestock, cows, sheep, pigs, which fled in all directions. What
disorder resulted from this agglomeration, human and animal, under darkest


night, amid forests, threatened by the fires of the volcano, along the border of
marshes whose waters might be upheaved and overflow! With the earth itself
threatening to disappear from under the feet of the fugitives! Would they be in
time to save themselves, if a cascade of glowing lava came rolling down the
slope of the mountain across their route?

Nevertheless, some of the chief and shrewder farm owners were not swept
away in this mad flight, which they did their best to restrain. Venturing within a
mile of the mountain, they saw that the glare of the flames was decreasing. In
truth it hardly seemed that the region was immediately menaced by any further
upheaval. No stones were being hurled into space; no torrent of lava was visible
upon the slopes; no rumblings rose from the ground. There was no further
manifestation of any seismic disturbance capable of overwhelming the land.

At length, the flight of the fugitives ceased at a distance where they seemed
secure from all danger. Then a few ventured back toward the mountain. Some
farms were reoccupied before the break of day.

By morning the crests of the Great Eyrie showed scarcely the least remnant
of its cloud of smoke. The fires were certainly at an end; and if it were
impossible to determine their cause, one might at least hope that they would not
break out again.

It appeared possible that the Great Eyrie had not really been the theater of
volcanic phenomena at all. There was no further evidence that the neighborhood
was at the mercy either of eruptions or of earthquakes.

Yet once more about five o'clock, from beneath the ridge of the mountain,
where the shadows of night still lingered, a strange noise swept across the air, a
sort of whirring, accompanied by the beating of mighty wings. And had it been a
clear day, perhaps the farmers would have seen the passage of a mighty bird of
prey, some monster of the skies, which having risen from the Great Eyrie sped
away toward the east.


Chapter 2


I REACH MORGANTON


The twenty-seventh of April, having left Washington the night before, I
arrived at Raleigh, the capital of the State of North Carolina.

Two days before, the head of the federal police had called me to his room.
He was awaiting me with some impatience. "John Strock," said he, "are you still
the man who on so many occasions has proven to me both his devotion and his
ability?"

"Mr. Ward," I answered, with a bow, "I cannot promise success or even
ability, but as to devotion, I assure you, it is yours."

"I do not doubt it," responded the chief. "And I will ask you instead this
more exact question: Are you as fond of riddles as ever? As eager to penetrate
into mysteries, as I have known you before?"

"Tam, Mr. Ward."

"Good, Strock; then listen."

Mr. Ward, a man of about fifty years, of great power and intellect, was fully
master of the important position he filled. He had several times entrusted to me
difficult missions which I had accomplished successfully, and which had won
me his confidence. For several months past, however, he had found no occasion
for my services. Therefore I awaited with impatience what he had to say. I did
not doubt that his questioning implied a serious and important task for me.

"Doubtless you know," said he, "what has happened down in the Blueridge
Mountains near Morganton."

"Surely, Mr. Ward, the phenomena reported from there have been singular
enough to arouse anyone's curiosity."

"They are singular, even remarkable, Strock. No doubt about that. But there
is also reason to ask, if these phenomena about the Great Eyrie are not a source
of continued danger to the people there, if they are not forerunners of some
disaster as terrible as it is mysterious."

"Tt is to be feared, sir."

"So we must know, Strock, what is inside of that mountain. If we are helpless
in the face of some great force of nature, people must be warned in time of the
danger which threatens them."

"It is clearly the duty of the authorities, Mr. Ward," responded I, "to learn
what is going on within there."


"True, Strock; but that presents great difficulties. Everyone reports that it is
impossible to scale the precipices of the Great Eyrie and reach its interior. But
has anyone ever attempted it with scientific appliances and under the best
conditions? I doubt it, and believe a resolute attempt may bring success."

"Nothing is impossible, Mr. Ward; what we face here is merely a question of
expense.”

"We must not regard expense when we are seeking to reassure an entire
population, or to preserve it from a catastrophe. There is another suggestion I
would make to you. Perhaps this Great Eyrie is not so inaccessible as is
supposed. Perhaps a band of malefactors have secreted themselves there, gaining
access by ways known only to themselves."

"What! You suspect that robbers--"

"Perhaps I am wrong, Strock; and these strange sights and sounds have all
had natural causes. Well, that is what we have to settle, and as quickly as
possible."

"I have one question to ask."

"Go ahead, Strock."

"When the Great Eyrie has been visited, when we know the source of these
phenomena, if there really is a crater there and an eruption is imminent, can we
avert it?”

"No, Strock; but we can estimate the extent of the danger. If some volcano in
the Alleghanies threatens North Carolina with a disaster similar to that of
Martinique, buried beneath the outpourings of Mont Pelee, then these people
must leave their homes."

"I hope, sir, there is no such widespread danger."

"T think not, Strock; it seems to me highly improbable that an active volcano
exists in the Blueridge mountain chain. Our Appalachian mountain system is
nowhere volcanic in its origin. But all these events cannot be without basis. In
short, Strock, we have decided to make a strict inquiry into the phenomena of the
Great Eyrie, to gather all the testimony, to question the people of the towns and
farms. To do this, I have made choice of an agent in whom we have full
confidence; and this agent is you, Strock."

"Good! I am ready, Mr. Ward," cried I, "and be sure that I shall neglect
nothing to bring you full information."

"I know it, Strock, and I will add that I regard you as specially fitted for the
work. You will have a splendid opportunity to exercise, and I hope to satisfy,
your favorite passion of curiosity."

"AS you Say, sir."

"You will be free to act according to circumstances. As to expenses, if there


seems reason to organize an ascension party, which will be costly, you have carte
blanche."

"T will act as seems best, Mr. Ward."

"Let me caution you to act with all possible discretion. The people in the
vicinity are already over-excited. It will be well to move secretly. Do not
mention the suspicions I have suggested to you. And above all, avoid arousing
any fresh panic."

"It is understood."

"You will be accredited to the Mayor of Morganton, who will assist you.
Once more, be prudent, Strock, and acquaint no one with your mission, unless it
is absolutely necessary. You have often given proofs of your intelligence and
address; and this time I feel assured you will succeed."

I asked him only "When shall I start?"

"Tomorrow."

"Tomorrow, I shall leave Washington; and the day after, I shall be at
Morganton."

How little suspicion had I of what the future had in store for me!

I returned immediately to my house where I made my preparations for
departure; and the next evening found me in Raleigh. There I passed the night,
and in the course of the next afternoon arrived at the railroad station of
Morganton.

Morganton is but a small town, built upon strata of the jurassic period,
particularly rich in coal. Its mines give it some prosperity. It also has numerous
unpleasant mineral waters, so that the season there attracts many visitors.
Around Morganton is a rich farming country, with broad fields of grain. It lies in
the midst of swamps, covered with mosses and reeds. Evergreen forests rise high
up the mountain slopes. All that the region lacks is the wells of natural gas, that
invaluable natural source of power, light, and warmth, so abundant in most of the
Alleghany valleys. Villages and farms are numerous up to the very borders of the
mountain forests. Thus there were many thousands of people threatened, if the
Great Eyrie proved indeed a volcano, if the convulsions of nature extended to
Pleasant Garden and to Morganton.

The mayor of Morganton, Mr. Elias Smith, was a tall man, vigorous and
enterprising, forty years old or more, and of a health to defy all the doctors of the
two Americas. He was a great hunter of bears and panthers, beasts which may
still be found in the wild gorges and mighty forests of the Alleghanies.

Mr. Smith was himself a rich land-owner, possessing several farms in the
neighborhood. Even his most distant tenants received frequent visits from him.
Indeed, whenever his official duties did not keep him in his so-called home at


Morganton, he was exploring the surrounding country, irresistibly drawn by the
instincts of the hunter.

I went at once to the house of Mr. Smith. He was expecting me, having been
warned by telegram. He received me very frankly, without any formality, his
pipe in his mouth, a glass of brandy on the table. A second glass was brought in
by a servant, and I had to drink to my host before beginning our interview.

"Mr. Ward sent you," said he to me in a jovial tone. "Good; let us drink to
Mr. Ward's health."

I clinked glasses with him, and drank in honor of the chief of police.

"And now," demanded Elias Smith, "what is worrying him?"

At this I made known to the mayor of Morganton the cause and the purpose
of my mission in North Carolina. I assured him that my chief had given me full
power, and would render me every assistance, financial and otherwise, to solve
the riddle and relieve the neighborhood of its anxiety relative to the Great Eyrie.

Elias Smith listened to me without uttering a word, but not without several
times refilling his glass and mine. While he puffed steadily at his pipe, the close
attention which he gave me was beyond question. I saw his cheeks flush at
times, and his eyes gleam under their bushy brows. Evidently the chief
magistrate of Morganton was uneasy about Great Eyrie, and would be as eager
as I to discover the cause of these phenomena.

When I had finished my communication, Elias Smith gazed at me for some
moments in silence. Then he said, softly, "So at Washington they wish to know
what the Great Eyrie hides within its circuit?"

"Yes, Mr. Smith."

"And you, also?"

"T do."

"So do I, Mr. Strock."

He and I were as one in our curiosity.

"You will understand," added he, knocking the cinders from his pipe, "that as
a land-owner, I am much interested in these stories of the Great Eyrie, and as
mayor, I wish to protect my constituents."

"A double reason,” I commented, "to stimulate you to discover the cause of
these extraordinary occurrences! Without doubt, my dear Mr. Smith, they have
appeared to you as inexplicable and as threatening as to your people."

"Inexplicable, certainly, Mr. Strock. For on my part, I do not believe it
possible that the Great Eyrie can be a volcano; the Alleghanies are nowhere of
volcanic origins. I, myself, in our immediate district, have never found any
geological traces of scoria, or lava, or any eruptive rock whatever. I do not think,
therefore, that Morganton can possibly be threatened from such a source."


"You really think not, Mr. Smith?"

"Certainly."

"But these tremblings of the earth that have been felt in the neighborhood!"

"Yes these tremblings! These tremblings!" repeated Mr. Smith, shaking his
head; "but in the first place, is it certain that there have been tremblings? At the
moment when the flames showed most sharply, I was on my farm of Wildon,
less than a mile from the Great Eyrie. There was certainly a tumult in the air, but
I felt no quivering of the earth."

"But in the reports sent to Mr. Ward--"

"Reports made under the impulse of the panic," interrupted the mayor of
Morganton. "I said nothing of any earth tremors in mine.”

"But as to the flames which rose clearly above the crest?"

"Yes, as to those, Mr. Strock, that is different. I saw them; saw them with my
own eyes, and the clouds certainly reflected them for miles around. Moreover
noises certainly came from the crater of the Great Eyrie, hissings, as if a great
boiler were letting off steam."

"You have reliable testimony of this?"

"Yes, the evidence of my own ears."

"And in the midst of this noise, Mr. Smith, did you believe that you heard
that most remarkable of all the phenomena, a sound like the flapping of great
wings?"

"I thought so, Mr. Strock; but what mighty bird could this be, which sped
away after the flames had died down, and what wings could ever make such
tremendous sounds. I therefore seriously question, if this must not have been a
deception of my imagination. The Great Eyrie a refuge for unknown monsters of
the sky! Would they not have been seen long since, soaring above their immense
nest of stone? In short, there is in all this a mystery which has not yet been
solved."

"But we will solve it, Mr. Smith, if you will give me your aid."

"Surely, Mr. Strock; tomorrow we will start our campaign."

"Tomorrow." And on that word the mayor and I separated. I went to a hotel,
and established myself for a stay which might be indefinitely prolonged. Then
having dined, and written to Mr. Ward, I saw Mr. Smith again in the afternoon,
and arranged to leave Morganton with him at daybreak.

Our first purpose was to undertake the ascent of the mountain, with the aid of
two experienced guides. These men had ascended Mt. Mitchell and others of the
highest peaks of the Blueridge. They had never, however, attempted the Great
Eyrie, knowing that its walls of inaccessible cliffs defended it on every side.
Moreover, before the recent startling occurrences the Great Eyrie had not


particularly attracted the attention of tourists. Mr. Smith knew the two guides
personally as men daring, skillful and trustworthy. They would stop at no
obstacle; and we were resolved to follow them through everything.

Moreover Mr. Smith remarked at the last that perhaps it was no longer as
difficult as formerly to penetrate within the Great Eyrie.

"And why?" asked I.

"Because a huge block has recently broken away from the mountain side and
perhaps it has left a practicable path or entrance."

"That would be a fortunate chance, Mr. Smith."

"We shall know all about it, Mr. Strock, no later than tomorrow."

"Till tomorrow, then."


Chapter 3


THE GREAT EYRIE


The next day at dawn, Elias Smith and I left Morganton by a road which,
winding along the left bank of the Catawba River, led to the village of Pleasant
Garden. The guides accompanied us, Harry Horn, a man of thirty, and James
Bruck, aged twenty-five. They were both natives of the region, and in constant
demand among the tourists who climbed the peaks of the Blueridge and
Cumberland Mountains.

A light wagon with two good horses was provided to carry us to the foot of
the range. It contained provisions for two or three days, beyond which our trip
surely would not be protracted. Mr. Smith had shown himself a generous
provider both in meats and in liquors. As to water the mountain springs would
furnish it in abundance, increased by the heavy rains, frequent in that region
during springtime.

It is needless to add that the Mayor of Morganton in his role of hunter, had
brought along his gun and his dog, Nisko, who gamboled joyously about the
wagon. Nisko, however, was to remain behind at the farm at Wildon, when we
attempted our ascent. He could not possibly follow us to the Great Eyrie with its
cliffs to scale and its crevasses to cross.

The day was beautiful, the fresh air in that climate is still cool of an April
morming. A few fleecy clouds sped rapidly overhead, driven by a light breeze
which swept across the long plains, from the distant Atlantic. The sun peeping
forth at intervals, illumined all the fresh young verdure of the countryside.

An entire world animated the woods through which we passed. From before
our equipage fled squirrels, field-mice, parroquets of brilliant colors and
deafening loquacity. Opossums passed in hurried leaps, bearing their young in
their pouches. Myriads of birds were scattered amid the foliage of banyans,
palms, and masses of rhododendrons, so luxuriant that their thickets were
impenetrable.

We arrived that evening at Pleasant Garden, where we were comfortably
located for the night with the mayor of the town, a particular friend of Mr. Smith.
Pleasant Garden proved little more than a village; but its mayor gave us a warm
and generous reception, and we supped pleasantly in his charming home, which
stood beneath the shades of some giant beech-trees.

Naturally the conversation turned upon our attempt to explore the interior of


the Great Eyrie. "You are right," said our host, "until we all know what is hidden
within there, our people will remain uneasy.”

"Has nothing new occurred," I asked, "since the last appearance of flames
above the Great Eyrie?"

"Nothing, Mr. Strock. From Pleasant Garden we can see the entire crest of
the mountain. Not a suspicious noise has come down to us. Not a spark has risen.
If a legion of devils is in hiding there, they must have finished their infernal
cookery, and soared away to some other haunt."

"Devils!" cried Mr. Smith. "Well, I hope they have not decamped without
leaving some traces of their occupation, some parings of hoofs or horns or tails.
We shall find them out."

On the morrow, the twenty-ninth of April, we started again at dawn. By the
end of this second day, we expected to reach the farm of Wildon at the foot of
the mountain. The country was much the same as before, except that our road led
more steeply upward. Woods and marshes alternated, though the latter grew
sparser, being drained by the sun as we approached the higher levels. The
country was also less populous. There were only a few little hamlets, almost lost
beneath the beech trees, a few lonely farms, abundantly watered by the many
streams that rushed downward toward the Catawba River.

The smaller birds and beasts grew yet more numerous. "I am much tempted
to take my gun," said Mr. Smith, "and to go off with Nisko. This will be the first
time that I have passed here without trying my luck with the partridges and
hares. The good beasts will not recognize me. But not only have we plenty of
provisions, but we have a bigger chase on hand today. The chase of a mystery."

"And let us hope," added I, "we do not come back disappointed hunters."

In the afternoon the whole chain of the Blueridge stretched before us at a
distance of only six miles. The mountain crests were sharply outlined against the
clear sky. Well wooded at the base, they grew more bare and showed only
stunted evergreens toward the summit. There the scraggly trees, grotesquely
twisted, gave to the rocky heights a bleak and bizarre appearance. Here and there
the ridge rose in sharp peaks. On our right the Black Dome, nearly seven
thousand feet high, reared its gigantic head, sparkling at times above the clouds.

"Have you ever climbed that dome, Mr. Smith?" I asked.

"No," answered he, "but I am told that it is a very difficult ascent. A few
mountaineers have climbed it; but they report that it has no outlook commanding
the crater of the Great Eyrie."

"That is so," said the guide, Harry Horn. "I have tried it myself."

"Perhaps," suggested I, "the weather was unfavorable."

"On the contrary, Mr. Strock, it was unusually clear. But the wall of the Great


Eyrie on that side rose so high, it completely hid the interior."

"Forward," cried Mr. Smith. "I shall not be sorry to set foot where no person
has ever stepped, or even looked, before."

Certainly on this day the Great Eyrie looked tranquil enough. As we gazed
upon it, there rose from its heights neither smoke nor flame.

Toward five o'clock our expedition halted at the Wildon farm, where the
tenants warmly welcomed their landlord. The farmer assured us that nothing
notable had happened about the Great Eyrie for some time. We supped at a
common table with all the people of the farm; and our sleep that night was sound
and wholly untroubled by premonitions of the future.

On the morrow, before break of day, we set out for the ascent of the
mountain. The height of the Great Eyrie scarce exceeds five thousand feet. A
modest altitude, often surpassed in this section of the Alleghanies. As we were
already more than three thousand feet above sea level, the fatigue of the ascent
could not be great. A few hours should suffice to bring us to the crest of the
crater. Of course, difficulties might present themselves, precipices to scale, clefts
and breaks in the ridge might necessitate painful and even dangerous detours.
This was the unknown, the spur to our attempt. As I said, our guides knew no
more than we upon this point. What made me anxious, was, of course, the
common report that the Great Eyrie was wholly inaccessible. But this remained
unproven. And then there was the new chance that a fallen block had left a
breach in the rocky wall.

"At last," said Mr. Smith to me, after lighting the first pipe of the twenty or
more which he smoked each day, "we are well started. As to whether the ascent
will take more or less time--"

"In any case, Mr. Smith," interrupted I, "you and I are fully resolved to
pursue our quest to the end."

"Fully resolved, Mr. Strock."

"My chief has charged me to snatch the secret from this demon of the Great
Eyrie."

"We will snatch it from him, willing or unwilling," vowed Mr. Smith, calling
Heaven to witness. "Even if we have to search the very bowels of the mountain."

"As it may happen, then," said I, "that our excursion will be prolonged
beyond today, it will be well to look to our provisions."

"Be easy, Mr. Strock; our guides have food for two days in their knapsacks,
besides what we carry ourselves. Moreover, though I left my brave Nisko at the
farm, I have my gun. Game will be plentiful in the woods and gorges of the
lower part of the mountain, and perhaps at the top we shall find a fire to cook it,
already lighted."


"Already lighted, Mr. Smith?"

"And why not, Mr. Strock? These flames! These superb flames, which have
so terrified our country folk! Is their fire absolutely cold, is no spark to be found
beneath their ashes? And then, if this is truly a crater, is the volcano so wholly
extinct that we cannot find there a single ember? Bah! This would be but a poor
volcano if it hasn't enough fire even to cook an egg or roast a potato. Come, I
repeat, we shall see! We shall see!"

At that point of the investigation I had, I confess, no opinion formed. I had
my orders to examine the Great Eyrie. If it proved harmless, I would announce
it, and people would be reassured. But at heart, I must admit, I had the very
natural desire of a man possessed by the demon of curiosity. I should be glad,
both for my own sake, and for the renown which would attach to my mission if
the Great Eyrie proved the center of the most remarkable phenomena--of which I
would discover the cause.

Our ascent began in this order. The two guides went in front to seek out the
most practicable paths. Elias Smith and I followed more leisurely. We mounted
by a narrow and not very steep gorge amid rocks and trees. A tiny stream
trickled downward under our feet. During the rainy season or after a heavy
shower, the water doubtless bounded from rock to rock in tumultuous cascades.
But it evidently was fed only by the rain, for now we could scarcely trace its
course. It could not be the outlet of any lake within the Great Eyrie.

After an hour of climbing, the slope became so steep that we had to turn,
now to the right, now to the left; and our progress was much delayed. Soon the
gorge became wholly impracticable; its cliff-like sides offered no sufficient
foothold. We had to cling by branches, to crawl upon our knees. At this rate the
top would not be reached before sundown.

"Faith!" cried Mr. Smith, stopping for breath, "I realize why the climbers of
the Great Eyrie have been few, so few, that it has never been ascended within my
knowledge."

"The fact is," I responded, "that it would be much toil for very little profit.
And if we had not special reasons to persist in our attempt."

"You never said a truer word," declared Harry Horn. "My comrade and I
have scaled the Black Dome several times, but we never met such obstacles as
these."

"The difficulties seem almost impassable," added James Bruck.

The question now was to determine to which side we should turn for a new
route; to right, as to left, arose impenetrable masses of trees and bushes. In truth
even the scaling of cliffs would have been more easy. Perhaps if we could get
above this wooded slope we could advance with surer foot. Now, we could only


go ahead blindly, and trust to the instincts of our two guides. James Bruck was
especially useful. I believe that that gallant lad would have equaled a monkey in
lightness and a wild goat in agility. Unfortunately, neither Elias Smith nor I was
able to climb where he could.

However, when it is a matter of real need with me, I trust I shall never be
backward, being resolute by nature and well-trained in bodily exercise. Where
James Bruck went, I was determined to go, also; though it might cost me some
uncomfortable falls. But it was not the same with the first magistrate of
Morganton, less young, less vigorous, larger, stouter, and less persistent than we
others. Plainly he made every effort, not to retard our progress, but he panted
like a seal, and soon I insisted on his stopping to rest.

In short, it was evident that the ascent of the Great Eyrie would require far
more time than we had estimated. We had expected to reach the foot of the rocky
wall before eleven o'clock, but we now saw that mid-day would still find us
several hundred feet below it.

Toward ten o'clock, after repeated attempts to discover some more
practicable route, after numberless turnings and returnings, one of the guides
gave the signal to halt. We found ourselves at last on the upper border of the
heavy wood. The trees, more thinly spaced, permitted us a glimpse upward to the
base of the rocky wall which constituted the true Great Eyrie.

"Whew!" exclaimed Mr. Smith, leaning against a mighty pine tree, "a little
respite, a little repose, and even a little repast would not go badly."

"We will rest an hour," said I.

"Yes; after working our lungs and our legs, we will make our stomachs
work."

We were all agreed on this point. A rest would certainty freshen us. Our only
cause for inquietude was now the appearance of the precipitous slope above us.
We looked up toward one of those bare strips called in that region, slides. Amid
this loose earth, these yielding stones, and these abrupt rocks there was no
roadway.

Harry Horn said to his comrade, "It will not be easy."

"Perhaps impossible," responded Bruck.

Their comments caused me secret uneasiness. If I returned without even
having scaled the mountain, my mission would be a complete failure, without
speaking of the torture to my curiosity. And when I stood again before Mr. Ward,
shamed and confused, I should cut but a sorry figure.

We opened our knapsacks and lunched moderately on bread and cold meat.
Our repast finished, in less than half an hour, Mr. Smith sprang up eager to push
forward once more. James Bruck took the lead; and we had only to follow him


as best we could.

We advanced slowly. Our guides did not attempt to conceal their doubt and
hesitation. Soon Horn left us and went far ahead to spy out which road promised
most chance of success.

Twenty minutes later he returned and led us onward toward the northwest. It
was on this side that the Black Dome rose at a distance of three or four miles.
Our path was still difficult and painful, amid the sliding stones, held in place
only occasionally by wiry bushes. At length after a weary struggle, we gained
some two hundred feet further upward and found ourselves facing a great gash,
which, broke the earth at this spot. Here and there were scattered roots recently
uptorn, branches broken off, huge stones reduced to powder, as if an avalanche
had rushed down this flank of the mountain.

"That must be the path taken by the huge block which broke away from the
Great Eyrie," commented James Bruck.

"No doubt," answered Mr. Smith, "and I think we had better follow the road
that it has made for us."

It was indeed this gash that Harry Horn had selected for our ascent. Our feet
found lodgment in the firmer earth which had resisted the passage of the monster
rock. Our task thus became much easier, and our progress was in a straight line
upward, so that toward half past eleven we reached the upper border of the
"slide."

Before us, less than a hundred feet away, but towering a hundred feet straight
upwards in the air rose the rocky wall which formed the final crest, the last
defence of the Great Eyrie.

From this side, the summit of the wall showed capriciously irregular, rising
in rude towers and jagged needles. At one point the outline appeared to be an
enormous eagle silhouetted against the sky, just ready to take flight. Upon this
side, at least, the precipice was insurmountable.

"Rest a minute," said Mr. Smith, "and we will see if it is possible to make our
way around the base of this cliff."

"At any rate," said Harry Horn, "the great block must have fallen from this
part of the cliff; and it has left no breach for entering."

They were both right; we must seek entrance elsewhere. After a rest of ten
minutes, we clambered up close to the foot of the wall, and began to make a
circuit of its base.

Assuredly the Great Eyrie now took on to my eyes an aspect absolutely
fantastic. Its heights seemed peopled by dragons and huge monsters. If chimeras,
griffins, and all the creations of mythology had appeared to guard it, I should
have been scarcely surprised.


With great difficulty and not without danger we continued our tour of this
circumvallation, where it seemed that nature had worked as man does, with
careful regularity. Nowhere was there any break in the fortification; nowhere a
fault in the strata by which one might clamber up. Always this mighty wall, a
hundred feet in height!

After an hour and a half of this laborious circuit, we regained our starting-
place. I could not conceal my disappointment, and Mr. Smith was not less
chagrined than I.

"A thousand devils!" cried he, "we know no better than before what is inside
this confounded Great Eyrie, nor even if it is a crater."

"Volcano, or not," said I, "there are no suspicious noises now; neither smoke
nor flame rises above it; nothing whatever threatens an eruption."

This was true. A profound silence reigned around us; and a perfectly clear
sky shone overhead. We tasted the perfect calm of great altitudes.

It was worth noting that the circumference of the huge wall was about twelve
or fifteen hundred feet. As to the space enclosed within, we could scarce reckon
that without knowing the thickness of the encompassing wall. The surroundings
were absolutely deserted. Probably not a living creature ever mounted to this
height, except the few birds of prey which soared high above us.

Our watches showed three o'clock, and Mr. Smith cried in disgust, "What is
the use of stopping here all day! We shall learn nothing more. We must make a
start, Mr. Strock, if we want to get back to Pleasant Garden to-night."

I made no answer, and did not move from where I was seated; so he called
again, "Come, Mr. Strock; you don't answer."

In truth, it cut me deeply to abandon our effort, to descend the slope without
having achieved my mission. I felt an imperious need of persisting; my curiosity
had redoubled. But what could I do? Could I tear open this unyielding earth?
Overleap the mighty cliff? Throwing one last defiant glare at the Great Eyrie, I
followed my companions.

The return was effected without great difficulty. We had only to slide down
where we had so laboriously scrambled up. Before five o'clock we descended the
last slopes of the mountain, and the farmer of Wildon welcomed us to a much
needed meal.

"Then you didn't get inside?" said he.

"No," responded Mr. Smith, "and I believe that the inside exists only in the
imagination of our country folk."

At half past eight our carriage drew up before the house of the Mayor of
Pleasant Garden, where we passed the night. While I strove vainly to sleep, I
asked myself if I should not stop there in the village and organize a new ascent.


But what better chance had it of succeeding than the first? The wisest course
was, doubtless, to return to Washington and consult Mr. Ward.

So, the next day, having rewarded our two guides, I took leave of Mr. Smith
at Morganton, and that same evening left by train for Washington.


Chapter 4


A MEETING OF THE AUTOMOBILE CLUB


Was the mystery of the Great Eyrie to be solved some day by chances
beyond our imagining? That was known only to the future. And was the solution
a matter of the first importance? That was beyond doubt, since the safety of the
people of western Carolina perhaps depended upon it.

Yet a fortnight after my return to Washington, public attention was wholly
distracted from this problem by another very different in nature, but equally
astonishing.

Toward the middle of that month of May the newspapers of Pennsylvania
informed their readers of some strange occurrences in different parts of the state.
On the roads which radiated from Philadelphia, the chief city, there circulated an
extraordinary vehicle, of which no one could describe the form, or the nature, or
even the size, so rapidly did it rush past. It was an automobile; all were agreed
on that. But as to what motor drove it, only imagination could say; and when the
popular imagination is aroused, what limit is there to its hypotheses?

At that period the most improved automobiles, whether driven by steam,
gasoline, or electricity, could not accomplish much more than sixty miles an
hour, a speed that the railroads, with their most rapid expresses, scarce exceed on
the best lines of America and Europe. Now, this new automobile which was
astonishing the world, traveled at more than double this speed.

It is needless to add that such a rate constituted an extreme danger on the
highroads, as much so for vehicles, as for pedestrians. This rushing mass,
coming like a thunder-bolt, preceded by a formidable rumbling, caused a
whirlwind, which tore the branches from the trees along the road, terrified the
animals browsing in adjoining fields, and scattered and killed the birds, which
could not resist the suction of the tremendous air currents engendered by its
passage.

And, a bizarre detail to which the newspapers drew particular attention, the
surface of the roads was scarcely even scratched by the wheels of the apparition,
which left behind it no such ruts as are usually made by heavy vehicles. At most
there was a light touch, a mere brushing of the dust. It was only the tremendous
speed which raised behind the vehicle such whirlwinds of dust.

"It is probable," commented the New Fork Herald, "that the extreme rapidity
of motion destroys the weight."


Naturally there were protests from all sides. It was impossible to permit the
mad speed of this apparition which threatened to overthrow and destroy
everything in its passage, equipages and people. But how could it be stopped?
No one knew to whom the vehicle belonged, nor whence it came, nor whither it
went. It was seen but for an instant as it darted forward like a bullet in its dizzy
flight. How could one seize a cannon-ball in the air, as it leaped from the mouth
of the gun?

I repeat, there was no evidence as to the character of the propelling engine. It
left behind it no smoke, no steam, no odor of gasoline, or any other oil. It
seemed probable, therefore, that the vehicle ran by electricity, and that its
accumulators were of an unknown model, using some unknown fluid.

The public imagination, highly excited, readily accepted every sort of rumor
about this mysterious automobile. It was said to be a supernatural car. It was
driven by a specter, by one of the chauffeurs of hell, a goblin from another
world, a monster escaped from some mythological menagerie, in short, the devil
in person, who could defy all human intervention, having at his command
invisible and infinite satanic powers.

But even Satan himself had no right to run at such speed over the roads of
the United States without a special permit, without a number on his car, and
without a regular license. And it was certain that not a single municipality had
given him permission to go two hundred miles an hour. Public security
demanded that some means be found to unmask the secret of this terrible
chauffeur.

Moreover, it was not only Pennsylvania that served as the theater of his
sportive eccentricities. The police reported his appearance in other states; in
Kentucky near Frankfort; in Ohio near Columbus; in Tennessee near Nashville;
in Missouri near Jefferson; and finally in Illinois in the neighborhood of
Chicago.

The alarm having been given, it became the duty of the authorities to take
steps against this public danger. To arrest or even to halt an apparition moving at
such speed was scarcely practicable. A better way would be to erect across the
roads solid gateways with which the flying machine must come in contact sooner
or later, and be smashed into a thousand pieces.

"Nonsense!" declared the incredulous. "This madman would know well how
to circle around such obstructions."

"And if necessary," added others, "the machine would leap over the barriers."

"And if he is indeed the devil, he has, as a former angel, presumably
preserved his wings, and so he will take to flight."

But this last was but the suggestion of foolish old gossips who did not stop to


study the matter. For if the King of Hades possessed a pair of wings, why did he
obstinately persist in running around on the earth at the risk of crushing his own
subjects, when he might more easily have hurled himself through space as free
as a bird.

Such was the situation when, in the last week of May, a fresh event occurred,
which seemed to show that the United States was indeed helpless in the hands of
some unapproachable monster. And after the New World, would not the Old in
its turn, be desecrated by the mad career of this remarkable automobilist?

The following occurrence was reported in all the newspapers of the Union,
and with what comments and outcries it is easy to imagine.

A race was to be held by the automobile Club of Wisconsin, over the roads of
that state of which Madison is the capital. The route laid out formed an excellent
track, about two hundred miles in length, starting from Prairie-du-chien on the
western frontier, passing by Madison and ending a little above Milwaukee on the
borders of Lake Michigan. Except for the Japanese road between Nikko and
Namode, bordered by giant cypresses, there is no better track in the world than
this of Wisconsin. It runs straight and level as an arrow for sometimes fifty miles
at a stretch. Many and noted were the machines entered for this great race. Every
kind of motor vehicle was permitted to compete, even motorcycles, as well as
automobiles. The machines were of all makes and nationalities. The sum of the
different prizes reached fifty thousand dollars, so that the race was sure to be
desperately contested. New records were expected to be made.

Calculating on the maximum speed hitherto attained, of perhaps eighty miles
an hour, this international contest covering two hundred miles would last about
three hours. And, to avoid all danger, the state authorities of Wisconsin had
forbidden all other traffic between Prairie-du-chien and Milwaukee during three
hours on the morning of the thirtieth of May. Thus, if there were any accidents,
those who suffered would be themselves to blame.

There was an enormous crowd; and it was not composed only of the people
of Wisconsin. Many thousands gathered from the neighboring states of Illinois,
Michigan, Iowa, Indiana, and even from New York. Among the sportsmen
assembled were many foreigners, English, French, Germans and Austrians, each
nationality, of course, supporting the chauffeurs of its land. Moreover, as this
was the United States, the country of the greatest gamblers of the world, bets
were made of every sort and of enormous amounts.

The start was to be made at eight o'clock in the morning; and to avoid
crowding and the accidents which must result from it, the automobiles were to
follow each other at two minute intervals, along the roads whose borders were
black with spectators.


The first ten racers, numbered by lot, were dispatched between eight o'clock
and twenty minutes past. Unless there was some disastrous accident, some of
these machines would surely arrive at the goal by eleven o'clock. The others
followed in order.

An hour and a half had passed. There remained but a single contestant at
Prairie-du-chien. Word was sent back and forth by telephone every five minutes
as to the order of the racers. Midway between Madison and Milwaukee, the lead
was held by a machine of Renault brothers, four cylindered, of twenty
horsepower, and with Michelin tires. It was closely followed by a Harvard-
Watson car and by a Dion-Bouton. Some accidents had already occurred, other
machines were hopelessly behind. Not more than a dozen would contest the
finish. Several chauffeurs had been injured, but not seriously. And even had they
been killed, the death of men is but a detail, not considered of great importance
in that astonishing country of America.

Naturally the excitement became more intense as one approached the
finishing line near Milwaukee. There were assembled the most curious, the most
interested; and there the passions of the moment were unchained. By ten o'clock
it was evident, that the first prize, twenty thousand dollars, lay between five
machines, two American, two French, and one English. Imagine, therefore, the
fury with which bets were being made under the influence of national pride. The
regular book makers could scarcely meet the demands of those who wished to
wager. Offers and amounts were hurled from lip to lip with feverish rapidity.
"One to three on the Harvard-Watson!"

"One to two on the Dion-Bouton!"

"Even money on the Renault!"

These cries rang along the line of spectators at each new announcement from
the telephones.

Suddenly at half-past nine by the town clock of Prairie-du-chien, two miles
beyond that town was heard a tremendous noise and rumbling which proceeded
from the midst of a flying cloud of dust accompanied by shrieks like those of a
naval siren.

Scarcely had the crowds time to draw to one side, to escape a destruction
which would have included hundreds of victims. The cloud swept by like a
hurricane. No one could distinguish what it was that passed with such speed.
There was no exaggeration in saying that its rate was at least one hundred and
fifty miles an hour.

The apparition passed and disappeared in an instant, leaving behind it a long
train of white dust, as an express locomotive leaves behind a train of smoke.
Evidently it was an automobile with a most extraordinary motor. If it maintained


this arrow-like speed, it would reach the contestants in the fore-front of the race;
it would pass them with this speed double their own; it would arrive first at the
goal.

And then from all parts arose an uproar, as soon as the spectators had nothing
more to fear.

"Tt is that infernal machine."

"Yes; the one the police cannot stop."

"But it has not been heard of for a fortnight."

"Tt was supposed to be done for, destroyed, gone forever."

"Tt is a devil's car, driven by hellfire, and with Satan driving!"

In truth, if he were not the devil, who could this mysterious chauffeur be,
driving with this unbelievable velocity, his no less mysterious machine? At least
it was beyond doubt that this was the same machine which had already attracted
so much attention. If the police believed that they had frightened it away, that it
was never to be, heard of more, well, the police were mistaken which happens in
America as elsewhere.

The first stunned moment of surprise having passed, many people rushed to
the telephones to warn those further along the route of the danger which
menaced, not only the people, but also the automobiles scattered along the road.

When this terrible madman arrived like an avalanche they would be smashed
to pieces, ground into powder, annihilated!

And from the collision might not the destroyer himself emerge safe and
sound? He must be so adroit, this chauffeur of chauffeurs, he must handle his
machine with such perfection of eye and hand, that he knew, no doubt, how to
escape from every situation. Fortunately the Wisconsin authorities had taken
such precautions that the road would be clear except for contesting automobiles.
But what right had this machine among them!

And what said the racers themselves, who, warned by telephone, had to sheer
aside from the road in their struggle for the grand prize? By their estimate, this
amazing vehicle was going at least one hundred and thirty miles an hour. Fast as
was their speed, it shot by them at such a rate that they could hardly make out
even the shape of the machine, a sort of lengthened spindle, probably not over
thirty feet long. Its wheels spun with such velocity that they could scarce be
seen. For the rest, the machine left behind it neither smoke nor scent.

As for the driver, hidden in the interior of his machine, he had been quite
invisible. He remained as unknown as when he had first appeared on the various
roads throughout the country.

Milwaukee was promptly warned of the coming of this interloper. Fancy the
excitement the news caused! The immediate purpose agreed upon was to stop


this projectile, to erect across its route an obstacle against which it would smash
into a thousand pieces. But was there time? Would not the machine appear at any
moment? And what need was there, since the track ended on the edge of Lake
Michigan, and so the vehicle would be forced to stop there anyway, unless its
supernatural driver could ride the water as well as the land.

Here, also, as all along the route, the most extravagant suggestions were
offered. Even those who would not admit that the mysterious chauffeur must be
Satan in person allowed that he might be some monster escaped from the
fantastic visions of the Apocalypse.

And now there were no longer minutes to wait. Any second might bring the
expected apparition.

It was not yet eleven o'clock when a rumbling was heard far down the track,
and the dust rose in violent whirlwinds. Harsh whistlings shrieked through the
air warning all to give passage to the monster.

It did not slacken speed at the finish. Lake Michigan was not half a mile
beyond, and the machine must certainly be hurled into the water! Could it be that
the mechanician was no longer master of his mechanism?

There could be little doubt of it. Like a shooting star, the vehicle flashed
through Milwaukee. When it had passed the city, would it plunge itself to
destruction in the waters of Lake Michigan?

At any rate when it disappeared at a slight bend in the road no trace was to
be found of its passage.


Chapter 5


ALONG THE SHORES OF NEW ENGLAND


At the time when the newspapers were filled with these reports, I was again
in Washington. On my return I had presented myself at my chief's office, but had
been unable to see him. Family affairs had suddenly called him away, to be
absent some weeks. Mr. Ward, however, undoubtedly knew of the failure of my
mission. The newspapers, especially those of North Carolina, had given full
details of our ascent of the Great Eyrie.

Naturally, I was much annoyed by this delay which further fretted my
restless curiosity. I could turn to no other plans for the future. Could I give up the
hope of learning the secret of the Great Eyrie? No! I would return to the attack a
dozen times if necessary, and despite every failure.

Surely, the winning of access within those walls was not a task beyond
human power. A scaffolding might be raised to the summit of the cliff; or a
tunnel might be pierced through its depth. Our engineers met problems more
difficult every day. But in this case it was necessary to consider the expense,
which might easily grow out of proportion to the advantages to be gained. A
tunnel would cost many thousand dollars, and what good would it accomplish
beyond satisfying the public curiosity and my own?

My personal resources were wholly insufficient for the achievement. Mr.
Ward, who held the government's funds, was away. I even thought of trying to
interest some millionaire. Oh, if I could but have promised one of them some
gold or silver mines within the mountain! But such an hypothesis was not
admissible. The chain of the Appalachians is not situated in a gold bearing
region like that of the Pacific mountains, the Transvaal, or Australia.

It was not until the fifteenth of June that Mr. Ward returned to duty. Despite
my lack of success he received me warmly. "Here is our poor Strock!" cried he,
at my entrance. "Our poor Strock, who has failed!"

"No more, Mr. Ward, than if you had charged me to investigate the surface of
the moon," answered I. "We found ourselves face to face with purely natural
obstacles insurmountable with the forces then at our command."

"T do not doubt that, Strock, I do not doubt that in the least. Nevertheless, the
fact remains that you have discovered nothing of what is going on within the
Great Eyrie."

"Nothing, Mr. Ward."


"You saw no sign of fire?"

"None."

"And you heard no suspicious noises whatever?"

"None."

"Then it is still uncertain if there is really a volcano there?"

"Still uncertain, Mr. Ward. But if it is there, we have good reason to believe
that it has sunk into a profound sleep."

"Still," returned Mr. Ward, "there is nothing to show that it will not wake up
again any day, Strock. It is not enough that a volcano should sleep, it must be
absolutely extinguished unless indeed all these threatening rumors have been
born solely in the Carolinian imagination."

"That is not possible, sir," I said. "Both Mr. Smith, the mayor of Morganton
and his friend the mayor of Pleasant Garden, are reliable men. And they speak
from their own knowledge in this matter. Flames have certainly risen above the
Great Eyrie. Strange noises have issued from it. There can be no doubt whatever
of the reality of these phenomena."

"Granted," declared Mr. Ward. "I admit that the evidence is unassailable. So
the deduction to be drawn is that the Great Eyrie has not yet given up its secret."

"If we are determined to know it, Mr. Ward, the solution is only a solution of
expense. Pickaxes and dynamite would soon conquer those walls."

"No doubt," responded the chief, "but such an undertaking hardly seems
justified, since the mountain is now quiet. We will wait awhile and perhaps
nature herself will disclose her mystery."

"Mr. Ward, believe me that I regret deeply that I have been unable to solve
the problem you entrusted to me," I said.

"Nonsense! Do not upset yourself, Strock. Take your defeat philosophically.
We cannot always be successful, even in the police. How many criminals escape
us! I believe we should never capture one of them, if they were a little more
intelligent and less imprudent, and if they did not compromise themselves so
stupidly. Nothing, it seems to me, would be easier than to plan a crime, a theft or
an assassination, and to execute it without arousing any suspicions, or leaving
any traces to be followed. You understand, Strock, I do not want to give our
criminals lessons; I much prefer to have them remain as they are. Nevertheless
there are many whom the police will never be able to track down."

On this matter I shared absolutely the opinion of my chief. It is among
rascals that one finds the most fools. For this very reason I had been much
surprised that none of the authorities had been able to throw any light upon the
recent performances of the "demon automobile." And when Mr. Ward brought
up this subject, I did not conceal from him my astonishment.


He pointed out that the vehicle was practically unpursuable; that in its earlier
appearances, it had apparently vanished from all roads even before a telephone
message could be sent ahead. Active and numerous police agents had been
spread throughout the country, but no one of them had encountered the
delinquent. He did not move continuously from place to place, even at his
amazing speed, but seemed to appear only for a moment and then to vanish into
thin air. True, he had at length remained visible along the entire route from
Prairie-du-Chien to Milwaukee, and he had covered in less than an hour and a
half this track of two hundred miles.

But since then, there had been no news whatever of the machine. Arrived at
the end of the route, driven onward by its own impetus, unable to stop, had it
indeed been engulfed within the waters of Lake Michigan? Must we conclude
that the machine and its driver had both perished, that there was no longer any
danger to be feared from either? The great majority of the public refused to
accept this conclusion. They fully expected the machine to reappear.

Mr. Ward frankly admitted that the whole matter seemed to him most
extraordinary; and I shared his view. Assuredly if this infernal chauffeur did not
return, his apparition would have to be placed among those superhuman
mysteries which it is not given to man to understand.

We had fully discussed this affair, the chief and I; and I thought that our
interview was at an end, when, after pacing the room for a few moments, he said
abruptly, "Yes, what happened there at Milwaukee was very strange. But here is
something no less so!"

With this he handed me a report which he had received from Boston, on a
subject of which the evening papers had just begun to apprise their readers.
While I read it, Mr. Ward was summoned from the room. I seated myself by the
window and studied with extreme attention the matter of the report.

For some days the waters along the coast of Maine, Connecticut, and
Massachusetts had been the scene of an appearance which no one could exactly
describe. A moving body would appear amid the waters, some two or three miles
off shore, and go through rapid evolutions. It would flash for a while back and
forth among the waves and then dart out of sight.

The body moved with such lightning speed that the best telescopes could
hardly follow it. Its length did not seem to exceed thirty feet. Its cigar-shaped
form and greenish color, made it difficult to distinguish against the background
of the ocean. It had been most frequently observed along the coast between Cape
Cod and Nova Scotia. From Providence, from Boston, from Portsmouth, and
from Portland motor boats and steam launches had repeatedly attempted to
approach this moving body and even to give it chase. They could not get


anywhere near it. Pursuit seemed useless. It darted like an arrow beyond the
range of view.

Naturally, widely differing opinions were held as to the nature of this object.
But no hypothesis rested on any secure basis. Seamen were as much at a loss as
others. At first sailors thought it must be some great fish, like a whale. But it is
well known that all these animals come to the surface with a certain regularity to
breathe, and spout up columns of mingled air and water. Now, this strange
animal, if it was an animal, had never "blown" as the whalers say; nor, had it
ever made any noises of breathing. Yet if it were not one of these huge marine
mammals, how was this unknown monster to be classed? Did it belong among
the legendary dwellers in the deep, the krakens, the octopuses, the leviathans, the
famous sea-serpents?

At any rate, since this monster, whatever it was, had appeared along the New
England shores, the little fishing-smacks and pleasure boats dared not venture
forth. Wherever it appeared the boats fled to the nearest harbor, as was but
prudent. If the animal was of a ferocious character, none cared to await its attack.

As to the large ships and coast steamers, they had nothing to fear from any
monster, whale or otherwise. Several of them had seen this creature at a distance
of some miles. But when they attempted to approach, it fled rapidly away. One
day, even, a fast United States gun boat went out from Boston, if not to pursue
the monster, at least to send after it a few cannon shot. Almost instantly the
animal disappeared, and the attempt was vain. As yet, however, the monster had
shown no intention of attacking either boats or people.

At this moment Mr. Ward retumed and I interrupted my reading to say,
"There seems as yet no reason to complain of this sea-serpent. It flees before big
ships. It does not pursue little ones. Feeling and intelligence are not very strong
in fishes."

"Yet their emotions exist, Strock, and if strongly aroused--"

"But, Mr. Ward, the beast seems not at all dangerous. One of two things will
happen. Either it will presently quit these coasts, or finally it will be captured
and we shall be able to study it at our leisure here in the museum of
Washington.”

"And if it is not a marine animal?" asked Mr. Ward.

"What else can it be?" I protested in surprise.

"Finish your reading," said Mr. Ward.

I did so; and found that in the second part of the report, my chief had
underlined some passages in red pencil.

For some time no one had doubted that this was an animal; and that, if it
were vigorously pursued, it would at last be driven from our shores. But a


change of opinion had come about. People began to ask if, instead of a fish, this
were not some new and remarkable kind of boat.

Certainly in that case its engine must be one of amazing power. Perhaps the
inventor before selling the secret of his invention, sought to attract public
attention and to astound the maritime world. Such surety in the movements of
his boat, grace in its every evolution, such ease in defying pursuit by its arrow-
like speed, surely, these were enough to arouse world-wide curiosity!

At that time great progress had been made in the manufacture of marine
engines. Huge transatlantic steamers completed the ocean passage in five days.
And the engineers had not yet spoken their last word. Neither were the navies of
the world behind. The cruisers, the torpedo boats, the torpedo-destroyers, could
match the swiftest steamers of the Atlantic and Pacific, or of the Indian trade.

If, however, this were a boat of some new design, there had as yet been no
opportunity to observe its form. As to the engines which drove it, they must be
of a power far beyond the fastest known. By what force they worked, was
equally a problem. Since the boat had no sails, it was not driven by the wind; and
since it had no smoke-stack, it was not driven by steam.

At this point in the report, I again paused in my reading and considered the
comment I wished to make.

"What are you puzzling over, Strock?" demanded my chief.

"It is this, Mr. Ward; the motive power of this so-called boat must be as
tremendous and as unknown as that of the remarkable automobile which has so
amazed us all."

"So that is your idea, is it, Strock?"

"Yes, Mr. Ward."

There was but one conclusion to be drawn. If the mysterious chauffeur had
disappeared, if he had perished with his machine in Lake Michigan, it was
equally important now to win the secret of this no less mysterious navigator. And
it must be won before he in his turn plunged into the abyss of the ocean. Was it
not the interest of the inventor to disclose his invention? Would not the
American government or any other give him any price he chose to ask?

Yet unfortunately, since the inventor of the terrestrial apparition had persisted
in preserving his incognito, was it not to be feared that the inventor of the marine
apparition would equally preserve his? Even if the first machine still existed, it
was no longer heard from; and would not the second, in the same way, after
having disclosed its powers, disappear in its turn, without a single trace?

What gave weight to this probability was that since the arrival of this report
at Washington twenty-four hours before, the presence of the extraordinary boat
hadn't been announced from anywhere along the shore. Neither had it been seen


on any other coast. Though, of course, the assertion that it would not reappear at
all would have been hazardous, to say the least.

I noted another interesting and possibly important point. It was a singular
coincidence which indeed Mr. Ward suggested to me, at the same moment that I
was considering it. This was that only after the disappearance of the wonderful
automobile had the no less wonderful boat come into view. Moreover, their
engines both possessed a most dangerous power of locomotion. If both should
go rushing at the same time over the face of the world, the same danger would
threaten mankind everywhere, in boats, in vehicles, and on foot. Therefore it was
absolutely necessary that the police should in some manner interfere to protect
the public ways of travel.

That is what Mr. Ward pointed out to me; and our duty was obvious. But how
could we accomplish this task? We discussed the matter for some time; and I
was just about to leave when Mr. Ward made one last suggestion.

"Have you not observed, Strock," said he, "that there is a sort of fantastic
resemblance between the general appearance of this boat and this automobile?"

"There is something of the sort, Mr. Ward."

"Well, is it not possible that the two are one?"


Chapter 6


THE FIRST LETTER


After leaving Mr. Ward I returned to my home in Long Street. There I had
plenty of time to consider this strange case uninterrupted by either wife or
children. My household consisted solely of an ancient servant, who having been
formerly in the service of my mother, had now continued for fifteen years in
mine.

Two months before I had obtained a leave of absence. It had still two weeks
to run, unless indeed some unforeseen circumstance interrupted it, some mission
which could not be delayed. This leave, as I have shown, had already been
interrupted for four days by my exploration of the Great Eyrie.

And now was it not my duty to abandon my vacation, and endeavor to throw
light upon the remarkable events of which the road to Milwaukee and the shore
of New England had been in turn the scene? I would have given much to solve
the twin mysteries, but how was it possible to follow the track of this automobile
or this boat?

Seated in my easy chair after breakfast, with my pipe lighted, I opened my
newspaper. To what should I turn? Politics interested me but little, with its
eternal strife between the Republicans and the Democrats. Neither did I care for
the news of society, nor for the sporting page. You will not be surprised, then,
that my first idea was to see if there was any news from North Carolina about the
Great Eyrie. There was little hope of this, however, for Mr. Smith had promised
to telegraph me at once if anything occurred. I felt quite sure that the mayor of
Morganton was as eager for information and as watchful as could have been
myself. The paper told me nothing new. It dropped idly from my hand; and I
remained deep in thought.

What most frequently recurred to me was the suggestion of Mr. Ward that
perhaps the automobile and the boat which had attracted our attention were in
reality one and the same. Very probably, at least, the two machines had been
built by the same hand. And beyond doubt, these were similar engines, which
generated this remarkable speed, more than doubling the previous records of
earth and sea.

"The same inventor!" repeated I.

Evidently this hypothesis had strong grounds. The fact that the two machines
had not yet appeared at the same time added weight to the idea. I murmured to


myself, "After the mystery of Great Eyrie, comes that of Milwaukee and Boston.
Will this new problem be as difficult to solve as was the other?"

I noted idly that this new affair had a general resemblance to the other, since
both menaced the security of the general public. To be sure, only the inhabitants
of the Blueridge region had been in danger from an eruption or possible
earthquake at Great Eyrie. While now, on every road of the United States, or
along every league of its coasts and harbors, every inhabitant was in danger from
this vehicle or this boat, with its sudden appearance and insane speed.

I found that, as was to be expected, the newspapers not only suggested, but
enlarged upon the dangers of the case. Timid people everywhere were much
alarmed. My old servant, naturally credulous and superstitious, was particularly
upset. That same day after dinner, as she was clearing away the things, she
stopped before me, a water bottle in one hand, the serviette in the other, and
asked anxiously, "Is there no news, sir?"

"None," I answered, knowing well to what she referred.

"The automobile has not come back?"

"No."

"Nor the boat?"

"Nor the boat There is no news even-in the best informed papers."

"But--your secret police information?”

"We are no wiser."

"Then, sir, if you please, of what use are the police?"

It is a question which has phased me more than once.

"Now you see what will happen," continued the old housekeeper,
complainingly, "Some fine morning, he will come without warning, this terrible
chauffeur, and rush down our street here, and kill us all!"

"Good! When that happens, there will be some chance of catching him."

"He will never be arrested, sir."

"Why not?"

"Because he is the devil himself, and you can't arrest the devil!"

Decidedly, thought I, the devil has many uses; and if he did not exist we
would have to invent him, to give people some way of explaining the
inexplicable. It was he who lit the flames of the Great Eyrie. It was he who
smashed the record in the Wisconsin race. It is he who is scurrying along the
shores of Connecticut and Massachusetts. But putting to one side this evil spirit
who is so necessary, for the convenience of the ignorant, there was no doubt that
we were facing a most bewildering problem. Had both of these machines
disappeared forever? They had passed like a meteor, like a star shooting through
space; and in a hundred years the adventure would become a legend, much to the


taste of the gossips of the next century.

For several days the newspapers of America and even those of Europe
continued to discuss these events. Editorials crowded upon editorials. Rumors
were added to rumors. Story tellers of every kind crowded to the front. The
public of two continents was interested. In some parts of Europe there was even
jealousy that America should have been chosen as the field of such an
experience. If these marvelous inventors were American, then their country, their
army and navy, would have a great advantage over others. The United States
might acquire an incontestable superiority.

Under the date of the tenth of June, a New York paper published a carefully
studied article on this phase of the subject. Comparing the speed of the swiftest
known vessels with the smallest minimum of speed which could possibly be
assigned to the new boat, the article demonstrated that if the United States
secured this secret, Europe would be but three days away from her, while she
would still be five days from Europe.

If our own police had searched diligently to discover the mystery of the
Great Eyrie, the secret service of every country in the world was now interested
in these new problems.

Mr. Ward referred to the matter each time I saw him. Our chat would begin
by his rallying me about my ill-success in Carolina, and I would respond by
reminding him that success there was only a question of expense.

"Never mind, my good Strock," said he, "there will come a chance for our
clever inspector to regain his laurels. Take now this affair of the automobile and
the boat. If you could clear that up in advance of all the detectives of the world,
what an honor it would be to our department! What glory for you!"

"Tt certainly would, Mr. Ward. And if you put the matter in my charge--"

"Who knows, Strock? Let us wait a while! Let us wait!"

Matters stood thus when, on the morning of June fifteenth, my old servant
brought me a letter from the letter-carrier, a registered letter for which I had to
sign. I looked at the address. I did not know the handwriting. The postmark,
dating from two days before, was stamped at the post office of Morganton.

Morganton! Here at last was, no doubt, news from Mr. Elias Smith.

"Yes!" exclaimed I, speaking to my old servant, for lack of another, "it must
be from Mr. Smith at last. I know no one else in Morganton. And if he writes he
has news!"

"Morganton?" said the old woman, "isn't that the place where the demons set
fire to their mountain?"

"Exactly."

"Oh, sir! I hope you don't mean to go back there!"


"Because you will end by being burned up in that furnace of the Great Eyrie.
And I wouldn't want you buried that way, sir."

"Cheer up, and let us see if it is not better news than that."

The envelope was sealed with red sealing wax, and stamped with a sort of
coat of arms, surmounted with three stars. The paper was thick and very strong. I
broke the envelope and drew out a letter. It was a single sheet, folded in four, and
written on one side only. My first glance was for the signature.

There was no signature! Nothing but three initials at the end of the last line!

"The letter is not from the Mayor of Morganton," said I.

"Then from whom?" asked the old servant, doubly curious in her quality as a
woman and as an old gossip.

Looking again at the three initials of the signature, I said, "I know no one for
whom these letters would stand; neither at Morganton nor elsewhere."

The handwriting was bold. Both up strokes and down strokes very sharp,
about twenty lines in all. Here is the letter, of which I, with good reason, retained
an exact copy. It was dated, to my extreme stupefaction, from that mysterious
Great Eyrie:

Great Eyrie, Blueridge Mtns,

To Mr. Strock: North Carolina, June 13th.

Chief Inspector of Police,

34 Long St., Washington, D. C.

Sir,

You were charged with the mission of penetrating the Great Eyrie.

You came on April the twenty-eighth, accompanied by the Mayor of
Morganton and two guides.

You mounted to the foot of the wall, and you encircled it, finding it too high
and steep to climb.

You sought a breech and you found none. Know this: none enter the Great
Eyrie; or if one enters, he never returns.

"Do not try again, for the second attempt will not result as did the first, but
will have grave consequences for you.

"Heed this warning, or evil fortune will come to you.

"M. o. W."


Chapter 7


A THIRD MACHINE


I confess that at first this letter dumfounded me. "Ohs!" and "Ahs!" slipped
from my open mouth. The old servant stared at me, not knowing what to think.

"Oh, sir! is it bad news?"

I answered for I kept few secrets from this faithful soul by reading her the
letter from end to end. She listened with much anxiety.

"A joke, without doubt," said I, shrugging my shoulders.

"Well," returned my superstitious handmaid, "if it isn't from the devil, it's
from the devil's country, anyway."

Left alone, I again went over this unexpected letter. Reflection inclined me
yet more strongly to believe that it was the work of a practical joker. My
adventure was well known. The newspapers had given it in full detail. Some
satirist, such as exists even in America, must have written this threatening letter
to mock me.

To assume, on the other hand, that the Eyrie really served as the refuge of a
band of criminals, seemed absurd. If they feared that the police would discover
their retreat, surely they would not have been so foolish as thus to force attention
upon themselves. Their chief security would lie in keeping their presence there
unknown. They must have realized that such a challenge from them would only
arouse the police to renewed activity. Dynamite or melinite would soon open an
entrance to their fortress. Moreover, how could these men have, themselves,
gained entrance into the Eyrie unless there existed a passage which we had failed
to discover? Assuredly the letter came from a jester or a madman; and I need not
wolIry over it, nor even consider it.

Hence, though for an instant I had thought of showing this letter to Mr. Ward,
I decided not to do so. Surely he would attach no importance to it. However, I
did not destroy it, but locked it in my desk for safe keeping. If more letters came
of the same kind, and with the same initials, I would attach as little weight to
them as to this.

Several days passed quietly. There was nothing to lead me to expect that I
should soon quit Washington; though in my line of duty one is never certain of
the morrow. At any moment I might be sent speeding from Oregon to Florida,
from Maine to Texas. And this unpleasant thought haunted me frequently if my
next mission were no more successful than that to the Great Eyrie, I might as


well give up and hand in my resignation from the force. Of the mysterious
chauffeur or chauffeurs, nothing more was heard. I knew that our own
government agents, as well as foreign ones, were keeping keen watch over all
the roads and rivers, all the lakes and the coasts of America. Of course, the size
of the country made any close supervision impossible; but these twin inventors
had not before chosen secluded and unfrequented spots in which to appear. The
main highway of Wisconsin on a great race day, the harbor of Boston,
incessantly crossed by thousands of boats, these were hardly what would be
called hiding-places! If the daring driver had not perished of which there was
always strong probability; then he must have left America. Perhaps he was in the
waters of the Old World, or else resting in some retreat known only to himself,
and in that case--

"Ah!" T repeated to myself, many times, "for such a retreat, as secret as
inaccessible, this fantastic personage could not find one better than the Great
Eyrie!" But, of course, a boat could not get there, any more than an automobile.
Only high-flying birds of prey, eagles or condors, could find refuge there.

The nineteenth of June I was going to the police bureau, when, on leaving
my house, I noticed two men who looked at me with a certain keenness. Not
knowing them, I took no notice; and if my attention was drawn to the matter, it
was because my servant spoke of it when I returned.

For some days, she said, she had noticed that two men seemed to be spying
upon me in the street. They stood constantly, perhaps a hundred steps from my
house; and she suspected that they followed me each time I went up the street.

"You are sure?" I asked.

"Yes, sir and no longer ago than yesterday, when you came into the house,
these men came slipping along in your footsteps, and then went away as soon as
the door was shut behind you."

"You must be mistaken?"

"T am not, sir."

"And if you met these two men, you would know them?"

"T would."

"Good;" I cried, laughing, "I see you have the very spirit for a detective. I
must engage you as a member of our force."

"Joke if you like, sir. But I have still two good eyes, and I don't need
spectacles to recognize people. Someone is spying on you, that's certain; and you
should put some of your men to track them in turn."

"All right; I promise to do so," I said, to satisfy her. "And when my men get
after them, we shall soon know what these mysterious fellows want of me."

In truth I did not take the good soul's excited announcement very seriously. I


added, however, "When I go out, I will watch the people around me with great
care."

"That will be best, sir."

My poor old housekeeper was always frightening herself at nothing. "If I see
them again," she added, "I will warn you before you set foot out of doors."

"Agreed!" And I broke off the conversation, knowing well that if I allowed
her to run on, she would end by being sure that Beelzebub himself and one of his
chief attendants were at my heels.

The two following days, there was certainly no one spying on me, either at
my exits or entrances. So I concluded my old servant had made much of nothing,
as usual. But on the morning of the twenty-second of June, after rushing upstairs
as rapidly as her age would permit, the devoted old soul burst into my room and
in a half whisper gasped "Sir! Sir!"

"What is it?"

"They are there!"

"Who?" IT queried, my mind on anything but the web she had been spinning
about me.

"The two spies!"

"Ah, those wonderful spies!"

"Themselves! In the street! Right in front of our windows! Watching the
house, waiting for you to go out."

I went to the window and raising just an edge of the shade, so as not to give
any warning, I saw two men on the pavement.

They were rather fine-looking men, broad-shouldered and vigorous, aged
somewhat under forty, dressed in the ordinary fashion of the day, with slouched
hats, heavy woolen suits, stout walking shoes and sticks in hand. Undoubtedly,
they were staring persistently at my apparently unwatchful house. Then, having
exchanged a few words, they strolled off a little way, and returned again.

"Are you sure these are the same men you saw before?"

"Yes, sir."

Evidently, I could no longer dismiss her warning as an hallucination; and I
promised myself to clear up the matter. As to following the men myself, I was
presumably too well known to them. To address them directly would probably be
of no use. But that very day, one of our best men should be put on watch, and if
the spies returned on the morrow, they should be tracked in their turn, and
watched until their identity was established.

At the moment, they were waiting to follow me to police headquarters? For it
was there that I was bound, as usual. If they accompanied me I might be able to
offer them a hospitality for which they would scarce thank me.


I took my hat; and while the housekeeper remained peeping from the
window, I went down stairs, opened the door, and stepped into the street.

The two men were no longer there.

Despite all my watchfulness, that day I saw no more of them as I passed
along the streets. From that time on, indeed, neither my old servant nor I saw
them again before the house, nor did I encounter them elsewhere. Their
appearance, however, was stamped upon my memory, I would not forget them.

Perhaps after all, admitting that I had been the object of their espionage, they
had been mistaken in my identity. Having obtained a good look at me, they now
followed me no more. So in the end, I came to regard this matter as of no more
importance than the letter with the initials, M. 0. W.

Then, on the twenty-fourth of June, there came a new event, to further
stimulate both my interest and that of the general public in the previous
mysteries of the automobile and the boat. The Washington Evening Star
published the following account, which was next morning copied by every paper
in the country.

"Lake Kirdall in Kansas, forty miles west of Topeka, is little known. It
deserves wider knowledge, and doubtless will have it hereafter, for attention is
now drawn to it in a very remarkable way.

"This lake, deep among the mountains, appears to have no outlet. What it
loses by evaporation, it regains from the little neighboring streamlets and the
heavy rains.

"Lake Kirdall covers about seventy-five square miles, and its level is but
slightly below that of the heights which surround it. Shut in among the
mountains, it can be reached only by narrow and rocky gorges. Several villages,
however, have sprung up upon its banks. It is full of fish, and fishing-boats cover
its waters.

"Lake Kirdall is in many places fifty feet deep close to shore. Sharp, pointed
rocks form the edges of this huge basin. Its surges, roused by high winds, beat
upon its banks with fury, and the houses near at hand are often deluged with
spray as if with the downpour of a hurricane. The lake, already deep at the edge,
becomes yet deeper toward the center, where in some places soundings show
over three hundred feet of water.

"The fishing industry supports a population of several thousands, and there
are several hundred fishing boats in addition to the dozen or so of little steamers
which serve the traffic of the lake. Beyond the circle of the mountains lie the
railroads which transport the products of the fishing industry throughout Kansas
and the neighboring states.

"This account of Lake Kirdall is necessary for the understanding of the


remarkable facts which we are about to report."

And this is what the Evening Star then reported in its startling article. "For
some time past, the fishermen have noticed a strange upheaval in the waters of
the lake. Sometimes it rises as if a wave surged up from its depths. Even in
perfectly calm weather, when there is no wind whatever, this upheaval
sometimes arises in a mass of foam.

"Tossed about by violent waves and unaccountable currents, boats have been
swept beyond all control. Sometimes they have been dashed one against another,
and serious damage has resulted.

"This confusion of the waters evidently has its origin somewhere in the
depths of the lake; and various explanations have been offered to account for it.
At first, it was suggested that the trouble was due to seismic forces, to some
volcanic action beneath the lake; but this hypothesis had to be rejected when it
was recognized that the disturbance was not confined to one locality, but spread
itself over the entire surface of the lake, either at one part or another, in the
center or along the edges, traveling along almost in a regular line and in a way to
exclude entirely all idea of earthquake or volcanic action.

"Another hypothesis suggested that it was a marine monster who thus
upheaved the waters. But unless the beast had been born in the lake and had
there grown to its gigantic proportions unsuspected, which was scarce possible,
he must have come there from outside. Lake Kirdall, however, has no connection
with any other waters. If this lake were situated near any of the oceans, there
might be subterranean canals; but in the center of America, and at the height of
some thousands of feet above sea-level, this is not possible. In short, here is
another riddle not easy to solve, and it is much easier to point out the
impossibility of false explanations, than to discover the true one.

"Is it possible that a submarine boat is being experimented with beneath the
lake? Such boats are no longer impossible today. Some years ago, at Bridgeport,
Connecticut, there was launched a boat, The Protector, which could go on the
water, under the water, and also upon land. Built by an inventor named Lake,
supplied with two motors, an electric one of seventy-five horse power, and a
gasoline one of two hundred and fifty horse power, it was also provided with
wheels a yard in diameter, which enabled it to roll over the roads, as well as
swim the seas.

"But even then, granting that the turmoil of Lake Kirdall might be produced
by a submarine, brought to a high degree of perfection, there remains as before
the question how could it have reached Lake Kirdall? The lake, shut in on all
sides by a circle of mountains, is no more accessible to a submarine than to a
sea-monster.


"In whatever way this last puzzling question may be solved, the nature of
this strange appearance can no longer be disputed since the twentieth of June. On
that day, in the afternoon, the schooner "Markel" while speeding with all sails
set, came into violent collision with something just below the water level. There
was no shoal nor rock near; for the lake in this part is eighty or ninety feet deep.
The schooner with both her bow and her side badly broken, ran great danger of
sinking. She managed, however, to reach the shore before her decks were
completely submerged.

"When the 'Markel' had been pumped out and hauled up on shore, an
examination showed that she had received a blow near the bow as if from a
powerful ram.

"From this it seems evident that there is actually a submarine boat which
darts about beneath the surface of Lake Kirdall with most remarkable rapidity.

"The thing is difficult to explain. Not only is there a question as to how did
the submarine get there? But why is it there? Why does it never come to the
surface? What reason has its owner for remaining unknown? Are other disasters
to be expected from its reckless course?"

The article in the Evening Star closed with this truly striking suggestion:
"After the mysterious automobile, came the mysterious boat. Now comes the
mysterious submarine.

"Must we conclude that the three engines are due to the genius of the same
inventor, and that the three vehicles are in truth but one?"


Chapter 8


AT ANY COST


The suggestion of the Star came like a revelation. It was accepted
everywhere. Not only were these three vehicles the work of the same inventor;
they were the same machine!

It was not easy to see how the remarkable transformation could be practically
accomplished from one means of locomotion to the other. How could an
automobile become a boat, and yet more, a submarine? All the machine seemed
to lack was the power of flying through the air. Nevertheless, everything that
was known of the three different machines, as to their size, their shape, their lack
of odor or of steam, and above all their remarkable speed, seemed to imply their
identity. The public, grown blase with so many excitements, found in this new
marvel a stimulus to reawaken their curiosity.

The newspapers dwelt now chiefly on the importance of the invention. This
new engine, whether in one vehicle or three, had given proofs of its power. What
amazing proofs! The invention must be bought at any price. The United States
government must purchase it at once for the use of the nation. Assuredly, the
great European powers would stop at nothing to be beforehand with America,
and gain possession of an engine so invaluable for military and naval use. What
incalculable advantages would it give to any nation, both on land and sea! Its
destructive powers could not even be estimated, until its qualities and limitations
were better known. No amount of money would be too great to pay for the
secret; America could not put her millions to better use.

But to buy the machine, it was necessary to find the inventor; and there
seemed the chief difficulty. In vain was Lake Kirdall searched from end to end.
Even its depths were explored with a sounding-line without result. Must it be
concluded that the submarine no longer lurked beneath its waters? But in that
case, how had the boat gotten away? For that matter, how had it come? An
insoluble problem!

The submarine was heard from no more, neither in Lake Kirdall nor
elsewhere. It had disappeared like the automobile from the roads, and like the
boat from the shores of America. Several times in my interviews with Mr. Ward,
we discussed this matter, which still filled his mind. Our men continued
everywhere on the lookout, but as unsuccessfully as other agents.

On the morning of the twenty-seventh of June, I was summoned into the


presence of Mr. Ward.

"Well, Strock," said he, "here is a splendid chance for you to get your
revenge."

"Revenge for the Great Eyrie disappointment?"

"Of course."

"What chance?" asked I, not knowing if he spoke seriously, or in jest.

"Why, here,” he answered. "Would not you like to discover the inventor of
this three-fold machine?"

"I certainly should, Mr. Ward. Give me the order to take charge of the matter,
and I will accomplish the impossible, in order to succeed. It is true, I believe it
will be difficult."

"Undoubtedly, Strock. Perhaps even more difficult than to penetrate into the
Great Eyrie."

It was evident that Mr. Ward was intent on rallying me about my unsuccess.
He would not do that, I felt assured, out of mere unkindness. Perhaps then he
meant to rouse my resolution. He knew me well; and realized that I would have
given anything in the world to recoup my defeat. I waited quietly for new
instructions.

Mr. Ward dropped his jesting and said to me very generously, "I know,
Strock, that you accomplished everything that depended on human powers; and
that no blame attaches to you. But we face now a matter very different from that
of the Great Eyrie. The day the government decides to force that secret,
everything is ready. We have only to spend some thousands of dollars, and the
road will be open."

"That is what I would urge."

"But at present," said Mr. Ward, shaking his head, "it is much more important
to place our hands on this fantastic inventor, who so constantly escapes us. That
is work for a detective, indeed; a master detective!"

"He has not been heard from again?"

"No; and though there is every reason to believe that he has been, and still
continues, beneath the waters of Lake Kirdall, it has been impossible to find any
trace of him anywhere around there. One would almost fancy he had the power
of making himself invisible, this Proteus of a mechanic!"

"It seems likely," said I, "that he will never be seen until he wishes to be."

"True, Strock. And to my mind there is only one way of dealing with him,
and that is to offer him such an enormous price that he cannot refuse to sell his
invention."

Mr. Ward was right. Indeed, the government had already made the effort to
secure speech with this hero of the day, than whom surely no human being has


ever better merited the title. The press had widely spread the news, and this
extraordinary individual must assuredly know what the government desired of
him, and how completely he could name the terms he wished.

"Surely," added Mr. Ward, "this invention can be of no personal use to the
man, that he should hide it from the rest of us. There is every reason why he
should sell it. Can this unknown be already some dangerous criminal who,
thanks to his machine, hopes to defy all pursuit?"

My chief then went on to explain that it had been decided to employ other
means in search of the inventor. It was possible after all that he had perished
with his machine in some dangerous maneuver. If so, the ruined vehicle might
prove almost as valuable and instructive to the mechanical world as the man
himself. But since the accident to the schooner "Markel" on Lake Kirdall, no
news of him whatever had reached the police.

On this point Mr. Ward did not attempt to hide his disappointment and his
anxiety. Anxiety, yes, for it was manifestly becoming more and more difficult for
him to fulfill his duty of protecting the public. How could we arrest criminals, if
they could flee from justice at such speed over both land and sea? How could we
pursue them under the oceans? And when dirigible balloons should also have
reached their full perfection, we would even have to chase men through the air! I
asked myself if my colleagues and I would not find ourselves some day reduced
to utter helplessness? If police officials, become a useless incumbrance, would
be definitely discarded by society?

Here, there recurred to me the jesting letter I had received a fortnight before,
the letter which threatened my liberty and even my life. I recalled, also, the
singular espionage of which I had been the subject. I asked myself if I had better
mention these things to Mr. Ward. But they seemed to have absolutely no
relation to the matter now in hand. The Great Eyrie affair had been definitely put
aside by the government, since an eruption was no longer threatening. And they
now wished to employ me upon this newer matter. I waited, then, to mention this
letter to my chief at some future time, when it would be not so sore a joke to me.

Mr. Ward again took up our conversation. "We are resolved by some means
to establish communication with this inventor. He has disappeared, it is true; but
he may reappear at any moment, and in any part of the country. I have chosen
you, Strock, to follow him the instant he appears. You must hold yourself ready
to leave Washington on the moment. Do not quit your house, except to come
here to headquarters each day; notify me, each time by telephone, when you start
from home, and report to me personally the moment you arrive here."

"I will follow orders exactly, Mr. Ward," I answered. "But permit me one
question. Ought I to act alone, or will it not be better to join with me?"


"That is what I intend," said the chief, interrupting me. "You are to choose
two of our men whom you think the best fitted."

"I will do so, Mr. Ward. And now, if some day or other I stand in the
presence of our man, what am I to do with him?"

"Above all things, do not lose sight of him. If there is no other way, arrest
him. You shall have a warrant."

"A useful precaution, Mr. Ward. If he started to jump into his automobile and
to speed away at the rate we know of, I must stop him at any cost. One cannot
argue long with a man making two hundred miles an hour!"

"You must prevent that, Strock. And the arrest made, telegraph me. After
that, the matter will be in my hands."

"Count on me, Mr. Ward; at any hour, day or night, I shall be ready to start
with my men. I thank you for having entrusted this mission to me. If it succeeds,
it will be a great honor--"

"And of great profit," added my chief, dismissing me.

Returning home, I made all preparations for a trip of indefinite duration.
Perhaps my good housekeeper imagined that I planned a return to the Great
Eyrie, which she regarded as an ante-chamber of hell itself. She said nothing, but
went about her work with a most despairing face. Nevertheless, sure as I was of
her discretion, I told her nothing. In this great mission I would confide in no one.

My choice of the two men to accompany me was easily made. They both
belonged to my own department, and had many times under my direct command
given proofs of their vigor, courage and intelligence. One, John Hart, of Illinois,
was a man of thirty years; the other, aged thirty-two, was Nab Walker, of
Massachusetts. I could not have had better assistants.

Several days passed, without news, either of the automobile, the boat, or the
submarine. There were rumors in plenty; but the police knew them to be false.
As to the reckless stories that appeared in the newspapers, they had most of
them, no foundation whatever. Even the best journals cannot be trusted to refuse
an exciting bit of news on the mere ground of its unreliability.

Then, twice in quick succession, there came what seemed trustworthy reports
of the "man of the hour." The first asserted that he had been seen on the roads of
Arkansas, near Little Rock. The second, that he was in the very middle of Lake
Superior.

Unfortunately, these two notices were absolutely unreconcilable; for while
the first gave the afternoon of June twenty-sixth, as the time of appearance, the
second set it for the evening of the same day. Now, these two points of the
United States territory are not less than eight hundred miles apart. Even granting
the automobile this unthinkable speed, greater than any it had yet shown, how


could it have crossed all the intervening country unseen? How could it traverse
the States of Arkansas, Missouri, lowa and Wisconsin, from end to end without
anyone of our agents giving us warning, without any interested person rushing to
a telephone?

After these two momentary appearances, if appearances they were, the
machine again dropped out of knowledge. Mr. Ward did not think it worth while
to dispatch me and my men to either point whence it had been reported.

Yet since this marvelous machine seemed still in existence, something must
be done. The following official notice was published in every newspaper of the
United States under July 3d. It was couched in the most formal terms.

"During the month of April, of the present year, an automobile traversed the
roads of Pennsylvania, of Kentucky, of Ohio, of Tennessee, of Missouri, of
Illinois; and on the twenty-seventh of May, during the race held by the American
Automobile Club, it covered the course in Wisconsin. Then it disappeared.

"During the first week of June, a boat maneuvering at great speed appeared
off the coast of New England between Cape Cod and Cape Sable, and more
particularly around Boston. Then it disappeared.

"In the second fortnight of the same month, a submarine boat was run
beneath the waters of Lake Kirdall, in Kansas. Then it disappeared.

"Everything points to the belief that the same inventor must have built these
three machines, or perhaps that they are the same machine, constructed so as to
travel both on land and water.

"A proposition is therefore addressed to the said inventor, whoever he be,
with the aim of acquiring the said machine.

"He is requested to make himself known and to name the terms upon which
he will treat with the United States government. He is also requested to answer
as promptly as possible to the Department of Federal Police, Washington, D. C.,
United States of America."

Such was the notice printed in large type on the front page of every
newspaper. Surely it could not fail to reach the eye of him for whom it was
intended, wherever he might be. He would read it. He could scarce fail to answer
it in some manner. And why should he refuse such an unlimited offer? We had
only to await his reply.

One can easily imagine how high the public curiosity rose. From morning till
night, an eager and noisy crowd pressed about the bureau of police, awaiting the
arrival of a letter or a telegram. The best reporters were on the spot. What honor,
what profit would come to the paper which was first to publish the famous news!
To know at last the name and place of the undiscoverable unknown! And to
know if he would agree to some bargain with the government! It goes without


saying that America does things on a magnificent scale. Millions would not be
lacking for the inventor. If necessary all the millionaires in the country would
open their inexhaustible purses!

The day passed. To how many excited and impatient people it seemed to
contain more than twenty-four hours! And each hour held far more than sixty
minutes! There came no answer, no letter, no telegram! The night following,
there was still no news. And it was the same the next day and the next.

There came, however another result, which had been fully foreseen. The
cables informed Europe of what the United States government had done. The
different Powers of the Old World hoped also to obtain possession of the
wonderful invention. Why should they not struggle for an advantage so
tremendous? Why should they not enter the contest with their millions?

In brief, every great Power took part in the affair, France, England, Russia,
Italy, Austria, Germany. Only the states of the second order refrained from
entering, with their smaller resources, upon a useless effort. The European press
published notices identical with that of the United States. The extraordinary
"chauffeur" had only to speak, to become a rival to the Vanderbilts, the Astors,
the Goulds, the Morgans, and the Rothschilds of every country of Europe.

And, when the mysterious inventor made no sign, what attractive offers were
held forth to tempt him to discard the secrecy in which he was enwrapped! The
whole world became a public market, an auction house whence arose the most
amazing bids. Twice a day the newspapers would add up the amounts, and these
kept rising from millions to millions. The end came when the United States
Congress, after a memorable session, voted to offer the sum of twenty million
dollars. And there was not a citizen of the States of whatever rank, who objected
to the amount, so much importance was attached to the possession of this
prodigious engine of locomotion. As for me, I said emphatically to my old
housekeeper: "The machine is worth even more than that."

Evidently the other nations of the world did not think so, for their bids
remained below the final sum. But how useless was this mighty struggle of the
great rivals! The inventor did not appear! He did not exist! He had never existed!
It was all a monstrous pretense of the American newspapers. That, at least,
became the announced view of the Old World.

And so the time passed. There was no further news of our man, there was no
response from him. He appeared no more. For my part, not knowing what to
think, I commenced to lose all hope of reaching any solution to the strange affair.

Then on the morning of the fifteenth of July, a letter without postmark was
found in the mailbox of the police bureau. After the authorities had studied it, it
was given out to the Washington journals, which published it in facsimile, in


special numbers. It was couched as follows:


Chapter 9


THE SECOND LETTER


On Board the Terror

July 15.

To the Old and New World,

The propositions emanating from the different governments of Europe, as
also that which has finally been made by the United States of America, need
expect no other answer than this:

I refuse absolutely and definitely the sums offered for my invention.

My machine will be neither French nor German, nor Austrian nor Russian,
nor English nor American.

The invention will remain my own, and I shall use it as pleases me.

With it, I hold control of the entire world, and there lies no force within the
reach of humanity which is able to resist me, under any circumstances
whatsoever.

Let no one attempt to seize or stop me. It is, and will be, utterly impossible.
Whatever injury anyone attempts against me, I will return a hundredfold.

As to the money which is offered me, I despise it! I have no need of it.
Moreover, on the day when it pleases me to have millions, or billions, I have but
to reach out my hand and take them.

Let both the Old and the New World realize this: They can accomplish
nothing against me; I can accomplish anything against them.

I sign this letter:

The Master of the World.


Chapter 10


OUTSIDE THE LAW


Such was the letter addressed to the government of the United States. As to
the person who had placed it in the mailbox of the police, no one had seen him.

The sidewalk in front of our offices had probably not been once vacant
during the entire night. From sunset to sunrise, there had always been people,
busy, anxious, or curious, passing before our door. It is true, however, that even
then, the bearer of the letter might easily have slipped by unseen and dropped the
letter in the box. The night had been so dark, you could scarcely see from one
side of the street to the other.

I have said that this letter appeared in facsimile in all the newspapers to
which the government communicated it. Perhaps one would naturally imagine
that the first comment of the public would be, "This is the work of some
practical joker." It was in that way that I had accepted my letter from the Great
Eyrie, five weeks before.

But this was not the general attitude toward the present letter, neither in
Washington, nor in the rest of America. To the few who would have maintained
that the document should not be taken seriously, an immense majority would
have responded. "This letter has not the style nor the spirit of a jester. Only one
man could have written it; and that is the inventor of this unapproachable
machine."

To most people this conclusion seemed indisputable owing to a curious state
of mind easily explainable. For all the strange facts of which the key had hitherto
been lacking, this letter furnished an explanation. The theory now almost
universally accepted was as follows. The inventor had hidden himself for a time,
only in order to reappear more startlingly in some new light. Instead of having
perished in an accident, he had concealed himself in some retreat where the
police were unable to discover him. Then to assert positively his attitude toward
all governments he had written this letter. But instead of dropping it in the post
in any one locality, which might have resulted in its being traced to him, he had
come to Washington and deposited it himself in the very spot suggested by the
government's official notice, the bureau of police.

Well! If this remarkable personage had reckoned that this new proof of his
existence would make some noise in two worlds, he certainly figured rightly.
That day, the millions of good folk who read and re-read their daily paper could


to employ a well-known phrase, scarcely believe their eyes.

As for myself, I studied carefully every phrase of the defiant document. The
handwriting was black and heavy. An expert at chirography would doubtless
have distinguished in the lines traces of a violent temperament, of a character
stern and unsocial. Suddenly, a cry escaped me a cry that fortunately my
housekeeper did not hear. Why had I not noticed sooner the resemblance of the
handwriting to that of the letter I had received from Morganton?

Moreover, a yet more significant coincidence, the initials with which my
letter had been signed, did they not stand for the words "Master of the World?"

And whence came the second letter? "On Board the 'Terror.'" Doubtless this
name was that of the triple machine commanded by the mysterious captain. The
initials in my letter were his own signature; and it was he who had threatened
me, if I dared to renew my attempt on the Great Eyrie.

I rose and took from my desk the letter of June thirteenth. I compared it with
the facsimile in the newspapers. There was no doubt about it. They were both in
the same peculiar handwriting.

My mind worked eagerly. I sought to trace the probable deductions from this
striking fact, known only to myself. The man who had threatened me was the
commander of this "Terror"--startling name, only too well justified! I asked
myself if our search could not now be prosecuted under less vague conditions.
Could we not now start our men upon a trail which would lead definitely to
success? In short, what relation existed between the "Terror" and the Great
Eyrie? What connection was there between the phenomena of the Blueridge
Mountains, arid the no less phenomenal performances of the fantastic machine?

I knew what my first step should be; and with the letter in my pocket, I
hastened to police headquarters. Inquiring if Mr. Ward was within and receiving
an affirmative reply, I hastened toward his door, and rapped upon it with unusual
and perhaps unnecessary vigor. Upon his call to enter, I stepped eagerly into the
room.

The chief had spread before him the letter published in the papers, not a
facsimile, but the original itself which had been deposited in the letter-box of the
department.

"You come as if you had important news, Strock?"

"Judge for yourself, Mr. Ward;" and I drew from my pocket the letter with
the initials.

Mr. Ward took it, glanced at its face, and asked, "What is this?"

"A letter signed only with initials, as you can see."

"And where was it posted?"

"In Morganton, in North Carolina."


"When did you receive it?"

"A month ago, the thirteenth of June."

"What did you think of it then?"

"That it had been written as a joke."

"And now Strock?"

"T think, what you will think, Mr. Ward, after you have studied it."

My chief turned to the letter again and read it carefully. "It is signed with
three initials," said he.

"Yes, Mr. Ward, and those initials belong to the words, 'Master of the World,’
in this facsimile."

"Of which this is the original," responded Mr. Ward, taking it up.

"It is quite evident," I urged, "that the two letters are by the same hand."

"It seems so."

"You see what threats are made against me, to protect the Great Eyrie."

"Yes, the threat of death! But Strock, you have had this letter for a month.
Why have you not shown it to me before?"

"Because I attached no importance to it. Today, after the letter from the
‘Terror,’ it must be taken seriously."

"I agree with you. It appears to me most important. I even hope it may prove
the means of tracking this strange personage."

"That is what I also hope, Mr. Ward."

"Only what connection can possibly exist between the "Terror' and the Great
Eyrie?"

"That I do not know. I cannot even imagine."

"There can be but one explanation," continued Mr. Ward, "though it is almost
inadmissible, even impossible."

"And that is?"

"That the Great Eyrie was the spot selected by the inventor, where he
gathered his material."

"That is impossible!" cried I. "In what way would he get his material in
there? And how get his machine out? After what I have seen, Mr. Ward, your
suggestion is impossible."

"Unless, Strock--"

"Unless what?" I demanded.

"Unless the machine of this Master of the World has also wings, which
permit it to take refuge in the Great Eyrie."

At the suggestion that the "Terror," which had searched the deeps of the sea,
might be capable also of rivaling the vultures and the eagles, I could not restrain
an expressive shrug of incredulity. Neither did Mr. Ward himself dwell upon the


extravagant hypothesis.

He took the two letters and compared them afresh. He examined them under
a microscope, especially the signatures, and established their perfect identity.
Not only the same hand, but the same pen had written them.

After some moments of further reflection, Mr. Ward said, "I will keep your
letter, Strock. Decidedly, I think, that you are fated to play an important part in
this strange affair or rather in these two affairs. What thread attaches them, I
cannot yet see; but I am sure the thread exists. You have been connected with the
first, and it will not be surprising if you have a large part in the second."

"I hope so, Mr. Ward. You know how inquisitive I am."

"I do, Strock. That is understood. Now, I can only repeat my former order;
hold yourself in readiness to leave Washington at a moment's warning."

All that day, the public excitement caused by the defiant letter mounted
steadily higher. It was felt both at the White House and at the Capitol that public
opinion absolutely demanded some action. Of course, it was difficult to do
anything. Where could one find this Master of the World? And even if he were
discovered, how could he be captured? He had at his disposal not only the
powers he had displayed, but apparently still greater resources as yet unknown.
How had he been able to reach Lake Kirdall over the rocks; and how had he
escaped from it? Then, if he had indeed appeared on Lake Superior, how had he
covered all the intervening territory unseen?

What a bewildering affair it was altogether! This, of course, made it all the
more important to get to the bottom of it. Since the millions of dollars had been
refused, force must be employed. The inventor and his invention were not to be
bought. And in what haughty and menacing terms he had couched his refusal! So
be it! He must be treated as an enemy of society, against whom all means
became justified, that he might be deprived of his power to injure others. The
idea that he had perished was now entirely discarded. He was alive, very much
alive; and his existence constituted a perpetual public danger!

Influenced by these ideas, the government issued the following
proclamation:

"Since the commander of the "Terror' has refused to make public his
invention, at any price whatever, since the use which he makes of his machine
constitutes a public menace, against which it is impossible to guard, the said
commander of the "Terror' is hereby placed beyond the protection of the law. Any
measures taken in the effort to capture or destroy either him or his machine will
be approved and rewarded."

It was a declaration of war, war to the death against this "Master of the
World" who thought to threaten and defy an entire nation, the American nation!


Before the day was over, various rewards of large amounts were promised to
anyone who revealed the hiding place of this dangerous inventor, to anyone who
could identify him, and to anyone who should rid the country of him.

Such was the situation during the last fortnight of July. All was left to the
hazard of fortune. The moment the outlaw reappeared he would be seen and
signaled, and when the chance came he would be arrested. This could not be
accomplished when he was in his automobile on land or in his boat on the water.
No; he must be seized suddenly, before he had any opportunity to escape by
means of that speed which no other machine could equal.

I was therefore all alert, awaiting an order from Mr. Ward to start out with
my men. But the order did not arrive for the very good reason that the man
whom it concerned remained undiscovered. The end of July approached. The
newspapers continued the excitement. They published repeated rumors. New
clues were constantly being announced. But all this was mere idle talk.
Telegrams reached the police bureau from every part of America, each
contradicting and nullifying the others. The enormous rewards offered could not
help but lead to accusations, errors, and blunders, made, many of them, in good
faith. One time it would be a cloud of dust, which must have contained the
automobile. At another time, almost any wave on any of America's thousand
lakes represented the submarine. In truth, in the excited state of the public
imagination, apparitions assailed us from every side.

At last, on the twenty-ninth of July, I received a telephone message to come
to Mr. Ward on the instant. Twenty minutes later I was in his cabinet.

"You leave in an hour, Strock," said he.

"Where for?"

"For Toledo."

"It has been seen?"

"Yes. At Toledo you will get your final orders."

"In an hour, my men and I will be on the way."

"Good! And, Strock, I now give you a formal order."

"What is it, Mr. Ward?"

"To succeed! This time to succeed!"


Chapter 11


THE CAMPAIGN


So the undiscoverable commander had reappeared upon the territory of the
United States! He had never shown himself in Europe either on the roads or in
the seas. He had not crossed the Atlantic, which apparently he could have
traversed in three days. Did he then intend to make only America the scene of
his exploits? Ought we to conclude from this that he was an American?

Let me insist upon this point. It seemed clear that the submarine might easily
have crossed the vast sea which separates the New and the Old World. Not only
would its amazing speed have made its voyage short, in comparison to that of
the swiftest steamship, but also it would have escaped all the storms that make
the voyage dangerous. Tempests did not exist for it. It had but to abandon the
surface of the waves, and it could find absolute calm a few score feet beneath.

But the inventor had not crossed the Atlantic, and if he were to be captured
now, it would probably be in Ohio, since Toledo is a city of that state.

This time the fact of the machine's appearance had been kept secret, between
the police and the agent who had warned them, and whom I was hurrying to
meet. No journal--and many would have paid high for the chance--was printing
this news. We had decided that nothing should be revealed until our effort was at
an end. No indiscretion would be committed by either my comrades or myself.

The man to whom I was sent with an order from Mr. Ward was named
Arthur Wells. He awaited us at Toledo. The city of Toledo stands at the western
end of Lake Erie. Our train sped during the night across West Virginia and Ohio.
There was no delay; and before noon the next day the locomotive stopped in the
Toledo depot.

John Hart, Nab Walker and I stepped out with traveling bags in our hands,
and revolvers in our pockets. Perhaps we should need weapons for an attack, or
even to defend ourselves. Scarcely had I stepped from the train when I picked
out the man who awaited us. He was scanning the arriving passengers
impatiently, evidently as eager and full of haste as I.

I approached him. "Mr. Wells?" said I.

"Mr. Strock?" asked he.

"Yes."

"IT am at your command," said Mr. Wells.

"Are we to stop any time in Toledo?" I asked.


"No; with your permission, Mr. Strock. A carriage with two good horses is
waiting outside the station; and we must leave at once to reach our destination as
soon as possible."

"We will go at once," I answered, signing to my two men to follow us. "Is it
far?"

"Twenty miles."

"And the place is called?"

"Black Rock Creek."

Having left our bags at a hotel, we started on our drive. Much to my surprise
I found there were provisions sufficient for several days packed beneath the seat
of the carriage. Mr. Wells told me that the region around Black Rock Creek was
among the wildest in the state. There was nothing there to attract either farmers
or fishermen. We would find not an inn for our meals nor a room in which to
sleep. Fortunately, during the July heat there would be no hardship even if we
had to lie one or two nights under the stars.

More probably, however, if we were successful, the matter would not occupy
us many hours. Either the commander of the "Terror" would be surprised before
he had a chance to escape, or he would take to flight and we must give up all
hope of arresting him.

I found Arthur Wells to be a man of about forty, large and powerful. I knew
him by reputation to be one of the best of our local police agents. Cool in danger
and enterprising always, he had proven his daring on more than one occasion at
the peril of his life. He had been in Toledo on a wholly different mission, when
chance had thrown him on the track of the "Terror."

We drove rapidly along the shore of Lake Erie, toward the southwest. This
inland sea of water is on the northern boundary of the United States, lying
between Canada on one side and the States of Ohio, Pennsylvania and New York
on the other. If I stop to mention the geographical position of this lake, its depth,
its extent, and the waters nearest around, it is because the knowledge is
necessary for the understanding of the events which were about to happen.

The surface of Lake Erie covers about ten thousand square miles. It is nearly
six hundred feet above sea level. It is joined on the northwest, by means of the
Detroit River, with the still greater lakes to the westward, and receives their
waters. It has also rivers of its own though of less importance, such as the Rocky,
the Cuyahoga, and the Black. The lake empties at its northeastern end into Lake
Ontario by means of Niagara River and its celebrated falls.

The greatest known depth of Lake Erie is over one hundred and thirty feet.
Hence it will be seen that the mass of its waters is considerable. In short, this is a
region of most magnificent lakes. The land, though not situated far northward, is


exposed to the full sweep of the Arctic cold. The region to the northward is low,
and the winds of winter rush down with extreme violence. Hence Lake Erie is
sometimes frozen over from shore to shore.

The principal cities on the borders of this great lake are Buffalo at the east,
which belongs to New York State, and Toledo in Ohio, at the west, with
Cleveland and Sandusky, both Ohio cities, at the south. Smaller towns and
villages are numerous along the shore. The traffic is naturally large, its annual
value being estimated at considerably over two million dollars.

Our carriage followed a rough and little used road along the borders of the
lake; and as we toiled along, Arthur Wells told me, what he had learned.

Less than two days before, on the afternoon of July twenty-seventh Wells
had been riding on horseback toward the town of Herly. Five miles outside the
town, he was riding through a little wood, when he saw, far up across the lake, a
submarine which rose suddenly above the waves. He stopped, tied his horse, and
stole on foot to the edge of the lake. There, from behind a tree he had seen with
his own eyes seen this submarine advance toward him, and stop at the mouth of
Black Rock Creek. Was it the famous machine for which the whole world was
seeking, which thus came directly to his feet?

When the submarine was close to the rocks, two men climbed out upon its
deck and stepped ashore. Was one of them this Master of the World, who had not
been seen since he was reported from Lake Superior? Was this the mysterious
"Terror" which had thus risen from the depths of Lake Erie?

"I was alone," said Wells. "Alone on the edge of the Creek. If you and your
assistants, Mr. Strock had been there, we four against two, we would have been
able to reach these men and seize them before they could have regained their
boat and fled."

"Probably," I answered. "But were there no others on the boat with them?
Still, if we had seized the two, we could at least have learned who they were."

"And above all," added Wells, "if one of them turned out to be the captain of
the "Terror!"

"T have only one fear, Wells; this submarine, whether it is the one we seek or
another, may have left the creek since your departure."

"We shall know about that in a few hours, now. Pray Heaven they are still
there! Then when night comes?"

"But," I asked, "did you remain watching in the wood until night?"

"No; I left after an hour's watching, and rode straight for the telegraph station
at Toledo. I reached there late at night and sent immediate word to Washington."

"That was night before last. Did you return yesterday to Black Rock Creek?"

"Yes."


"The submarine was still there?"

"In the same spot."

"And the two men?"

"The same two men. I judge that some accident had happened, and they
came to this lonely spot to repair it."

"Probably so," said I. "Some damage which made it impossible for them to
regain their usual hiding-place. If only they are still here!"

"I have reason to believe they will be, for quite a lot of stuff was taken out of
the boat, and laid about upon the shore; and as well as I could discern from a
distance they seemed to be working on board."

"Only the two men?"

"Only the two."

"But," protested I, "can two be sufficient to handle an apparatus of such
speed, and of such intricacy, as to be at once automobile, boat and submarine?"

"I think not, Mr. Strock; but I only saw the same two. Several times they
came to the edge of the little wood where I was hidden, and gathered sticks for a
fire which they made upon the beach. The region is so uninhabited and the creek
so hidden from the lake that they ran little danger of discovery. They seemed to
know this."

"You would recognize them both again?"

"Perfectly. One was of middle size, vigorous, and quick of movement,
heavily bearded. The other was smaller, but stocky and strong. Yesterday, as
before, I left the wood about five o'clock and hurried back to Toledo. There I
found a telegram from Mr. Ward, notifying me of your coming; and I awaited
you at the station."

Summed up, then, the news amounted to this: For forty hours past a
submarine, presumably the one we sought, had been hidden in Black Rock
Creek, engaged in repairs. Probably these were absolutely necessary, and we
should find the boat still there. As to how the "Terror" came to be in Lake Erie,
Arthur Wells and I discussed that, and agreed that it was a very probable place
for her. The last time she had been seen was on Lake Superior. From there to
Lake Erie the machine could have come by the roads of Michigan, but since no
one had remarked its passage and as both the police and the people were
specially aroused and active in that portion of the country, it seemed more
probable, that the "Terror" had come by water. There was a clear route through
the chain of the Great Lakes and their rivers, by which in her character of a
submarine she could easily proceed undiscovered.

And now, if the "Terror" had already left the creek, or if she escaped when
we attempted to seize her, in what direction would she turn? In any case, there


was little chance o following her. There were two torpedo-destroyers at the port
of Buffalo, at the other extremity of Lake Erie. By treaty between the United
States and Canada, there are no vessels of war whatever on the Great Lakes.
These might, however, have been little launches belonging to the customs
service. Before I left Washington Mr. Ward had informed me of their presence;
and a telegram to their commanders would, if there were need, start them in
pursuit of the "Terror." But despite their splendid speed, how could they vie with
her! And if she plunged beneath the waters, they would be helpless. Moreover
Arthur Wells averred that in case of a battle, the advantage would not be with the
destroyers, despite their large crews, and many guns. Hence, if we did not
succeed this night, the campaign would end in failure.

Arthur Wells knew Black Rock Creek thoroughly, having hunted there more
than once. It was bordered in most places with sharp rocks against which the
waters of the lake beat heavily. Its channel was some thirty feet deep, so that the
"Terror" could take shelter either upon the surface or under water. In two or three
places the steep banks gave way to sand beaches which led to little gorges
reaching up toward the woods, two or three hundred feet.

It was seven in the evening when our carriage reached these woods. There
was still daylight enough for us to see easily, even in the shade of the trees. To
have crossed openly to the edge of the creek would have exposed us to the view
of the men of the "Terror," if she were still there, and thus give her warning to
escape.

"Had we better stop here?" I asked Wells, as our rig drew up to the edge of
the woods.

"No, Mr. Strock," said he. "We had better leave the carriage deeper in the
woods, where there will be no chance whatever of our being seen."

"Can the carriage drive under these trees?"

"Tt can," declared Wells. "I have already explored these woods thoroughly.
Five or six hundred feet from here, there is a little clearing, where we will be
completely hidden, and where our horses may find pasture. Then, as soon as it is
dark, we will go down to the beach, at the edge of the rocks which shut in the
mouth of the creek. Thus if the 'Terror' is still there, we shall stand between her
and escape."

Eager as we all were for action, it was evidently best to do as Wells
suggested and wait for night. The intervening time could well be occupied as he
said. Leading the horses by the bridle, while they dragged the empty carriage, we
proceeded through the heavy woods. The tall pines, the stalwart oaks, the
cypress scattered here and there, made the evening darker overhead. Beneath our
feet spread a carpet of scattered herbs, pine needles and dead leaves. Such was


the thickness of the upper foliage that the last rays of the setting sun could no
longer penetrate here. We had to feel our way; and it was not without some
knocks that the carriage reached the clearing ten minutes later.

This clearing, surrounded by great trees, formed a sort of oval, covered with
rich grass. Here it was still daylight, and the darkness would scarcely deepen for
over an hour. There was thus time to arrange an encampment and to rest awhile
after our hard trip over the rough and rocky roads.

Of course, we were intensely eager to approach the Creek and see if the
"Terror" was still there. But prudence restrained us. A little patience, and the
night-would enable us to reach a commanding position unsuspected. Wells urged
this strongly; and despite my eagerness, I felt that he was right.

The horses were unharnessed, and left to browse under the care of the
coachman who had driven us. The provisions were unpacked, and John Hart and
Nab Walker spread out a meal on the grass at the foot of a superb cypress which
recalled to me the forest odors of Morganton and Pleasant Garden. We were
hungry and thirsty; and food and drink were not lacking. Then our pipes were
lighted to calm the anxious moments of waiting that remained.

Silence reigned within the wood. The last song of the birds had ceased. With
the coming of night the breeze fell little by little, and the leaves scarcely
quivered even at the tops of the highest branches. The sky darkened rapidly after
sundown and twilight deepened into obscurity.

I looked at my watch, it was half-past eight. "It is time, Wells."

"When you will, Mr. Strock."

"Then let us start."

We cautioned the coachman not to let the horses stray beyond the clearing.
Then we started. Wells went in advance, I followed him, and John Hart and Nab
Walker came behind. In the darkness, we three would have been helpless without
the guidance of Wells. Soon we reached the farther border of the woods; and
before us stretched the banks of Black Rock Creek.

All was silent; all seemed deserted. We could advance without risk. If the
"Terror" was there, she had cast anchor behind the rocks. But was she there?
That was the momentous question! As we approached the denouement of this
exciting affair, my heart was in my throat.

Wells motioned to us to advance. The sand of the shore crunched beneath our
steps. The two hundred feet between us and the mouth of the Creek were crossed
softly, and a few minutes sufficed to bring us to the rocks at the edge of the lake.

There was nothing! Nothing!

The spot where Wells had left the "Terror" twenty-four hours before was
empty. The "Master of the World" was no longer at Black Rock Creek.


Chapter 12


BLACK ROCK CREEK


Human nature is prone to illusions. Of course, there had been all along a
probability that the "Terror" had deserted the locality, even admitting that it was
she Wells had seen the previous day. If some damage to her triple system of
locomotion had prevented her from regaining either by land or by water her
usual hiding-place, and obliged her to seek refuge in Black Rock Creek, what
ought we to conclude now upon finding her here no longer? Obviously, that,
having finished her repairs, she had continued on her way, and was already far
beyond the waters of Lake Erie.

But probable as this result had been from the first, we had more and more
ignored it as our trip proceeded. We had come to accept as a fact that we should
meet the "Terror," that we should find her anchored at the base of the rocks
where Wells had seen her.

And now what disappointment! I might even say, what despair! All our
efforts gone for nothing! Even if the "Terror" was still upon the lake, to find her,
reach her and capture her, was beyond our power, and it might as well be fully
recognized beyond all human power.

We stood there, Wells and I, completely crushed, while John Hart and Nab
Walker, no less chagrined, went tramping along the banks of the Creek, seeking
any trace that had been left behind.

Posted there, at the mouth of the Creek, Wells and I exchanged scarcely a
word. What need was there of words to enable us to understand each other! After
our eagerness and our despair, we were now exhausted. Defeated in our well-
planned attempt, we felt as unwilling to abandon our campaign, as we were
unable to continue it.

Nearly an hour slipped by. We could not resolve to leave the place. Our eyes
still sought to pierce the night. Sometimes a glimmer, due to the sparkle of the
waters, trembled on the surface of the lake. Then it vanished, and with it the
foolish hope that it had roused. Sometimes again, we thought we saw a shadow
outlined against the dark, the silhouette of an approaching boat. Yet again some
eddies would swirl up at our feet, as if the Creek had been stirred within its
depths. These vain imaginings were dissipated one after the other. They were but
the illusions raised by our strained fancies.

At length our companions rejoined us. My first question was, "Nothing


new?"

"Nothing," said John Hart.

"You have explored both banks of the Creek?"

"Yes," responded Nab Walker, "as far as the shallow water above; and we
have not seen even a vestige of the things which Mr. Wells saw laid on the
shore."

"Let us wait awhile," said I, unable to resolve upon a return to the woods.

At that moment our attention was caught by a sudden agitation of the waters,
which swelled upward at the foot of the rocks.

"Tt is like the swell from a vessel," said Wells.

"Yes," said I, instinctively lowering my voice. "What has caused it? The
wind has completely died out. Does it come from something on the surface of
the lake?"

"Or from something underneath," said Wells, bending forward, the better to
determine.

The commotion certainly seemed as if caused by some boat, whether from
beneath the water, or approaching the creek from outside upon the lake.

Silent, motionless, we strained eyes and ears to pierce the profound
obscurity. The faint noise of the waves of the lake lapping on the shore beyond
the creek, came to us distinctly through the night. John Hart and Nab Walker
drew a little aside upon a higher ridge of rocks. As for me, I leaned close to the
water to watch the agitation. It did not lessen. On the contrary it became
momentarily more evident, and I began to distinguish a sort of regular throbbing,
like that produced by a screw in motion.

"There is no doubt," declared Wells, leaning close to me, "there is a boat
coming toward us."


"There certainly is," responded I, "unless they have whales or sharks in Lake
Erie."

"No, it is a boat," repeated Wells. "Is she headed toward the mouth of the
creek, or is she going further up it?"

"This is just where you saw the boat twice before?"

"Yes, just here."

"Then if this is the same one, and it can be no other, she will probably return
to the same spot."

"There!" whispered Wells, extending his hand toward the entrance of the
creek.

Our companions rejoined us, and all four, crouching low upon the bank,
peered in the direction he pointed.

We vaguely distinguished a black mass moving through the darkness. It
advanced very slowly and was still outside the creek, upon the lake, perhaps a
cable's length to the northeast. We could scarcely hear even now the faint
throbbing of its engines. Perhaps they had stopped and the boat was only gliding
forward under their previous impulse.

It seemed, then, that this was indeed the submarine which Wells had
watched, and it was returning to pass this night, like the last, within the shelter of
the creek.

Why had it left the anchorage, if only to return? Had it suffered some new
disaster, which again impaired its power? Or had it been before compelled to
leave, with its repairs still unfinished? What cause constrained it to return here?
Was there some imperious reason why it could no longer be turned into an
automobile, and go darting away across the roads of Ohio?

To all these questions which came crowding upon me, I could give no
answer. Furthermore both Wells and I kept reasoning under the assumption that
this was really the "Terror" commanded by the "Master of the World" who had
dated from it his letter of defiance to the government. Yet this premise was still
unproven, no matter how confident we might feel of it.

Whatever boat this was, that stole so softly through the night, it continued to
approach us. Assuredly its captain must know perfectly the channels and shores
of Black Rock Creek, since he ventured here in such darkness. Not a light
showed upon the deck. Not a single ray from within the cabin glimmered
through any crevice.

A moment later, we heard some machinery moving very softly. The swell of
the eddies grew stronger, and in a few moments the boat touched the quay.

This word "quay," only used in that region, exactly describes the spot. The
rocks at our feet formed a level, five or six feet above the water, and descending


to it perpendicularly, exactly like a landing wharf.

"We must not stop here," whispered Wells, seizing me by the arm.

"No," I answered, "they might see us. We must lie crouched upon the beach!
Or we might hide in some crevice of the rocks."

"We will follow you."

There was not a moment to lose. The dark mass was now close at hand, and
on its deck, but slightly raised above the surface of the water, we could trace the
silhouettes of two men.

Were there, then, really only two on board?

We stole softly back to where the ravines rose toward the woods above.
Several niches in the rocks were at hand. Wells and I crouched down in one, my
two assistants in another. If the men on the "Terror" landed, they could not see
us; but we could see them, and would be able to act as opportunity offered.

There were some slight noises from the boat, a few words exchanged in our
own language. It was evident that the vessel was preparing to anchor. Then
almost instantly, a rope was thrown out, exactly on the point of the quay where
we had stood.

Leaning forward, Wells could discern that the rope was seized by one of the
mariners, who had leaped ashore. Then we heard a grappling-iron scrape along
the ground.

Some moments later, steps crunched upon the sand. Two men came up the
ravine, and went onward toward the edge of the woods, guiding their steps by a
ship lantern.

Where were they going? Was Black Rock Creek a regular hiding place of the
"Terror?" Had her commander a depot here for stores or provisions? Did they
come here to restock their craft, when the whim of their wild voyaging brought
them to this part of the continent? Did they know this deserted, uninhabited spot
so well, that they had no fear of ever being discovered here?

"What shall we do?" whispered Wells.

"Wait till they return, and then--" My words were cut short by a surprise. The
men were not thirty feet from us, when, one of them chancing to turn suddenly,
the light of their lantern fell full upon his face.

He was one of the two men who had watched before my house in Long
Street! I could not be mistaken! I recognized him as positively as my old servant
had done. It was he; it was assuredly one of the spies of whom I had never been
able to find any further traces! There was no longer any doubt, my warning letter
had come from them. It was therefore from the "Master of the World"; it had
been written from the "Terror" and this was the "Terror." Once more I asked
myself what could be the connection between this machine and the Great Eyrie!


In whispered words, I told Wells of my discovery. His only comment was, "It
is all incomprehensible!"

Meanwhile the two men had continued on their way to the woods, and were
gathering sticks beneath the trees. "What if they discover our encampment?"
murmured Wells.

"No danger, if they do not go beyond the nearest trees."

"But if they do discover it?"

"They will hurry back to their boat, and we shall be able to cut off their
retreat."

Toward the creek, where their craft lay, there was no further sound. I left my
hiding-place; I descended the ravine to the quay; I stood on the very spot where
the grappling-iron was fast among the rocks.

The "Terror" lay there, quiet at the end of its cable. Not a light was on board;
not a person visible, either on the deck, or on the bank. Was not this my
opportunity? Should I leap on board and there await the return of the two men?

"Mr. Strock!" It was Wells, who called to me softly from close at hand.

I drew back in all haste and crouched down beside him. Was it too late to
take possession of the boat? Or would the attempt perhaps result in disaster from
the presence of others watching on board?

At any rate, the two men with the lantern were close at hand returning down
the ravine. Plainly they suspected nothing. Each carrying a bundle of wood, they
came forward and stopped upon the quay.

Then one of them raised his voice, though not loudly. "Hullo! Captain!"

"All right," answered a voice from the boat.

Wells murmured in my ear, "There are three!"

"Perhaps four," I answered, "perhaps five or six!"

The situation grew more complicated. Against a crew so numerous, what
ought we to do? The least imprudence might cost us dear! Now that the two men
had returned, would they re-embark with their faggots? Then would the boat
leave the creek, or would it remain anchored until day? If it withdrew, would it
not be lost to us? It could leave the waters of Lake Erie, and cross any of the
neighboring states by land; or it could retrace its road by the Detroit River which
would lead it to Lake Huron and the Great Lakes above. Would such an
opportunity as this, in the narrow waters of Black Rock Creek, ever occur again!

"At least," said I to Wells, "we are four. They do not expect attack; they will
be surprised. The result is in the hands of Providence."

I was about to call our two men, when Wells again seized my arm. "Listen!"
said he.

One of the men hailed the boat, and it drew close up to the rocks. We heard


the Captain say to the two men ashore, "Everything is all right, up there?"

"Everything, Captain."

"There are still two bundles of wood left there?"

"Two."

"Then one more trip will bring them all on board the "Terror."

The "Terror!" It WAS she!

"Yes; just one more trip," answered one of the men.

"Good; then we will start off again at daybreak."

Were there then but three of them on board? The Captain, this Master of the
World, and these two men?

Evidently they planned to take aboard the last of their wood. Then they
would withdraw within their machine, and go to sleep. Would not that be the
time to surprise them, before they could defend themselves?

Rather than to attempt to reach and capture the ship in face of this resolute
Captain who was guarding it, Wells and I agreed that it was better to let his men
return unassailed, and wait till they were all asleep.

It was now half an hour after ten. Steps were once more heard upon the
shore. The man with a lantern and his companion, again remounted the ravine
toward the woods. When they were safely beyond hearing, Wells went to warn
our men, while I stole forward again to the very edge of the water.

The "Terror" lay at the end of a short cable. As well as I could judge, she was
long and slim, shaped like a spindle, without chimney, without masts, without
rigging, such a shape as had been described when she was seen on the coast of
New England.

I returned to my place, with my men in the shelter of the ravine; and we
looked to our revolvers, which might well prove of service.

Five minutes had passed since the men reached the woods, and we expected
their return at any moment. After that, we must wait at least an hour before we
made our attack; so that both the Captain and his comrades might be deep in
sleep. It was important that they should have not a moment either to send their
craft darting out upon the waters of Lake Erie, or to plunge it beneath the waves
where we would have been entrapped with it.

In all my career I have never felt such impatience. It seemed to me that the
two men must have been detained in the woods. Something had barred their
return.

Suddenly a loud noise was heard, the tumult of run-away horses, galloping
furiously along the shore!

They were our own, which, frightened, and perhaps neglected by the driver,
had broken away from the clearing, and now came rushing along the bank.


At the same moment, the two men reappeared, and this time they were
running with all speed. Doubtless they had discovered our encampment, and had
at once suspected that there were police hidden in the woods. They realized that
they were watched, they were followed, they would be seized. So they dashed
recklessly down the ravine, and after loosening the cable, they would doubtless
endeavor to leap aboard. The "Terror" would disappear with the speed of a
meteor, and our attempt would be wholly defeated!

"Forward," I cried. And we scrambled down the sides of the ravine to cut off
the retreat of the two men.

They saw us and, on the instant, throwing down their bundles, fired at us
with revolvers, hitting John Hart in the leg.

We fired in our turn, but less successfully. The men neither fell nor faltered
in their course. Reaching the edge of the creek, without stopping to unloose the
cable, they plunged overboard, and in a moment were clinging to the deck of the
"Terror."

Their captain, springing forward, revolver in hand, fired. The ball grazed
Wells.

Nab Walker and I seizing the cable, pulled the black mass of the boat toward
shore. Could they cut the rope in time to escape us?

Suddenly the grappling-iron was torn violently from the rocks. One of its
hooks caught in my belt, while Walker was knocked down by the flying cable. I
was entangled by the iron and the rope and dragged forward--

The "Terror," driven by all the power of her engines, made a single bound
and darted out across Black Rock Creek.


Chapter 13


ON BOARD THE TERROR


When I came to my senses it was daylight. A half light pierced the thick
glass porthole of the narrow cabin wherein someone had placed me--how many
hours ago, I could not say! Yet it seemed to me by the slanting rays, that the sun
could not be very far above the horizon.

I was resting in a narrow bunk with coverings over me. My clothes, hanging
in a corner, had been dried. My belt, torn in half by the hook of the iron, lay on
the floor.

I felt no wound nor injury, only a little weakness. If I had lost consciousness,
I was sure it had not been from a blow. My head must have been drawn beneath
the water, when I was tangled in the cable. I should have been suffocated, if
someone had not dragged me from the lake.

Now, was I on board the "Terror?" And was I alone with the Captain and his
two men? This seemed probable, almost certain. The whole scene of our
encounter rose before my eyes, Hart lying wounded upon the bank; Wells firing
shot after shot, Walker hurled down at the instant when the grappling hook
caught my belt! And my companions? On their side, must not they think that I
had perished in the waters of Lake Erie?

Where was the "Terror" now, and how was it navigating? Was it moving as
an automobile? Speeding across the roads of some neighboring State? If so, and
if I had been unconscious for many hours, the machine with its tremendous
powers must be already far away. Or, on the other hand, were we, as a
submarine, following some course beneath the lake?

No, the "Terror" was moving upon some broad liquid surface. The sunlight,
penetrating my cabin, showed that the window was not submerged. On the other
hand, I felt none of the jolting that the automobile must have suffered even on
the smoothest highway. Hence the "Terror" was not traveling upon land.

As to deciding whether she was still traversing Lake Erie, that was another
matter. Had not the Captain reascended the Detroit River, and entered Lake
Huron, or even Lake Superior beyond? It was difficult to say.

At any rate I decided to go up on deck. From there I might be able to judge.
Dragging myself somewhat heavily from the bunk, I reached for my clothes and
dressed, though without much energy. Was I not probably locked within this
cabin?


The only exit seemed by a ladder and hatchway above my head. The hatch
rose readily to my hand, and I ascended half way on deck.

My first care was to look forward, backward, and on both sides of the
speeding "Terror." Everywhere a vast expanse of waves! Not a shore in sight!
Nothing but the horizon formed by sea and sky!

Whether it was a lake or the ocean I could easily settle. As we shot forward
at such speed the water cut by the bow, rose furiously upward on either side, and
the spray lashed savagely against me.

I tasted it. It was fresh water, and very probably that of Lake Erie. The sun
was but midway toward the zenith so it could scarcely be more than seven or
eight hours since the moment when the "Terror" had darted from Black Rock
Creek.

This must therefore be the following morning, that of the thirty-first of July.

Considering that Lake Erie is two hundred and twenty miles long, and over
fifty wide, there was no reason to be surprised that I could see no land, neither
that of the United States to the southeast nor of Canada to the northwest.

At this moment there were two men on the deck, one being at the bow on the
lookout, the other in the stern, keeping the course to the northeast, as I judged by
the position of the sun. The one at the bow was he whom I had recognized as he
ascended the ravine at Black Rock. The second was his companion who had
carried the lantern. I looked in vain for the one whom they had called Captain.
He was not in sight.

It will be readily appreciated how eager was my desire to stand in the
presence of the creator of this prodigious machines of this fantastic personage
who occupied and preoccupied the attention of all the world, the daring inventor
who did not fear to engage in battle against the entire human race, and who
proclaimed himself "Master of the World."

I approached the man on the lookout, and after a minute of silence I asked
him, "Where is the Captain?"

He looked at me through half-closed eyes. He seemed not to understand me.
Yet I knew, having heard him the night before, that he spoke English. Moreover,
I noticed that he did not appear surprised to see me out of my cabin. Turning his
back upon me, he continued to search the horizon.

I stepped then toward the stern, determined to ask the same question about
the Captain. But when I approached the steersman, he waved me away with his
hand, and I obtained no other response.

It only remained for me to study this craft, from which we had been repelled
with revolver shots, when we had seized upon its anchor rope.

I therefore set leisurely to work to examine the construction of this machine,


which was carrying me--whither? The deck and the upper works were all made
of some metal which I did not recognize. In the center of the deck, a scuttle half
raised covered the room where the engines were working regularly and almost
silently. As I had seen before, neither masts, nor rigging! Not even a flagstaff at
the stern! Toward the bow there arose the top of a periscope by which the
"Terror" could be guided when beneath the water.

On the sides were folded back two sort of outshoots resembling the
gangways on certain Dutch boats. Of these I could not understand the use.

In the bow there rose a third hatchway which presumably covered the
quarters occupied by the two men when the "Terror" was at rest.

At the stern a similar hatch gave access probably to the cabin of the captain,
who remained unseen. When these different hatches were shut down, they had a
sort of rubber covering which closed them hermetically tight, so that the water
could not reach the interior when the boat plunged beneath the ocean.

As to the motor, which imparted such prodigious speed to the machine, I
could see nothing of it, nor of the propeller. However, the fast speeding boat left
behind it only a long, smooth wake. The extreme fineness of the lines of the
craft, caused it to make scarcely any waves, and enabled it to ride lightly over
the crest of the billows even in a rough sea.

As was already known, the power by which the machine was driven, was
neither steam nor gasoline, nor any of those similar liquids so well known by
their odor, which are usually employed for automobiles and submarines. No
doubt the power here used was electricity, generated on board, at some high
power. Naturally I asked myself whence comes this electricity, from piles, or
from accumulators? But how were these piles or accumulators charged? Unless,
indeed, the electricity was drawn directly from the surrounding air or from the
water, by processes hitherto unknown. And I asked myself with intense
eagerness if in the present situation, I might be able to discover these secrets.

Then I thought of my companions, left behind on the shore of Black Rock
Creek. One of them, I knew, was wounded; perhaps the others were also. Having
seen me dragged overboard by the hawser, could they possibly suppose that I
had been rescued by the "Terror?" Surely not! Doubtless the news of my death
had already been telegraphed to Mr. Ward from Toledo. And now who would
dare to undertake a new campaign against this "Master of the World"?

These thoughts occupied my mind as I awaited the captain's appearance on
the deck. He did not appear.

I soon began to feel very hungry; for I must have fasted now nearly twenty-
four hours. I had eaten nothing since our hasty meal in the woods, even if that
had been the night before. And judging by the pangs which now assailed my


stomach, I began to wonder if I had not been snatched on board the "Terror" two
days before,--or even more.

Happily the question if they meant to feed me, and how they meant to feed
me, was solved at once. The man at the bow left his post, descended, and
reappeared. Then, without saying a word, he placed some food before me and
returned to his place. Some potted meat, dried fish, sea-biscuit, and a pot of ale
so strong that I had to mix it with water, such was the meal to which I did full
justice. My fellow travelers had doubtless eaten before I came out of the cabin,
and they did not join me.

There was nothing further to attract my eyes, and I sank again into thought.
How would this adventure finish? Would I see this invisible captain at length,
and would he restore me to liberty? Could I regain it in spite of him? That would
depend on circumstances! But if the "Terror" kept thus far away from the shore,
or if she traveled beneath the water, how could I escape from her? Unless we
landed, and the machine became an automobile, must I not abandon all hope of
escape?

Moreover--why should I not admit it?--to escape without having learned
anything of the "Terror's" secrets would not have contented me at all. Although I
could not thus far flatter myself upon the success of my campaign, and though I
had come within a hairbreadth of losing my life and though the future promised
far more of evil than of good, yet after all, a step forward had been attained. To
be sure, if I was never to be able to reenter into communication with the world,
if, like this Master of the World who had voluntarily placed himself outside the
law, I was now placed outside humanity, then the fact that I had reached the
"Terror" would have little value.

The craft continued headed to the northeast, following the longer axis of
Lake Erie. She was advancing at only half speed; for, had she been doing her
best, she must some hours before have reached the northeastern extremity of the
lake.

At this end Lake Erie has no other outlet than the Niagara River, by which it
empties into Lake Ontario. Now, this river is barred by the famous cataract some
fifteen miles beyond the important city of Buffalo. Since the "Terror" had not
retreated by the Detroit River, down which she had descended from the upper
lakes, how was she to escape from these waters, unless indeed she crossed by
land?

The sun passed the meridian. The day was beautiful; warm but not
unpleasantly so, thanks to the breeze made by our passage. The shores of the
lake continued invisible on both the Canadian and the American side.

Was the captain determined not to show himself? Had he some reason for


remaining unknown? Such a precaution would indicate that he intended to set
me at liberty in the evening, when the "Terror" could approach the shore unseen.

Toward two o'clock, however, I heard a slight noise; the central hatchway
was raised. The man I had so impatiently awaited appeared on deck.

I must admit he paid no more attention to me, than his men had done. Going
to the stern, he took the helm. The man whom he had relieved, after a few words
in a low tone, left the deck, descending by the forward hatchway. The captain,
having scanned the horizon, consulted the compass, and slightly altered our
course. The speed of the "Terror" increased.

This man, so interesting both to me and to the world, must have been some
years over fifty. He was of middle height, with powerful shoulders still very
erect; a strong head, with thick hair rather gray than white, smooth shaven
cheeks, and a short, crisp beard. His chest was broad, his jaw prominent, and he
had that characteristic sign of tremendous energy, bushy eyebrows drawn sharply
together. Assuredly he possessed a constitution of iron, splendid health, and
warm red blood beneath his sun burned skin.

Like his companions the captain was dressed in sea-clothes covered by an
oil-skin coat, and with a woolen cap which could be pulled down to cover his
head entirely, when he so desired.

Need I add that the captain of the "Terror" was the other of the two men, who
had watched my house in Long street. Moreover, if I recognized him, he also
must recognize me as chief-inspector Strock, to whom had been assigned the
task of penetrating the Great Eyrie.

I looked at him curiously. On his part, while he did not seek to avoid my
eyes, he showed at least a singular indifference to the fact that he had a stranger
on board.

As I watched him, the idea came to me, a suggestion which I had not
connected with the first view of him in Washington, that I had already seen this
characteristic figure. Was it in one of the photographs held in the police
department, or was it merely a picture in some shop window? But the
remembrance was very vague. Perhaps I merely imagined it.

Well, though his companions had not had the politeness to answer me,
perhaps he would be more courteous. He spoke the same language as I, although
I could not feel quite positive that he was of American birth. He might indeed
have decided to pretend not to understand me, so as to avoid all discussion while
he held me prisoner.

In that case, what did he mean to do with me? Did he intend to dispose of me
without further ceremony? Was he only waiting for night to throw me
overboard? Did even the little which I knew of him, make me a danger of which


he must rid himself? But in that case, he might better have left me at the end of
his anchor line. That would have saved him the necessity of drowning me over
again.

I turned, I walked to the stern, I stopped full in front of him. Then, at length,
he fixed full upon me a glance that burned like a flame.

"Are you the captain?" I asked.

He was silent.

"This boat! Is it really the "Terror?"

To this question also there was no response. Then I reached toward him; I
would have taken hold of his arm.

He repelled me without violence, but with a movement that suggested
tremendous restrained power.

Planting myself again before him, I demanded in a louder tone, "What do
you mean to do with me?"

Words seemed almost ready to burst from his lips, which he compressed with
visible irritation. As though to check his speech he turned his head aside. His
hand touched a regulator of some sort, and the machine rapidly increased its
speed.

Anger almost mastered me. I wanted to cry out "So be it! Keep your silence!
I know who you are, just as I know your machine, recognized at Madison, at
Boston, at Lake Kirdall. Yes; it is you, who have rushed so recklessly over our
roads, our seas and our lakes! Your boat is the "Terror' and you her commander,
wrote that letter to the government. It is you who fancy you can fight the entire
world. You, who call yourself the Master of the World!"

And how could he have denied it! I saw at that moment the famous initials
inscribed upon the helm!

Fortunately I restrained myself; and despairing of getting any response to my
questions, I returned to my seat near the hatchway of my cabin.

For long hours, I patiently watched the horizon in the hope that land would
soon appear. Yes, I sat waiting! For I was reduced to that! Waiting! No doubt,
before the day closed, the "Terror" must reach the end of Lake Erie, since she
continued her course steadily to the northeast.


Chapter 14


NIAGARA


The hours passed, and the situation did not change. The steersman returned
on deck, and the captain, descending, watched the movement of the engines.
Even when our speed increased, these engines continued working without noise,
and with remarkable smoothness There was never one of those inevitable breaks,
with which in most motors the pistons sometimes miss a stroke. I concluded that
the "Terror," in each of its transformations must be worked by rotary engines.
But I could not assure myself of this.

For the rest, our direction did not change. Always we headed toward the
northeast end of the lake, and hence toward Buffalo.

Why, I wondered, did the captain persist in following this route? He could
not intend to stop at Buffalo, in the midst of a crowd of boats and shipping of
every kind. If he meant to leave the lake by water, there was only the Niagara
River to follow; and its Falls would be impassable, even to such a machine as
this. The only escape was by the Detroit River, and the "Terror" was constantly
leaving that farther behind.

Then another idea occurred to me. Perhaps the captain was only waiting for
night to return to the shore of the lake. There, the boat, changed to an
automobile, would quickly cross the neighboring States. If I did not succeed in
making my escape, during this passage across the land, all hope of regaining my
liberty would be gone.

True, I might learn where this Master of the World hid himself. I might learn
what no one had yet been able to discover, assuming always that he did not
dispose of me at one time or another--and what I expected his "disposal" would
be, is easily comprehended.

I knew the northeast end of Lake Erie well, having often visited that section
of New York State which extends westward from Albany to Buffalo. Three years
before, a police mission had led me to explore carefully the shores of the
Niagara River, both above and below the cataract and its Suspension Bridge. I
had visited the two principal islands between Buffalo and the little city of
Niagara Falls, I had explored Navy Island and also Goat Island, which separates
the American falls from those of the Canadian side.

Thus if an opportunity for flight presented itself, I should not find myself in
an unknown district. But would this chance offer? And at heart, did I desire it, or


would I seize upon it? What secrets still remained in this affair in which good
fortune or was it evil fortune--had so closely entangled me!

On the other hand, I saw no real reason to suppose that there was any chance
of my reaching the shores of the Niagara River. The "Terror" would surely not
venture into this trap which had no exit. Probably she would not even go to the
extremity of the lake.

Such were the thoughts that spun through my excited brain, while my eyes
remained fixed upon the empty horizon.

And always one persistent question remained insolvable. Why had the
captain written to me personally that threatening letter? Why had he spied upon
me in Washington? What bond attached him to the Great Eyrie? There might
indeed be subterranean canals which gave him passage to Lake Kirdall, but
could he pierce the impenetrable fortress of the Eyrie? No! That was beyond
him!

Toward four o'clock in the afternoon, reckoning by the speed of the "Terror"
and her direction, I knew we must be approaching Buffalo; and indeed, its
outlines began to show some fifteen miles ahead. During our passage, a few
boats had been seen, but we had passed them at a long distance, a distance which
our captain could easily keep as great as he pleased. Moreover, the "Terror" lay
so low upon the water, that at even a mile away it would have been difficult to
discover her.

Now, however, the hills encircling the end of Lake Erie, came within vision,
beyond Buffalo, forming the sort of funnel by which Lake Erie pours its waters
into the channel of the Niagara river. Some dunes rose on the right, groups of
trees stood out here and there. In the distance, several freight steamers and
fishing smacks appeared. The sky became spotted with trails of smoke, which
were swept along by a light eastern breeze.

What was our captain thinking of in still heading toward the port of Buffalo!
Did not prudence forbid him to venture further? At each moment, I expected that
he would give a sweep of the helm and turn away toward the western shore of
the lake. Or else, I thought, he would prepare to plunge beneath the surface. But
this persistence in holding our bow toward Buffalo was impossible to
understand!

At length the helmsman, whose eyes were watching the northeastern shore,
made a sign to his companion. The latter, leaving the bow, went to the central
hatchway, and descended into the engine room. Almost immediately the captain
came on deck, and joining the helmsman, spoke with him in a low voice.

The latter, extending his hand toward Buffalo, pointed out two black spots,
which showed five or six miles distant on the starboard side. The captain studied


them attentively. Then shrugging his shoulders, he seated himself at the stern
without altering the course of the "Terror."

A quarter of an hour later, I could see plainly that there were two smoke
clouds at the point they had studied so carefully. Little by little the black spots
beneath these became more defined. They were two long, low steamers, which,
coming from the port of Buffalo, were approaching rapidly.

Suddenly it struck me that these were the two torpedo destroyers of which
Mr. Ward had spoken, and which I had been told to summon in case of need.

These destroyers were of the newest type, the swiftest boats yet constructed
in the country. Driven by powerful engines of the latest make, they had covered
almost thirty miles an hour. It is true, the "Terror" commanded an even greater
speed, and always, if she were surrounded so that flight was impossible, she
could submerge herself out of reach of all pursuit. In truth, the destroyers would
have had to be submarines to attack the "Terror" with any chance of success.
And I know not, if even in that case, the contest would have been equal.

Meanwhile, it seemed to me evident that the commanders of the two ships
had been warned, perhaps by Mr. Wells who, returning swiftly to Toledo, might
have telegraphed to them the news of our defeat. It appeared, moreover, that they
had seen the "Terror," for they were headed at full speed toward her. Yet our
captain, seemingly giving them no thought whatever, continued his course
toward the Niagara River.

What would the torpedo destroyers do? Presumably, they would maneuver so
as to seek to shut the "Terror" within the narrowing end of the lake where the
Niagara offered her no passage.

Our captain now took the helm. One of the men was at the bow, the other in
the engine room. Would the order be given for me to go down into the cabin?

It was not, to my extreme satisfaction. To speak frankly, no one paid any
attention to me. It was as if I had not been on board. I watched, therefore, not
without mixed emotions, the approach of the destroyers. Less than two miles
distant now they separated in such a way as to hold the "Terror" between their
fires.

As to the Master of the World, his manner indicated only the most profound
disdain. He seemed sure that these destroyers were powerless against him. With
a touch to his machinery he could distance them, no matter what their speed!
With a few turns of her engine, the "Terror" would dart beyond their cannon
shots! Or, in the depths of the lake, what projectiles could find the submarine?

Five minutes later, scarcely a mile separated us from the two powerful
fighters which pursued us. Our captain permitted them to approach still closer.
Then he pressed upon a handle. The "Terror," doubling the action of her


propellers, leaped across the surface of the lake. She played with the destroyers!
Instead of turning in flight, she continued her forward course. Who knew if she
would not even have the audacity to pass between her two enemies, to coax them
after her, until the hour when, as night closed in, they would be forced to
abandon the useless pursuit!

The city of Buffalo was now in plain view on the border of the lake. I saw its
huge buildings, its church towers, its grain elevators. Only four or five miles
ahead, Niagara river opened to the northward.

Under these new conditions which way should I turn? When we passed in
front of the destroyers, or perhaps between them, should I not throw myself into
the waters I was a good swimmer, and such a chance might never occur again.
The captain could not stop to recapture me. By diving could I not easily escape,
even from a bullet? I should surely be seen by one or other of the pursuers.
Perhaps, even, their commanders had been warned of my presence on board the
"Terror." Would not a boat be sent to rescue me?

Evidently my chance of success would be even greater, if the "Terror"
entered the narrow waters of Niagara River. At Navy Island I would be able to
set foot on territory that I knew well. But to suppose that our captain would rush
into this river where he might be swept over the great cataract! That seemed
impossible! I resolved to await the destroyers’ closest approach and at the last
moment I would decide.

Yet my resolution to escape was but half-hearted. I could not resign myself
thus to lose all chance of following up this mystery. My instincts as a police
official revolted. I had but to reach out my hand in order to seize this man who
had been outlawed! Should I let him escape me! No! I would not save myself!
Yet, on the other hand, what fate awaited me, and where would I be carried by
the "Terror," if I remained on board?

It was a quarter past six. The destroyers, quivering and trembling under the
strain of their speed, gained on us perceptibly. They were now directly astern,
leaving between them a distance of twelve or fifteen cable lengths. The "Terror,"
without increasing her speed, saw one of them approach on the port side, the
other to starboard.

I did not leave my place. The man at the bow was close by me. Immovable at
the helm, his eyes burning beneath his contracted brows, the captain waited. He
meant, perhaps, to finish the chase by one last maneuver.

Suddenly, a puff of smoke rose from the destroyer on our left. A projectile,
brushing the surface of the water, passed in front of the "Terror," and sped
beyond the destroyer on our right.

I glanced around anxiously. Standing by my side, the lookout seemed to


await a sign from the captain. As for him, he did not even turn his head; and I
shall never forget the expression of disdain imprinted on his visage.

At this moment, I was pushed suddenly toward the hatchway of my cabin,
which was fastened above me. At the same instant the other hatchways were
closed; the deck became watertight. I heard a single throb of the machinery, and
the plunge was made, the submarine disappeared beneath the waters of the lake.

Cannon shot still boomed above us. Their heavy echo reached my ear; then
everything was peace. Only a faint light penetrated through the porthole into my
cabin. The submarine, without the least rolling or pitching, sped silently through
the deeps.

I had seen with what rapidity, and also with what ease the transformation of
the "Terror" had been made. No less easy and rapid, perhaps, would be her
change to an automobile.

And now what would this Master of the World do? Presumably he would
change his course, unless, indeed, he preferred to speed to land, and there
continue his route along the roads. It still seemed more probable, however, that
he would turn back toward the west, and after distancing the destroyers, regain
the Detroit River. Our submersion would probably only last long enough to
escape out of cannon range, or until night forbade pursuit.

Fate, however, had decreed a different ending to this exciting chase. Scarce
ten minutes had passed when there seemed some confusion on board. I heard
rapid words exchanged in the engine room. The steadily moving machinery
became noisy and irregular. At once I suspected that some accident compelled
the submarine to reascend.

I was not mistaken. In a moment, the semi-obscurity of my cabin was
pierced by sunshine. The "Terror" had risen above water. I heard steps on the
deck, and the hatchways were reopened, including mine. I sprang up the ladder.

The captain had resumed his place at the helm, while the two men were busy
below. I looked to see if the destroyers were still in view. Yes! Only a quarter of
a mile away! The "Terror" had already been seen, and the powerful vessels
which enforced the mandates of our government were swinging into position to
give chase. Once more the "Terror" sped in the direction of Niagara River.

I must confess, I could make nothing of this maneuver. Plunging into a cul-
de-sac, no longer able to seek the depths because of the accident, the "Terror"
might, indeed, temporarily distance her pursuers; but she must find her path
barred by them when she attempted to return. Did she intend to land, and if so,
could she hope to outrun the telegrams which would warn every police agency
of her approach?

We were now not half a mile ahead. The destroyers pursued us at top speed,


though being now directly behind, they were in poor position for using their
guns. Our captain seemed content to keep this distance; though it would have
been easy for him to increase it, and then at nightfall, to dodge back behind the
enemy.

Already Buffalo had disappeared on our right, and a little after seven o'clock
the opening of the Niagara River appeared ahead. If he entered there, knowing
that he could not return, our captain must have lost his mind! And in truth was
he not insane, this man who proclaimed himself, who believed himself, Master
of the World?

I watched him there, calm, impassive not even turning his head to note the
progress of the destroyers and I wondered at him.

This end of the lake was absolutely deserted. Freight steamers bound for the
towns on the banks of the upper Niagara are not numerous, as its navigation is
dangerous. Not one was in sight. Not even a fishing-boat crossed the path of the
"Terror." Even the two destroyers would soon be obliged to pause in their
pursuit, if we continued our mad rush through these dangerous waters.

I have said that the Niagara River flows between New York and Canada. Its
width, of about three quarters of a mile, narrows as it approaches the falls. Its
length, from Lake Erie to Lake Ontario, is about fifteen leagues. It flows in a
northerly direction, until it empties the waters of Lake Superior, Michigan,
Huron, and Erie into Ontario, the last lake of this mighty chain. The celebrated
falls, which occur in the midst of this great river have a height of over a hundred
and fifty feet. They are called sometimes the Horseshoe Falls, because they
curve inward like the iron shoe. The Indians have given them the name of
"Thunder of Waters," and in truth a mighty thunder roars from them without
cessation, and with a tumult which is heard for several miles away.

Between Lake Erie, and the little city of Niagara Falls, two islands divide the
current of the river, Navy Island, a league above the cataract, and Goat Island,
which separates the American and the Canadian Falls. Indeed, on the lower point
of this latter isle stood once that "Terrapin Tower" so daringly built in the midst
of the plunging waters on the very edge of the abyss. It has been destroyed; for
the constant wearing away of the stone beneath the cataract makes the ledge
move with the ages slowly up the river, and the tower has been drawn into the
gulf.

The town of Fort Erie stands on the Canadian shore at the entrance of the
river. Two other towns are set along the banks above the falls, Schlosser on the
right bank, and Chippewa on the left, located on either side of Navy Island. It is
at this point that the current, bound within a narrower channel, begins to move at
tremendous speed, to become two miles further on, the celebrated cataract.


The "Terror" had already passed Fort Erie. The sun in the west touched the
edge of the Canadian horizon, and the moon, faintly seen, rose above the mists
of the south. Darkness would not envelop us for another hour.

The destroyers, with huge clouds of smoke streaming from their funnels,
followed us a mile behind. They sped between banks green with shade trees and
dotted with cottages which lay among lovely gardens.

Obviously the "Terror" could no longer turn back. The destroyers shut her in
completely. It is true their commanders did not know, as I did, that an accident to
her machinery had forced her to the surface, and that it was impossible for her to
escape them by another plunge. Nevertheless, they continued to follow, and
would assuredly maintain their pursuit to the very last.

I marveled at the intrepidity of their chase through these dangerous waters. I
marveled still more at the conduct of our captain. Within a half hour now, his
course would be barred by the cataract. No matter how perfect his machine, it
could not escape the power of the great falls. If the current once mastered our
engines, we should inevitably disappear in the gulf nearly two hundred feet deep
which the waters have dug at the base of the falls! Perhaps, however, our captain
had still power to turn to one of the shores and flee by the automobile routes.

In the midst of this excitement, what action should I take personally? Should
I attempt to gain the shores of Navy Island, if we indeed advanced that far? If I
did not seize this chance, never after what I had learned of his secrets, never
would the Master of the World restore me to liberty.

I suspected, however, that my flight was no longer possible. If I was not
confined within my cabin, I no longer remained unwatched. While the captain
retained his place at the helm, his assistant by my side never removed his eyes
from me. At the first movement, I should be seized and locked within my room.
For the present, my fate was evidently bound up with that of the "Terror."

The distance which separated us from the two destroyers was now growing
rapidly less. Soon they were but a few cable-lengths away. Could the motor of
the "Terror," since the accident, no longer hold its speeds? Yet the captain
showed not the least anxiety, and made no effort to reach land!

We could hear the hissing of the steam which escaped from the valves of the
destroyers, to mingle with the streamers of black smoke. But we heard, even
more plainly, the roar of the cataract, now less than three miles away.

The "Terror" took the left branch of the river in passing Navy Island. At this
point, she was within easy reach of the shore, yet she shot ahead. Five minutes
later, we could see the first trees of Goat Island. The current became more and
more irresistible. If the "Terror" did not stop, the destroyers could not much
longer follow her. If it pleased our accursed captain to plunge us into the vortex


of the falls, surely they did not mean to follow into the abyss!

Indeed, at this moment they signaled each other, and stopped the pursuit.
They were scarce more than six hundred feet from the cataract. Then their
thunders burst on the air and several cannon shot swept over the "Terror" without
hitting its lowlying deck.

The sun had set, and through the twilight the moon's rays shone upon us
from the south. The speed of our craft, doubled by the speed of the current, was
prodigious! In another moment, we should plunge into that black hollow which
forms the very center of the Canadian Falls.

With an eye of horror, I saw the shores of Goat Island flashed by, then came
the Isles of the Three Sisters, drowned in the spray from the abyss.

I sprang up; I started to throw myself into the water, in the desperate hope of
gaining this last refuge. One of the men seized me from behind.

Suddenly a sharp noise was heard from the mechanism which throbbed
within our craft. The long gangways folded back on the sides of the machine,
spread out like wings, and at the moment when the "Terror" reached the very
edge of the falls, she arose into space, escaping from the thundering cataract in
the center of a lunar rainbow.


Chapter 15


THE EAGLE'S NEST


On the morrow, when I awoke after a sound sleep, our vehicle seemed
motionless. It seemed to me evident that we were not running upon land. Yet
neither were we rushing through or beneath the waters; nor yet soaring across
the sky. Had the inventor regained that mysterious hiding-place of his, where no
human being had ever set foot before him?

And now, since he had not disembarrassed himself of my presence, was his
secret about to be revealed to me?

It seemed astonishing that I had slept so profoundly during most of our
voyage through the air. It puzzled me and I asked if this sleep had not been
caused by some drug, mixed with my last meal, the captain of the "Terror"
having wished thus to prevent me from knowing the place where we landed. All
that I can recall of the previous night is the terrible impression made upon me by
that moment when the machine, instead of being caught in the vortex of the
cataract rose under the impulse of its machinery like a bird with its huge wings
beating with tremendous power!

So this machine actually fulfilled a four-fold use! It was at the same time
automobile, boat, submarine, and airship. Earth, sea and air,--it could move
through all three elements! And with what power! With what speed! Al few
instants sufficed to complete its marvelous transformations. The same engine
drove it along all its courses! And I had been a witness of its metamorphoses!
But that of which I was still ignorant, and which I could perhaps discover, was
the source of the energy which drove the machine, and above all, who was the
inspired inventor who, after having created it, in every detail, guided it with so
much ability and audacity!

At the moment when the "Terror" rose above the Canadian Falls, I was held
down against the hatchway of my cabin. The clear, moonlit evening had
permitted me to note the direction taken by the airship. It followed the course of
the river and passed the Suspension Bridge three miles below the falls. It is here
that the irresistible rapids of the Niagara River begin, where the river bends
sharply to descend toward Lake Ontario.

On leaving this point, I was sure that we had turned toward the east. The
captain continued at the helm. I had not addressed a word to him. What good
would it do? He would not have answered. I noted that the "Terror" seemed to be


guided in its course through the air with surprising ease. Assuredly the roads of
the air were as familiar to it as those of the seas and of the lands!

In the presence of such results, could one not understand the enormous pride
of this man who proclaimed himself Master of the World? Was he not in control
of a machine infinitely superior to any that had ever sprung from the hand of
man, and against which men were powerless? In truth, why should he sell this
marvel? Why should he accept the millions offered him? Yes, I comprehended
now that absolute confidence in himself which was expressed in his every
attitude. And where might not his ambition carry him, if by its own excess it
mounted some day into madness!

A half hour after the "Terror" soared into the air, I had sunk into complete
unconsciousness, without realizing its approach. I repeat, it must have been
caused by some drug. Without doubt, our commander did not wish me to know
the road he followed.

Hence I cannot say whether the aviator continued his flight through space, or
whether the mariner sailed the surface of some sea or lake, or the chauffeur sped
across the American roads. No recollection remains with me of what passed
during that night of July thirty-first.

Now, what was to follow from this adventure? And especially concerning
myself, what would be its end?

I have said that at the moment when I awoke from my strange sleep, the
"Terror" seemed to me completely motionless. I could hardly be mistaken;
whatever had been her method of progress, I should have felt some movement,
even in the air. I lay in my berth in the cabin, where I had been shut in without
knowing it, just as I had been on the preceding night which I had passed on
board the "Terror" on Lake Erie.

My business now was to learn if I would be allowed to go on deck here
where the machine had landed. I attempted to raise the hatchway. It was
fastened.

"Ah!" said I, "am I to be kept here until the "Terror' recommences its
travels?" Was not that, indeed, the only time when escape was hopeless?

My impatience and anxiety may be appreciated. I knew not how long this
halt might continue.

I had not a quarter of an hour to wait. A noise of bars being removed came to
my ear. The hatchway was raised from above. A wave of light and air penetrated
my cabin.

With one bound I reached the deck. My eyes in an instant swept round the
horizon.

The "Terror," as I had thought, rested quiet on the ground. She was in the


midst of a rocky hollow measuring from fifteen to eighteen hundred feet in
circumference. A floor of yellow gravel carpeted its entire extent, unrelieved by
a single tuft of herbage.

This hollow formed an almost regular oval, with its longer diameter
extending north and south. As to the surrounding-wall, what was its height, what
the character of its crest, I could not judge. Above us was gathered a fog so
heavy, that the rays of the sun had not yet pierced it. Heavy trails of cloud drifted
across the sandy floor, Doubtless the morning was still young, and this mist
might later be dissolved.

It was quite cold here, although this was the first day of August. I concluded
therefore that we must be far in the north, or else high above sea-level. We must
still be somewhere on the New Continent; though where, it was impossible to
surmise. Yet no matter how rapid our flight had been, the airship could not have
traversed either ocean in the dozen hours since our departure from Niagara.

At this moment, I saw the captain come from an opening in the rocks,
probably a grotto, at the base of this cliff hidden in the fog. Occasionally, in the
mists above, appeared the shadows of huge birds. Their raucous cries were the
sole interruption to the profound silence. Who knows if they were not affrighted
by the arrival of this formidable, winged monster, which they could not match
either in might or speed.

Everything led me to believe that it was here that the Master of the World
withdrew in the intervals between his prodigious journeys. Here was the garage
of his automobile; the harbor of his boat; the hangar of his airship.

And now the "Terror" stood motionless at the bottom of this hollow. At last I
could examine her; and it looked as if her owners had no intention of preventing
me. The truth is that the commander seemed to take no more notice of my
presence than before. His two companions joined him, and the three did not
hesitate to enter together into the grotto I had seen. What a chance to study the
machine, at least its exterior! As to its inner parts, probably I should never get
beyond conjecture.

In fact, except for that of my cabin, the hatchways were closed; and it would
be vain for me to attempt to open them. At any rate, it might be more interesting
to find out what kind of propeller drove the "Terror" in these many
transformations.

I jumped to the ground and found I was left at leisure, to proceed with this
first examination.

The machine was as I have said spindle-shaped. The bow was sharper than
the stern. The body was of aluminium, the wings of a substance whose nature I
could not determine. The body rested on four wheels, about two feet in diameter.


These had pneumatic tires so thick as to assure ease of movement at any speed.
Their spokes spread out like paddles or battledores; and when the "Terror"
moved either on or under the water, they must have increased her pace.

These wheels were not however, the principal propeller. This consisted of
two "Parsons" turbines placed on either side of the keel. Driven with extreme
rapidity by the engine, they urged the boat onward in the water by twin screws,
and I even questioned if they were not powerful enough to propel the machine
through the air.

The chief aerial support, however, was that of the great wings, now again in
repose, and folded back along the sides. Thus the theory of the "heavier than air"
flying machine was employed by the inventor, a system which enabled him to
dart through space with a speed probably superior to that of the largest birds.

As to the agent which set in action these various mechanisms, I repeat, it
was, it could be, no other than electricity. But from what source did his batteries
get their power? Had he somewhere an electric factory, to which he must return?
Were the dynamos, perhaps working in one of the caverns of this hollow?

The result of my examination was that, while I could see that the machine
used wheels and turbine screws and wings, I knew nothing of either its engine,
nor of the force which drove it. To be sure, the discovery of this secret would be
of little value to me. To employ it I must first be free. And after what I knew--
little as that really was--the Master of the World would never release me.

There remained, it is true, the chance of escape. But would an opportunity
ever present itself? If there could be none during the voyages of the "Terror,"
might there possibly be, while we remained in this retreat?

The first question to be solved was the location of this hollow. What
communication did it have with the surrounding region? Could one only depart
from it by a flying-machine? And in what part of the United States were we?
Was it not reasonable to estimate, that our flight through the darkness had
covered several hundred leagues?

There was one very natural hypothesis which deserved to be considered, if
not actually accepted. What more natural harbor could there be for the "Terror"
than the Great Eyrie? Was it too difficult a flight for our aviator to reach the
summit? Could he not soar anywhere that the vultures and the eagles could? Did
not that inaccessible Eyrie offer to the Master of the World just such a retreat as
our police had been unable to discover, one in which he might well believe
himself safe from all attacks? Moreover, the distance between Niagara Falls and
this part of the Blueridge Mountains, did not exceed four hundred and fifty
miles, a flight which would have been easy for the "Terror."

Yes, this idea more and more took possession of me. It crowded out a


hundred other unsupported suggestions. Did not this explain the nature of the
bond which existed between the Great Eyrie and the letter which I had received
with our commander's initials? And the threats against me if I renewed the
ascent! And the espionage to which I had been subjected! And all the
phenomena of which the Great Eyrie had been the theater, were they not to be
attributed to this same cause--though what lay behind the phenomena was not
yet clear? Yes, the Great Eyrie! The Great Eyrie!

But since it had been impossible for me to penetrate here, would it not be
equally impossible for me to get out again, except upon the "Terror?" Ah, if the
mists would but lift! Perhaps I should recognize the place. What was as yet a
mere hypothesis, would become a starting point to act upon.

However, since I had freedom to move about, since neither the captain nor
his men paid any heed to me, I resolved to explore the hollow. The three of them
were all in the grotto toward the north end of the oval. Therefore I would
commence my inspection at the southern end.

Reaching the rocky wall, I skirted along its base and found it broken by
many crevices; above, arose more solid rocks of that feldspar of which the chain
of the Alleghanies largely consists. To what height the rock wall rose, or what
was the character of its summit, was still impossible to see. I must wait until the
sun had scattered the mists.

In the meantime, I continued to follow along the base of the cliff. None of its
cavities seemed to extend inward to any distance. Several of them contained
debris from the hand of man, bits of broken wood, heaps of dried grasses. On the
ground were still to be seen the footprints that the captain and his men must have
left, perhaps months before, upon the sand.

My jailers, being doubtless very busy in their cabin, did not show themselves
until they had arranged and packed several large bundles. Did they purpose to
carry those on board the "Terror?" And were they packing up with the intention
of permanently leaving their retreat?

In half an hour my explorations were completed and I returned toward the
center. Here and there were heaped up piles of ashes, bleached by weather. There
were fragments of burned planks and beams; posts to which clung rusted iron-
work; armatures of metal twisted by fire; all the remnants of some intricate
mechanism destroyed by the flames.

Clearly at some period not very remote the hollow had been the scene of a
conflagration, accidental or intentional. Naturally I connected this with the
phenomena observed at the Great Eyrie, the flames which rose above the crest,
the noises which had so frightened the people of Pleasant Garden and
Morganton. But of what mechanisms were these the fragments, and what reason


had our captain for destroying them?

At this moment I felt a breath of air; a breeze came from the east. The sky
swiftly cleared. The hollow was filled with light from the rays of the sun which
appeared midway between the horizon and the zenith.

A cry escaped me! The crest of the rocky wall rose a hundred feet above me.
And on the eastern side was revealed that easily recognizable pinnacle, the rock
like a mounting eagle. It was the same that had held the attention of Mr. Elias
Smith and myself, when we had looked up at it from the outer side of the Great
Eyrie.

Thus there was no further doubt. In its flight during the night the airship had
covered the distance between Lake Erie and North Carolina. It was in the depth
of this Eyrie that the machine had found shelter! This was the nest, worthy of the
gigantic and powerful bird created by the genius of our captain! The fortress
whose mighty walls none but he could scale! Perhaps even, he had discovered in
the depths of some cavern, some subterranean passage by which he himself
could quit the Great Eyrie, leaving the "Terror" safely sheltered within.

At last I saw it all! This explained the first letter sent me from the Great
Eyrie itself with the threat of death. If we had been able to penetrate into this
hollow, who knows if the secrets of the Master of the World might not have been
discovered before he had been able to set them beyond our reach?

I stood there, motionless; my eyes fixed on that mounting eagle of stone,
prey to a sudden, violent emotion. Whatsoever might be the consequences to
myself, was it not my duty to destroy this machine, here and now, before it could
resume its menacing flight of mastery across the world!

Steps approached behind me. I turned. The inventor stood by my side, and
pausing looked me in the face.

I was unable to restrain myself; the words burst forth--""The Great Eyrie! The
Great Eyrie!"

"Yes, Inspector Strock."

"And you! You are the Master of the World?"

"Of that world to which I have already proved myself to be the most
powerful of men."

"You!" I reiterated, stupefied with amazement.

"I," responded he, drawing himself up in all his pride, "I, Robur--Robur, the
Conqueror!"


Chapter 16


ROBUR, THE CONQUEROR


Robur, the Conqueror! This then was the likeness I had vaguely recalled.
Some years before the portrait of this extraordinary man had been printed in all
the American newspapers, under date of the thirteenth of June, the day after this
personage had made his sensational appearance at the meeting of the Weldon
Institute at Philadelphia.

I had noted the striking character of the portrait at the time; the square
shoulders; the back like a regular trapezoid, its longer side formed by that
geometrical shoulder line; the robust neck; the enormous spheroidal head. The
eyes at the least emotion, burned with fire, while above them were the heavy,
permanently contracted brows, which signified such energy. The hair was short
and crisp, with a glitter as of metal in its lights. The huge breast rose and fell like
a blacksmith's forge; and the thighs, the arms and hands, were worthy of the
mighty body. The narrow beard was the same also, with the smooth shaven
cheeks which showed the powerful muscles of the jaw.

And this was Robur the Conqueror, who now stood before me, who revealed
himself to me, hurling forth his name like a threat, within his own impenetrable
fortress!

Let me recall briefly the facts which had previously drawn upon Robur the
Conqueror the attention of the entire world. The Weldon Institute was a club
devoted to aeronautics under the presidency of one of the chief personages of
Philadelphia, commonly called Uncle Prudent. Its secretary was Mr. Phillip
Evans. The members of the Institute were devoted to the theory of the "lighter
than air" machine; and under their two leaders were constructing an enormous
dirigible balloon, the "Go-Ahead."

At a meeting in which they were discussing the details of the construction of
their balloon, this unknown Robur had suddenly appeared and, ridiculing all
their plans, had insisted that the only true solution of flight lay with the heavier
than air machines, and that he had proven this by constructing one.

He was in this turn doubted and ridiculed by the members of the club, who
called him in mockery Robur the Conqueror. In the tumult that followed,
revolver shots were fired; and the intruder disappeared.

That same night he had by force abducted the president and the secretary of
the club, and had taken them, much against their will upon a voyage in the


wonderful airship, the "Albatross," which he had constructed. He meant thus to
prove to them beyond argument the correctness of his assertions. This ship, a
hundred feet long, was upheld in the air by a large number of horizontal screws
and was driven forward by vertical screws at its bow and stern. It was managed
by a crew of at least half a dozen men, who seemed absolutely devoted to their
leader, Robur.

After a voyage almost completely around the world, Mr. Prudent and Mr.
Evans managed to escape from the "Albatross" after a desperate struggle. They
even managed to cause an explosion on the airship, destroying it, and involving
the inventor and all his crew in a terrific fall from the sky into the Pacific ocean.

Mr. Prudent and Mr. Evans then returned to Philadelphia. They had learned
that the "Albatross" had been constructed on an unknown isle of the Pacific
called Island X; but since the location of this hiding-place was wholly unknown,
its discovery lay scarcely within the bounds of possibility. Moreover, the search
seemed entirely unnecessary, as the vengeful prisoners were quite certain that
they had destroyed their jailers.

Hence the two millionaires, restored to their homes, went calmly on with the
construction of their own machine, the "Go-Ahead." They hoped by means of it
to soar once more into the regions they had traversed with Robur, and to prove to
themselves that their lighter than air machine was at least the equal of the heavy
"Albatross." If they had not persisted, they would not have been true Americans.

On the twentieth of April in the following year the "Go-Ahead" was finished
and the ascent was made, from Fairmount Park in Philadelphia. I myself was
there with thousands of other spectators. We saw the huge balloon rise
gracefully; and, thanks to its powerful screws, it maneuvered in every direction
with surprising ease. Suddenly a cry was heard, a cry repeated from a thousand
throats. Another airship had appeared in the distant skies and it now approached
with marvelous rapidity. It was another "Albatross," perhaps even superior to the
first. Robur and his men had escaped death in the Pacific; and, burning for
revenge, they had constructed a second airship in their secret Island X.

Like a gigantic bird of prey, the "Albatross" hurled itself upon the "Go-
Ahead." Doubtless, Robur, while avenging himself wished also to prove the
immeasurable superiority of the heavier than air machines.

Mr. Prudent and Mr. Evans defended themselves as best they could.
Knowing that their balloon had nothing like the horizontal speed of the
"Albatross," they attempted to take advantage of their superior lightness and rise
above her. The "Go-Ahead," throwing out all her ballast, soared to a height of
over twenty thousand feet. Yet even there the "Albatross" rose above her, and
circled round her with ease.


Suddenly an explosion was heard. The enormous gas-bag of the "Go-
Ahead," expanding under the dilation of its contents at this great height, had
finally burst.

Half-emptied, the balloon fell rapidly.

Then to our universal astonishment, the "Albatross" shot down after her
rival, not to finish the work of destruction but to bring rescue. Yes! Robur,
forgetting his vengeance, rejoined the sinking "Go-Ahead," and his men lifted
Mr. Prudent, Mr. Evans, and the aeronaut who accompanied them, onto the
platform of his craft. Then the balloon, being at length entirely empty, fell to its
destruction among the trees of Fairmount Park.

The public was overwhelmed with astonishment, with fear! Now that Robur
had recaptured his prisoners, how would he avenge himself? Would they be
carried away, this time, forever?

The "Albatross" continued to descend, as if to land in the clearing at
Fairmount Park. But if it came within reach, would not the infuriated crowd
throw themselves upon the airship, tearing both it and its inventor to pieces?

The "Albatross" descended within six feet of the ground. I remember well
the general movement forward with which the crowd threatened to attack it.
Then Robur's voice rang out in words which even now I can repeat almost as he
said them:

"Citizens of the United States, the president and the secretary of the Weldon
Institute are again in my power. In holding them prisoners I would but be
exercising my natural right of reprisal for the injuries they have done me. But the
passion and resentment which have been roused both in them and you by the
success of the 'Albatross,' show that the souls of men are not yet ready for the
vast increase of power which the conquest of the air will bring to them. Uncle
Prudent, Phillip Evans, you are free."

The three men rescued from the balloon leaped to the ground. The airship
rose some thirty feet out of reach, and Robur recommenced:

"Citizens of the United States, the conquest of the air is made; but it shall not
be given into your hands until the proper time. I leave, and I carry my secret with
me. It will not be lost to humanity, but shall be entrusted to them when they have
learned not to abuse it. Farewell, Citizens of the United States!"

Then the "Albatross" rose under the impulse of its mighty screws, and sped
away amidst the hurrahs of the multitude.

I have ventured to remind my readers of this last scene somewhat in detail,
because it seemed to reveal the state of mind of the remarkable personage who
now stood before me. Apparently he had not then been animated by sentiments
hostile to humanity. He was content to await the future; though his attitude


undeniably revealed the immeasurable confidence which he had in his own
genius, the immense pride which his almost superhuman powers had aroused
within him.

It was not astonishing, moreover, that this haughtiness had little by little been
aggravated to such a degree that he now presumed to enslave the entire world, as
his public letter had suggested by its significant threats. His vehement mind had
with time been roused to such over-excitement that he might easily be driven
into the most violent excesses.

As to what had happened in the years since the last departure of the
"Albatross," I could only partly reconstruct this even with my present
knowledge. It had not sufficed the prodigious inventor to create a flying
machine, perfect as that was! He had planned to construct a machine which
could conquer all the elements at once. Probably in the workshops of Island X, a
selected body of devoted workmen had constructed, one by one, the pieces of
this marvelous machine, with its quadruple transformation. Then the second
"Albatross" must have carried these pieces to the Great Eyrie, where they had
been put together, within easier access of the world of men than the far-off island
had permitted. The "Albatross" itself had apparently been destroyed, whether by
accident or design, within the eyrie. The "Terror" had then made its appearance
on the roads of the United States and in the neighboring waters. And I have told
under what conditions, after having been vainly pursued across Lake Erie, this
remarkable masterpiece had risen through the air carrying me a prisoner on
board.


Chapter 17


IN THE NAME OF THE LAW


What was to be the issue of this remarkable adventure? Could I bring it to
any denouement whatever, either sooner or later? Did not Robur hold the results
wholly in his own hands? Probably I would never have such an opportunity for
escape as had occurred to Mr. Prudent and Mr. Evans amid the islands of the
Pacific. I could only wait. And how long might the waiting last!

To be sure, my curiosity had been partly satisfied. But even now I knew only
the answer to the problems of the Great Eyrie. Having at length penetrated its
circle, I comprehended all the phenomena observed by the people of the
Blueridge Mountains. I was assured that neither the country-folk throughout the
region, nor the townfolk of Pleasant Garden and Morganton were in danger of
volcanic eruptions or earthquakes. No subterranean forces whatever were
battling within the bowels of the mountains. No crater had arisen in this corner
of the Alleghanies. The Great Eyrie served merely as the retreat of Robur the
Conqueror. This impenetrable hiding-place where he stored his materials and
provisions, had without doubt been discovered by him during one of his aerial
voyages in the "Albatross." It was a retreat probably even more secure than that
as yet undiscovered Island X in the Pacific.

This much I knew of him; but of this marvelous machine of his, of the
secrets of its construction and propelling force, what did I really know?
Admitting that this multiple mechanism was driven by electricity, and that this
electricity was, as we knew it had been in the "Albatross," extracted directly
from the surrounding air by some new process, what were the details of its
mechanism? I had not been permitted to see the engine; doubtless I should never
see it.

On the question of my liberty I argued thus: Robur evidently intends to
remain unknown. As to what he intends to do with his machine, I fear, recalling
his letter, that the world must expect from it more of evil than of good. At any
rate, the incognito which he has so carefully guarded in the past he must mean to
preserve in the future. Now only one man can establish the identity of the Master
of the World with Robur the Conqueror. This man is I his prisoner, I who have
the right to arrest him, I, who ought to put my hand on his shoulder, saying, "In
the Name of the Law--"

On the other hand, could I hope for a rescue from with out? Evidently not.


The police authorities must know everything that had happened at Black Rock
Creek. Mr. Ward, advised of all the incidents, would have reasoned on the matter
as follows: when the "Terror" quitted the creek dragging me at the end of her
hawser, I had either been drowned or, since my body had not been recovered, I
had been taken on board the "Terror," and was in the hands of its commander.

In the first case, there was nothing more to do than to write "deceased" after
the name of John Strock, chief inspector of the federal police in Washington.

In the second case, could my confreres hope ever to see me again? The two
destroyers which had pursued the "Terror" into the Niagara River had stopped,
perforce, when the current threatened to drag them over the falls. At that
moment, night was closing in, and what could be thought on board the
destroyers but that the "Terror" had been engulfed in the abyss of the cataract? It
was scarce possible that our machine had been seen when, amid the shades of
night, it rose above the Horseshoe Falls, or when it winged its way high above
the mountains on its route to the Great Eyrie.

With regard to my own fate, should I resolve to question Robur? Would he
consent even to appear to hear me? Was he not content with having hurled at me
his name? Would not that name seem to him to answer everything?

That day wore away without bringing the least change to the situation. Robur
and his men continued actively at work upon the machine, which apparently
needed considerable repair. I concluded that they meant to start forth again very
shortly, and to take me with them. It would, however, have been quite possible to
leave me at the bottom of the Eyrie. There would have been no way by which I
could have escaped, and there were provisions at hand sufficient to keep me
alive for many days.

What I studied particularly during this period was the mental state of Robur.
He seemed to me under the dominance of a continuous excitement. What was it
that his ever-seething brain now meditated? What projects was he forming for
the future? Toward what region would he now turn? Would he put in execution
the menaces expressed in his letter--the menaces of a madman!

The night of that first day, I slept on a couch of dry grass in one of the
grottoes of the Great Eyrie. Food was set for me in this grotto each succeeding
day. On the second and third of August, the three men continued at their work
scarcely once, however, exchanging any words, even in the midst of their labors.
When the engines were all repaired to Robur's satisfaction, the men began
putting stores aboard their craft, as if expecting a long absence. Perhaps the
"Terror" was about to traverse immense distances; perhaps even, the captain
intended to regain his Island X, in the midst of the Pacific.

Sometimes I saw him wander about the Eyrie buried in thought, or he would


stop and raise his arm toward heaven as if in defiance of that God with Whom he
assumed to divide the empire of the world. Was not his overweening pride
leading him toward insanity? An insanity which his two companions, hardly less
excited than he, could do nothing to subdue! Had he not come to regard himself
as mightier than the elements which he had so audaciously defied even when he
possessed only an airship, the "Albatross?" And now, how much more powerful
had he become, when earth, air and water combined to offer him an infinite field
where none might follow him!

Hence I had much to fear from the future, even the most dread catastrophes.
It was impossible for me to escape from the Great Eyrie, before being dragged
into a new voyage. After that, how could I possibly get away while the "Terror"
sped through the air or the ocean? My only chance must be when she crossed the
land, and did so at some moderate speed. Surely a distant and feeble hope to
cling to!

It will be recalled that after our arrival at the Great Eyrie, I had attempted to
obtain some response from Robur, as to his purpose with me; but I had failed.
On this last day I made another attempt.

In the afternoon I walked up and down before the large grotto where my
captors were at work. Robur, standing at the entrance, followed me steadily with
his eyes. Did he mean to address me?

I went up to him. "Captain," said I, "I have already asked you a question,
which you have not answered. I ask it again: What do you intend to do with
me?"

We stood face to face scarce two steps apart. With arms folded, he glared at
me, and I was terrified by his glance. Terrified, that is the word! The glance was
not that of a sane man. Indeed, it seemed to reflect nothing whatever of humanity
within.

I repeated my question in a more challenging tone. For an instant I thought
that Robur would break his silence and burst forth.

"What do you intend to do with me? Will you set me free?"

Evidently my captor's mind was obsessed by some other thought, from which
I had only distracted him for a moment. He made again that gesture which I had
already observed; he raised one defiant arm toward the zenith. It seemed to me
as if some irresistible force drew him toward those upper zones of the sky, that
he belonged no more to the earth, that he was destined to live in space; a
perpetual dweller in the clouds.

Without answering me, without seeming to have understood me, Robur
reentered the grotto.

How long this sojourn or rather relaxation of the "Terror" in the Great Eyrie


was to last, I did not know. I saw, however, on the afternoon of this third of
August that the repairs and the embarkation of stores were completed. The hold
and lockers of our craft must have been completely crowded with the provisions
taken from the grottoes of the Eyrie.

Then the chief of the two assistants, a man whom I now recognized as that
John Turner who had been mate of the "Albatross," began another labor. With
the help of his companion, he dragged to the center of the hollow all that
remained of their materials, empty cases, fragments of carpentry, peculiar pieces
of wood which clearly must have belonged to the "Albatross," which had been
sacrificed to this new and mightier engine of locomotion. Beneath this mass
there lay a great quantity of dried grasses. The thought came to me that Robur
was preparing to leave this retreat forever!

In fact, he could not be ignorant that the attention of the public was now
keenly fixed upon the Great Eyrie; and that some further attempt was likely to be
made to penetrate it. Must he not fear that some day or other the effort would be
successful, and that men would end by invading his hiding-place? Did he not
wish that they should find there no single evidence of his occupation?

The sun disappeared behind the crests of the Blueridge. His rays now lighted
only the very summit of Black Dome towering in the northwest. Probably the
"Terror" awaited only the night in order to begin her flight. The world did not yet
know that the automobile and boat could also transform itself into a flying
machine. Until now, it had never been seen in the air. And would not this fourth
transformation be carefully concealed, until the day when the Master of the
World chose to put into execution his insensate menaces?

Toward nine o'clock profound obscurity enwrapped the hollow. Not a star
looked down on us. Heavy clouds driven by a keen eastern wind covered the
entire sky. The passage of the "Terror" would be invisible, not only in our
immediate neighborhood, but probably across all the American territory and
even the adjoining seas.

At this moment Turner, approaching the huge stack in the middle of the
eyrie, set fire to the grass beneath.

The whole mass flared up at once. From the midst of a dense smoke, the
roaring flames rose to a height which towered above the walls of the Great
Eyrie. Once more the good folk of Morganton and Pleasant Garden would
believe that the crater had reopened. These flames would announce to them
another volcanic upheaval.

I watched the conflagration. I heard the roarings and cracklings which filled
the air. From the deck of the "Terror," Robur watched it also.

Turner and his companion pushed back into the fire the fragments which the


violence of the flames cast forth. Little by little the huge bonfire grew less. The
flames sank down into a mere mass of burnt-out ashes; and once more all was
silence and blackest night.

Suddenly I felt myself seized by the arm. Turner drew me toward the
"Terror." Resistance would have been useless. And moreover what could be
worse than to be abandoned without resources in this prison whose walls I could
not climb!

As soon as I set foot on the deck, Tumer also embarked. His companion
went forward to the lookout; Turner climbed down into the engine-room, lighted
by electric bulbs, from which not a gleam escaped outside.

Robur himself was at the helm, the regulator within reach of his hand, so that
he could control both our speed and our direction. As to me, I was forced to
descend into my cabin, and the hatchway was fastened above me. During that
night, as on that of our departure from Niagara, I was not allowed to watch the
movements of the "Terror."

Nevertheless, if I could see nothing of what was passing on board, I could
hear the noises of the machinery. I had first the feeling that our craft, its bow
slightly raised, lost contact with the earth. Some swerves and balancings in the
air followed. Then the turbines underneath spun with prodigious rapidity, while
the great wings beat with steady regularity.

Thus the "Terror," probably forever, had left the Great Eyrie, and launched
into the air as a ship launches into the waters. Our captain soared above the
double chain of the Alleghanies, and without doubt he would remain in the upper
zones of the air until he had left all the mountain region behind.

But in what direction would he turn? Would he pass in flight across the
plains of North Carolina, seeking the Atlantic Ocean? Or would he head to the
west to reach the Pacific? Perhaps he would seek, to the south, the waters of the
Gulf of Mexico. When day came how should I recognize which sea we were
upon, if the horizon of water and sky encircled us on every side?

Several hours passed; and how long they seemed to me! I made no effort to
find forgetfulness in sleep. Wild and incoherent thoughts assailed me. I felt
myself swept over worlds of imagination, as I was swept through space, by an
aerial monster. At the speed which the "Terror" possessed, whither might I not be
carried during this interminable night? I recalled the unbelievable voyage of the
"Albatross," of which the Weldon Institute had published an account, as
described by Mr. Prudent and Mr. Evans. What Robur, the Conqueror, had done
with his first airship, he could do even more readily with this quadruple
machine.

At length the first rays of daylight brightened my cabin. Would I be


permitted to go out now, to take my place upon the deck, as I had done upon
Lake Erie?

I pushed upon the hatchway: it opened. I came half way out upon the deck.

All about was sky and sea. We floated in the air above an ocean, at a height
which I judged to be about a thousand or twelve hundred feet. I could not see
Robur, so he was probably in the engine room. Turner was at the helm, his
companion on the lookout.

Now that I was upon the deck, I saw what I had not been able to see during
our former nocturnal voyage, the action of those powerful wings which beat
upon either side at the same time that the screws spun beneath the flanks of the
machine.

By the position of the sun, as it slowly mounted from the horizon, I realized
that we were advancing toward the south. Hence if this direction had not been
changed during the night this was the Gulf of Mexico which lay beneath us.

A hot day was announced by the heavy livid clouds which clung to the
horizon. These warnings of a coming storm did not escape the eye of Robur
when toward eight o'clock he came on deck and took Tummer's place at the helm.
Perhaps the cloud-bank recalled to him the waterspout in which the "Albatross"
had so nearly been destroyed, or the mighty cyclone from which he had escaped
only as if by a miracle above the Antarctic Sea.

It is true that the forces of Nature which had been too strong for the
"Albatross," might easily be evaded by this lighter and more versatile machine.
It could abandon the sky where the elements were in battle and descend to the
surface of the sea; and if the waves beat against it there too heavily, it could
always find calm in the tranquil depths.

Doubtless, however, there were some signs by which Robur, who must be
experienced in judging, decided that the storm would not burst until the next day.

He continued his flight; and in the afternoon, when we settled down upon the
surface of the sea, there was not a sign of bad weather. The "Terror" is a sea bird,
an albatross or frigate-bird, which can rest at will upon the waves! Only we have
this advantage, that fatigue has never any hold upon this metal organism, driven
by the inexhaustible electricity!

The whole vast ocean around us was empty. Not a sail nor a trail of smoke
was visible even on the limits of the horizon. Hence our passage through the
clouds had not been seen and signaled ahead.

The afternoon was not marked by any incident. The "Terror" advanced at
easy speed. What her captain intended to do, I could not guess. If he continued in
this direction, we should reach some one of the West Indies, or beyond that, at
the end of the Gulf, the shore of Venezuela or Colombia. But when night came,


perhaps we would again rise in the air to clear the mountainous barrier of
Guatemala and Nicaragua, and take flight toward Island X, somewhere in the
unknown regions of the Pacific.

Evening came. The sun sank in an horizon red as blood. The sea glistened
around the "Terror," which seemed to raise a shower of sparks in its passage.
There was a storm at hand. Evidently our captain thought so. Instead of being
allowed to remain on deck, I was compelled to reenter my cabin, and the
hatchway was closed above me.

In a few moments from the noises that followed, I knew that the machine
was about to be submerged. In fact, five minutes later, we were moving
peacefully forward through the ocean's depths.

Thoroughly wom out, less by fatigue than by excitement and anxious
thought, I fell into a profound sleep, natural this time and not provoked by any
soporific drug. When I awoke, after a length of time which I could not reckon,
the "Terror" had not yet returned to the surface of the sea.

This maneuver was executed a little later. The daylight pierced my porthole;
and at the same moment I felt the pitching and tossing to which we were
subjected by a heavy sea.

I was allowed to take my place once more outside the hatchway; where my
first thought was for the weather. A storm was approaching from the northwest.
Vivid lightning darted amid the dense, black clouds. Already we could hear the
rumbling of thunder echoing continuously through space. I was surprised--more
than surprised, frightened!--by the rapidity with which the storm rushed upward
toward the zenith. Scarcely would a ship have had time to furl her sails to escape
the shock of the blast, before it was upon her! The advance was as swift as it was
terrible.

Suddenly the wind was unchained with unheard of violence, as if it had
suddenly burst from this prison of cloud. In an instant a frightful sea uprose. The
breaking waves, foaming along all their crests, swept with their full weight over
the "Terror." If I had not been wedged solidly against the rail, I should have been
swept overboard!

There was but one thing to do--to change our machine again into a
submarine. It would find security and calm at a few dozen feet beneath the
surface. To continue to brave the fury of this outrageous sea was impossible.

Robur himself was on deck, and I awaited the order to return to my cabin--an
order which was not given. There was not even any preparation for the plunge.
With an eye more burning than ever, impassive before this frightful storm, the
captain looked it full in the face, as if to defy it, knowing that he had nothing to
fear.


It was imperative that the terror should plunge below without losing a
moment. Yet Robur seemed to have no thought of doing so. No! He preserved
his haughty attitude as of a man who in his immeasurable pride, believed himself
above or beyond humanity.

Seeing him thus I asked myself with almost superstitious awe, if he were not
indeed a demoniac being, escaped from some supernatural world.

A cry leaped from his mouth, and was heard amid the shrieks of the tempest
and the howlings of the thunder. "I, Robur! Robur!--The master of the world!"

He made a gesture which Turner and his companions understood. It was a
command; and without any hesitation these unhappy men, insane as their master,
obeyed it.

The great wings shot out, and the airship rose as it had risen above the falls
of Niagara. But if on that day it had escaped the might of the cataract, this time it
was amidst the might of the hurricane that we attempted our insensate flight.

The airship soared upward into the heart of the sky, amid a thousand
lightning flashes, surrounded and shaken by the bursts of thunder. It steered amid
the blinding, darting lights, courting destruction at every instant.

Robur's position and attitude did not change. With one hand on the helm, the
other on the speed regulators while the great wings beat furiously, he headed his
machine toward the very center of the storm, where the electric flashes were
leaping from cloud to cloud.

I must throw myself upon this madman to prevent him from driving his
machine into the very middle of this aerial furnace! I must compel him to
descend, to seek beneath the waters, a safety which was no longer possible either
upon the surface of the sea or in the sky! Beneath, we could wait until this
frightful outburst of the elements was at an end!

Then amid this wild excitement my own passion, all my instincts of duty,
arose within me! Yes, this was madness! Yet must I not arrest this criminal
whom my country had outlawed, who threatened the entire world with his
terrible invention? Must I not put my hand on his shoulder and summon him to
surrender to justice! Was I or was I not Strock, chief inspector of the federal
police? Forgetting where I was, one against three, uplifted in mid-sky above a
howling ocean, I leaped toward the stern, and in a voice which rose above the
tempest, I cried as I hurled myself upon Robur:

"In the name of the law, I--"

Suddenly the "Terror" trembled as if from a violent shock. All her frame
quivered, as the human frame quivers under the electric fluid. Struck by the
lightning in the very middle of her powerful batteries, the airship spread out on
all sides and went to pieces.


With her wings fallen, her screws broken, with bolt after bolt of the lightning
darting amid her ruins, the "Terror" fell from the height of more than a thousand
feet into the ocean beneath.


Chapter 18


THE OLD HOUSEKEEPER'S LAST COMMENT


When I came to myself after having been unconscious for many hours, a
group of sailors whose care had restored me to life surrounded the door of a
cabin in which I lay. By my pillow sat an officer who questioned me; and as my
senses slowly returned, I answered to his questioning.

I told them everything. Yes, everything! And assuredly my listeners must
have thought that they had upon their hands an unfortunate whose reason had not
returned with his consciousness.

I was on board the steamer Ottawa, in the Gulf of Mexico, headed for the
port of New Orleans. This ship, while flying before the same terrific thunder-
storm which destroyed the "Terror," had encountered some wreckage, among
whose fragments was entangled my helpless body. Thus I found myself back
among humankind once more, while Robur the Conqueror and his two
companions had ended their adventurous careers in the waters of the Gulf. The
Master of the World had disappeared forever, struck down by those thunderbolts
which he had dared to brave in the regions of their fullest power. He carried with
him the secret of his extraordinary machine.

Five days later the Ottawa sighted the shores of Louisiana; and on the
morning of the tenth of August she reached her port. After taking a warm leave
of my rescuers, I set out at once by train for Washington, which more than once I
had despaired of ever seeing again.

I went first of all to the bureau of police, meaning to make my earliest
appearance before Mr. Ward.

What was the surprise, the stupefaction, and also the joy of my chief, when
the door of his cabinet opened before me! Had he not every reason to believe,
from the report of my companions, that I had perished in the waters of Lake
Erie?

I informed him of all my experiences since I had disappeared, the pursuit of
the destroyers on the lake, the soaring of the "Terror" from amid Niagara Falls,
the halt within the crater of the Great Eyrie, and the catastrophe, during the
storm, above the Gulf of Mexico.

He learned for the first time that the machine created by the genius of this
Robur, could traverse space, as it did the earth and the sea.

In truth, did not the possession of so complete and marvelous a machine


justify the name of Master of the World, which Robur had taken to himself?
Certain it is that the comfort and even the lives of the public must have been
forever in danger from him; and that all methods of defence must have been
feeble and ineffective.

But the pride which I had seen rising bit by bit within the heart of this
prodigious man had driven him to give equal battle to the most terrible of all the
elements. It was a miracle that I had escaped safe and sound from that frightful
catastrophe.

Mr. Ward could scarcely believe my story. "Well, my dear Strock," said he at
last, "you have come back; and that is the main thing. Next to this notorious
Robur, you will be the man of the hour. I hope that your head will not be turned
with vanity, like that of this crazy inventor!"

"No, Mr. Ward," I responded, "but you will agree with me that never was
inquisitive man put to greater straits to satisfy his curiosity."

"I agree, Strock; and the mysteries of the Great Eyrie, the transformations of
the "Terror," you have discovered them! But unfortunately, the still greater
secrets of this Master of the World have perished with him."

The same evening the newspapers published an account of my adventures,
the truthfulness of which could not be doubted. Then, as Mr. Ward had
prophesied, I was the man of the hour.

One of the papers said, "Thanks to Inspector Strock the American police still
lead the world. While others have accomplished their work, with more or less
success, by land and by sea, the American police hurl themselves in pursuit of
criminals through the depths of lakes and oceans and even through the sky."

Yet, in following, as I have told, in pursuit of the "Terror," had I done
anything more than by the close of the present century will have become the
regular duty of my successors?

It is easy to imagine what a welcome my old housekeeper gave me when I
entered my house in Long Street. When my apparition--does not the word seem
just--stood before her, I feared for a moment she would drop dead, poor woman!
Then, after hearing my story, with eyes streaming with tears, she thanked
Providence for having saved me from so many perils.

"Now, sir," said she, "now--was I wrong?"

"Wrong? About what?"

"In saying that the Great Eyrie was the home of the devil?"

"Nonsense; this Robur was not the devil!"

"Ah, well!" replied the old woman, "he was worthy of being so!"


THE PEARL OF LIMA: A STORY OF TRUE LOVE
by JULES VERNE


CHAPTER I.

THE PLAZA-MAYOR.

The sun had disappeared behind the snowy peaks of the Cordilleras; but the
beautiful Peruvian sky long retains, through the transparent veil of night, the
reflection of his rays; the atmosphere is impregnated with a refreshing coolness,
which in these burning latitudes affords freedom of breath; it is the hour in
which one can live a European life, and seek without on the verandas some
cooling gentle zephyr; it seems as if a metallic roof was then interposed between
the sun and the earth, which, retaining the heat and suffering only the light to
pass, offers beneath its shelter a reparative repose.

This much desired hour had at last sounded from the clock of the cathedral.
While the earliest stars were rising above the horizon, the numerous
promenaders were traversing the streets of Lima, wrapped in their light mantles,
and conversing gravely on the most trivial affairs. There was a great movement
of the populace on the Plaza-Mayor, that forum of the ancient city of kings;
artisans were profiting by the coolness to quit their daily labors; they circulated
actively among the crowd, crying their various merchandise; the ladies of Lima,
carefully enveloped in the mantillas which mask their countenances, with the
exception of the right eye, darted stealthy glances on the surrounding masses;
they undulated through the groups of smokers, like foam at the will of the
waves; other sefioras, in ball costume, coiffed only with their abundant hair or
some natural flowers, passed in large caléches, throwing on the caballeros
nonchalant regards.

But these glances were not bestowed indiscriminately upon the young
cavaliers; the thoughts of the noble ladies could rest only on aristocratic heights.
The Indians passed without lifting their eyes upon them, knowing themselves to
be beneath their notice; betraying by no gesture or word, the bitter envy of their
hearts. They contrasted strongly with the half-breeds, or mestizoes, who,
repulsed like the former, vented their indignation in cries and protestations.

The proud descendants of Pizarro marched with heads high, as in the times
when their ancestors founded the city of kings; their traditional scorn rested alike
on the Indians whom they had conquered, and the mestizoes, born of their
relations with the natives of the New World. The Indians, on the contrary, were


constantly struggling to break their chains, and cherished alike aversion toward
the conquerors of the ancient empire of the Incas and their haughty and insolent
descendants.

But the mestizoes, Spanish in their contempt for the Indians, and Indian in
their hatred which they had vowed against the Spaniards, burned with both these
vivid and impassioned sentiments.

A group of these young people stood near the pretty fountain in the centre of
the Plaza-Mayor. Clad in their poncho, a piece of cloth or cotton in the form of a
parallelogram, with an opening in the middle to give passage to the head, in
large pantaloons, striped with a thousand colors, coiffed with broad-brimmed
hats of Guayaquil straw, they were talking, declaiming, gesticulating.

"You are right, André,” said a very obsequious young man, whom they called
Milleflores.

This was the friend, the parasite of André Certa, a young mestizo of swarthy
complexion, whose thin beard gave a singular appearance to his countenance.

André Certa, the son of a rich merchant killed in the last émeute of the
conspirator Lafuente, had inherited a large fortune; this he freely scattered
among his friends, whose humble salutations he demanded in exchange for
handfuls of gold.

"Of what use are these changes in government, these _ etermal
pronunciamentos which disturb Peru to gratify private ambition?" resumed
André, in a loud voice; "what is it to me whether Gambarra or Santa Cruz rule, if
there is no equality."

"Well said," exclaimed Milleflores, who, under the most republican
government, could never have been the equal of a man of sense.

"How is it," resumed André Certa, "that I, the son of a merchant, can ride
only in a caléche drawn by mules? Have not my ships brought wealth and
prosperity to the country? Is not the aristocracy of piasters worth all the titles of
Spain?"

"It is a shame!" resumed the young mestizo. "There is Don Fernand, who
passes in his carriage drawn by two horses! Don Fernand d'Aiquillo! He has
scarcely property enough to feed his coachman and horses, and he must come to
parade himself proudly about the square. And, hold! here is another! the Marquis
Don Vegal!"

A magnificent carriage, drawn by four fine horses, at that moment entered
the Plaza-Mayor; its only occupant was a man of proud mien, mingled with
sadness; he gazed, without seeming to see them, on the multitude assembled to
breathe the coolness of the evening. This man was the Marquis Don Vegal,
knight of Alcantara, of Malta, and of Charles II. He had a right to appear in this


pompous equipage; the viceroy and the archbishop could alone take precedence
of him; but this great nobleman came here from ennui and not from ostentation;
his thoughts were not depicted on his countenance, they were concentrated
beneath his bent brow; he received no impression from exterior objects, on
which he bestowed not a look, and heard not the envious reflections of the
mestizoes, when his four horses made their way through the crowd.

"T hate that man," said André Certa.

"You will not hate him long."

"I know it! All these nobles are displaying the last splendors of their luxury;
I can tell where their silver and their family jewels go."

"You have not your entrée with the Jew Samuel for nothing."

"Certainly not! On his account-books are inscribed aristocratic creditors; in
his strong-box are piled the wrecks of great fortunes; and in the day when the
Spaniards shall be as ragged as their Cesar de Bazan, we will have fine sport."

"Yes, we will have fine sport, dear André, mounted on your millions, on a
golden pedestal! And you are about to double your fortune! When are you to
marry the beautiful young daughter of old Samuel, a Limanienne to the end of
her nails, with nothing Jewish about her but her name of Sarah?"

"In a month," replied André Certa, proudly, "there will be no fortune in Peru
which can compete with mine."

"But why," asked some one, "do you not espouse some Spanish girl of high
descent?"

"I despise these people as much as I hate them."

André Certa concealed the fact of his having been repulsed by several noble
families, into which he had sought to introduce himself.

His interlocutor still wore an expression of doubt, and the brow of the
mestizo had contracted, when the latter was rudely elbowed by a man of tall
stature, whose gray hairs proclaimed him to be at least fifty, while the muscular
force of his firmly knit limbs seemed undiminished by age.

This man was clad in a brown vest, through which appeared a coarse shirt
with a broad collar; his short breeches, striped with green, were fastened by red
garters to stockings of clay-color; on his feet were sandals made of ojotas, ox-
hide prepared for this purpose; beneath his high-pointed hat gleamed large ear-
rings. His complexion was dark. After having jostled André Certa, he looked at
him fixedly, but with no particular expression.

"Miserable Indian!" exclaimed the mestizo, raising his hand upon him.

His companions restrained him. Milleflores, whose face was pale with terror,
exclaimed:

"André! André! take care."


"A vile slave! to presume to elbow me!"

"Tt is amadman! it is the Sambo!"

The Sambo, as the name indicated, was an Indian of the mountains; he
continued to fix his eyes on the mestizo, whom he had intentionally jostled. The
latter, whose anger was unbounded, had seized a poignard at his girdle, and was
about to have rushed on the impassable aggressor, when a guttural cry, like that
of the cilguero, (a kind of linnet of Peru,) re-echoed in the midst of the tumult of
promenaders, and the Sambo disappeared.

"Brutal and cowardly!" exclaimed André.

"Control yourself," said Milleflores, softly. "Let us leave the Plaza-Mayor;
the Limanienne ladies are too haughty here."

As he said these words, the brave Milleflores looked cautiously around to see
whether he was not within reach of the foot or arm of some Indian in the
neighborhood.

"In an hour, I must be at the house of Jew Samuel," said André.

"In an hour! we have time to pass to the Calle del Peligro; you can offer
some oranges or ananas to the charming tapadas who promenade there. Shall we
go, gentlemen?"

The group directed their steps toward the extremity of the square, and began
to descend the street of Danger, where Milleflores hoped his good looks would
be appreciated; but it was nightfall, and the young Limaniennes merited better
than ever their name of tapadas (hidden), for they drew their mantles more
closely over their countenances.

The Plaza-Mayor was all alive; the cries and the tumult were redoubled; the
guards on horseback, stationed before the central portico of the viceroy's palace,
situated on the north side of the square, could scarcely maintain their position
amid the shifting crowd; there were merchants for all customers and customers
for all merchants. The greatest variety of trades seemed to be congregated there,
and from the Portal de Escribanos to the Portal de Botoneros, there was one
immense display of articles of every kind, the Plaza-Mayor serving at once as
promenade, bazaar, market and fair. The ground-floor of the viceroy's palace is
occupied by shops; along the first story runs an immense gallery where the
crowd can promenade on days of public rejoicing; on the east side of the square
rises the cathedral, with its steeples and light balustrades, proudly adorning its
two towers; the basement story of the edifice being ten feet high, and containing
warehouses full of the products of tropical climates.

In the centre of this square is situated the beautiful fountain, constructed in
1653, by the orders of the viceroy, the Comte de Salvatierra. From the top of the
pillar, which rises in the middle of the fountain and is surmounted with a statue


of Fame, the water falls in sheets, and is discharged into a basin beneath through
the mouths of lions. It is here that the water-carriers (_aguadores_) load their
mules with barrels, attach a bell to a hoop, and mount behind their liquid
merchandise.

This square is therefore noisy from morning till evening, and when the stars
of night rise above the snowy summits of the Cordilleras, the tumult of the élite
of Lima equals the matinal hubbub of the merchants.

Nevertheless, when the oracion (evening angelus) sounds from the bell of
the cathedral, all this noise suddenly ceases; to the clamor of pleasure succeeds
the murmur of prayer; the women pause in their walk and put their hands on
their rosaries, invoking the Virgin Mary. Then, not a merchant dares sell his
merchandise, not a customer thinks of buying, and this square, so recently
animated, seems to have become a vast solitude.

While the Limanians paused and knelt at the sound of the angelus, a young
girl, carefully surrounded by her discreet mantle, sought to pass through the
praying multitude; she was followed by a mestizo woman, a sort of duenna, who
watched every glance and step. The duenna, as if she had not understood the
warning bell, continued her way through the devout populace: to the general
surprise succeeded harsh epithets. The young girl would have stopped, but the
duenna kept on.

"Do you see that daughter of Satan?" said some one near her.

"Who is that balarina--that impious dancer?"

"It is one of the Carcaman women." (A reproachful name bestowed upon
Europeans. )

The young girl at last stopped, blushing and confused.

Suddenly a gaucho, a merchant of mules, seized her by the shoulder, and
would have compelled her to kneel; but he had scarcely laid his hand upon her
when a vigorous arm rudely felled him to the ground. This scene, rapid as
lightning, was followed by a moment of confusion.

"Save yourself, miss," said a gentle and respectful voice in the ear of the
young girl.

The latter turned, pale with terror, and saw a young Indian of tall stature,
who, with his arms tranquilly folded, was awaiting with firm foot the attack of
his adversary.

"We are lost!" exclaimed the duenna; "nifia, nifia, let us go, for the love of
God!" and she seized the arm of the young girl, who disappeared, while the
crowd rose and dispersed.

The gaucho had risen, bruised with his fall, and thinking it not prudent to
seek revenge, rejoined his mules, muttering threats.


CHAPTER II.

EVENING IN THE STREETS OF LIMA.

Night had succeeded, almost without intervening twilight, the glare of day.
The two women quickened their pace, for it was late; the young girl, still under
the influence of strong emotion, maintained silence, while the duenna murmured
some mysterious paternosters--they walked rapidly through one of the sloping
streets leading from the Plaza-Mayor.

This place is situated more than four hundred feet above the level of the sea,
and about a hundred and fifty rods from the bridge thrown over the river Rimac,
which forms the diameter of the city of Lima, arranged in a semicircle.

The city of Lima lies in the valley of the Rimac, nine leagues from its mouth;
at the north and east commence the first undulations of ground which form a part
of the great chain of the Andes: the valley of Lungaucho, formed by the
mountains of San Cristoval and the Amancaés, which rise behind Lima,
terminates in its suburbs. The city lies on one bank of the river; the other is
occupied by the suburb of San Lazaro, and is united to the city by a bridge of
five arches, the upper piers of which are triangular to break the force of the
current; while the lower ones present to the promenaders circular benches, on
which the fashionables may lounge during the summer evenings, and where they
can contemplate a pretty cascade.

The city is two miles long from east to west, and only a mile and a quarter
wide from the bridge to the walls; the latter, twelve feet in height, ten feet thick
at their base, are built of adobes, a kind of brick dried in the sun, and made of
potter's clay mingled with a great quantity of chopped straw: these walls are
calculated to resist earthquakes; the enclosure, pierced with seven gates and
three posterns, terminates at its southeast extremity by the little citadel of Santa
Caterina.

Such is the ancient city of kings, founded in 1534 by Pizarro, on the day of
Epiphany; it has been and is still the theatre of constantly renewed revolutions.
Lima, situated three miles from the sea, was formerly the principal storehouse of
America on the Pacific Ocean, thanks to its Port of Callao, built in 1779, in a
singular manner. An old vessel, filled with stones, sand, and rubbish of all sorts,
was wrecked on the shore; piles of the mangrove-tree, brought from Guayaquil
and impervious to water, were driven around this as a centre, which became the
immovable base on which rose the mole of Callao.

The climate, milder and more temperate than that of Carthagena or Bahia,
situated on the opposite side of America, makes Lima one of the most agreeable


cities of the New World: the wind has two directions from which it never varies;
either it blows from the southeast, and becomes cool by crossing the Pacific
Ocean; or it comes from the south-west, impregnated with the mild atmosphere
of the forests and the freshness which it has derived from the icy summits of the
Cordilleras.

The nights beneath tropical latitudes are very beautiful and very clear; they
mysteriously prepare that beneficent dew which fertilizes a soil exposed to the
rays of a cloudless sky--so the inhabitants of Lima prolong their nocturnal
conversations and receptions; household labors are quietly finished in the
dwellings refreshed by the shadows, and the streets are soon deserted; scarcely is
some pulperia still haunted by the drinkers of chica or quarapo.

These, the young girl, whom we have seen, carefully avoided; crossing in the
middle of the numerous squares scattered about the city, she arrived, without
interruption, at the bridge of the Rimac, listening to catch the slightest sound--
which her emotion exaggerated, and hearing only the bells of a train of mules
conducted by its arriero, or the joyous stribillo of some Indian.

This young girl was called Sarah, and was returning to the house of the Jew
Samuel, her father; she was clad in a saya of satin--a kind of petticoat of a dark
color, plaited in elastic folds, and very narrow at the bottom, which compelled
her to take short steps, and gave her that graceful delicacy peculiar to the
Limanienne ladies; this petticoat, ornamented with lace and flowers, was in part
covered with a silk mantle, which was raised above the head and enveloped it
like a hood; stockings of exquisite fineness and little satin shoes peeped out
beneath the graceful saya; bracelets of great value encircled the arms of the
young girl, whose rich toilet was of exquisite taste, and her whole person
redolent of that charm so well expressed by the Spanish word donaire.

Milleflores might well say to André Certa that his betrothed had nothing of
the Jewess but the name, for she was a faithful specimen of those admirable
sehoras whose beauty is above all praise.

The duenna, an old Jewess, whose countenance was expressive of avarice
and cupidity, was a devoted servant of Samuel, who paid her liberally.

At the moment when these two women entered the suburb of San Lazaro, a
man, clad in the robe of a monk, and with his head covered with a cowl, passed
near them and looked at them attentively. This man, of tall stature, possessed a
countenance expressive of gentleness and benevolence; it was Padre Joachim de
Camarones; he threw a glance of intelligence on Sarah, who immediately looked
at her follower.

The latter was still grumbling, muttering and whining, which prevented her
seeing any thing; the young girl turned toward the good father and made a


graceful sign with her hand.

"Well, sefiora," said the old woman, sharply, "is it not enough to have been
insulted by these Christians, that you should stop to look at a priest?"

Sarah did not reply.

"Shall we see you one day, with rosary in hand, engaged in the ceremonies of
the church?"

The ceremonies of the church--_las funciones de iglesia_--are the great
business of the Limanian ladies.

"You make strange suppositions," replied the young girl, blushing.

"Strange as your conduct! What would my master Samuel say, if he knew
what had taken place this evening?"

"Am I to blame because a brutal muleteer chose to address me?"

"I understand, sefiora," said the old woman, shaking her head, "and will not
speak of the gaucho."

"Then the young man did wrong in defending me from the abuse of the
populace?"

"Is it the first time the Indian has thrown himself in your way?"

The countenance of the young girl was fortunately sheltered by her mantle,
for the darkness would not have sufficed to conceal her emotion from the
inquisitive glance of the duenna.

"But let us leave the Indian where he is," resumed the old woman, "it is not
my business to watch him. What I complain of is, that in order not to disturb
these Christians, you wished to remain among them! Had you not some desire to
kneel with them? Ah, sefiora, your father would soon dismiss me if I were guilty
of such apostasy."

But the young girl no longer heard; the remark of the old woman on the
subject of the young Indian had inspired her with sweeter thoughts; it seemed to
her that the intervention of this young man was providential; and she turned
several times to see if he had not followed her in the shadow. Sarah had in her
heart a certain natural confidence which became her wonderfully; she felt herself
to be the child of these warm latitudes, which the sun decorates with surprising
vegetation; proud as a Spaniard, if she had fixed her regards on this man, it was
because he had stood proudly in the presence of her pride, and had not begged a
glance as a reward of his protection.

In imagining that the Indian was near her, Sarah was not mistaken; Martin
Paz, after having come to the assistance of the young girl, wished to ensure her
safe retreat; so when the promenaders had dispersed, he followed her, without
being perceived by her, but without concealing himself; the darkness alone
favoring his pursuit.


This Martin Paz was a handsome young man, wearing with unparalleled
nobility the national costume of the Indian of the mountains; from his broad-
brimmed straw hat escaped fine black hair, whose curls harmonized with the
bronze of his manly face. His eyes shone with infinite sweetness, like the
transparent atmosphere of starry nights; his well-formed nose surmounted a
pretty mouth, unlike that of most of his race. He was one of the noblest
descendants of Manco-Capac, and his veins were full of that ardent blood which
leads men to the accomplishment of lofty deeds.

He was proudly draped in his poncho of brilliant colors; at his girdle hung
one of those Malay poignards, so terrible in a practiced hand, for they seem to be
riveted to the arm which strikes. In North America, on the shores of Lake
Ontario, Martin Paz would have been a great chief among those wandering tribes
which have fought with the English so many heroic combats.

Martin Paz knew that Sarah was the daughter of the wealthy Samuel; he
knew her to be the most charming woman in Lima; he knew her to be betrothed
to the opulent mestizo André Certa; he knew that by her birth, her position and
her wealth she was beyond the reach of his heart; but he forgot all these
impossibilities in his all-absorbing passion. It seemed to him that this beautiful
young girl belonged to him, as the llama to the Peruvian forests, as the eagle to
the depths of immensity.

Plunged in his reflections, Martin Paz hastened his steps to see the saya of
the young girl sweep the threshold of the paternal dwelling; and Sarah herself,
half-opening then her mantilla, cast on him a bewildering glance of gratitude.

He was quickly joined by two Indians of the species of zambos, pillagers and
robbers, who walked beside him.

"Martin Paz," said one of them to him, "you ought this very evening to meet
our brethren in the mountains."

"I shall be there," coldly replied the other.

"The schooner Annonciation has appeared in sight from Callao, tacked for a
few moments, then, protected by the point, rapidly disappeared. She will
undoubtedly approach the land near the mouth of the Rimac, and our bark
canoes must be there to relieve her of her merchandise. We shall need your
presence."

"You are losing time by your observations. Martin Paz knows his duty and he
will do it."

"It is in the name of the Sambo that we speak to you here."

"It is in my own name that I speak to you."

"Do you not fear that he will find your presence in the suburb of San Lazaro
at this hour unaccountable?"


"IT am where my fancy and my will have brought me."

"Before the house of the Jew?"

"Those of my brethren who are disposed to find fault can meet me to-night in
the mountain."

The eyes of the three men sparkled, and this was all. The zambos regained
the bank of the Rimac, and the sound of their footsteps died away in the
darkness.

Martin Paz had hastily approached the house of the Jew. This house, like all
those of Lima, had but two stories; the ground floor, built of bricks, was
surmounted with walls formed of canes tied together and covered with plaster;
all this part of the building, constructed to resist earthquakes, imitated, by a
skillful painting, the bricks of the lower story; the square roof, called asoetas,
was covered with flowers, and formed a terrace full of perfumes and pretty
points of view.

A vast gate, placed between two pavilions, gave access to a court; but as
usual, these pavilions had no window opening upon the street.

The clock of the parish church was striking eleven when Martin Paz stopped
before the dwelling of Sarah. Profound silence reigned around; a flickering light
within proved that the saloon of the Jew Samuel was still occupied.

Why does the Indian stand motionless before these silent walls? The cool
atmosphere woos him with its transparency and its perfumes; the radiant stars
send down upon the sleeping earth rays of diaphanous mildness; the white
constellations illumine the darkness with their enchanting light; his heart
believes in those sympathetic communications which brave time and distance.

A white form appears upon the terrace amid the flowers to which night has
only left a vague outline, without diminishing their delicious perfumes; the
dahlias mingle with the mentzelias, with the helianthus, and, beneath the
occidental breeze, form a waving basket which surrounds Sarah, the young and
beautiful Jewess.

Martin Paz involuntarily raises his hands and clasps them with adoration.
Suddenly the white form sinks down, as if terrified.

Martin Paz turns, and finds himself face to face with André Certa.

"Since when do the Indians pass their nights in contemplation?"

André Certa spoke angrily.

"Since the Indians have trodden the soil of their ancestors."

"Have they no longer, on the mountain side, some yaravis to chant, some
boleros to dance with the girls of their caste?"

"The cholos," replied the Indian, in a high voice, "bestow their devotion
where it is merited; the Indians love according to their hearts."


André Certa became pale with anger; he advanced a step toward his
immovable rival.

"Wretch! will you quit this place?"

"Rather quit it yourself," shouted Martin Paz; and two poignards gleamed in
the two right hands of the adversaries; they were of equal stature, they seemed of
equal strength, and the lightnings of their eyes were reflected in the steel of their
arms.

André Certa rapidly raised his arm, which he dropped still more quickly. But
his poignard had encountered the Malay poignard of the Indian; at the fire which
flashed from this shock, André saw the arm of Martin Paz suspended over his
head, and immediately rolled on the earth, his arm pierced through.

"Help, help!" he exclaimed.

The door of the Jew's house opened at his cries. Some mestizoes ran from a
neighboring house; some pursued the Indian, who fled rapidly; others raised the
wounded man. He had swooned.

"Who is this man?" said one of them. "If he is a sailor, take him to the
hospital of Spiritu Santo; if an Indian, to the hospital of Santa Anna."

An old man advanced toward the wounded youth; he had scarcely looked
upon him when he exclaimed:

"Let the poor young man be carried into my house. This is a strange
mischance."

This man was the Jew Samuel; he had just recognized the betrothed of his
daughter.

Martin Paz, thanks to the darkness and the rapidity of his flight, may hope to
escape his pursuers; he has risked his life; an Indian assassin of a mestizo! If he
can gain the open country he is safe, but he knows that the gates of the city are
closed at eleven o'clock in the evening, not to be reopened till four in the
morning.

He reaches at last the stone bridge which he had already crossed. The
Indians, and some soldiers who had joined them, pursue him closely; he springs
upon the bridge. Unfortunately a patrol appears at the opposite extremity; Martin
Paz can neither advance nor retrace his steps; without hesitation he clears the
parapet and leaps into the rapid current which breaks against the comers of the
stones.

The pursuers spring upon the banks below the bridge to seize the swimmer at
his landing.

But it is in vain; Martin Paz does not reappear.


CHAPTER III.

THE JEW EVERY WHERE A JEW.

André Certa, once introduced into the house of Samuel, and laid in a bed
hastily prepared, recovered his senses and pressed the hand of the old Jew. The
physician, summoned by one of the domestics, was promptly in attendance. The
wound appeared to be a slight one; the shoulder of the mestizo had been pierced
in such a manner that the steel had only glided among the flesh. In a few days,
André Certa might be once more upon his feet.

When Samuel was left alone with André, the latter said to him:

"You would do well to wall up the gate which leads to your terrace, Master
Samuel."

"What fear you, André?"

"I fear lest Sarah should present herself there to the contemplation of the
Indians. It was not a robber who attacked me; it was a rival, from whom I have
escaped but by miracle!"

"By the holy tables, it is a task to bring up young girls!" exclaimed the Jew.
"But you are mistaken, sefior," he resumed, "Sarah will be a dutiful spouse. I
spare no pains that she may do you honor."

André Certa half raised himself on his elbow.

"Master Samuel, there is one thing which you do not enough remember, that
I pay you for the hand of Sarah a hundred thousand piasters."

"Senior," replied the Jew, with a miserly chuckle, "I remember it so well, that
I am ready now to exchange this receipt for the money."

As he said this, Samuel drew from his pocket-book a paper which André
Certa repulsed with his hand.

"The bargain is not complete until Sarah has become my wife, and she will
never be such if her hand is to be disputed by such an adversary. You know,
Master Samuel, what is my object; in espousing Sarah, I wish to be the equal of
this nobility which casts such scornful glances upon us."

"And you will, sefor, for you see the proudest grandees of Spain throng our
saloons, around the pearl of Lima."

"Where has Sarah been this evening?"

"To the Israelitish temple, with old Ammon."

"Why should Sarah attend your religious rites?"

"I am a Jew, sefior," replied Samuel proudly, "and would Sarah be my
daughter if she did not fulfill the duties of my religion?"

The old Jew remained sad and silent for several minutes. His bent brow
rested on one of his withered hands. His face usually bronze, was now almost
pale; beneath a brown cap appeared locks of an indescribable color. He was clad


in a sort of great-coat fastened around the waist.

This old man trafficked every where and in every thing; he might have been
a descendant of the Judas who sold his Master for thirty pieces of silver. He had
been a resident of Lima ten years; his taste and his economy had led him to
choose his dwelling at the extremity of the suburb of San Lazaro, and from
thence he entered into various speculations to make money. By degrees, Samuel
assumed a luxury uncommon in misers; his house was sumptuously furnished;
his numerous domestics, his splendid equipages betokened immense revenues.
Sarah was then eight years of age. Already graceful and charming, she pleased
all, and was the idol of the Jew. All her inclinations were unhesitatingly
gratified. Always elegantly dressed, she attracted the eyes of the most fastidious,
of which her father seemed strangely careless. It will readily be understood how
the mestizo, André Certa, became enamored of the beautiful Jewess. What
would have appeared inexplicable to the public, was the hundred thousand
piasters, the price of her hand; but this bargain was secret. And besides, Samuel
trafficked in sentiments as in native productions. A banker, usurer, merchant,
ship-owner, he had the talent to do business with everybody. The schooner
Annonciation, which was hovering about the mouth of the Rimac, belonged to
the Jew Samuel.

Amid this life of business and speculation this man fulfilled the duties of his
religion with scrupulous punctuality; his daughter had been carefully instructed
in the Israelitish faith and practices.

So, when the mestizo had manifested his displeasure on this subject, the old
man remained mute and pensive, and André Certa broke the silence, saying:

"Do you forget that the motive for which I espouse Sarah will compel her to
become a convert to Catholicism? It is not my fault," added the mestizo; "but in
spite of you, in spite of me, in spite of herself, it will be so."

"You are right," said the Jew sadly; "but, by the Bible, Sarah shall be a
Jewess as long as she is my daughter."

At this moment the door of the chamber opened, and the major-domo of the
Jew Samuel respectfully entered.

"Is the murderer arrested?" asked the old man.

"We have reason to believe he is dead!"

"Dead!" repeated André, with a joyful exclamation.

"Caught between us and a company of soldiers," replied the major-domo, "he
was obliged to leap over the parapet of the bridge."

"He has thrown himself into the Rimac!" exclaimed André.

"And how do you know that he has not reached the shore?" asked Samuel.

"The melting of the snow has made the current rapid at that spot; besides, we


stationed ourselves on each side of the river, and he did not reappear. I have left
sentinels who will pass the night in watching the banks."

"Tt is well," said the old man; "he has met with a just fate. Did you recognize
him in his flight?"

"Perfectly, sir; it was Martin Paz, the Indian of the mountains."

"Has this man been observing Sarah for some time past?"

"I do not know," replied the servant.

"Summon old Ammon."

The major-domo withdrew.

"These Indians," said the old man, "have secret understandings among
themselves; I must know whether the pursuit of this man dates from a distant
period."

The duenna entered, and remained standing before her master.

"Does my daughter," asked Samuel, "know any thing of what has taken place
this morning?"

"When the cries of your servants awoke me, I ran to the chamber of the
sefiora, and found her almost motionless and of a mortal paleness."

"Fatality!" said Samuel; "continue," added he, seeing that the mestizo was
apparently asleep.

"To my urgent inquiries as to the cause of her agitation, the sehora would not
reply; she retired without accepting my services, and I withdrew."

"Has this Indian often thrown himself in her way?"

"I do not know, master; nevertheless I have often met him in the streets of
San Lazaro."

"And you have told me nothing of this?"

"He came to her assistance this evening on the Plaza-Mayor," added the old
duenna.

"Her assistance! how?"

The old woman related the scene with downcast head.

"Ah! my daughter wish to kneel among these Christians!" exclaimed the Jew,
angrily; "and I knew nothing of all this! You deserve that I should dismiss you."

The duenna went out of the room in confusion.

"Do you not see that the marriage should take place soon?" said André Certa.
"IT am not asleep, Master Samuel! But I need rest, now, and I will dream of our
espousals."

At these words, the old man slowly retired. Before regaining his room, he
wished to assure himself of the condition of his daughter, and softly entered the
chamber of Sarah.

The young girl was in an agitated slumber, in the midst of the rich silk


drapery around her; a watch-lamp of alabaster, suspended from the arabesques of
the ceiling, shed its soft light upon her beautiful countenance; the half-open
window admitted, through lowered blinds, the quiet coolness of the air,
impregnated with the penetrating perfumes of the aloes and magnolia; creole
luxury was displayed in the thousand objects of art which good taste and grace
had dispersed on richly carved étagéres; and, beneath the vague and placid rays
of night, it seemed as if the soul of the child was sporting amid these wonders.

The old man approached the bed of Sarah: he bent over her to listen. The
beautiful Jewess seemed disturbed by sorrowful thoughts, and more than once
the name of Martin Paz escaped her lips.

Samuel regained his chamber, uttering maledictions.

At the first rays of morning, Sarah hastily arose. Liberta, a full-blooded
Indian attached to her service, hastened to her; and, in pursuance of her orders,
saddled a mule for his mistress and a horse for himself.

Sarah was accustomed to take moming-rides, accompanied by this Indian,
who was entirely devoted to her.

She was clad in a saya of a brown color, and a mantle of cashmere with long
tassels; her head was not covered with the usual hood, but sheltered beneath the
broad brim of a straw hat, which left her long black tresses to float over her
shoulders; and to conceal any unusual preoccupation, she held between her lips a
cigarette of perfumed tobacco.

Liberta, clad like an Indian of the mountains, prepared to accompany his
mistress.

"Liberta," said the young girl to him, "remember to be blind and dumb."

Once in the saddle, Sarah left the city as usual, and began to ride through the
country; she directed her way toward Callao. The port was in full animation:
there had been a conflict during the night between the revenue-officers and a
schooner, whose undecided movements betrayed a fraudulent speculation. The
Annonciation seemed to have been awaiting some suspicious barks near the
mouth of the Rimac; but before the latter could reach her, she had been
compelled to flee before the custom-house boats, which had boldly given her
chase.

Various rumors were in circulation respecting the destination of this vessel--
which bore no name on her stern. According to some, this schooner, laden with
Colombian troops, was seeking to seize the principal vessels of Callao; for
Bolivar had it in his heart to revenge the affront given to the soldiers left by him
in Peru, and who had been driven from it in disgrace.

According to others, the schooner was simply a smuggler of European
goods.


Without troubling herself about these rumors, more or less important, Sarah,
whose ride to the port had been only a pretext, returned toward Lima, which she
reached near the banks of the Rimac.

She ascended them toward the bridge: numbers of soldiers, mestizoes, and
Indians, were stationed at various points on the shore.

Liberta had acquainted the young girl with the events of the night. In
compliance with her orders, he interrogated some Indians leaning over the
parapet, and learned that although Martin Paz had been undoubtedly drowned,
his body had not yet been recovered.

Sarah was pale and almost fainting; it required all her strength of soul not to
abandon herself to her grief.

Among the people wandering on the banks, she remarked an Indian with
ferocious features--the Sambo! He was crouched on the bank, and seemed a prey
to despair.

As Sarah passed near the old mountaineer, she heard these words, full of
gloomy anger:

"Wo! wo! They have killed the son of the Sambo! They have killed my son!"

The young girl resolutely drew herself up, made a sign to Liberta to follow
her; and this time, without caring whether she was observed or not, went directly
to the church of Santa Anna; left her mule in charge of the Indian, entered the
Catholic temple, and asking for the good Father Joachim, knelt on the stone
steps, praying to Jesus and Mary for the soul of Martin Paz.


CHAPTER IV.

A SPANISH GRANDEE.

Any other than the Indian, Martin Paz, would have, indeed, perished in the
waters of the Rimac; to escape death, his surprising strength, his insurmountable
will, and especially his sublime coolness, one of the privileges of the free hordes
of the pampas of the New World, had all been found necessary.

Martin knew that his pursuers would concentrate their efforts to seize him
below the bridge; it seemed impossible for him to overcome the current, and that
the Indian must be carried down; but by vigorous strokes he succeeded in
stemming the torrent; he dived repeatedly, and finding the under-currents less
strong, at last ventured to land, and concealed himself behind a thicket of
mangrove-trees.

But what was to become of him? Retreat was perilous; the soldiers might
change their plans and ascend the river; the Indian must then inevitably be
captured; he would lose his life, and, worse yet, Sarah. His decision was rapidly


made; through the narrow streets and deserted squares he plunged into the heart
of the city; but it was important that he should be supposed dead; he therefore
avoided being seen, since his garments, dripping with water and covered with
sea-weed, would have betrayed him.

To avoid the indiscreet glances of some belated inhabitants, Martin Paz was
obliged to pass through one of the widest streets of the city; a house still
brilliantly illuminated presented itself: the port-cochere was open to give
passage to the elegant equipages which were issuing from the court, and
conveying to their respective dwellings the nobles of the Spanish aristocracy.

The Indian adroitly glided into this magnificent dwelling; he could not
remain in the street, where curious zambos were thronging around, attracted by
the carriages. The gates of the hotel were soon carefully closed, and the Indian
found flight impossible.

Some lacqueys were going to and fro in the court; Martin Paz rapidly passed
up a rich stairway of cedar-wood, ornamented with valuable tapestry; the
saloons, still illuminated, presented no convenient place of refuge; he crossed
them with the rapidity of lightning, and disappeared in a room filled with
protecting darkness.

The last lustres were quickly extinguished, and the house became profoundly
silent.

The Indian Paz, as a man of energy to whom moments are precious, hastened
to reconnoitre the place, and to find the surest means of evasion; the windows of
this chamber opened on an interior garden; flight was practicable, and Martin
Paz was about to spring from them, when he heard these words:

"Sefior, you have forgotten to take the diamonds which I had left on that
table!"

Martin Paz turned. A man of noble stature and of great pride of countenance
was pointing to a jewel-case.

At this insult Martin Paz laid his hand on his poignard. He approached the
Spaniard, who stood unmoved, and, in a first impulse of indignation, raised his
arm to strike him; but turning his weapon against himself, said, in a deep tone,

"Senior, if you repeat such words, I will kill myself at your feet."

The Spaniard, astonished, looked at the Indian more attentively, and through
his tangled and dripping locks perceived so lofty a frankness, that he felt a
strange sympathy fill his heart. He went toward the window, gently closed it, and
returned toward the Indian, whose poignard had fallen to the ground.

"Who are you?" said he to him.

"The Indian, Martin Paz. I am pursued by soldiers for having defended
myself against a mestizo who attacked me, and levelled him to the ground with a


blow from my poignard. This mestizo is the betrothed of a young girl whom I
love. Now, sefior, you can deliver me to my enemies, if you judge it noble and
right."

"Sir," replied the Spaniard, gravely, "I depart to-morrow for the Baths of
Chorillos; if you please to accompany me, you will be for the present safe from
pursuit, and will never have reason to complain of the hospitality of the Marquis
Don Vegal."

Martin Paz bent coldly without manifesting any emotion.

"You can rest until morning on this bed," resumed Don Vegal; "no one here
will suspect your retreat. Good-night, sefior!"

The Spaniard went out of the room, and left the Indian, moved to tears by a
confidence so generous; he yielded himself entirely to the protection of the
marquis, and without thinking that his slumbers might be taken advantage of to
seize him, slept with peaceful security.

The next day, at sunrise, the marquis gave the last orders for his departure,
and summoned the Jew Samuel to come to him; in the meantime he attended the
morning mass.

This was a custom generally observed by the aristocracy. From its very
foundation Lima had been essentially Catholic. Besides its numerous churches, it
numbered twenty-two convents, seventeen monasteries, and four beaterios, or
houses of retreat for females who did not take the vows. Each of these
establishments possessed a chapel, so that there were at Lima more than a
hundred edifices for worship, where eight hundred secular or regular priests,
three hundred religieuses, lay-brothers and sisters, performed the duties of
religion.

As Don Vegal entered the church of Santa Anna, he noticed a young girl
kneeling in prayer and in tears. There was so much of grief in her depression,
that the marquis could not look at her without emotion; and he was preparing to
console her by some kind words, when Father Joachim de Camarones
approached him, saying in a low voice:

"Senor Don Vegal, pray do not approach her."

Then he made a sign to Sarah, who followed him to an obscure and deserted
chapel.

Don Vegal directed his steps to the altar and listened to the mass; then, as he
was returning, he thought involuntarily of the deep sadness of the kneeling
maiden. Her image followed him to his hotel, and remained deeply engraven in
his soul.

Don Vegal found in his saloon the Jew Samuel, who had come in compliance
with his request. Samuel seemed to have forgotten the events of the night; the


hope of gain animated his countenance with a natural gayety.

"What is your lordship's will?" asked he of the Spaniard.

"T must have thirty thousand piasters within an hour."

"Thirty thousand piasters! And who has them! By the holy king David, my
lord, I am far from being able to furnish such a sum."

"Here are some jewels of great value," resumed Don Vegal, without noticing
the language of the Jew; "besides I can sell you at a low price a considerable
estate near Cusco."

"Ah! sefior, lands ruin us--we have not arms enough left to cultivate them;
the Indians have withdrawn to the mountains, and our harvests do not pay us for
the trouble they cost."

"At what value do you estimate these diamonds?"

Samuel drew from his pocket a little pair of scales and began to weigh the
stones with scrupulous skill. As he did this, he continued to talk, and, as was his
custom, depreciated the pledges offered him.

"Diamonds! a poor investment! What would they bring? One might as well
bury money! You will notice, sefior, that this is not of the purest water. Do you
know that I do not find a ready market for these costly ornaments? I am obliged
to send such merchandise to the United Provinces! The Americans would buy
them, undoubtedly, but to give them up to the sons of Albion. They wish besides,
and it is very just, to gain an honest per centage, so that the depreciation falls
upon me. I think that ten thousand piasters should satisfy your lordship. It is
little, I know; but----"

"Have I not said," resumed the Spaniard, with a sovereign air of scorn, "that
ten thousand piasters would not suffice?"

"Senor, I cannot give you a half real more!"

"Take away these caskets and bring me the sum I ask for. To complete the
thirty thousand piasters which I need, you will take a mortgage on this house.
Does it seem to you to be solid?"

"Ah, sefior, in this city, subject to earthquakes, one knows not who lives or
dies, who stands or falls."

And, as he said this, Samuel let himself fall on his heels several times to test
the solidity of the floors.

"Well, to oblige your lordship, I will furnish you with the required sum;
although, at this moment I ought not to part with money; for I am about to marry
my daughter to the caballero André Certa. Do you know him, sir?"

"I do not know him, and I beg of you to send me this instant, the sum agreed
upon. Take away these jewels."

"Will you have a receipt for them?" asked the Jew.


Don Vegal passed into the adjoining room, without replying.

"Proud Spaniard!" muttered Samuel, "I will crush thy insolence, as I disperse
thy riches! By Solomon! I am a skillful man, since my interests keep pace with
my sentiments."

Don Vegal, on leaving the Jew, had found Martin Paz in profound dejection
of spirits, mingled with mortification.

"What is the matter?" he asked affectionately.

"Sefior, it is the daughter of the Jew whom I love."

"A Jewess!" exclaimed Don Vegal, with disgust.

But seeing the sadness of the Indian, he added:

"Let us go, amigo, we will talk of these things afterward!"

An hour later, Martin Paz, clad in Spanish costume, left the city,
accompanied by Don Vegal, who took none of his people with him.

The Baths of Chorillos are situated at two leagues from Lima. This Indian
parish possesses a pretty church; during the hot season it is the rendezvous of the
fashionable Limanian society. Public games, interdicted at Lima, are permitted at
Chorillos during the whole summer. The sefioras there display unwonted ardor,
and, in decorating himself for these pretty partners, more than one rich cavalier
has seen his fortune dissipated in a few nights.

Chorillos was still little frequented; so Don Vegal and Martin Paz retired to a
pretty cottage, built on the sea-shore, could live in quiet contemplation of the
vast plains of the Pacific Ocean.

The Marquis Don Vegal, belonging to one of the most ancient families of
Peru, saw about to terminate in himself the noble line of which he was justly
proud; so his countenance bore the impress of profound sadness. After having
mingled for some time in political affairs, he had felt an inexpressible disgust for
the incessant revolutions brought about to gratify personal ambition; he had
withdrawn into a sort of solitude, interrupted only at rare intervals by the duties
of strict politeness.

His immense fortune was daily diminishing. The neglect into which his vast
domains had fallen for want of laborers, had compelled him to borrow at a
disadvantage; but the prospect of approaching mediocrity did not alarm him; that
carelessness natural to the Spanish race, joined to the ennui of a useless
existence, had rendered him insensible to the menaces of the future. Formerly
the husband of an adored wife, the father of a charming little girl, he had seen
himself deprived, by a horrible event, of both these objects of his love. Since
then, no bond of affection had attached him to earth, and he suffered his life to
float at the will of events.

Don Vegal had thought his heart to be indeed dead, when he felt it palpitate


at contact with that of Martin Paz. This ardent nature awoke fire beneath the
ashes; the proud bearing of the Indian suited the chivalric hidalgo; and then,
weary of the Spanish nobles, in whom he no longer had confidence, disgusted
with the selfish mestizoes, who wished to aggrandize themselves at his expense,
he took a pleasure in turning to that primitive race, who have disputed so
valiantly the American soil with the soldiers of Pizarro.

According to the intelligence received by the marquis, the Indian passed for
dead at Lima; but, looking on his attachment for the Jewess as worse than death
itself, the Spaniard resolved doubly to save his guest, by leaving the daughter of
Samuel to marry André Certa.

While Martin Paz felt an infinite sadness pervade his heart, Don Vegal
avoided all allusion to the past, and conversed with the young Indian on
indifferent subjects.

Meanwhile, one day, saddened by his gloomy preoccupations, the Spaniard
said to him:

"Why, my friend, do you lower the nobility of your nature by a sentiment so
much beneath you? Was not that bold Manco-Capac, whom his patriotism placed
in the rank of heroes, your ancestor? There is a noble part left for a valiant man,
who will not suffer himself to be overcome by an unworthy passion. Have you
no heart to regain your independence?"

"We are laboring for this, senor," said the Indian; "and the day when my
brethren shall rise en masse is perhaps not far distant."

"IT understand you; you allude to the war for which your brethren are
preparing among their mountains; at a signal they will descend on the city, arms
in hand--and will be conquered as they have always been! See how your
interests will disappear amid these perpetual revolutions of which Peru is the
theatre, and which will ruin it entirely, Indians and Spaniards, to the profit of the
mestizoes, who are neither."

"We will save it ourselves," exclaimed Martin Paz.

"Yes, you will save it if you understand how to play your part! Listen to me,
Paz, you whom I love from day to day as a son! I say it with grief; but, we
Spaniards, the degenerate sons of a powerful race, no longer have the energy
necessary to elevate and govern a State. It is therefore yours to triumph over that
unhappy Americanism, which tends to reject European colonization. Yes, know
that only European emigration can save the old Peruvian empire. Instead of this
intestine war which tends to exclude all castes, with the exception of one,
frankly extend your hands to the industrious population of the Old World."

"The Indians, senor, will always see in strangers an enemy, and will never
suffer them to breathe with impunity the air of their mountains. The kind of


dominion which I exercise over them will be without effect on the day when I do
not swear death to their oppressors, whoever they may be! And, besides, what
am I now?" added Martin Paz, with great sadness; "a fugitive who would not
have three hours to live in the streets of Lima."

"Paz, you must promise me that you will not return thither."

"How can I promise you this, Don Vegal? I speak only the truth, and I should
perjure myself were I to take an oath to that effect."

Don Vegal was silent. The passion of the young Indian increased from day to
day; the marquis trembled to see him incur certain death by reappearing at Lima.
He hastened by all his desires, he would have hastened by all his efforts, the
marriage of the Jewess!

To ascertain himself the state of things he quitted Chorillos one morning,
returned to the city, and learned that André Certa had recovered from his wound.
His approaching marriage was the topic of general conversation.

Don Vegal wished to see this woman whose image troubled the mind of
Martin Paz. He repaired, at evening, to the Plaza-Mayor. The crowd was always
numerous there. There he met Father Joachim de Camarones, his confessor and
his oldest friend; he acquainted him with his mode of life. What was the
astonishment of the good father to learn the existence of Martin Paz. He
promised Don Vegal to watch also himself over the young Indian, and to convey
to the marquis any intelligence of importance.

Suddenly the glances of Don Vegal rested on a young girl, enveloped in a
black mantle, reclining in a caléche.

"Who is that beautiful person?" asked he of the father.

"Tt is the betrothed of André Certa, the daughter of the Jew Samuel."

"She! the daughter of the Jew!"

The marquis could hardly suppress his astonishment, and, pressing the hand
of Father Joachim, pensively took the road to Chorillos.

He had just recognized in Sarah, the pretended Jewess, the young girl whom
he had seen praying with such Christian fervor, at the church of Santa Anna.


CHAPTER V.

THE HATRED OF THE INDIANS.

Since the Colombian troops, confided by Bolivar to the orders of General
Santa Cruz, had been driven from lower Peru, this country, which had been
incessantly agitated by pronunciamentos, military revolts, had recovered some
calmness and tranquillity.

In fact, private ambition no longer had any thing to expect; the president


Gambarra seemed immovable in his palace of the Plaza-Mayor. In this direction
there was nothing to fear; but the true danger, concealed, imminent, was not
from these rebellions, as promptly extinguished as kindled, and which seemed to
flatter the taste of the Americans for military parades.

This unknown peril escaped the eyes of the Spaniards, too lofty to perceive
it, and the attention of the mestizoes, who never wished to look beneath them.

And yet there was an unusual agitation among the Indians of the city; they
often mingled with the serranos, the inhabitants of the mountains; these people
seemed to have shaken off their natural apathy. Instead of rolling themselves in
their ponchos, with their feet turned to the spring sun, they were scattered
throughout the country, stopping one another, exchanging private signals, and
haunting the least frequented pulperias, in which they could converse without
danger.

This movement was principally to be observed on one of the squares remote
from the centre of the city. At the corner of a street stood a house, of only one
story, whose wretched appearance struck the eye disagreeably.

A tavern of the lowest order, a chingana, kept by an old Indian woman,
offered to the lowest zambos the chica, beer of fermented maize, and the
quarapo, a beverage made of the sugar-cane.

The concourse of Indians on this square took place only at certain hours, and
principally when a long pole was raised on the roof of the inn as a signal of
assemblage, then the zambos of every profession, the capataz, the arrieros,
muleteers, the carreteros, carters, entered the chingana, one by one, and
immediately disappeared in the great hall; the padrona (hostess) seemed very
busy, and leaving to her servant the care of the shop, hastened to serve herself
her usual customers.

A few days after the disappearance of Martin Paz, there was a numerous
assembly in the hall of the inn; one could scarcely through the darkness,
rendered still more obscure by the tobacco-smoke, distinguish the frequenters of
this tavern. Fifty Indians were ranged around a long table; some were chewing
the coca, a kind of tea-leaf, mingled with a little piece of fragrant earth called
manubi; others were drinking from large pots of fermented maize; but these
occupations did not distract their attention, and they were closely listening to the
speech of an Indian.

This was the Sambo, whose fixed eyes were strangely wild. He was clad as
on the Plaza-Mayor.

After having carefully observed his auditors, the Sambo commenced in these
terms:

"The children of the Sun can converse on grave affairs; there is no perfidious


ear to hear them; on the square, some of our friends, disguised as street-singers,
will attract the attention of the passers-by, and we shall enjoy entire liberty."

In fact the tones of a mandoline and of a viguela were echoing without.

The Indians within, knowing themselves in safety, lent therefore close
attention to the words of the Sambo, in whom they placed entire confidence.

"What news can the Sambo give us of Martin Paz?" asked an Indian.

"None--is he dead or not? The Great Spirit only knows. I am expecting some
of our brethren, who have descended the river to its mouth, perhaps they will
have found the body of Martin Paz."

"He was a good chief," said Manangani, a ferocious Indian, much dreaded;
"but why was he not at his post on the day when the schooner brought us arms?"

The Sambo cast down his head without reply.

"Did not my brethren know," resumed Manangani, "that there was an
exchange of shots between the Annonciation and the custom-house officers, and
that the capture of the vessel would have ruined our projects of conspiracy?"

A murmur of approbation received the words of the Indian.

"Those of my brethren who will wait before they judge will be the beloved of
my heart," resumed the Sambo; "who knows whether my son Martin Paz will not
one day reappear? Listen now; the arms which have been sent us from Sechura
are in our power; they are concealed in the mountains of the Cordilleras, and
ready to do their office when you shall be prepared to do your duty."

"And what delays us?" said a young Indian; "we have sharpened our knives
and are waiting."

"Let the hour come," said the Sambo; "do my brethren know what enemy
their arms should strike first?"

"Those mestizoes who treat us as slaves, and strike us with the hand and
whip, like restive mules."

"These are the monopolizers of the riches of the soil, who will not suffer us
to purchase a little comfort for our old age."

"You are mistaken; and your first blows must be struck elsewhere," said the
Sambo, growing animated; "these are not the men who have dared for three
hundred years past to tread the soil of our ancestors; it is not these rich men
gorged with gold who have dragged to the tomb the sons of Manco-Capac; no, it
is these proud Spaniards whom Fate has thrust on our independent shores! These
are the true conquerors of whom you are the true slaves! If they have no longer
wealth, they have authority; and, in spite of Peruvian emancipation, they crush
and trample upon our natural rights. Let us forget what we are, to remember
what our fathers have been!"

"Anda! anda!" exclaimed the assembly, with stamps of approbation.


After a few moments of silence, the Sambo assured himself, by interrogating
various conspirators, that the friends of Cusco and of all Bolivia were ready to
strike as a single man.

Then, resuming with fire:

"And our brethren of the mountains, brave Manangani, if they have all a
heart of hatred equal to thine, a courage equal to thine, they will fall on Lima
like an avalanche from the summit of the Cordilleras."

"The Sambo shall not complain of their boldness on the day appointed. Let
the Indian leave the city, he shall not go far without seeing throng around him
zambos buming for vengeance! In the gorges of San Cristoval and the
Amancaés, more than one is couched on his poncho, with his poignard at his
girdle, waiting until a long carbine shall be confided to his skillful hand. They
also have not forgotten that they have to revenge on the vain Spaniards the
defeat of Manco-Capac."

"Well said! Manangani; it is the god of hatred who speaks from thy mouth.
My brethren shall know before long him whom their chiefs have chosen to lead
this great vengeance. President Gambarra is seeking only to consolidate his
power; Bolivar is afar, Santa Cruz has been driven away; we can act with
certainty. In a few days, the féte of the Amancaés will summon our oppressors to
pleasure; then, let each be ready to march, and let the news be carried to the most
remote villages of Bolivia."

At this moment three Indians entered the great hall. The Sambo hastened to
meet them.

"Well?" said he to them.

"The body of Martin Paz has not been recovered; we have sounded the river
in every direction; our most skillful divers have explored it with religious care,
and the son of the Sambo cannot have perished in the waters of the Rimac."

"Have they killed him? What has become of him? Oh! wo, wo to them if
they have killed my son! Let my brethren separate in silence; let each return to
his post, look, watch and wait!"

The Indians went out and dispersed; the Sambo alone remained with
Manangani, who asked him:

"Does the Sambo know what sentiment conducted his son to San Lazaro?
The Sambo, I trust, is sure of his son?"

The eyes of the Indian flashed, and the blood mounted to his cheek. The
ferocious Manangani recoiled.

But the Indian controlled himself, and said:

"If Martin Paz has betrayed his brethren, I will first kill all those to whom he
has given his friendship, all those to whom he has given his love! Then I will kill


him, and myself afterward, that nothing may be left beneath the sun of an
infamous, and dishonored race."

At this moment, the padrona opened the door of the room, advanced toward
the Sambo, and handed him a billet directed to his address.

"Who gave you this?" said he.

"I do not know; this paper may have been designedly forgotten by a chica-
drinker. I found it on the table."

"Have there been any but Indians here?"

"There have been none but Indians."

The padrona went out; the Sambo unfolded the billet, and read aloud:

"A young girl has prayed for the return of Martin Paz, for she has not
forgotten that the young Indian protected her and risked his life for her. If the
Sambo has any news of his poor son, or any hope of finding him, let him
surround his arm with a red handkerchief; there are eyes which see him pass
daily."

The Sambo crushed the billet in his hand.

"The unhappy boy," said he, "has suffered himself to be caught by the eyes
of a woman."

"Who is this woman?" asked Manangani.

"It is not an Indian," replied the Sambo, observing the billet; "it is some
young girl of the other classes. Martin Paz, I no longer know thee!"

"Shall you do what this woman requests?"

"No," replied the Indian, violently; "let her lose all hope of seeing him again;
let her die, if she will."

And the Sambo tore the billet in a rage.

"Tt must have been an Indian who brought this billet," observed Manangani.

"Oh, it cannot have been one of ours! He must have known that I often came
to this inn, but I will set my foot in it no more. We have occupied ourselves long
enough with trifling affairs," resumed he, coldly; "let my brother return to the
mountains; I will remain to watch over the city. We shall see whether the féte of
the Amancaés will be joyous for the oppressors or the oppressed!"

The two Indians separated.

The plan of the conspiracy was well conceived and the hour of its execution
well chosen. Peru, almost depopulated, counted only a small number of
Spaniards and mestizoes. The invasion of the Indians, gathered from every
direction, from the forests of Brazil, as well as the mountains of Chili and the
plains of La Plata, would cover the theatre of war with a formidable army. The
great cities, like Lima, Cusco, Pufia, might be utterly destroyed; and it was not to
be expected that the Colombian troops, so recently driven away by the Peruvian


government, would come to the assistance of their enemies in peril.

This social overturn might therefore have succeeded, if the secret had
remained buried in the hearts of the Indians, and there surely could not be
traitors among them?

But they were ignorant that a man had obtained private audience of the
President Gambarra. This man informed him that the schooner Annonciation had
been captured from him by Indian pirates! That it had been laden with arms of
all sorts; that canoes had unloaded it at the mouth of the Rimac; and he claimed a
high indemnity for the service he thus rendered to the Peruvian government.

And yet this man had let his vessel to the agents of the Sambo; he had
received for it a considerable sum, and had come to sell the secret which he had
surprised.

By these traits the reader will recognize the Jew Samuel.


CHAPTER VI.

THE BETROTHAL.

André Certa, entirely recovered, sure of the death of Martin Paz, pressed his
marriage: he was impatient to parade the young and beautiful Jewess through the
streets of Lima.

Sarah constantly manifested toward him a haughty indifference; but he cared
not for it, considering her as an article of sale, for which he had paid a hundred
thousand piasters.

And yet André Certa suspected the Jew, and with good reason; if the contract
was dishonorable, the contractors were still more so. So the mestizo wished to
have a secret interview with Samuel, and took him one day to the Baths of
Chorillos.

He was not sorry, besides, to try the chances of play before his wedding:
public gaming, prohibited at Lima, is perfectly tolerated elsewhere. The passion
of the Limanian ladies and gentlemen for this hazardous amusement is singular
and irresistible.

The games were open some days before the arrival of the Marquis Don
Vegal; thenceforth there was a perpetual movement of the populace on the road
from Lima: some came on foot, who returned in carriages; others were about to
risk and lose the last remnants of their fortunes.

Don Vegal and Martin Paz took no part in these exciting pleasures. The
reveries of the young Indian had more noble causes; he was thinking of Sarah
and of his benefactor.

The concourse of the Limanians to the Baths of Chorillos was without


danger for him; little known by the inhabitants of the city, like all the mountain
Indians he easily concealed himself from all eyes.

After his evening walk with the marquis, Martin Paz would return to his
room, and leaning his elbow on the window, pass long hours in allowing his
tumultuous thoughts to wander over the Pacific Ocean. Don Vegal lodged in a
neighboring chamber, and guarded him with paternal tenderness.

The Spaniard always remembered the daughter of Samuel, whom he had so
unexpectedly seen at prayer in the Catholic temple. But he had not dared to
confide this important secret to Martin Paz while instructing him by degrees in
Christian truths; he feared to re-animate sentiments which he wished to
extinguish--for the poor Indian, unknown and proscribed, must renounce all
hope of happiness! Father Joachim kept Don Vegal informed of the progress of
affairs: the police had at last ceased to trouble themselves about Martin Paz; and
with time and the influence of his protector, the Indian, become a man of merit
and capable of great things, might one day take rank in the highest Peruvian
society.

Weary of the uncertainty into which his incognito plunged him, Paz resolved
to know what had become of the young Jewess. Thanks to his Spanish costume,
he could glide into a gaming-saloon, and listen to the conversation of its various
frequenters. André Certa was a man of so much importance, that his marriage, if
it was approaching, would be the subject of conversation.

One evening, instead of directing his steps toward the sea, the Indian climbed
over the high rocks on which the principal habitations of Chorillos are built; a
house, fronted by broad stone steps, struck his eyes--he entered it without noise.

The day had been hard for many of the wealthy Limanians; some among
them, exhausted with the fatigues of the preceding night, were reposing on the
ground, wrapped in their ponchos.

Other players were seated before a large green table, divided into four
compartments by two lines, which intersected each other at the centre in right
angles; on each of these compartments were the first letters of the words azar
and suerte, (chance and fate,) A and S.

At this moment, the parties of the monte were animated; a mestizo was
pursuing the unfavorable chance with feverish ardor.

"Two thousand piasters!" exclaimed he.

The banker shook the dice, and the player burst into imprecations.

"Four thousand piasters!" said he, again. And he lost once more.

Martin Paz, protected by the obscurity of the saloon, could look the player in
the face, and he turned pale.

It was André Certa!


Near him, was standing the Jew Samuel.

"You have played enough, Sefior André," said Samuel to him; "the luck is
not for you."

"What business is it of yours?" replied the mestizo, roughly.

Samuel bent down to his ear.

"If it is not my business, it is your business to break off these habits during
the days which precede your marriage."

"Eight thousand piasters!" resumed André Certa.

He lost again: the mestizo suppressed a curse and the banker resumed--"Play
on!"

André Certa, drawing from his pocket some bills, was about to have
hazarded a considerable sum; he had even deposited it on one of the tables, and
the banker, shaking his dice, was about to have decided its fate, when a sign
from Samuel stopped him short. The Jew bent again to the ear of the mestizo,
and said--

"If nothing remains to you to conclude our bargain, it shall be broken off this
evening!"

André Certa shrugged his shoulders, took up his money, and went out.

"Continue now," said Samuel to the banker; "you may ruin this gentleman
after his marriage."

The banker bowed submissively. The Jew Samuel was the founder and
proprietor of the games of Chorillos. Wherever there was a real to be made this
man was to be met with.

He followed the mestizo; and finding him on the stone steps, said to him--

"I have secrets of importance to communicate. Where can we converse in
safety?"

"Wherever you please," replied Certa, roughly.

"Senior, let not your passions ruin your prospects. I would neither confide my
secret to the most carefully closed chambers, nor the most lonely plains. If you
pay me dearly for it, it is because it is worth telling and worth keeping."

As they spoke thus, these two men had reached the sea, near the cabins
destined for the use of the bathers. They knew not that they were seen, heard and
watched by Martin Paz, who glided like a serpent in the shadow.

"Let us take a canoe," said André, "and go out into the open sea; the sharks
may, perhaps, show themselves discreet."

André detached from the shore a little boat, and threw some money to its
guardian. Samuel embarked with him, and the mestizo pushed off. He vigorously
plied two flexible oars, which soon took them a mile from the shore.

But as he saw the canoe put off, Martin Paz, concealed in a crevice of the


rock, hastily undressed, and precipitating himself into the sea, swam vigorously
toward the boat.

The sun had just buried his last rays in the waves of the ocean, and darkness
hovered over the crests of the waves.

Martin Paz had not once reflected that sharks of the most dangerous species
frequented these fatal shores. He stopped not far from the boat of the mestizo,
and listened.

"But what proof of the identity of the daughter shall I carry to the father?"
asked André Certa of the Jew.

"You will recall to him the circumstances under which he lost her."

"What were these circumstances?"

Martin Paz, now scarcely above the waves, listened without understanding.
In a girdle attached to his body, he had a poignard; he waited.

"Her father," said the Jew, "lived at Concencion, in Chili: he was then the
great nobleman he is now; only his fortune equalled his nobility. Obliged to
come to Lima on business, he set out alone, leaving at Concencion his wife, and
child aged fifteen months. The climate of Peru agreed with him, and he sent for
the marchioness to rejoin him. She embarked on the San-José of Valparaiso, with
her confidential servants.

"I was going to Peru in the same ship. The San-José was about to enter the
harbor of Lima; but, near Juan Fernandez, was struck by a terrific hurricane,
which disabled her and threw her on her side--it was the affair of half an hour.
The San-José filled with water and was slowly sinking; the passengers and crew
took refuge in the boat, but at sight of the furious waves, the marchioness
refused to enter it; she pressed her infant in her arms, and remained in the ship. I
remained with her--the boat was swallowed up at a hundred fathoms from the
San-José, with all her crew. We were alone--the tempest blew with increasing
violence. As my fortune was not on board, I had nothing to lose. The San-José,
having five feet of water in her hold, drifted on the rocks of the shore, where she
broke to pieces. The young woman was thrown into the sea with her daughter:
fortunately, for me," said the Jew, with a gloomy smile, "I could seize the child,
and reach the shore with it."

"All these details are exact?"

"Perfectly so. The father will recognize them. I had done a good day's work,
sefior; since she is worth to me the hundred thousand piasters which you are
about to pay me. Now, let the marriage take place to-morrow."

"What does this mean?" asked Martin Paz of himself, still swimming in the
shadow.

"Here is my pocket-book, with the hundred thousand piasters--take it, Master


Samuel," replied André Certa to the Jew.

"Thanks, Senor André," said the Israelite, seizing the treasure; "take this
receipt in exchange--I pledge myself to restore you double this sum, if you do
not become a member of one of the proudest families of Spain."

But the Indian had not heard this last sentence; he had dived to avoid the
approach of the boat, and his eyes could see a shapeless mass gliding rapidly
toward him. He thought it was the canoe--he was mistaken.

It was a tintorea; a shark of the most ferocious species.

Martin Paz did not quail, or he would have been lost. The animal approached
him--the Indian dived; but he was obliged to come up, in order to breathe.... He
looked at the sky, as if he was never to behold it again. The stars sparkled above
his head; the tintorea continued to approach. A vigorous blow with his tail struck
the swimmer; Martin Paz felt his slimy scales brush his breast. The shark, in
order to snatch at him, turned on his back and opened his jaws, armed with a
triple row of teeth. Martin Paz saw the white belly of the animal gleam beneath
the wave, and with a rapid hand struck it with his poignard.

Suddenly he found the waters around him red with blood. He dived--came up
again at ten fathoms' distance--thought of the daughter of Samuel; and seeing
nothing more of the boat of the mestizo, regained the shore in a few strokes,
already forgetting that he had just escaped death.

He quickly rejoined Don Vegal. The latter, not having found him on his
return, was anxiously awaiting him. Paz made no allusion to his recent
adventures; but seemed to take a lively pleasure in his conversation.

But the next day Martin Paz had left Chorillos, and Don Vegal, tortured with
anxiety, hastily returned to Lima.

The marriage of André Certa with the daughter of the wealthy Samuel, was
an important event. The beautiful sefioras had not given themselves a moment's
rest; they had exhausted their ingenuity to invent some pretty corsage or novel
head-dress; they had wearied themselves in trying without cessation the most
varied toilets.

Numerous preparations were also going on in the house of Samuel; it was a
part of the Jew's plan to give great publicity to the marriage of Sarah. The
frescoes which adorned his dwelling according to the Spanish custom, had been
newly painted; the richest hangings fell in large folds at the windows and doors
of the habitation. Furniture carved in the latest fashion, of precious or fragrant
wood, was crowded in vast saloons, impregnated with a delicious coolness. Rare
shrubs, the productions of warm countries, seized the eye with their splendid
colors, and one would have thought Spring had stolen along the balconies and
terraces, to inundate them with flowers and perfumes.


Meanwhile, amid these smiling marvels, the young girl was weeping; Sarah
no longer had hope, since the Sambo had none; and the Sambo had no hope,
since he wore no sign of hope! The negro Liberta had watched the steps of the
old Indian; he had seen nothing. Ah! if the poor child could have followed the
impulses of her heart, she would have immured herself in one of those tranquil
beaterios, to die there amid tears and prayer.

Urged by an irresistible attraction to the doctrines of Catholicism, the young
Jewess had been secretly converted; by the cares of the good Father Joachim, she
had been won over to a religion more in accordance with her feelings than that in
which she had been educated. If Samuel had destined her for a Jew, she would
have avowed her faith; but, about to espouse a Catholic, she reserved for her
husband the secret of her conversion.

Father Joachim, in order to avoid scandal, and besides, better read in his
breviary than in the human heart, had suffered Sarah to believe in the death of
Martin Paz. The conversion of the young girl was the most important thing to
him; he saw it assured by her union with André Certa, and he sought to accustom
her to the idea of this marriage, the conditions of which he was far from
respecting.

At last the day so joyous for some, so sad for others, had arrived. André
Certa had invited the entire city to his nuptials; his invitations were refused by
the noble families, who excused themselves on various pretexts. The mestizo,
meanwhile, proudly held up his head, and scarcely looked at those of his own
class. The little Milleflores in vain essayed his humblest vows; but he consoled
himself with the idea that he was about to figure as an active party in the repast
which was to follow.

In the meantime, the young mestizoes were discoursing with him in the
brilliant saloons of the Jew, and the crowd of guests thronged around André
Certa, who proudly displayed the splendors of his toilet.

The contract was soon to be signed; the sun had long been set, and the young
girl had not appeared.

Doubtless she was discussing with her duenna and her maids the place of a
ribbon or the choice of an ornament. Perhaps, that enchanting timidity which so
beautifully adorns the cheeks of a young girl, detained her still from their
inquisitive regards.

The Jew Samuel seemed a prey to secret uneasiness; André Certa bent his
brow in an impatient manner; a sort of embarrassment was depicted on the
countenance of more than one guest, while the thousand of wax-lights, reflected
by the mirrors, filled the saloon with dazzling splendor.

Without, a man was wandering in mortal anxiety; it was the Marquis Don


Vegal.


CHAPTER VII.

ALL INTERESTS AT STAKE.

Meanwhile, Sarah was left alone, alone with her anguish and her grief! She
was about to give up her whole life to a man whom she did not love! She leaned
over the perfumed balcony of her chamber, which overlooked the interior
gardens. Through the green jalousies, her ear listened to the sounds of the
slumbering country. Her lace mantle, gliding over her arms, revealed a profusion
of diamonds sparkling on her shoulders. Her sorrow, proud and majestic,
appeared through all her ornaments, and she might have been taken for one of
those beautiful Greek slaves, nobly draped in their antique garments.

Suddenly her glance rested on a man who was gliding silently among the
avenues of the magnolia; she recognized him; it was Liberta, her servant. He
seemed to be watching some invisible enemy, now sheltering himself behind a
statue, now crouching on the ground.

Sarah was afraid, and looked around her. She was alone, entirely alone. Her
eyes rested on the gardens, and she became pale, paler still! Before her was
transpiring a terrible scene. Liberta was in the grasp of a man of tall stature, who
had thrown him down; stifled sighs proved that a robust hand was pressing the
lips of the Indian.

The young girl, summoning all her courage, was about to cry out, when she
saw the two men rise! The negro was looking fixedly at his adversary.

"It is you, then! it is you!" exclaimed he.

And he followed this man in a strange stupefaction. They arrived beneath the
balcony of Sarah. Suddenly, before she had time to utter a cry, Martin Paz
appeared to her, like a phantom from another world; and, like the negro when
overthrown by the Indian, the young girl, bending before the glance of Martin
Paz, could in her turn only repeat these words,

"It is you, then! it is you!"

The young Indian fixed on her his motionless eyes, and said:

"Does the betrothed hear the sound of the festival? The guests are thronging
into the saloons to see happiness radiate from her countenance! Is it then a
victim, prepared for the sacrifice, who is about to present herself to their
impatient eyes? Is it with these features, pale with sorrow, with eyes in which
sparkle bitter tears, that the young girl is to appear herself before her betrothed?"

Martin Paz spoke thus, in a tone full of sympathizing sadness, and Sarah
listened vaguely as to those harmonies which we hear in dreams!


The young Indian resumed with infinite sweetness:

"Since the soul of the young girl is in mourning, let her look beyond the
house of her father, beyond the city where she suffers and weeps; beyond the
mountains, the palm-trees lift up their heads in freedom, the birds strike the air
with an independent wing; men have immensity to live in, and the young girls
may unfold their spirits and their hearts!"

Sarah raised her head toward Martin Paz. The Indian had drawn himself up
to his full height, and with his arm extended toward the summits of the
Cordilleras, was pointing out to the young girl the path to liberty.

Sarah felt herself constrained by an irresistible force. Already the sound of
voices reached her; they approached her chamber; her father was undoubtedly
about to enter; perhaps her lover would accompany him! The Indian suddenly
extinguished the lamp suspended above his head. A whistling, similar to the cry
of the cilguero, and reminding one of that heard on the Plaza-Mayor, pierced the
silent darkness of night; the young girl swooned.

The door opened hastily; Samuel and André Certa entered. The darkness was
profound; some servants ran with torches. The chamber was empty.

"Death and fury!" exclaimed the mestizo.

"Where is she?" asked Samuel.

"You are responsible for her," said André, brutally.

At these words, the Jew felt a cold sweat freeze even his bones.

"Help! help!" he exclaimed.

And, followed by his domestics, he sprang out of the house.

Martin Paz fled rapidly through the streets of the city. The negro Liberta
followed him; but did not appear disposed to dispute with him the possession of
the young girl.

At two hundred paces from the dwelling of the Jew, Paz found some Indians
of his companions, who had assembled at the whistle uttered by him.

"To our mountain ranchos!" exclaimed he.

"To the house of the Marquis Don Vegal!" said another voice behind him.

Martin Paz turned; the Spaniard was at his side.

"Will you not confide this young girl to me?" asked the marquis.

The Indian bent his head, and said in a low voice to his companions:

"To the dwelling of the Marquis Don Vegal!"

They turned their steps in this direction.

An extreme confusion reigned then in the saloons of the Jew. The news of
Sarah's disappearance was a thunderbolt; the friends of André hastened to follow
him. The faubourg of San Lazaro was explored, hastily searched; but nothing
could be discovered. Samuel tore his hair in despair. During the whole night the


most active research was useless.

"Martin Paz is living!" exclaimed André Certa, in a moment of fury.

And the presentiment quickly acquired confirmation. The police were
immediately informed of the elopement; its most active agents bestirred
themselves; the Indians were closely watched, and if the retreat of the young girl
was not discovered, evident proofs of an approaching revolt came to light, which
accorded with the denunciations of the Jew.

André Certa lavished gold freely, but could learn nothing. Meanwhile, the
gate-keepers declared that they had seen no person leave Lima; the young girl
must therefore be concealed in the city.

Liberta, who returned to his master, was often interrogated; but no person
seemed more astonished than himself at the elopement of Sarah.

Meanwhile, one man besides André Certa had seen in the disappearance of
the young Jewess, a proof of the existence of Martin Paz; it was the Sambo. He
was wandering in the streets of Lima, when the cry uttered by the Indian fixed
his attention; it was a signal of rally well known to him! The Sambo was
therefore a spectator of the capture of the young girl, and followed her to the
dwelling of the marquis.

The Spaniard entered by a secret door, of which he alone had the key; so that
his domestics suspected nothing. Martin Paz carried the young girl in his arms
and laid her on a bed.

When Don Vegal, who had returned to reenter by the principal door, reached
the chamber where Sarah was reposing, he found Martin Paz kneeling beside
her. The marquis was about to reproach the Indian with his conduct, when the
latter said to him:

"You see, my father, whether I love you! Ah! why did you throw yourself in
my way? We should have been already free in our mountains. But how, should I
not have obeyed your words?"

Don Vegal knew not what to reply, his heart was seized with a powerful
emotion. He felt how much he was beloved by Martin Paz.

"The day on which Sarah shall quit your dwelling to be restored to her father
and her betrothed," sighed the Indian, "you will have a son and a friend less in
the world."

As he said these last words, Paz moistened with his tears the hand of Don
Vegal. They were the first tears this man had shed!

The reproaches of Don Vegal died away before this respectful submission.
The young girl had become his guest; she was sacred! He could not help
admiring Sarah, still in a swoon; he was prepared to love her, of whose
conversion he had been a witness, and whom he would have been pleased to


bestow as a companion upon the young Indian.

It was then that, on opening her eyes, Sarah found herself in the presence of
a stranger.

"Where am I?" said she, with a sentiment of terror.

"With a generous man who has permitted me to call him my father," replied
Martin Paz, pointing to the Spaniard.

The young girl, restored by the voice of the Indian to a consciousness of her
position, covered her face with her trembling hands, and began to sob.

"Withdraw, friend," said Don Vegal to the young man; "withdraw."

Martin Paz slowly left the room, not without having pressed the hand of the
Spaniard, and cast on Sarah a lingering look.

Then Don Vegal bestowed upon this poor child consolations of exquisite
delicacy; he conveyed in suitable language his sentiments of nobility and honor.
Attentive and resigned, the young girl comprehended what danger she had
escaped; and she confided her future happiness to the care of the Spaniard. But
amid phrases interrupted by sighs and mingled with tears, Don Vegal perceived
the intense attachment of this simple heart for him whom she called her
deliverer. He induced Sarah to take some repose, and watched over her with the
solicitude of a father.

Martin Paz comprehended the duties that honor required of him, and, in spite
of perils and dangers, would not pass the night beneath the roof of Don Vegal.

He therefore went out; his head was burning, his blood was boiling with
fever in his veins.

He had not gone a hundred paces in the street, when five or six men threw
themselves upon him, and, notwithstanding his obstinate defense, succeeded in
binding him. Martin Paz uttered a cry of despair, which was lost in the night. He
believed himself in the power of his enemies, and gave a last thought to the
young girl.

A short time afterward the Indian was deposited in a room. The bandage
which had covered his eyes was taken off. He looked around him, and saw
himself in the lower hall of that tavern where his brethren had organized their
approaching revolt.

The Sambo, Manangani, and others, surrounded him. A gleam of indignation
flashed from his eyes, which was reciprocated by his captors.

"My son had then no pity on my tears," said the Sambo, "since he suffered
me for so long a time to believe in his death?"

"Ts it on the eve before a revolt that Martin Paz, our chief, should be found in
the camp of our enemies?"

Martin Paz replied neither to his father, nor to Manangani.


"So our most important interests have been sacrificed to a woman!"

As he spoke thus, Manangani had approached Martin Paz; a poignard was
gleaming in his hand. Martin Paz did not even look at him.

"Let us first speak," said the Sambo; "we will act afterward. If my son fails
to conduct his brethren to the combat, I shall know now on whom to avenge his
treason. Let him take care! the daughter of the Jew Samuel is not so well
concealed that she can escape our hatred. My son will reflect. Struck with a
mortal condemnation, proscribed, wandering among our masters, he will not
have a stone on which to rest his sorrows. If, on the contrary, we resume our
ancient country and our ancient power, Martin Paz, the chief of numerous tribes,
may bestow upon his betrothed both happiness and glory."

Martin Paz remained silent; but a terrific conflict was going on within him.
The Sambo had roused the most sensitive chords of his proud nature to vibrate;
placed between a life of fatigues, of dangers, of despair, and an existence happy,
honored, illustrious, he could not hesitate. But should he then abandon the
Marquis Don Vegal, whose noble hopes destined him as the deliverer of Peru!

"Oh!" thought he, as he looked at his father, "they will kill Sarah, if I forsake
them."

"What does my son reply to us?" imperiously demanded the Sambo.

"That Martin Paz is indispensable to your projects; that he enjoys a supreme
authority over the Indians of the city; that he leads them at his will, and, at a
sign, could have them dragged to death. He must therefore resume his place in
the revolt, in order to ensure victory."

The bonds which still enchained him were detached by order of the Sambo;
Martin Paz arose free among his brethren.

"My son," said the Indian, who was observing him attentively, "to-morrow,
during the féte of the Amancaés, our brethren will fall like an avalanche on the
unarmed Limanians. There is the road to the Cordilleras, there is the road to the
city; you will go wherever your good pleasure shall lead you. To-morrow! to-
morrow! you will find more than one mestizo breast to break your poignard
against. You are free."

"To the mountains!" exclaimed Martin Paz, with a stern voice.

The Indian had again become an Indian amid the hatred which surrounded
him.

"To the mountains," repeated he, "and wo to our enemies, wo!"

And the rising sun illumined with its earliest rays the council of the Indian
chiefs in the heart of the Cordilleras.

These rays were joyless to the heart of the poor young girl, who wept and
prayed. The marquis had summoned Father Joachim; and the worthy man had


there met his beloved penitent. What happiness was it for her to kneel at the feet
of the old priest, and to pour out her anguish and her afflictions.

But Sarah could not longer remain in the dwelling of the Spaniard. Father
Joachim suggested this to Don Vegal, who knew not what part to take, for he
was a prey to extreme anxiety. What had become of Martin Paz? He had fled the
house. Was he in the power of his enemies? Oh! how the Spaniard regretted
having suffered him to leave it during that night of alarms! He sought him with
the ardor, with the affection of a father; he found him not.

"My old friend," said he to Joachim, "the young girl is in safety near you; do
not leave her during this fatal night."

"But her father, who seeks her--her betrothed, who awaits her?"

"One day--one single day! You know not whose existence is bound to that of
this child. One day--one single day! at least until I find Martin Paz, he whom my
heart and God have named my son!"

Father Joachim returned to the young girl; Don Vegal went out and traversed
the streets of Lima.

The Spaniard was surprised at the noise, the commotion, the agitation of the
city. It was that the great féte of the Amancaés, forgotten by him alone, the 24th
of June, the day of St. John, had arrived. The neighboring mountains were
covered with verdure and flowers; the inhabitants, on foot, on horseback, in
carriages, were repairing to a celebrated table-land, situated at half a league from
Lima, where the spectators enjoyed an admirable prospect; mestizoes and
Indians mingled in the common féte; they walked gayly by groups of relatives or
friends; each group, calling itself by the name of partida, carried its provisions,
and was preceded by a player on the guitar, who chanted, accompanying himself,
the most popular yaravis and Ilantos. These joyous promenaders advanced with
cries, sports, endless jests, through the fields of maize and of alfalfa, through the
groves of banana, whose fruits hung to the ground; they traversed those beautiful
alamedas, planted with willows, and forests of citron, and orange-trees, whose
intoxicating perfumes were mingled with the wild fragrance from the mountains.
All along the road, traveling cabarets offered to the promenaders the brandy of
pisco and the chica, whose copious libations excited to laughter and clamor;
cavaliers made their horses caracole in the midst of the throng, and rivaled each
other in swiftness, address, and dexterity; all the dances in vogue, from the
loudon to the mismis, from the boleros to the zamacuecas, agitated and hurried
on the caballeros and black-eyed sambas. The sounds of the viguela were soon
no longer sufficient for the disordered movements of the dancers; the musicians
uttered wild cries, which stimulated them to delirium; the spectators beat the
measure with their feet and hands, and the exhausted couples sunk one after


another to the ground.

There reigned in this féte, which derives its name from the little mountain-
flowers, an inconceivable transport and freedom; and yet no private brawl
mingled among the cries of public rejoicing; a few lancers on horseback,
omamented with their shining cuirasses, maintained here and there order among
the populace.

The various classes of Limanian society mingled in these rejoicings, which
are repeated every day throughout the month of July. Pretty tapadas laughingly
elbow beautiful girls, who bravely come, with uncovered faces, to meet joyous
cavaliers; and when at last this multitude arrive at the plateau of the Amancaés,
an immense clamor of admiration is repeated by the mountain echoes.

At the feet of the spectators extends the ancient city of kings, proudly lifting
toward heaven its towers and its steeples, whose bells are ringing joyous peals.
San Pedro, Saint Augustine, the Cathedral, attract the eye to their roofs,
resplendent with the rays of the sun. San Domingo, the rich church, the Madonna
of which is never clad in the same garments two days in succession, raises above
her neighbors her tapering spire; on the right, the vast plains of the Pacific Ocean
are undulating to the breath of the occidental breeze, and the eye, as it roves
from Callao to Lima, rests on those funereal chulpas, the last remains of the
great dynasty of the Incas; at the horizon, Cape Morro-Solar frames, with its
sloping hills, the wonderful splendors of this picture.

So the Limanians are never satisfied with these admirable prospects, and
their noisy approbation deafens every year the echoes of San Cristoval and the
Amancaés.

Now, while they fearlessly enjoyed these picturesque views, and were giving
themselves up to an irresistible delight, a gloomy bloody funereal drama was
preparing on the snowy summits of the Cordilleras.


CHAPTER VIII.

CONQUERORS AND CONQUERED.

A prey to his blind grief, Don Vegal walked at random. After having lost his
daughter, the hope of his race and of his love, was he about to see himself also
deprived of the child of his adoption whom he had wrested from death? Don
Vegal had forgotten Sarah, to think only of Martin Paz.

He was struck with the great number of Indians, of zambos, of chifios, who
were wandering about the streets; these men, who usually took an active part in
the sports of the Amancaés, were now walking silently with singular
preoccupation. Often some busy chief gave them a secret order, and went on his


way; and all, notwithstanding their detours, were assembling by degrees in the
wealthiest quarters of Lima, in proportion as the Limanians were scattered
abroad in the country.

Don Vegal, absorbed in his own researches, soon forgot this singular state of
things. He traversed San Lazaro throughout, saw André Certa there, enraged and
armed, and the Jew Samuel, in the extremity of distress, not for the loss of his
daughter, but for the loss of his hundred thousand piasters; but he found not
Martin Paz, whom he was impatiently seeking. He ran to the consistorial prison.
Nothing! He returned home. Nothing! He mounted his horse and hastened to
Chorillos. Nothing! He returned at last, exhausted with fatigue, to Lima; the
clock of the cathedral was striking four.

Don Vegal remarked some groups of Indians before his dwelling; but he
could not, without compromising the man of whom he was in search, ask them--

"Where is Martin Paz?"

He reentered, more despairing than ever.

Immediately a man emerged from a neighboring alley, and came directly to
the Indians. This man was the Sambo.

"The Spaniard has returned," said he to them; "you know him now; he is one
of the representatives of the race which crushes us--wo to him!"

"And when shall we strike?"

"When five o'clock sounds, and the tocsin from the mountain gives the signal
of vengeance.”

Then the Sambo marched with hasty steps to the chingana, and rejoined the
chief of the revolt.

Meanwhile the sun had begun to sink beneath the horizon; it was the hour in
which the Limanian aristocracy went in its turn to the Amancaés; the richest
toilets shone in the equipages which defiled to the right and left beneath the trees
along the road; there was an inextricable mélée of foot-passengers, carriages,
horses; a confusion of cries, songs, instruments, and vociferations.

The clock on the tower of the cathedral suddenly struck five! and a shrill
funereal sound vibrated through the air; the tocsin thundered over the crowd,
frozen in its delirium.

An immense cry resounded in the city. From every square, every street, every
house issued the Indians, with arms in their hands, and fury in their eyes. The
principal places of the city were thronged with these men, some of whom shook
above their heads burning torches!

"Death to the Spaniards! death to the oppressors!" such was the watch-word
of the rebels.

Those who attempted to return to Lima must have recoiled before these


masses; but the summits of the hills were quickly covered with other enemies,
and all retreat was impossible; the zambos precipitated themselves like a
thunderbolt on this crowd, exhausted with the fatigues of the festival, while the
mountain Indians cleared for themselves a bloody path to rejoin their brethren of
the city.

Imagine the aspect presented by Lima at this terrible moment. The rebels had
left the square of the tavern, and were scattered in all quarters; at the head of one
of the columns, Martin Paz was waving the black flag--the flag of independence;
while the Indians in the other streets were attacking the houses appointed to ruin,
Martin Paz took possession of the Plaza-Mayor with his company; near him,
Manangani was uttering ferocious yells, and proudly displaying his bloody arms.

But the soldiers of the government, forewarned of the revolt, were ranged in
battle array before the palace of the president; a frightful fusillade greeted the
insurgents at their entrance on the square; surprised by this unexpected
discharge, which extended a goodly number of them on the ground, they sprang
upon the troops with insurmountable impatience; a horrible mélée followed, in
which men fought body to body. Martin Paz and Manangani performed prodigies
of valor, and escaped death only by miracle.

It was necessary at all hazards that the palace should be taken and occupied
by their men.

"Forward!" cried Martin Paz, and his voice led the Indians to the assault.
Although they were crushed in every direction, they succeeded in making the
body of troops around the palace recoil. Already had Manangani sprang on the
first steps; but he suddenly stopped as the opening ranks of soldiers unmasked
two pieces of cannon ready to fire on the assailants.

There was not a moment to lose; the battery must be seized before it could be
discharged.

"On!" cried Manangani, addressing himself to Martin Paz.

But the young Indian had just stooped and no longer heard him, for an Indian
had whispered these words in his ear:

"They are pillaging the house of Don Vegal, perhaps assassinating him!"

At these words Martin Paz recoiled. Manangani seized him by the arm; but,
repulsing him with a vigorous hand, the Indian darted toward the square.

"Traitor! infamous traitor!" exclaimed Manangani, discharging his pistols at
Martin Paz.

At this moment the cannons were fired, and the grape swept the Indians on
the steps.

"This way, brethren,” cried Martin Paz, and a few fugitives, his devoted
companions, joined him; with this little company he could make his way through


the soldiers.

This flight had all the consequences of treason; the Indians believed
themselves abandoned by their chief. Manangani in vain attempted to bring them
back to the combat; a rapid fusillade sent among them a shower of balls;
thenceforth it was no longer possible to rally them; the confusion was at its
height and the rout complete. The flames which arose in certain quarters
attracted some fugitives to pillage; but the conquering soldiers pursued them
with the sword, and killed a great number without mercy.

Meanwhile, Martin Paz had gained the house of Don Vegal; it was the theatre
of a bloody struggle, headed by the Sambo himself; he had a double interest in
being there; while contending with the Spanish noblemen, he wished to seize
Sarah, as a pledge of the fidelity of his son.

On seeing Martin Paz return, he no longer doubted his treason, and turned
his brethren against him.

The overthrown gate and walls of the court revealed Don Vegal, sword in
hand, surrounded by his faithful servants, and contending with an invading mass.
This man's courage and pride were sublime; he was the first to present himself to
mortal blows, and his formidable arm had surrounded him with corpses.

But what could be done against this crowd of Indians, which was then
increasing with all the conquered of the Plaza-Mayor. Don Vegal felt that his
defenders were becoming exhausted, and nothing remained for him but death,
when Martin Paz arrived, rapid as the thunderbolt, charged the aggressors from
behind, forced them to turn against him, and, amid balls, poignard-strokes and
maledictions, reached Don Vegal, to whom he made a rampart of his body.
Courage revived in the hearts of the besieged.

"Well done, my son, well done!" said Don Vegal to Martin Paz, pressing his
hand.

But the young Indian was gloomy.

"Well done! Martin Paz," exclaimed another voice which went to his very
soul; he recognized Sarah, and his arm traced a bloody circle around him.

The company of Sambo gave way in its turn. Twenty times had this modern
Brutus directed his blows against his son, without being able to reach him, and
twenty times Martin had turned away the weapon about to strike his father.

Suddenly the ferocious Manangani, covered with blood, appeared beside the
Sambo.

"Thou hast sworn,” said he, "to avenge the treason of a wretch on his
kindred, on his friends, on himself. Well, it is time! the soldiers are coming; the
mestizo, André Certa, is with them."

"Come then," said the Sambo, with a ferocious laugh: "come then, for our


vengeance approaches."

And both abandoned the house of Don Vegal, while their companions were
being killed there. They went directly to the company who were arriving. The
latter aimed at them; but without being intimidated, the Sambo approached the
mestizo.

"You are André Certa," said he; "well, your betrothed is in the house of Don
Vegal, and Martin Paz is about to carry her to the mountains."

This said, the Indians disappeared. Thus the Sambo had put face to face two
mortal enemies, and, deceived by the presence of Martin Paz in the house of Don
Vegal, the soldiers rushed upon the dwelling of the marquis.

André Certa was intoxicated with rage. As soon as he perceived Martin Paz,
he rushed upon him.

"Here!" exclaimed the young Indian, and quitting the stone steps which he
had so valiantly defended, he joined the mestizo. Meanwhile the companions of
Martin Paz were repulsing the soldiers body to body.

Martin Paz had seized André Certa with his powerful hand, and clasped him
so closely that the mestizo could not use his pistols. They were there, foot
against foot, breast against breast, their faces touched, and their glances mingled
in a single gleam; their movements became rapid, even invisible; neither friends
nor enemies could approach them; in this terrible embrace respiration failed,
both fell. André Certa raised himself above Martin Paz, whose poignard had
escaped his grasp. The mestizo raised his arm, but the Indian succeeded in
seizing it before it had struck. The moment was horrible. André Certa in vain
attempted to disengage himself; Martin Paz, with supernatural strength, turned
against the mestizo the poignard and the arm which held it, and plunged it into
his heart.

Martin Paz arose all bloody. The place was free, the soldiers flying in every
direction. Martin Paz might have conquered had he remained on the Plaza-
Mayor. He fell into the arms of Don Vegal.

"To the mountains, my son; flee to the mountains! now I command it."

"Is my enemy indeed dead?" said Martin Paz, returning to the corpse of
André Certa.

A man was that moment searching it, and held a pocket-book which he had
taken from it. Martin Paz sprang on this man and overthrew him; it was the Jew
Samuel.

The Indian picked up the pocket-book, opened it hastily, searched it, uttered
a cry of joy, and springing toward the marquis, put in his hand a paper on which
were written these words:

"Received of the Sefor André Certa the sum of 100,000 piasters; I pledge


myself to restore this sum doubled, if Sarah, whom I saved from the shipwreck
of the San-José, and whom he is about to espouse, is not the daughter and only
heir of the Marquis Don Vegal.

"SAMUEL."

"My daughter! my daughter!" exclaimed the Spaniard, and he fell into the
arms of Martin Paz, who carried him to the chamber of Sarah.

Alas! the young girl was no longer there; Father Joachim, bathed in his own
blood, could articulate only these words:

"The Sambo!--carried off!--toward the river of Madeira!--"

And he fainted.


CHAPTER IX.

THE CATARACTS OF THE MADEIRA.

"On! on!" Martin Paz had exclaimed. And without saying a word, Don Vegal
followed the Indian. His daughter!--he must find again his daughter! Mules were
brought, prepared for a long journey among the Cordilleras; the two men
mounted them, wrapped in their ponchos; large gaiters were attached by thongs
above their knees; immense stirrups, armed with long spurs, surrounded their
feet, and broad-brimmed Guayaquil hats sheltered their heads. Arms filled the
holsters of each saddle; a carbine, formidable in the hands of Don Vegal, was
suspended at his side. Martin Paz had encircled himself with his lasso, one
extremity of which was fixed to the harness of his mule.

The Spaniard and the Indian spurred their horses to their utmost speed. At
the moment of leaving the walls of the city they were joined by an Indian
equipped like themselves. It was Liberta--Don Vegal recognized him; the faithful
servant wished to share in their pursuit.

Martin Paz knew all the plains, all the mountains, which they were to
traverse; he knew among what savage tribes, into what desert country the Sambo
had conveyed his betrothed. His betrothed! he no longer dared give this name to
the daughter of Don Vegal.

"My son," said the latter, "have you any hope in your heart?"

"As much as hatred and tenderness."

"The daughter of the Jew, in becoming my blood, has not ceased to be thine."

"Let us press on!" hastily replied Martin Paz.

On their way the travelers saw a great number of Indians flying to regain
their ranchos amid the mountains. The defection of Martin Paz had been
followed by defeat. If the émeute had triumphed in some places, it had received
its death-blow at Lima.


The three cavaliers traveled rapidly, having but one idea, one object. They
soon buried themselves among the almost impracticable passes of the
Cordilleras. Difficult pathways circulated through these reddish masses, planted
here and there with cocoanut and pine trees; the cedars, cotton-trees, and aloes
were left behind them, with the plains covered with maize and lucerne; some
thorny cactuses sometimes pricked their mules, and made them hesitate on the
verge of precipices.

It was a difficult task to traverse the Cordilleras during these summer
months; the melting of snows beneath the sun of June often made unforeseen
cataracts spout from beneath the steps of the traveler; often frightful masses,
detaching themselves from the summits of the peaks, were engulfed near them in
fathomless abysses!

But they continued their march, fearing neither the hurricane nor the cold of
these high solitudes; they traveled day and night, finding neither cities nor
dwellings where they might for a moment repose; happy if in some deserted hut
they found a mat of tortora upon which to extend their wearied limbs, some
pieces of meat dried in the sun, some calabashes full of muddy water.

They reached at last the summit of the Andes, 14,000 feet above the level of
the sea. There, no more trees, no more vegetation; sometimes an oso or ucuman,
a sort of enormous black bear, came to meet them. Often, during the afternoon,
they were enveloped in those formidable storms of the Cordilleras, which raise
whirlwinds of snow from the loftiest summits. Don Vegal sometimes paused,
unaccustomed to these frightful perils. Martin Paz then supported him in his
arms, and sheltered him against the drifting snow. And yet lightnings flashed
from the clouds, and thunders broke over these barren peaks, and filled the
mountain recesses with their terrific roar.


At this point, the most elevated of the Andes, the travelers were seized with a
malady called by the Indians soroche, which deprives the most intrepid man of
his courage and his strength. A superhuman will is then necessary to keep one
from falling motionless on the stones of the road, and being devoured by those
immense condors which display above their vast wings! These three men spoke
little; each wrapped himself in the silence which these vast deserts inspired.

On the eastern slope of the Cordilleras, they hoped to find traces of their
enemies; they therefore traveled on, and were at last descending the chain of
mountains; but the Andes are composed of a great number of salient peaks, so
that inaccessible precipices were constantly rising before them.

Nevertheless they soon found the trees of inferior levels; the llamas, the
vigonias, which feed on the thin grass, announced the neighborhood of men.
Sometimes they met gauchos conducting their arias of mules; and more than one
capataz (leader of a convoy) exchanged fresh animals for their exhausted ones.

In this manner they reached the immense virgin forests which cover the
plains situated between Peru and Brazil; they began thenceforth to recover traces
of the captors; and it was in the midst of these inextricable woods that Martin
Paz recovered all his Indian sagacity.

Courage returned to the Spaniard, strength returned to Liberta, when a half-
extinct fire and prints of footsteps proved the proximity of their enemies. Martin
Paz noted all and studied all, the breaking of the little branches, the nature of the
vestiges.

Don Vegal feared lest his unfortunate daughter should have been dragged on
foot through the stones and thorns; but the Indian showed him some pebbles
strongly imbedded in the earth, which indicated the pressure of an animal's foot;
above, branches had been pushed aside in the same direction, which could have
been reached only by a person on horseback. The poor father comforted himself
and recovered life and hope, and then Martin Paz was so confident, so skillful,
so strong, that there were for him neither impassable obstacles nor
insurmountable perils.

Nevertheless immense forests contracted the horizon around them, and trees
multiplied incessantly before their fatigued eyes.

One evening, while the darkness was gathering beneath the opaque foliage,
Martin Paz, Liberta and Don Vegal were compelled by fatigue to stop. They had
reached the banks of a river; it was the river Madeira, which the Indian
recognized perfectly; immense mangrove trees bent above the sleeping wave and
were united to the trees on the opposite shore by capricious lianes (vines), on
which were balancing the titipaying and the concoulies.

Had the captors ascended the banks? had they descended the course of the


river? had they crossed it in a direct line? Such were the questions with which
Martin Paz puzzled himself. He stepped a little aside from his companions,
following with infinite difficulty some fugitive tracks; these brought him to a
clearing a little less gloomy. Some footsteps indicated that a company of men
had, perhaps, crossed the river at this spot, which was the opinion of the Indian,
although he found around him no proof of the construction of a canoe; he knew
that the Sambo might have cut down some tree in the middle of the forest, and
having spoiled it of its bark, made of it a boat, which could have been carried on
the arms of men to the shores of the Madeira. Nevertheless, he was still
hesitating, when he saw a sort of black mass move near a thicket; he quickly
prepared his lasso and made ready for an attack; he advanced a few paces, and
perceived an animal lying on the ground, a prey to the final convulsions--it was a
mule. The poor, expiring beast had been struck at a distance from the spot
whither it had been dragged, leaving long traces of blood on its passage. Martin
Paz no longer doubted that the Indians, unable to induce it to cross the river, had
killed it with the stroke of a poignard, as a deep wound indicated. From this
moment he felt certain of the direction of his enemies; and returned to his
companions, who were already uneasy at his long absence.

"To-morrow, perhaps, we shall see the young girl!" said he to them.

"My daughter! Oh! my son! let us set out this instant," said the Spaniard; "I
am no longer fatigued, and strength returns with hope--let us go!"

"But we must cross this river, and we cannot lose time in constructing a
canoe."

"We will swim across."

"Courage, then, my father! Liberta and myself will sustain you."

All three laid aside their garments, which Martin Paz carried in a bundle
upon his head; and all three glided silently into the water, for fear of awakening
some of these dangerous caimans so numerous in the rivers of Brazil and Peru.

They arrived safely at the opposite shore: the first care of Martin Paz was to
recover traces of the Indians; but in vain did he scrutinize the smallest leaves, the
smallest pebbles--he could discover nothing; as the rapid current had carried
them down in crossing, he ascended the bank of the river to the spot opposite
that where he had found the mule, but nothing indicated the direction taken by
the captors. It must have been that these, that their tracks might be entirely lost,
had descended the river for several miles, in order to land far from the spot of
their embarkation.

Martin Paz, that his companions might not be discouraged, did not
communicate to them his fears; he said not even a word to Don Vegal respecting
the mule, for fear of saddening him still more with the thought that his daughter


must now be dragged through these difficult passes.

When he returned to the Spaniard, he found him asleep--fatigue had
prevailed over grief and resolution; Martin Paz was careful not to awaken him; a
little sleep might do him much good; but, while he himself watched, resting the
head of Don Vegal on his knees and piercing with his quick glances the
surrounding shadows, he sent Liberta to seek below on the river some trace
which might guide them at the first rays of the sun.

The Indian departed in the direction indicated, gliding like a serpent between
the high brush with which the shores were bristling, and the sound of his
footsteps was soon lost in the distance.

Thenceforth Martin Paz remained alone amid these gloomy solitudes: the
Spaniard was sleeping peacefully; the names of his daughter and the Indian
sometimes mingled in his dreams, and alone disturbed the silence of these
obscure forests.

The young Indian was not mistaken; the Sambo had descended the Madeira
three miles, then had landed with the young girl and his numerous companions,
among whom might be numbered Manangani, still covered with hideous
wounds.

The company of Sambo had increased during the journey. The Indians of the
plains and the mountains had awaited with impatience the triumph of the revolt;
on learning the failure of their brethren, they fell a prey to a gloomy despair;
hearing that they had been betrayed by Martin Paz, they uttered yells of rage;
when they saw that they had a victim to be sacrificed to their anger, they burst
forth in cries of joy and followed the company of the old Indian.

They marched thus to the approaching sacrifice, devouring the young girl
with sanguinary glances--it was the betrothed, the beloved of Martin Paz whom
they were about to put to death; abuse was heaped upon her, and more than once
the Sambo, who wished his revenge to be public, with difficulty wrested Sarah
from their fury.

The young girl, pale, languishing, was without thought and almost without
life amid this frightful horde; she had no longer the sentiment of motion, of will,
of existence--she advanced, because bloody hands urged her onward; they might
have abandoned her in the midst of these great solitudes--she could not have
taken a step to have escaped death. Sometimes the remembrance of her father
and of the young Indian passed before her eyes, but like a gleam of lightning
bewildering her; then she fell again an inert mass on the neck of the poor mule,
whose wounded feet could no longer sustain her. When beyond the river she was
compelled to follow her captors on foot, two Indians taking her by the arm
dragged her rapidly along, and a trace of blood marked on the sand and dead


leaves her painful passage.

But the Sambo was no longer afraid of pursuit; he cared little that this blood
betrayed the direction he had taken--he was approaching the termination of his
journey, and soon the cataracts which abound in the currents of the great river
sent up their deafening clamor.

The numerous company of Indians arrived at a sort of village, composed of a
hundred huts, made of reeds interlaced and clay; at their approach, a multitude of
women and children darted toward them with loud cries of joy--more than one
found there his anxious family--more than one wife missed the father of her
children!

These women soon learned the defeat of their party; their sadness was
transformed into rage on learning the defection of Martin Paz, and on seeing his
betrothed devoted to death.

Sarah remained immovable before these enemies and looked at them with a
dim eye; all these hideous faces were making grimaces around her, and the most
terrific threats were uttered in her ears--the poor child might have thought herself
delivered over to the torturers of the infernal regions.

"Where is my husband?" said one; "it is thou who hast caused him to be
killed!"

"And my brother, who will never again return to the cabin--what hast thou
done with him? Death! death! Let each of us have a piece of her flesh! let each
of us have a pain to make her suffer! Death! death!"

And these women, with dishevelled hair, brandishing knives, waving flaming
brands, bearing enormous stones, approached the young girl, surrounded her,
pressed her, crushed her.

"Back!" cried the Sambo, "back! and let all await the decision of their chiefs!
This girl must disarm the anger of the Great Spirit, which has rested upon our
arms; and she shall not serve for private revenge alone!"

The women obeyed the words of the old Indian, casting frightful glances on
the young girl; the latter, covered with blood, remained extended on the pebbly
shore.

Above this village, plunges, from a height of more than a hundred feet, a
foaming cataract, which breaks against sharp rocks; the Madeira, contracted into
a deep bed, precipitates this dense mass of water with frightful rapidity; a cloud
of mist is eternally suspended above this torrent, whose fall sends its formidable
and thundering roar afar.

It was in the midst of this foaming tempest that the unfortunate young girl
was destined to die; at the first rays of the sun, exposed in a bark canoe above
the cataract, she was to be precipitated with the mass of waters on the rude rocks


against which the Madeira broke.

So the council of chiefs had decided; and they had delayed until the morrow
the punishment of their victim, to give her a night of anguish, of torment, and of
terror.

When the sentence was made known, cries of joy welcomed it, and a furious
delirium seized the Indians.

It was a night of orgies--a night of blood and of horror; brandy increased the
excitement of these wild natives; dances, accompanied with perpetual yells,
surrounded the young girl, and wound their fantastic chains about the stake to
which she was fastened. Sometimes the circle narrowed, and enlaced her in its
furious whirls: the Indians ran through the uncultivated fields, brandishing
blazing pine-branches, and surrounding the victim with light.

And it was thus until sunrise, and worse yet when its first rays illuminated
the scene. The young girl was detached from the stake, and a hundred arms were
stretched out to drag her to execution, when the name of Martin Paz
involuntarily escaped her lips, and cries of hatred and of vengeance responded.

It was necessary to climb by steep paths the immense pile of rocks which led
to the upper level of the river, and the victim arrived there all bloody; a canoe of
bark awaited her a hundred paces above the fall; she was deposited in it, and
fastened by bonds which entered her flesh.

"Vengeance and death!" exclaimed the whole tribe, with one voice.

The canoe was hurried on with increasing rapidity and began to whirl.

Suddenly a man appeared on the opposite shore-- It is Martin Paz! Beside
him, are Don Vegal and Liberta.

"My daughter! my daughter!" exclaims the father, kneeling on the shore.

"My father!" replied Sarah, raising herself up with superhuman strength.

The scene was indescribable. The canoe was rapidly hastening to the
cataract, in whose foam it was already enveloped.

Martin Paz, standing on a rock, balanced his lasso which whistled around his
head. At the instant the boat was about to be precipitated, the long leathern thong
unfolded from above the head of the Indian, and surrounded the canoe with its
noose.

"My daughter! my daughter!" exclaimed Don Vegal.

"My betrothed! my beloved!" cried Martin Paz.

"Death!" yelled the savage multitude.

Meanwhile Martin Paz redoubles his efforts; the canoe remains suspended
over the abyss; the current cannot prevail over the strength of the young Indian;
the canoe is drawn to him; the enemies are far on the opposite shore; the young
girl is saved.


Suddenly an arrow whistles through the air, and pierces the heart of Martin
Paz. He falls forward in the bark of the victim; and, re-descending the current of
the river in her arms, is engulfed with Sarah in the vortex of the cataract.

A yell of triumph is heard above the sound of the torrent.

Liberta bore off the Spaniard amid a cloud of arrows, and disappeared with
him.

Don Vegal regained Lima, where he died with grief and exhaustion.

The Sambo, who remained among his sanguinary tribes, was never heard of
more.

The Jew Samuel kept the hundred thousand piasters he had received, and
continued his usuries at the expense of the Limanian nobles.

Martin Paz and Sarah were, in their brief and final reunion, betrothed for
eternity.


THE SECRET OF THE ISLAND


by JULES VERNE

Introduction.

The Secret of the Island was another of the series of Voyages Extraordinaires
which ran through a famous Paris magazine for younger readers, the Magasin
Illustre. It formed the third and completing part of the Mysterious Island set of
tales of adventure. We may count it, taken separately, as next to Robinson
Crusoe and possibly Treasure Island, the best read and the best appreciated book
in all that large group of island-tales and sea-stories to which it belongs. It
gained its vogue immediately in France, Great Britain, and overseas besides
being translated, with more or less despatch, into other European tongues. M.
Jules Verne must indeed have gained enough by it and its two connective tales to
have acquired an island of his own. The present book was translated into English
by the late W.H.G. Kingston; and is printed in Everyman's Library by special
exclusive arrangement with Messrs. Sampson Low, Marston & Co., Ltd., 1909.


CHAPTER ONE.

LOST OR SAVED--AYRTON SUMMONED--IMPORTANT
DISCUSSION--IT IS NOT THE DUNCAN--SUSPICIOUS VESSEL--
PRECAUTIONS TO BE TAKEN--THE SHIP APPROACHES--A CANNON-
SHOT--THE BRIG ANCHORS IN SIGHT OF THE ISLAND-- NIGHT
COMES ON.

It was now two years and a half since the castaways from the balloon had
been thrown on Lincoln Island, and during that period there had been no
communication between them and their fellow-creatures. Once the reporter had
attempted to communicate with the inhabited world by confiding to a bird a
letter which contained the secret of their situation, but that was a chance on
which it was impossible to reckon seriously. Ayrton, alone, under the
circumstances which have been related, had come to join the little colony. Now,
suddenly, on this day, the 17th of October, other men had unexpectedly appeared
in sight of the island, on that deserted sea!

There could be no doubt about it! A vessel was there! But would she pass on,
or would she put into port? In a few hours the colonists would definitely know
what to expect.

Cyrus Harding and Herbert having immediately called Gideon Spilett,
Pencroft, and Neb into the dining-room of Granite House, told them what had
happened. Pencroft, seizing the telescope, rapidly swept the horizon, and
stopping on the indicated point, that is to say, on that which had made the almost
imperceptible spot on the photographic negative--


"I'm blessed but it is really a vessel!" he exclaimed, in a voice which did not
express any great amount of satisfaction.

"Is she coming here?" asked Gideon Spilett.

"Impossible to say anything yet," answered Pencroft, "for her rigging alone
is above the horizon, and not a bit of her hull can be seen."

"What is to be done?" asked the lad.

"Wait," replied Harding.

And for a considerable time the settlers remained silent, given up to all the
thoughts, all the emotions, all the fears, all the hopes, which were aroused by this
incident--the most important which had occurred since their arrival in Lincoln
Island. Certainly, the colonists were not in the situation of castaways abandoned
on a sterile islet, constantly contending against a cruel nature for their miserable
existence, and incessantly tormented by the longing to return to inhabited
countries. Pencroft and Neb, especially, who felt themselves at once so happy
and so rich, would not have left their island without regret. They were
accustomed, besides, to this new life in the midst of the domain which their
intelligence had as it were civilised. But at any rate this ship brought news from
the world, perhaps even from their native land. It was bringing fellow-creatures
to them, and it may be conceived how deeply their hearts were moved at the
sight!

From time to time Pencroft took the glass and rested himself at the window.
From thence he very attentively examined the vessel, which was at a distance of
twenty miles to the east. The colonists had as yet, therefore, no means of
signalising their presence. A flag would not have been perceived; a gun would
not have been heard; a fire would not have been visible. However, it was certain
that the island, overtopped by Mount Franklin, could not have escaped the notice
of the vessel's look-out. But why was this ship coming there? Was it simple
chance which brought it to that part of the Pacific, where the maps mentioned no
land except Tabor Islet, which itself was out of the route usually followed by
vessels from the Polynesian Archipelagos, from New Zealand, and from the
American coast? To this question, which each one asked himself, a reply was
suddenly made by Herbert.

"Can it be the Duncan?" he cried.

The Duncan, as has been said, was Lord Glenarvan's yacht, which had left
Ayrton on the islet, and which was to return there some day to fetch him. Now,
the islet was not so far-distant from Lincoln Island, but that a vessel, standing for
the one, could pass in sight of the other. A hundred and fifty miles only separated
them in longitude, and seventy in latitude.

"We must tell Ayrton," said Gideon Spilett, "and send for him immediately.


He alone can say if it is the Duncan."

This was the opinion of all, and the reporter, going to the telegraphic
apparatus which placed the corral in communication with Granite House, sent
this telegram:--"Come with all possible speed."

In a few minutes the bell sounded.

"I am coming," replied Ayrton.

Then the settlers continued to watch the vessel.

"If it is the Duncan," said Herbert, "Ayrton will recognise her without
difficulty, since he sailed on board her for some time."

"And if he recognises her," added Pencroft, "it will agitate him exceedingly!"

"Yes," answered Cyrus Harding; "but now Ayrton is worthy to return on
board the Duncan, and pray Heaven that it is indeed Lord Glenarvan's yacht, for
I should be suspicious of any other vessel. These are ill-famed seas, and I have
always feared a visit from Malay pirates to our island."

"We could defend it," cried Herbert.

"No doubt, my boy," answered the engineer smiling, "but it would be better
not to have to defend it."

"A useless observation," said Spilett. "Lincoln Island is unknown to
navigators, since it is not marked even on the most recent maps. Do you not
think, Cyrus, that that is a sufficient motive for a ship, finding herself
unexpectedly in sight of new land, to try and visit rather than avoid it?"

"Certainly," replied Pencroft.

"T think so too," added the engineer. "It may even be said that it is the duty of
a captain to come and survey any land or island not yet known, and Lincoln
Island is in this position."

"Well," said Pencroft, "suppose this vessel comes and anchors there a few
cables-lengths from our island, what shall we do?" This sudden question
remained at first without any reply. But Cyrus Harding, after some moments'
thought, replied in the calm tone which was usual to him--

"What we shall do, my friends? What we ought to do is this:--we will
communicate with the ship, we will take our passage on board her, and we will
leave our island, after having taken possession of it in the name of the United
States. Then we will return with any who may wish to follow us to colonise it
definitely, and endow the American Republic with a useful station in this part of
the Pacific Ocean!"

"Hurrah!" exclaimed Pencroft, "and that will be no small present which we
shall make to our country! The colonisation is already almost finished; names
are given to every part of the island; there is a natural port, fresh water, roads, a
telegraph, a dockyard, and manufactories; and there will be nothing to be done


but to inscribe Lincoln Island on the maps!"

"But if any one seizes it in our absence?" observed Gideon Spilett.

"Hang it!" cried the sailor. "I would rather remain all alone to guard it: and
trust to Pencroft, they shouldn't steal it from him, like a watch from the pocket of
a swell!"

For an hour it was impossible to say with any certainty whether the vessel
was or was not standing towards Lincoln Island. She was nearer, but in what
direction was she sailing? This Pencroft could not determine. However, as the
wind was blowing from the north-east, in all probability the vessel was sailing
on the starboard tack. Besides, the wind was favourable for bringing her towards
the island, and, the sea being calm, she would not be afraid to approach although
the shallows were not marked on the chart.

Towards four o'clock--an hour after he had been sent for--Ayrton arrived at
Granite House. He entered the dining-room, saying--

"At your service, gentlemen."

Cyrus Harding gave him his hand, as was his custom to do, and, leading him
to the window--

"Ayrton," said he, "we have begged you to come here for an important
reason. A ship is in sight of the island."

Ayrton at first paled slightly, and for a moment his eyes became dim; then,
leaning out of the window, he surveyed the horizon, but could see nothing.

"Take this telescope," said Spilett, "and look carefully, Ayrton, for it is
possible that this ship may be the Duncan come to these seas for the purpose of
taking you home again."

"The Duncan!" murmured Ayrton. "Already?" This last word escaped
Ayrton's lips as if involuntarily, and his head drooped upon his hands.

Did not twelve years' solitude on a desert island appear to him a sufficient
expiation? Did not the penitent yet feel himself pardoned, either in his own eyes
or in the eyes of others?

"No," said he, "no! it cannot be the Duncan!"

"Look, Ayrton," then said the engineer, "for it is necessary that we should
know beforehand what to expect."

Ayrton took the glass and pointed it in the direction indicated. During some
minutes he examined the horizon without moving, without uttering a word.
Then--

"Tt is indeed a vessel," said he, "but I do not think she is the Duncan."

"Why do you not think so?" asked Gideon Spilett. "Because the Duncan is a
steam-yacht, and I cannot perceive any trace of smoke either above or near that
vessel."


"Perhaps she is simply sailing," observed Pencroft. "The wind is favourable
for the direction which she appears to be taking, and she may be anxious to
economise her coal, being so far from land."

"It is possible that you may be right, Mr Pencroft," answered Ayrton, "and
that the vessel has extinguished her fires. We must wait until she is nearer, and
then we shall soon know what to expect."

So saying, Ayrton sat down in a comer of the room and remained silent. The
colonists again discussed the strange ship, but Ayrton took no part in the
conversation. All were in such a mood that they found it impossible to continue
their work. Gideon Spilett and Pencroft were particularly nervous, going,
coming, not able to remain still in one place. Herbert felt more curiosity. Neb
alone maintained his usual calm manner. Was not his country that where his
master was? As to the engineer, he remained plunged in deep thought, and in his
heart feared rather than desired the arrival of the ship. In the meanwhile, the
vessel was a little nearer the island. With the aid of the glass, it was ascertained
that she was a brig, and not one of those Malay proas, which are generally used
by the pirates of the Pacific. It was, therefore, reasonable to believe that the
engineer's apprehensions would not be justified, and that the presence of this
vessel in the vicinity of the island was fraught with no danger. Pencroft, after a
minute examination, was able positively to affirm that the vessel was rigged as a
brig, and that she was standing obliquely towards the coast, on the starboard
tack, under her topsails and topgallant-sails. This was confirmed by Ayrton. But
by continuing in this direction she must soon disappear behind Claw Cape, as the
wind was from the south-west, and to watch her it would be then necessary to
ascend the heights of Washington Bay, near Port Balloon--a provoking
circumstance, for it was already five o'clock in the evening, and the twilight
would soon make any observation extremely difficult.

"What shall we do when night comes on?" asked Gideon Spilett. "Shall we
light a fire, so as to signal our presence, on the coast?"

This was a serious question, and yet, although the engineer still retained
some of his presentiments, it was answered in the affirmative. During the night
the ship might disappear and leave for ever, and, this ship gone, would another
ever return to the waters of Lincoln Island? Who could foresee what the future
would then have in store for the colonists?

"Yes," said the reporter, "we ought to make known to that vessel, whoever
she may be, that the island is inhabited. To neglect the opportunity which is
offered to us might be to create everlasting regrets."

It was, therefore, decided that Neb and Pencroft should go to Port Balloon,
and that there, at nightfall, they should light an immense fire, the blaze of which


would necessarily attract the attention of the brig.

But at the moment when Neb and the sailor were preparing to leave Granite
House, the vessel suddenly altered her course, and stood directly for Union Bay.
The brig was a good sailer, for she approached rapidly. Neb and Pencroft put off
their departure, therefore, and the glass was put into Ayrton's hands, that he
might ascertain for certain whether the ship was or was not the Duncan. The
Scotch yacht was also rigged as a brig. The question was, whether a chimney
could be discerned between the two masts of the vessel, which was now at a
distance of only five miles.

The horizon was still very clear. The examination was easy, and Ayrton soon
let the glass fall again, saying--

"It is not the Duncan! It could not be her!"

Pencroft again brought the brig within the range of the telescope, and could
see that she was of between three and four hundred tons burden, wonderfully
narrow, well-masted, admirably built, and must be a very rapid sailer. But to
what nation did she belong? That was difficult to say.

"And yet," added the sailor, "a flag is floating from her peak, but I cannot
distinguish the colours of it."

"In half an hour we shall be certain about that," answered the reporter.
"Besides, it is very evident that the intention of the captain of this ship is to land,
and, consequently, if not to-day, to-morrow at the latest, we shall make his
acquaintance."

"Never mind!" said Pencroft. "It is best to know whom we have to deal with,
and I shall not be sorry to recognise that fellow's colours!"

And, while thus speaking, the sailor never left the glass. The day began to
fade, and with the day the breeze fell also. The brig's ensign hung in folds, and it
became more and more difficult to observe it.

"It is not the American flag," said Pencroft from time to time, "nor the
English, the red of which could be easily seen, nor the French or German
colours, nor the white flag of Russia, nor the yellow of Spain. One would say it
was all one colour. Let's see: in these seas, what do we generally meet with? The
Chilian flag?--but that is tri-colour. Brazilian?--it is green. Japanese?--it is
yellow and black, whilst this--"

At that moment the breeze blew out the unknown flag. Ayrton, seizing the
telescope which the sailor had put down, put it to his eye, and in a hoarse voice--

"The black flag!" he exclaimed.

And indeed the sombre bunting was floating from the mast of the brig, and
they had now good reason for considering her to be a suspicious vessel!

Had the engineer, then, been right in his presentiments? Was this a pirate


vessel? Did she scour the Pacific, competing with the Malay proas which still
infest it? For what had she come to look at the shores of Lincoln Island? Was it
to them an unknown island, ready to become a magazine for stolen cargoes? Had
she come to find on the coast a sheltered port for the winter months? Was the
settler's honest domain destined to be transformed into an infamous refuge--the
headquarters of the piracy of the Pacific?

All these ideas instinctively presented themselves to the colonists’
imaginations. There was no doubt, besides, of the signification which must be
attached to the colour of the hoisted flag. It was that of pirates! It was that which
the Duncan would have carried, had the convicts succeeded in their criminal
design! No time was lost before discussing it.

"My friends," said Cyrus Harding, "perhaps this vessel only wishes to survey
the coast of the island. Perhaps her crew will not land. There is a chance of it.
However that may be, we ought to do everything we can to hide our presence
here. The windmill on Prospect Heights is too easily seen. Let Ayrton and Neb
go and take down the sails. We must also conceal the windows of Granite House
with thick branches. All the fires must be extinguished, so that nothing may
betray the presence of men on the island."

"And our vessel?" said Herbert.

"Oh," answered Pencroft, "she is sheltered in Port Balloon, and I defy any of
those rascals there to find her!"

The engineer's orders were immediately executed. Neb and Ayrton ascended
the plateau, and took the necessary precautions to conceal any indication of a
settlement. Whilst they were thus occupied, their companions went to the border
of Jacamar Wood, and brought back a large quantity of branches and creepers,
which would at some distance appear as natural foliage, and thus disguise the
windows in the granite cliff. At the same time, the ammunition and guns were
placed ready so as to be at hand in case of an unexpected attack.

When all these precautions had been taken--

"My friends," said Harding, and his voice betrayed some emotion, "if these
wretches endeavour to seize Lincoln Island, we shall defend it-- shall we not?"

"Yes, Cyrus," replied the reporter, "and if necessary we will die to defend it!"

The engineer extended his hand to his companions, who pressed it warmly.

Ayrton alone remained in his corner, not joining the colonists. Perhaps he,
the former convict, still felt himself unworthy to do so!

Cyrus Harding understood what was passing in Ayrton's mind, and going to
him--

"And you, Ayrton," he asked, "what will you do?"

"My duty," answered Ayrton.


He then took up his station near the window and gazed through the foliage.

It was now half-past seven. The sun had disappeared twenty minutes ago
behind Granite House. Consequently the eastern horizon was becoming
gradually obscured. In the meanwhile the brig continued to advance towards
Union Bay. She was now not more than two miles off, and exactly opposite the
plateau of Prospect Heights, for after having tacked off Claw Cape, she had
drifted towards the north in the current of the rising tide. One might have said
that at this distance she had already entered the vast bay, for a straight line drawn
from Claw Cape to Cape Mandible would have rested on her starboard quarter.

Was the brig about to penetrate far into the bay? That was the first question.
When once in the bay, would she anchor there? That was the second. Would she
not content herself with only surveying the coast, and stand out to sea again
without landing her crew? They would know this in an hour. The colonists could
do nothing but wait.

Cyrus Harding had not seen the suspected vessel hoist the black flag without
deep anxiety. Was it not a direct menace against the work which he and his
companions had till now conducted so successfully? Had these pirates--for the
sailors of the brig could be nothing else--already visited the island, since on
approaching it they had hoisted their colours. Had they formerly invaded it, so
that certain unaccountable peculiarities might be explained in this way? Did
there exist in the as yet unexplored parts some accomplice ready to enter into
communication with them?

To all these questions which he mentally asked himself, Harding knew not
what to reply; but he felt that the safety of the colony could not but be seriously
threatened by the arrival of the brig.

However, he and his companions were determined to fight to the last gasp. It
would have been very important to know if the pirates were numerous and better
armed than the colonists. But how was this information to be obtained?

Night fell. The new moon had disappeared. Profound darkness enveloped the
island and the sea. No light could pierce through the heavy piles of clouds on the
horizon. The wind had died away completely with the twilight. Not a leaf rustled
on the trees, not a ripple murmured on the shore. Nothing could be seen of the
ship, all her lights being extinguished, and if she was still in sight of the island,
her whereabouts could not be discovered.

"Well! who knows?" said Pencroft. "Perhaps that cursed craft will stand off
during the night, and we shall see nothing of her at daybreak."

As if in reply to the sailor's observation, a bright light flashed in the
darkness, and a cannon-shot was heard.

The vessel was still there and had guns on board.


Six seconds elapsed between the flash and the report.

Therefore the brig was about a mile and a quarter from the coast.

At the same time, the chains were heard rattling through the hawse-holes.
The vessel had just anchored in sight of Granite House!


CHAPTER TWO.

DISCUSSIONS--PRESENTIMENTS--AYRTON'S PROPOSAL--IT IS
ACCEPTED--AYRTON AND PENCROFT ON GRANT ISLET--CONVICTS
FROM NORFOLK  ISLAND--AYRTON'S HEROIC ATTEMPT--HIS
RETURN--SIX AGAINST FIFTY.

There was no longer any doubt as to the pirates’ intentions. They had
dropped anchor at a short distance from the island, and it was evident that the
next day by means of their boats they purposed to land on the beach!

Cyrus Harding and his companions were ready to act, but, determined
though they were, they must not forget to be prudent. Perhaps their presence
might still be concealed in the event of the pirates contenting themselves with
landing on the shore without examining the interior of the island. It might be,
indeed, that their only intention was to obtain fresh water from the Mercy, and it
was not impossible that the bridge, thrown across a mile and a half from the
mouth, and the manufactory at the Chimneys might escape their notice.

But why was that flag hoisted at the brig's peak? What was that shot fired
for? Pure bravado doubtless, unless it was a sign of the act of taking possession.
Harding knew now that the vessel was well-armed. And what had the colonists
of Lincoln Island to reply to the pirates' guns? A few muskets only.

"However," observed Cyrus Harding, "here we are in an impregnable
position. The enemy cannot discover the mouth of the outlet, now that it is
hidden under reeds and grass, and consequently it would be impossible for them
to penetrate into Granite House."

"But our plantations, our poultry-yard, our corral, all, everything!" exclaimed
Pencroft, stamping his foot. "They may spoil everything, destroy everything in a
few hours!"

"Everything, Pencroft," answered Harding, "and we have no means of
preventing them.”

"Are they numerous? that is the question," said the reporter. "If they are not
more than a dozen, we shall be able to stop them, but forty, fifty, more perhaps!"

"Captain Harding," then said Ayrton, advancing towards the engineer, "will
you give me leave."

"For what, my friend?"


"To go to that vessel to find out the strength of her crew."

"But Ayrton--" answered the engineer, hesitating, "you will risk your life--"

"Why not, sir?"

"That is more than your duty."

"I have more than my duty to do," replied Ayrton.

"Will you go to the ship in the boat?" asked Gideon Spilett.

"No, sir, but I will swim. A boat would be seen where a man may glide
between wind and water."

"Do you know that the brig is a mile and a quarter from the shore?" said
Herbert.

"IT am a good swimmer, Mr Herbert."

"T tell you it is risking your life," said the engineer.

"That is no matter," answered Ayrton. "Captain Harding, I ask this as a
favour. Perhaps it will be a means of raising me in my own eyes!"

"Go, Ayrton," replied the engineer, who felt sure that a refusal would have
deeply wounded the former convict, now become an honest man.

"T will accompany you," said Pencroft.

"You mistrust me!" said Ayrton quickly.

Then more humbly,--

"Alas!"

"No! no!" exclaimed Harding with animation, "no, Ayrton, Pencroft does not
mistrust you. You interpret his words wrongly."

"Indeed," returned the sailor, "I only propose to accompany Ayrton as far as
the islet. It may be, although it is scarcely possible, that one of these villains has
landed, and in that case two men will not be too many to hinder him from giving
the alarm. I will wait for Ayrton on the islet, and he shall go alone to the vessel,
since he has proposed to do so." These things agreed to, Ayrton made
preparations for his departure. His plan was bold, but it might succeed, thanks to
the darkness of the night. Once arrived at the vessel's side, Ayrton, holding onto
the main-chains, might reconnoitre the number and perhaps overhear the
intentions of the pirates.

Ayrton and Pencroft, followed by their companions, descended to the beach.
Ayrton undressed and rubbed himself with grease, so as to suffer less from the
temperature of the water, which was still cold. He might, indeed, be obliged to
remain in it for several hours.

Pencroft and Neb, during this time, had gone to fetch the boat, moored a few
hundred feet higher up, on the bank of the Mercy, and by the time they returned,
Ayrton was ready to start. A coat was thrown over his shoulders, and the settlers
all came round him to press his hand.


Ayrton then shoved off with Pencroft in the boat.

It was half-past ten in the evening when the two adventurers disappeared in
the darkness. Their companions returned to wait at the Chimneys.

The channel was easily traversed, and the boat touched the opposite shore of
the islet. This was not done without precaution, for fear lest the pirates might be
roaming about there. But after a careful survey, it was evident that the islet was
deserted. Ayrton then, followed by Pencroft, crossed it with a rapid step, scaring
the birds nestled in the holes of the rocks; then, without hesitating, he plunged
into the sea, and swam noiselessly in the direction of the ship, in which a few
lights had recently appeared, showing her exact situation. As to Pencroft, he
crouched down in a cleft of the rock, and awaited the return of his companion.

In the meanwhile, Ayrton, swimming with a vigorous stroke, glided through
the sheet of water without producing the slightest ripple. His head just emerged
above it and his eyes were fixed on the dark hull of the brig, from which the
lights were reflected in the water. He thought only of the duty which he had
promised to accomplish, and nothing of the danger which he ran, not only on
board the ship, but in the sea, often frequented by sharks. The current bore him
along and he rapidly receded from the shore.

Half an hour afterwards, Ayrton, without having been either seen or heard,
arrived at the ship and caught hold of the main-chains. He took breath, then,
hoisting himself up, he managed to reach the extremity of the cutwater. There
were drying several pairs of sailors' trousers. He put on a pair. Then settling
himself firmly, he listened. They were not sleeping on board the brig. On the
contrary, they were talking, singing, laughing. And these were the sentences,
accompanied with oaths, which principally struck Ayrton:--

"Our brig is a famous acquisition."

"She sails well, and merits her name of the Speedy."

"She would show all the navy of Norfolk a clean pair of heels."

"Hurrah for her captain!"

"Hurrah for Bob Harvey!"

What Ayrton felt when he overheard this fragment of conversation may be
understood when it is known that in this Bob Harvey he recognised one of his
old Australian companions, a daring sailor, who had continued his criminal
career. Bob Harvey had seized, on the shores of Norfolk Island, this brig, which
was loaded with arms, ammunition, utensils, and tools of all sorts, destined for
one of the Sandwich Islands. All his gang had gone on board, and pirates after
having been convicts, these wretches, more ferocious than the Malays
themselves, scoured the Pacific, destroying vessels, and massacring their crews.

The convicts spoke loudly, they recounted their deeds, drinking deeply at the


same time, and this is what Ayrton gathered. The actual crew of the Speedy was
composed solely of English prisoners, escaped from Norfolk Island.

Here it may be well to explain what this island was. In 29 degrees 2 minutes
south latitude, and 165 degrees 42 minutes east longitude, to the east of
Australia, is found a little island, six miles in circumference, overlooked by
Mount Pitt, which rises to a height of 1100 feet above the level of the sea. This is
Norfolk Island, once the seat of an establishment in which were lodged the most
intractable convicts from the English penitentiaries. They numbered 500, under
an iron discipline, threatened with terrible punishments, and were guarded by
150 soldiers, and 150 employed under the orders of the governor. It would be
difficult to imagine a collection of greater ruffians. Sometimes,--although very
rarely,--notwithstanding the extreme surveillance of which they were the object,
many managed to escape, and seizing vessels which they surprised, they infested
the Polynesian Archipelagos. [Note. Norfolk Island has long since been
abandoned as a penal settlement. |

Thus had Bob Harvey and his companions done. Thus had Ayrton formerly
wished to do. Bob Harvey had seized the brig Speedy, anchored in sight of
Norfolk Island; the crew had been massacred; and for a year this ship had
scoured the Pacific, under the command of Harvey, now a pirate, and well-
known to Ayrton!

The convicts were, for the most part, assembled under the poop; but a few,
stretched on the deck, were talking loudly.

The conversation still continued amidst shouts and libations. Ayrton learned
that chance alone had brought the Speedy in sight of Lincoln Island: Bob Harvey
had never yet set foot on it; but, as Cyrus Harding had conjectured, finding this
unknown land in his course, its position being marked on no chart, he had
formed the project of visiting it, and, if he found it suitable, of making it the
brig's headquarters.

As to the black flag hoisted at the Speedy's peak, and the gun which had been
fired, in imitation of men-of-war when they lower their colours, it was pure
piratical bravado. It was in no way a signal, and no communication yet existed
between the convicts and Lincoln Island.

The settlers' domain was now menaced with terrible danger. Evidently the
island, with its water, its harbour, its resources of all kinds so increased in value
by the colonists, and the concealment afforded by Granite House, could not but
be convenient for the convicts; in their hands it would become an excellent place
of refuge, and, being unknown, it would assure them, for a long time perhaps,
impunity and security. Evidently, also, the lives of the settlers would not be
respected, and Bob Harvey and his accomplices’ first care would be to massacre


them without mercy. Harding and his companions had, therefore, not even the
choice of flying and hiding themselves in the island, since the convicts intended
to reside there, and since, in the event of the Speedy departing on an expedition,
it was probable that some of the crew would remain on shore, so as to settle
themselves there. Therefore, it would be necessary to fight, to destroy every one
of these scoundrels, unworthy of pity, and against whom any means would be
right. So thought Ayrton, and he well knew that Cyrus Harding would be of his
way of thinking.

But was resistance and, in the last place, victory possible? That would
depend on the equipment of the brig, and the number of men which she carried.

This Ayrton resolved to learn at any cost, and as an hour after his arrival the
vociferations had begun to die away, and as a large number of the convicts were
already buried in a drunken sleep, Ayrton did not hesitate to venture onto the
Speedy's deck, which the extinguished lanterns now left in total darkness. He
hoisted himself onto the cutwater, and by the bowsprit arrived at the forecastle.
Then, gliding among the convicts stretched here and there, he made the round of
the ship, and found that the Speedy carried four guns, which would throw shot of
from eight to ten pounds in weight. He found also, on touching them, that these
guns were breech-loaders. They were, therefore, of modern make, easily used,
and of terrible effect.

As to the men lying on the deck, they were about ten in number, but it was to
be supposed that more were sleeping down below. Besides, by listening to them,
Ayrton had understood that there were fifty on board. That was a large number
for the six settlers of Lincoln Island to contend with! But now, thanks to Ayrton's
devotion, Cyrus Harding would not be surprised, he would know the strength of
his adversaries, and would make his arrangements accordingly.

There was nothing more for Ayrton to do but to return, and render to his
companions an account of the mission with which he had charged himself, and
he prepared to regain the bows of the brig, so that he might let himself down into
the water.

But to this man, whose wish was, as he had said, to do more than his duty,
there came an heroic thought. This was to sacrifice his own life, but save the
island and the colonists. Cyrus Harding evidently could not resist fifty ruffians,
all well-armed, who, either by penetrating by main force into Granite House, or
by starving out the besieged, could obtain from them what they wanted. And
then he thought of his preservers--those who had made him again a man, and an
honest man, those to whom he owed all--murdered without pity, their works
destroyed, their island turned into a pirates' den! He said to himself that he,
Ayrton, was the principal cause of so many disasters, since his old companion,


Bob Harvey, had but realised his own plans, and a feeling of horror took
possession of him. Then he was seized with an irresistible desire to blow up the
brig, and with her, all whom she had on board. He would perish in the explosion,
but he would have done his duty.

Ayrton did not hesitate. To reach the powder-room, which is always situated
in the after-part of a vessel, was easy. There would be no want of powder in a
vessel which followed such a trade, and a spark would be enough to destroy it in
an instant.

Ayrton stole carefully along the between-decks, strewn with numerous
sleepers, overcome more by drunkenness than sleep. A lantern was lighted at the
foot of the mainmast, round which was hung a gun-rack, furnished with weapons
of all sorts.

Ayrton took a revolver from the rack, and assured himself that it was loaded
and primed. Nothing more was needed to accomplish the work of destruction.
He then glided towards the stern, so as to arrive under the brig's poop at the
powder-magazine.

It was difficult to proceed along the dimly-lighted deck without stumbling
over some half-sleeping convict, who retorted by oaths and kicks. Ayrton was,
therefore, more than once obliged to halt. But at last he arrived at the partition
dividing the after-cabin, and found the door opening into the magazine itself.

Ayrton, compelled to force it open, set to work. It was a difficult operation to
perform without noise, for he had to break a padlock. But under his vigorous
hand, the padlock broke, and the door was open.

At that moment a hand was laid on Ayrton's shoulder.

"What are you doing here?" asked a tall man, in a harsh voice, who, standing
in the shadow, quickly threw the light of a lantern on Ayrton's face.

Ayrton drew back. In the rapid flash of the lantern, he had recognised his
former accomplice, Bob Harvey, who could not have known him, as he must
have thought Ayrton long since dead.

"What are you doing here?" again said Bob Harvey, seizing Ayrton by the
waistband.

But Ayrton, without replying, wrenched himself from his grasp and
attempted to rush into the magazine. A shot fired into the midst of the powder-
casks, and all would be over!

"Help, lads!" shouted Bob Harvey.

At his shout two or three pirates awoke, jumped up, and, rushing on Ayrton,
endeavoured to throw him down. He soon extricated himself from their grasp.
He fired his revolver, and two of the convicts fell; but a blow from a knife which
he could not ward off made a gash in his shoulder.


Ayrton perceived that he could no longer hope to carry out his project. Bob
Harvey had reclosed the door of the powder-magazine, and a movement on the
deck indicated a general awakening of the pirates. Ayrton must reserve himself
to fight at the side of Cyrus Harding. There was nothing for him but flight!

But was flight still possible? It was doubtful, yet Ayrton resolved to dare
everything in order to rejoin his companions.

Four barrels of the revolver were still undischarged. Two were fired-- one,
aimed at Bob Harvey, did not wound him, or at any rate only slightly; and
Ayrton, profiting by the momentary retreat of his adversaries, rushed towards the
companion-ladder to gain the deck. Passing before the lantern, he smashed it
with a blow from the butt of his revolver. A profound darkness ensued, which
favoured his flight. Two or three pirates, awakened by the noise, were
descending the ladder at the same moment. A fifth shot from Ayrton laid one
low, and the others drew back, not understanding what was going on. Ayrton was
on deck in two bounds, and three seconds later, having discharged his last barrel
in the face of a pirate who was about to seize him by the throat, he leapt over the
bulwarks into the sea.

Ayrton had not made six strokes before shots were splashing around him like
hail.

What were Pencroft's feelings, sheltered under a rock on the islet! what were
those of Harding, the reporter, Herbert, and Neb, crouched in the Chimneys,
when they heard the reports on board the brig! They rushed out onto the beach,
and, their guns shouldered, they stood ready to repel any attack.

They had no doubt about it themselves! Ayrton, surprised by the pirates, had
been murdered, and, perhaps, the wretches would profit by the night to make a
descent on the island!

Half an hour was passed in terrible anxiety. The firing had ceased, and yet
neither Ayrton nor Pencroft had reappeared. Was the islet invaded? Ought they
not to fly to the help of Ayrton and Pencroft? But how? The tide being high at
that time, rendered the channel impassable. The boat was not there! We may
imagine the horrible anxiety which took possession of Harding and his
companions!

At last, towards half-past twelve, a boat, carrying two men, touched the
beach. It was Ayrton, slightly wounded in the shoulder, and Pencroft, safe and
sound, whom their friends received with open arms.

All immediately took refuge in the Chimneys. There Ayrton recounted all
that had passed, even to his plan for blowing up the brig, which he had attempted
to put into execution.

All hands were extended to Ayrton, who did not conceal from them that their


situation was serious. The pirates had been alarmed. They knew that Lincoln
Island was inhabited. They would land upon it in numbers and well-armed. They
would respect nothing. Should the settlers fall into their hands, they must expect
no mercy!

"Well, we shall know how to die!" said the reporter.

"Let us go in and watch," answered the engineer.

"Have we any chance of escape, captain?" asked the sailor.

"Yes, Pencroft."

"Hum! six against fifty!"

"Yes! six! without counting--"

"Who?" asked Pencroft.

Cyrus did not reply, but pointed upwards.


CHAPTER THREE.

THE MIST RISES--THE ENGINEER'S PREPARATIONS--THREE
POSTS--AYRTON AND PENCROFT--THE FIRST BOAT--TWO OTHER
BOATS--ON THE ISLET--SIX CONVICTS LAND--THE BRIG WEIGHS
ANCHOR--THE SPEEDY'S GUNS--A DESPERATE = SITUATION--
UNEXPECTED CATASTROPHE.

The night passed without incident. The colonists were on the qui vive, and
did not leave their post at the Chimneys. The pirates, on their side, did not
appear to have made any attempt to land. Since the last shots fired at Ayrton not
a report, not even a sound, had betrayed the presence of the brig in the
neighbourhood of the island. It might have been fancied that she had weighed
anchor, thinking that she had to deal with her match, and had left the coast.

But it was no such thing, and when day began to dawn the settlers could see
a confused mass through the morning mist. It was the Speedy.

"These, my friends,” said the engineer, "are the arrangements which appear
to me best to make before the fog completely clears away. It hides us from the
eyes of the pirates, and we can act without attracting their attention. The most
important thing is, that the convicts should believe that the inhabitants of the
island are numerous, and consequently capable of resisting them. I therefore
propose that we divide into three parties, the first of which shall be posted at the
Chimneys, the second at the mouth of the Mercy. As to the third, I think it would
be best to place it on the islet, so as to prevent, or at all events delay, any attempt
at landing. We have the use of two rifles and four muskets. Each of us will be
armed, and, as we are amply provided with powder and shot, we need not spare
our fire. We have nothing to fear from the muskets, nor even from the guns of


the brig. What can they do against these rocks? And, as we shall not fire from
the windows of Granite House, the pirates will not think of causing irreparable
damage by throwing shell against it. What is to be feared is, the necessity of
meeting hand-to-hand, since the convicts have numbers on their side. We must,
therefore, try to prevent them from landing, but without discovering ourselves.
Therefore, do not economise the ammunition. Fire often, but with a sure aim. We
have each eight or ten enemies to kill, and they must be killed!"

Cyrus Harding had clearly represented their situation, although he spoke in
the calmest voice, as if it was a question of directing a piece of work, and not
ordering a battle. His companions approved these arrangements without even
uttering a word. There was nothing more to be done but for each to take his
place before the fog should be completely dissipated. Neb and Pencroft
immediately ascended to Granite House and brought back a sufficient quantity of
ammunition. Gideon Spilett and Ayrton, both very good marksmen, were armed
with the two rifles, which carried nearly a mile. The four other muskets were
divided amongst Harding, Neb, Pencroft, and Herbert.

The posts were arranged in the following manner:--

Cyrus Harding and Herbert remained in ambush at the Chimneys, thus
commanding the shore to the foot of Granite House.

Gideon Spilett and Neb crouched among the rocks at the mouth of the
Mercy, from which the drawbridges had been raised, so as to prevent any one
from crossing in a boat or landing on the opposite shore.

As to Ayrton and Pencroft, they shoved off in the boat, and prepared to cross
the channel and to take up two separate stations on the islet. In this way, shots
being fired from four different points at once, the convicts would be led to
believe that the island was both largely peopled and strongly defended.

In the event of a landing being effected without their having been able to
prevent it, and also if they saw that they were on the point of being cut off by the
brig's boat, Ayrton and Pencroft were to return in their boat to the shore and
proceed towards the threatened spot.

Before starting to occupy their posts, the colonists for the last time wrung
each other's hands.

Pencroft succeeded in controlling himself sufficiently to suppress his
emotion when he embraced Herbert, his boy! and then they separated.

In a few moments Harding and Herbert on one side, the reporter and Neb on
the other, had disappeared behind the rocks, and five minutes later Ayrton and
Pencroft, having without difficulty crossed the channel, disembarked on the islet
and concealed themselves in the clefts of its eastern shore.

None of them could have been seen, for they themselves could scarcely


distinguish the brig in the fog.

It was half-past six in the morning.

Soon the fog began to clear away, and the topmasts of the brig issued from
the vapour. For some minutes great masses rolled over the surface of the sea,
then a breeze sprang up, which rapidly dispelled the mist.

The Speedy now appeared in full view, with a spring on her cable, her head
to the north, presenting her larboard side to the island. Just as Harding had
calculated, she was not more than a mile and a quarter from the coast.

The sinister black flag floated from the peak.

The engineer, with his telescope, could see that the four guns on board were
pointed at the island. They were evidently ready to fire at a moment's notice.

In the meanwhile the Speedy remained silent. About thirty pirates could be
seen moving on the deck. A few were on the poop; two others posted in the
shrouds, and armed with spy-glasses, were attentively surveying the island.

Certainly, Bob Harvey and his crew would not be able easily to give an
account of what had happened during the night on board the brig. Had this half-
naked man, who had forced the door of the powder-magazine, and with whom
they had struggled, who had six times discharged his revolver at them, who had
killed one and wounded two others, escaped their shot? Had he been able to
swim to shore? Whence did he come? What had been his object? Had his design
really been to blow up the brig, as Bob Harvey had thought? All this must be
confused enough to the convicts’ minds. But what they could no longer doubt
was that the unknown island before which the Speedy had cast anchor was
inhabited, and that there was, perhaps, a numerous colony ready to defend it.
And yet no one was to be seen, neither on the shore, nor on the heights. The
beach appeared to be absolutely deserted. At any rate, there was no trace of
dwellings. Had the inhabitants fled into the interior? Thus probably the pirate
captain reasoned, and doubtless, like a prudent man, he wished to reconnoitre the
locality before he allowed his men to venture there.

During an hour and a half, no indication of attack or landing could be
observed on board the brig. Evidently Bob Harvey was hesitating. Even with his
strongest telescopes he could not have perceived one of the settlers crouched
among the rocks. It was not even probable that his attention had been awakened
by the screen of green branches and creepers hiding the windows of Granite
House, and showing rather conspicuously on the bare rock. Indeed, how could
he imagine that a dwelling was hollowed out, at that height, in the solid granite.
From Claw Cape to the Mandible Capes, in all the extent of Union Bay, there
was nothing to lead him to suppose that the island was or could be inhabited.

At eight o'clock, however, the colonists observed a movement on board the


Speedy. A boat was lowered, and seven men jumped into her. They were armed
with muskets: one took the yoke-lines, four others the oars, and the two others,
kneeling in the bows, ready to fire, reconnoitred the island. Their object was no
doubt to make an examination but not to land, for in the latter case they would
have come in larger numbers. The pirates from their look-out could have seen
that the coast was sheltered by an islet, separated from it by a channel half a mile
in width. However, it was soon evident to Cyrus Harding, on observing the
direction followed by the boat, that they would not attempt to penetrate into the
channel, but would land on the islet.

Pencroft and Ayrton, each hidden in a narrow cleft of the rock, saw them
coming directly towards them, and waited till they were within range.

The boat advanced with extreme caution. The oars only dipped into the water
at long intervals. It could now be seen that one of the convicts held a lead-line in
his hand, and that he wished to fathom the depth of the channel hollowed out by
the current of the Mercy. This showed that it was Bob Harvey's intention to bring
his brig as near as possible to the coast. About thirty pirates, scattered in the
rigging, followed every movement of the boat, and took the bearings of certain
landmarks which would allow them to approach without danger. The boat was
not more than two cables-lengths off the islet when she stopped. The man at the
tiller stood up and looked for the best place at which to land.

At that moment two shots were heard. Smoke curled up from among the
rocks of the islet. The man at the helm and the man with the lead-line fell
backwards into the boat. Ayrton's and Pencraft's balls had struck them both at the
same moment.

Almost immediately a louder report was heard, a cloud of smoke issued from
the brig's side, and a ball, striking the summit of the rock which sheltered Ayrton
and Pencroft, made it fly in splinters, but the two marksmen remained unhurt.

Horrible imprecations burst from the boat, which immediately continued its
way. The man who had been at the tiller was replaced by one of his comrades,
and the oars were rapidly plunged into the water. However, instead of returning
on board as might have been expected, the boat coasted along the islet, so as to
round its southern point. The pirates pulled vigorously at their oars that they
might get out of range of the bullets.

They advanced to within five cables-lengths of that part of the shore
terminated by Flotsam Point, and after having rounded it in a semicircular line,
still protected by the brig's guns, they proceeded towards the mouth of the
Mercy.

Their evident intention was to penetrate into the channel, and cut off the
colonists posted on the islet, in such a way, that whatever their number might be,


being placed between the fire from the boat and the fire from the brig, they
would find themselves in a very disadvantageous position.

A quarter of an hour passed whilst the boat advanced in this direction.
Absolute silence, perfect calm reigned in the air and on the water.

Pencroft and Ayrton, although they knew they ran the risk of being cut off,
had not left their post, both that they did not wish to show themselves as yet to
their assailants, and expose themselves to the Speedy's guns, and that they relied
on Neb and Gideon Spilett, watching at the mouth of the river, and on Cyrus
Harding and Herbert, in ambush among the rocks at the Chimneys.

Twenty minutes after the first shots were fired, the boat was less than two
cables-lengths off the Mercy. As the tide was beginning to rise with its
accustomed violence, caused by the narrowness of the straits, the pirates were
drawn towards the river, and it was only by dint of hard rowing that they were
able to keep in the middle of the channel. But, as they were passing within good
range of the mouth of the Mercy, two balls saluted them, and two more of their
number were laid in the bottom of the boat. Neb and Spilett had not missed their
aim.

The brig immediately sent a second ball on the post betrayed by the smoke,
but without any other result than that of splintering the rock.

The boat now contained only three able men. Carried on by the current, it
shot through the channel with the rapidity of an arrow, passed before Harding
and Herbert, who, not thinking it within range, withheld their fire, then, rounding
the northern point of the islet with the two remaining oars, they pulled towards
the brig.

Hitherto the settlers had nothing to complain of. Their adversaries had
certainly had the worst of it. The latter already counted four men seriously
wounded if not dead; they, on the contrary, unwounded, had not missed a shot. If
the pirates continued to attack them in this way, if they renewed their attempt to
land by means of a boat, they could be destroyed one by one.

It was now seen how advantageous the engineer's arrangements had been.
The pirates would think that they had to deal with numerous and well-armed
adversaries, whom they could not easily get the better of.

Half an hour passed before the boat, having to pull against the current, could
get alongside the Speedy. Frightful cries were heard when they returned on board
with the wounded, and two or three guns were fired with no result.

But now about a dozen other convicts, maddened with rage, and possibly by
the effect of the evening's potations, threw themselves into the boat. A second
boat was also lowered, in which eight men took their places, and whilst the first
pulled straight for the islet, to dislodge the colonists from thence, the second


manoeuvred so as to force the entrance of the Mercy.

The situation was evidently becoming very dangerous for Pencroft and
Ayrton, and they saw that they must regain the mainland.

However, they waited till the first boat was within range, when two well-
directed balls threw its crew into disorder. Then, Pencroft and Ayrton,
abandoning their posts, under fire from the dozen muskets, ran across the islet at
full speed, jumped into their boat, crossed the channel at the moment the second
boat reached the southern end, and ran to hide themselves in the Chimneys.

They had scarcely rejoined Cyrus Harding and Herbert, before the islet was
overrun with pirates in every direction. Almost at the same moment, fresh
reports resounded from the Mercy station, to which the second boat was rapidly
approaching. Two, out of the eight men who manned her, were mortally
wounded by Gideon Spilett and Neb, and the boat herself, carried irresistibly
onto the reefs, was stove in at the mouth of the Mercy. But the six survivors,
holding their muskets above their heads to preserve them from contact with the
water, managed to land on the right bank of the river. Then, finding they were
exposed to the fire of the ambush there, they fled in the direction of Flotsam
Point, out of range of the balls.

The actual situation was this: on the islet were a dozen convicts, of whom
some were no doubt wounded, but who had still a boat at their disposal; on the
island were six, but who could not by any possibility reach Granite House, as
they could not cross the river, all the bridges being raised.

"Hallo," exclaimed Pencroft as he rushed into the Chimneys, "hallo, captain!
What do you think of it, now?"

"T think," answered the engineer, "that the combat will now take a new form,
for it cannot be supposed that the convicts will be so foolish as to remain in a
position so unfavourable for them!"

"They won't cross the channel," said the sailor. "Ayrton and Mr Spilett's rifles
are there to prevent them. You know that they carry more than a mile!"

"No doubt," replied Herbert; "but what can two rifles do against the brig's
guns?"

"Well, the brig isn't in the channel yet, I fancy!" said Pencroft.

"But suppose she does come there?" said Harding.

"That's impossible, for she would risk running aground and being lost!"

"It is possible," said Ayrton. "The convicts might profit by the high tide to
enter the channel, with the risk of grounding at low tide, it is true; but then,
under the fire from her guns, our posts would be no longer tenable."

"Confound them!" exclaimed Pencroft. "It really seems as if the blackguards
were preparing to weigh anchor."


"Perhaps we shall be obliged to take refuge in Granite House!" observed
Herbert.

"We must wait!" answered Cyrus Harding.

"But Mr Spilett and Neb?" said Pencroft.

"They will know when it is best to rejoin us. Be ready, Ayrton. It is yours and
Spilett's rifles which must speak now."

It was only too true. The Speedy was beginning to weigh her anchor, and her
intention was evidently to approach the islet. The tide would be rising for an
hour and a half, and the ebb current being already weakened, it would be easy
for the brig to advance. But as to entering the channel, Pencroft, contrary to
Ayrton's opinion, could not believe that she would dare to attempt it.

In the meanwhile, the pirates who occupied the islet had gradually advanced
to the opposite shore, and were now only separated from the mainland by the
channel.

Being armed with muskets alone, they could do no harm to the settlers, in
ambush at the Chimneys and the mouth of the Mercy; but, not knowing the latter
to be supplied with long range rifles, they on their side did not believe
themselves to be exposed. Quite uncovered, therefore, they surveyed the islet,
and examined the shore.

Their illusion was of short duration. Ayrton's and Gideon Spilett's rifles then
spoke, and no doubt imparted some very disagreeable intelligence to two of the
convicts, for they fell backwards.

Then there was a general helter-skelter. The ten others, not even stopping to
pick up their dead or wounded companions, fled to the other side of the islet,
tumbled into the boat which had brought them, and pulled away with all their
strength.

"Eight less!" exclaimed Pencroft. "Really, one would have thought that Mr
Spilett and Ayrton had given the word to fire together!"

"Gentlemen," said Ayrton, as he reloaded his gun, "this is becoming more
serious. The brig is making sail!"

"The anchor is weighed!" exclaimed Pencroft.

"Yes; and she is already moving."

In fact, they could distinctly hear the creaking of the windlass. The Speedy
was at first held by her anchor; then, when that had been raised, she began to
drift towards the shore. The wind was blowing from the sea; the jib and the fore-
topsail were hoisted, and the vessel gradually approached the island.

From the two posts of the Mercy and the Chimneys they watched her without
giving a sign of life; but not without some emotion. What could be more terrible
for the colonists than to be exposed, at a short distance, to the brig's guns,


without being able to reply with any effect? How could they then prevent the
pirates from landing?

Cyrus Harding felt this strongly, and he asked himself what it would be
possible to do. Before long, he would be called upon for his determination. But
what was it to be? To shut themselves up in Granite House, to be besieged there,
to remain there for weeks, for months even, since they had an abundance of
provisions? So far good! But after that? The pirates would not the less be
masters of the island, which they would ravage at their pleasure, and in time they
would end by having their revenge on the prisoners in Granite House.

However, one chance yet remained; it was that Bob Harvey, after all, would
not venture his ship into the channel, and that he would keep outside the islet. He
would be still separated from the coast by half a mile, and at that distance his
shot could not be very destructive.

"Never!" repeated Pencroft, "Bob Harvey will never, if he is a good seaman,
enter that channel! He knows well that it would risk the brig, if the sea got up
ever so little! And what would become of him without his vessel?"

In the meanwhile the brig approached the islet, and it could be seen that she
was endeavouring to make the lower end. The breeze was light, and as the
current had then lost much of its force, Bob Harvey had absolute command over
his vessel.

The route previously followed by the boats had allowed her to reconnoitre
the channel, and she boldly entered it.

The pirate's design was now only too evident: he wished to bring her
broadside to bear on the Chimneys and from there to reply with shell and ball to
the shot which had till then decimated her crew.

Soon the Speedy reached the point of the islet; she rounded it with ease; the
mainsail was braced up, and the brig hugging the wind, stood across the mouth
of the Mercy.

"The scoundrels! they are coming!" said Pencroft.

At that moment, Cyrus Harding, Ayrton, the sailor, and Herbert, were
rejoined by Neb and Gideon Spilett.

The reporter and his companion had judged it best to abandon the post at the
Mercy, from which they could do nothing against the ship, and they had acted
wisely. It was better that the colonists should be together at the moment when
they were about to engage in a decisive action. Gideon Spilett and Neb had
arrived by dodging behind the rocks, though not without attracting a shower of
bullets, which had not, however, reached them.

"Spilett! Neb!" cried the engineer, "you are not wounded?"

"No," answered the reporter; "a few bruises only from the ricochet! But that


cursed brig has entered the channel!"

"Yes," replied Pencroft, "and in ten minutes she will have anchored before
Granite House!"

"Have you formed any plan, Cyrus?" asked the reporter.

"We must take refuge in Granite House whilst there is still time, and the
convicts cannot see us."

"That is my opinion, too," replied Gideon Spilett; "but once shut up--"

"We must be guided by circumstances," said the engineer.

"Let us be off, then, and make haste!" said the reporter.

"Would you not wish, captain, that Ayrton and I should remain here?" asked
the sailor.

"What would be the use of that, Pencroft?" replied Harding. "No. We will not
separate!"

There was not a moment to be lost. The colonists left the Chimneys. A bend
of the cliff prevented them from being seen by those in the brig; but two or three
reports, and the crash of bullets on the rock, told them that the Speedy was at no
great distance.

To spring into the lift, hoist themselves up to the door of Granite House,
where Top and Jup had been shut up since the evening before, to rush into the
large room, was the work of a minute only.

It was quite time, for the settlers, through the branches, could see the Speedy,
surrounded with smoke, gliding up the channel. The firing was incessant, and
shot from the four guns struck blindly, both on the Mercy post, although it was
not occupied, and on the Chimneys. The rocks were splintered, and cheers
accompanied each discharge. However, they were hoping that Granite House
would be spared, thanks to Harding's precaution of concealing the windows,
when a shot, piercing the door, penetrated into the passage.

"We are discovered!" exclaimed Pencroft.

The colonists had not, perhaps, been seen; but it was certain that Bob Harvey
had thought proper to send a ball through the suspected foliage which concealed
that part of the cliff. Soon he redoubled his attack, when another ball having torn
away the leafy screen, disclosed a gaping aperture in the granite.

The colonists' situation was desperate. Their retreat was discovered. They
could not oppose any obstacle to these missiles, nor protect the stone, which
flew in splinters around them. There was nothing to be done but to take refuge in
the upper passage of Granite House, and leave their dwelling to be devastated,
when a deep roar was heard, followed by frightful cries!

Cyrus Harding and his companions rushed to one of the windows--

The brig, irresistibly raised on a sort of water-spout, had just split in two, and


in less than ten seconds she was swallowed up with all her criminal crew!


CHAPTER FOUR.

THE COLONISTS ON THE BEACH--AYRTON AND PENCROFT WORK
AMID THE WRECK-- CONVERSATION DURING BREAKFAST--
PENCROFT'S ARGUMENTS--MINUTE EXAMINATION OF THE BRIG'S
HULL--THE POWDER-MAGAZINE UNTOUCHED--NEW RICHES--THE
LAST OF THE WRECK--A BROKEN PIECE OF CYLINDER.

"She has blown up!" cried Herbert.

"Yes! blown up, just as if Ayrton had set fire to the powder!" returned
Pencroft, throwing himself into the lift together with Neb and the lad.

"But what has happened?" asked Gideon Spilett, quite stunned by this
unexpected catastrophe.

"Oh! this time, we shall know," answered the engineer quickly.

"What shall we know?--"

"Later! later! Come, Spilett. The main point is that these pirates have been
exterminated!"

And Cyrus Harding, hurrying away the reporter and Ayrton, joined Pencroft,
Neb, and Herbert on the beach.

Nothing could be seen of the brig, not even her masts. After having been
raised by the water-spout, she had fallen on her side, and had sunk in that
position, doubtless in consequence of some enormous leak. But as in that place
the channel was not more than twenty feet in depth, it was certain that the sides
of the submerged brig would reappear at low-water.

A few things from the wreck floated on the surface of the water. A raft could
be seen consisting of spare spars, coops of poultry with their occupants still
living, boxes and barrels, which gradually came to the surface, after having
escaped through the hatchways, but no pieces of the wreck appeared, neither
planks from the deck, nor timber from the hull,--which rendered the sudden
disappearance of the Speedy perfectly inexplicable.

However, the two masts, which had been broken and escaped from the
shrouds and stays, came up, with their sails, some furled and the others spread.
But it was not necessary to wait for the tide to bring up these riches, and Ayrton
and Pencroft, jumped into the boat with the intention of towing the pieces of
wreck either to the beach or to the islet. But just as they were shoving off an
observation from Gideon Spilett arrested them.

"What about those six convicts who disembarked on the right bank of the
Mercy?" said he.


In fact, it would not do to forget that the six men whose boat had gone to
pieces on the rocks, had landed at Flotsam Point.

They looked in that direction. None of the fugitives were visible. It was
probable that, having seen their vessel engulfed in the channel, they had fled into
the interior of the island.

"We will deal with them later," said Harding. "As they are armed, they will
still be dangerous; but as it is six against six, the chances are equal. To the most
pressing business first."

Ayrton and Pencroft pulled vigorously towards the wreck.

The sea was calm and the tide very high, as there had been a new moon but
two days before. A whole hour at least would elapse before the hull of the brig
could emerge from the water of the channel.

Ayrton and Pencroft were able to fasten the masts and spars by means of
ropes, the ends of which were carried to the beach. There, by the united efforts
of the settlers the pieces of wreck were hauled up. Then the boat picked up all
that was floating, coops, barrels, and boxes, which were immediately carried to
the Chimneys.

Several bodies floated also. Amongst them, Ayrton recognised that of Bob
Harvey, which he pointed out to his companion, saying with some emotion--

"That is what I have been, Pencroft."

"But what you are no longer, brave Ayrton!" returned the sailor warmly.

It was singular enough that so few bodies floated. Only five or six were
counted, which were already being carried by the current towards the open sea.
Very probably the convicts had not had time to escape, and the ship lying over
on her side, the greater number of them had remained below. Now the current,
by carrying the bodies of these miserable men out to sea, would spare the
colonists the sad task of burying them in some corner of their island.

For two hours, Cyrus Harding and his companions were solely occupied in
hauling up the spars onto the sand, and then in spreading the sails, which were
perfectly uninjured, to dry. They spoke little, for they were absorbed in their
work, but what thoughts occupied their minds!

The possession of this brig, or rather all that she contained, was a perfect
mine of wealth. In fact, a ship is like a little world in miniature, and the stores of
the colony would be increased by a large number of useful articles. It would be,
on a large scale, equivalent to the chest found at Flotsam Point.

"And besides," thought Pencroft, "why should it be impossible to refloat the
brig? If she has only a leak, that may be stopped up; a vessel from three to four
hundred tons, why she is a regular ship compared to our Bonadventure! And we
could go a long distance in her! We could go anywhere we liked! Captain


Harding, Ayrton and I must examine her! She would be well worth the trouble!"

In fact, if the brig was still fit to navigate, the colonists' chances of returning
to their native land was singularly increased. But, to decide this important
question, it was necessary to wait until the tide was quite low, so that every part
of the brig's hull might be examined.

When their treasures had been safely conveyed on shore, Harding and his
companions agreed to devote some minutes to breakfast. They were almost
famished: fortunately, the larder was not far off, and Neb was noted for being an
expeditious cook. They breakfasted, therefore, near the Chimneys, and during
their repast, as may be supposed, nothing was talked of but the unexpected event
which had so miraculously saved the colony.

"Miraculous is the word," repeated Pencroft, "for it must be acknowledged
that those rascals blew up just at the right moment! Granite House was
beginning to be uncomfortable as a habitation!"

"And can you guess, Pencroft," asked the reporter, "how it happened, or what
can have occasioned the explosion?"

"Oh! Mr Spilett, nothing is more simple," answered Pencroft. "A convict
vessel is not disciplined like a man-of-war! Convicts are not sailors. Of course
the powder-magazine was open, and as they were firing incessantly, some
careless or clumsy fellow just blew up the vessel!"

"Captain Harding," said Herbert, "what astonishes me is that the explosion
has not produced more effect. The report was not loud, and besides there are so
few planks and timbers torn out. It seems as if the ship had rather foundered than
blown up."

"Does that astonish you, my boy?" asked the engineer.

"Yes, captain."

"And it astonishes me also Herbert," replied he, "but when we visit the hull
of the brig, we shall no doubt find the explanation of the matter."

"Why, captain,” said Pencroft, "you don't suppose that the Speedy simply
foundered like a ship which has struck on a rock?"

"Why not," observed Neb, "if there are rocks in the channel?"

"Nonsense, Neb," answered Pencroft, "you did not look at the right moment.
An instant before she sank, the brig, as I saw perfectly well, rose on an enormous
wave, and fell back on her larboard side. Now, if she had only struck, she would
have sunk quietly and gone to the bottom like an honest vessel."

"Tt was just because she was not an honest vessel!" returned Neb.

"Well, we shall soon see, Pencroft," said the engineer.

"We shall soon see," rejoined the sailor, "but I would wager my head there
are no rocks in the channel. Look here, captain, to speak candidly, do you mean


to say that there is anything marvellous in the occurrence?"

Cyrus Harding did not answer.

"At any rate," said Gideon Spilett, "whether rock or explosion, you will
agree, Pencroft, that it occurred just in the nick of time!"

"Yes! yes!" replied the sailor, "but that is not the question. I ask Captain
Harding if he sees anything supernatural in all this."

"IT cannot say, Pencroft," said the engineer. "That is all the answer I can
make."

A reply which did not satisfy Pencroft at all. He stuck to "an explosion," and
did not wish to give it up. He would never consent to admit that in that channel,
with its fine sandy bed, just like the beach, which he had often crossed at low-
water, there could be an unknown rock.

And besides, at the time the brig foundered, it was high-water, that is to say,
there was enough water to carry the vessel clear over any rocks which would not
be uncovered at low tide. Therefore, there could not have been a collision.
Therefore, the vessel had not struck. Therefore, she had blown up.

And it must be confessed that the sailor's arguments were not without reason.

Towards half-past one, the colonists embarked in the boat to visit the wreck.
It was to be regretted that the brig's two boats had not been saved; but one, as has
been said, had gone to pieces at the mouth of the Mercy, and was absolutely
useless; the other had disappeared when the brig went down, and had not again
been seen, having doubtless been crushed.

The hull of the Speedy was just beginning to issue from the water. The brig
was lying right over on her side, for her masts being broken, pressed down by
the weight of the ballast displaced by the shock, the keel was visible along her
whole length. She had been regularly turned over by the inexplicable but
frightful submarine action, which had been at the same time manifested by an
enormous water-spout.

The settlers rowed round the hull, and, in proportion as the tide went down,
they could ascertain, if not the cause which had occasioned the catastrophe, at
least the effect produced.

Towards the bows, on both sides of the keel, seven or eight feet from the
beginning of the stem, the sides of the brig were frightfully torn. Over a length
of at least twenty feet there opened two large leaks, which it would be
impossible to stop up. Not only had the copper sheathing and the planks
disappeared, reduced, no doubt, to powder, but also the ribs, the iron bolts, and
tree-nails which united them. From the entire length of the hull to the stern the
false keel had been separated with unaccountable violence, and the keel itself,
torn from the carline in several places, was split in all its length.


"T've a notion!" exclaimed Pencroft, "that this vessel will be difficult to get
afloat again."

"Tt will be impossible," said Ayrton.

"At any rate," observed Gideon Spilett to the sailor, "the explosion, if there
has been one, has produced singular effects! It has split the lower part of the hull,
instead of blowing up the deck and topsides! These great rents appear rather to
have been made by a rock than by the explosion of a powder-magazine."

"There is not a rock in the channel!" answered the sailor. "I will admit
anything you like, except the rock."

"Let us try to penetrate into the interior of the brig," said the engineer;
"perhaps we shall then know what to think of the cause of her destruction."

This was the best thing to be done, and it was agreed, besides, to take an
inventory of all the treasures on board, and to arrange for their preservation.

Access to the interior of the brig was now easy. The tide was still going
down, and the deck was practicable. The ballast, composed of heavy masses of
iron, had broken through in several places. The noise of the sea could be heard
as it rushed out at the holes in the hull.

Cyrus Harding and his companions, hatchets in hand, advanced along the
shattered deck. Cases of all sorts encumbered it, and, as they had been but a very
short time in the water, their contents were perhaps uninjured.

They then busied themselves in placing all this cargo in safety. The water
would not return for several hours, and these hours must be employed in the
most profitable way. Ayrton and Pencroft had, at the entrance made in the hull,
discovered tackle, which would serve to hoist up the barrels and chests. The boat
received them and transported them to the shore. They took the articles as they
came, intending to sort them afterwards.

At any rate, the settlers saw at once, with extreme satisfaction, that the brig
possessed a very varied cargo--an assortment of all sorts of articles, utensils,
manufactured goods, and tools--such as the ships which make the great coasting-
trade of Polynesia are usually laden with. It was probable that they would find a
little of everything, and they agreed that it was exactly what was necessary for
the colony of Lincoln Island.

However--and Cyrus Harding observed it in silent astonishment--not only, as
has been said, had the hull of the brig enormously suffered from the shock,
whatever it was, that had occasioned the catastrophe, but the interior
arrangements had been destroyed, especially towards the bows. Partitions and
staunchions were smashed, as if some tremendous shell had burst in the interior
of the brig. The colonists could easily go fore and aft, after having removed the
cases as they were extricated. They were not heavy bales, which would have


been difficult to remove, but simple packages, of which the stowage, besides,
was no longer recognisable.

The colonists then reached the stern of the brig--the part formerly
surmounted by the poop. It was there that, following Ayrton's directions, they
must look for the powder-magazine. Cyrus Harding thought that it had not
exploded; that it was possible some barrels might be saved, and that the powder,
which is usually enclosed in metal coverings, might not have suffered from
contact with the water.

This, in fact, was just what had happened. They extricated from amongst a
large number of shot twenty barrels, the insides of which were lined with copper.
Pencroft was convinced by the evidence of his own eyes that the destruction of
the Speedy could not be attributed to an explosion. That part of the hull in which
the magazine was situated was, moreover, that which had suffered least.

"It may be so," said the obstinate sailor; "but as to a rock, there is not one in
the channel!"

"Then, how did it happen?" asked Herbert.

"IT don't know," answered Pencroft, "Captain Harding doesn't know, and
nobody knows or ever will know!"

Several hours had passed during these researches, and the tide began to flow.
Work must be suspended for the present. There was no fear of the brig being
carried away by the sea, for she was already fixed as firmly as if moored by her
anchors.

They could therefore, without inconvenience, wait until the next day to
resume operations; but, as to the vessel herself, she was doomed, and it would be
best to hasten to save the remains of her hull, as she would not be long in
disappearing in the quicksands of the channel.

It was now five o'clock in the evening. It had been a hard day's work for the
men. They ate with good appetite, and, notwithstanding their fatigue, they could
not resist, after dinner, their desire of inspecting the cases which composed the
cargo of the Speedy.

Most of them contained clothes, which, as may be believed, were well
received. There were enough to clothe a whole colony--linen for every one's use,
shoes for every one's feet.

"We are too rich!" exclaimed Pencroft. "But what are we going to do with all
this?"

And every moment burst forth the hurrahs of the delighted sailor when he
caught sight of the barrels of gunpowder, fire-arms and side-arms, balls of
cotton, implements of husbandry, carpenter's, joiner's, and blacksmith's tools,
and boxes of all kinds of seeds, not in the least injured by their short sojourn in


the water. Ah, two years before, how these things would have been prized! And
now, even although the industrious colonists had provided themselves with tools,
these treasures would find their use.

There was no want of space in the store-rooms of Granite House, but that
daytime would not allow them to stow away the whole. It would not do also to
forget that the six survivors of the Speedy's crew had landed on the island, for
they were in all probability scoundrels of the deepest dye, and it was necessary
that the colonists should be on their guard against them. Although the bridges
over the Mercy were raised, the convicts would not be stopped by a river or a
stream, and, rendered desperate, these wretches would be capable of anything.

They would see later what plan it would be best to follow; but in the
meantime it was necessary to mount guard over cases and packages heaped up
near the Chimneys, and thus the settlers employed themselves in turn during the
night.

The morning came, however, without the convicts having attempted any
attack. Master Jup and Top, on guard at the foot of Granite House, would have
quickly given the alarm. The three following days--the 19th, 20th, and 21st of
October--were employed in saving everything of value, or of any use whatever,
either from the cargo or rigging of the brig. At low tide they overhauled the
hold--at high tide they stowed away the rescued articles. A great part of the
copper sheathing had been torn from the hull, which every day sank lower. But
before the sand had swallowed the heavy things which had fallen through the
bottom, Ayrton and Pencroft, diving to the bed of the channel, recovered the
chains and anchors of the brig, the iron of her ballast, and even four guns, which,
floated by means of empty casks, were brought to shore.

It may be seen that the arsenal of the colony had gained by the wreck, as well
as the store-rooms of Granite House. Pencroft, always enthusiastic in his
projects, already spoke of constructing a battery to command the channel and the
mouth of the river. With four guns, he engaged to prevent any fleet, "however
powerful it might be," from venturing into the waters of Lincoln Island!

In the meantime, when nothing remained of the brig but a useless hulk, bad
weather came on, which soon finished her. Cyrus Harding had intended to blow
her up, so as to collect the remains on the shore, but a strong gale from the north-
east and a heavy sea compelled him to economise his powder.

In fact, on the night of the 23rd, the hull entirely broke up, and some of the
wreck was cast up on the beach.

As to the papers on board, it is useless to say that, although he carefully
searched the lockers of the poop, Harding did not discover any trace of them.
The pirates had evidently destroyed everything that concerned either the captain


or the owners of the Speedy, and, as the name of her port was not painted on her
counter, there was nothing which would tell them her nationality. However, by
the shape of her boats Ayrton and Pencroft believed that the brig was of English
build.

A week after the catastrophe--or, rather, after the fortunate, though
inexplicable, event to which the colony owed its preservation--nothing more
could be seen of the vessel, even at low tide. The wreck had disappeared, and
Granite House was enriched by nearly all it had contained.

However, the mystery which enveloped its strange destruction would
doubtless never have been cleared away if, on the 30th of November, Neb,
strolling on the beach, had not found a piece of a thick iron cylinder, bearing
traces of explosion. The edges of this cylinder were twisted and broken, as if
they had been subjected to the action of some explosive substance.

Neb brought this piece of metal to his master, who was then occupied with
his companions in the workshop of the Chimneys.

Cyrus Harding examined the cylinder attentively, then, turning to Pencroft--

"You persist, my friend," said he, "in maintaining that the Speedy was not
lost in consequence of a collision?"

"Yes, captain,” answered the sailor. "You know as well as I do that there are
no rocks in the channel."

"But suppose she had run against this piece of iron?" said the engineer,
showing the broken cylinder.

"What, that bit of pipe!" exclaimed Pencroft in a tone of perfect incredulity.

"My friends," resumed Harding, "you remember that before she foundered
the brig rose on the summit of a regular water-spout?"

"Yes, captain," replied Herbert.

"Well, would you like to know what occasioned that water-spout? It was
this," said the engineer, holding up the broken tube.

"That?" returned Pencroft.

"Yes! This cylinder is all that remains of a torpedo!"

"A torpedo!" exclaimed the engineer's companions.

"And who put the torpedo there?" demanded Pencroft, who did not like to
yield.

"All that I can tell you is, that it was not I," answered Cyrus Harding; "but it
was there, and you have been able to judge of its incomparable power!"


CHAPTER FIVE.
THE ENGINEER'S DECLARATION--PENCROFT'S GRAND


HYPOTHESIS--AN AERIAL BATTERY--THE FOUR CANNONS--THE
SURVIVING CONVICTS--AYRTON'S HESITATION-- CYRUS HARDING'S
GENEROUS SENTIMENTS--PENCROFT'S REGRET.

So, then, all was explained by the submarine explosion of this torpedo. Cyrus
Harding could not be mistaken, as, during the war of the Union, he had had
occasion to try these terrible engines of destruction. It was under the action of
this cylinder, charged with some explosive substance, nitro-glycerine, picrate, or
some other material of the same nature, that the water of the channel had been
raised like a dome, the bottom of the brig crushed in, and she had sunk instantly,
the damage done to her hull being so considerable that it was impossible to
refloat her. The Speedy had not been able to withstand a torpedo that would have
destroyed an ironclad as easily as a fishing-boat!

Yes! all was explained, everything--except the presence of the torpedo in the
waters of the channel!

"My friends, then," said Cyrus Harding, "we can no longer be in doubt as to
the presence of a mysterious being, a castaway like us, perhaps, abandoned on
our island, and I say this in order that Ayrton may be acquainted with all the
strange events which have occurred during these two years. Who this beneficent
stranger is, whose intervention has, so fortunately for us, been manifested on
many occasions, I cannot imagine. What his object can be in acting thus, in
concealing himself after rendering us so many services, I cannot understand. But
his services are not the less real, and are of such a nature that only a man
possessed of prodigious power, could render them. Ayrton is indebted to him as
much as we are, for, if it was the stranger who saved me from the waves after the
fall from the balloon, evidently it was he who wrote the document, who placed
the bottle in the channel, and who has made known to us the situation of our
companion. I will add that it was he who guided that chest, provided with
everything we wanted, and stranded it on Flotsam Point; that it was he who
lighted that fire on the heights of the island, which permitted you to land; that it
was he who fired that bullet found in the body of the peccary; that it was he who
immersed that torpedo in the channel, which destroyed the brig; in a word, that
all those inexplicable events, for which we could not assign a reason, are due to
this mysterious being. Therefore, whoever he may be, whether shipwrecked, or
exiled on our island, we shall be ungrateful, if we think ourselves freed from
gratitude towards him. We have contracted a debt, and I hope that we shall one
day pay it."

"You are right in speaking thus, my dear Cyrus," replied Gideon Spilett.
"Yes, there is an almost all-powerful being, hidden in some part of the island,
and whose influence has been singularly useful to our colony. I will add that the


unknown appears to possess means of action which border on the supernatural if,
in the events of practical life, the supernatural were recognisable. Is it he who is
in secret communication with us by the well in Granite House, and has he thus a
knowledge of all our plans? Was it he who threw us that bottle, when the vessel
made her first cruise? Was it he who threw Top out of the lake, and killed the
dugong? Was it he, who as everything leads us to believe, saved you from the
waves, and that under circumstances in which any one else would not have been
able to act? If it was he, he possesses a power which renders him master of the
elements."

The reporter's reasoning was just, and every one felt it to be so.

"Yes," rejoined Cyrus Harding, "if the intervention of a human being is not
more questionable for us, I agree that he has at his disposal means of action
beyond those possessed by humanity. There is a mystery still, but if we discover
the man, the mystery will be discovered also. The question, then, is, ought we to
respect the incognito of this generous being, or ought we to do everything to find
him out? What is your opinion on the matter?"

"My opinion," said Pencroft, "is that, whoever he may be, he is a brave man,
and he has my esteem!"

"Be it so," answered Harding, "but that is not an answer, Pencroft."

"Master," then said Neb, "my idea is, that we may search as long as we like
for this gentleman whom you are talking about, but that we shall not discover
him till he pleases."

"That's not bad, what you say, Neb," observed Pencroft.

"IT am of Neb's opinion," said Gideon Spilett, "but that is no reason for not
attempting the adventure. Whether we find this mysterious being or not, we shall
at least have fulfilled our duty towards him."

"And you, my boy, give us your opinion," said the engineer, turning to
Herbert.

"Oh," cried Herbert, his countenance full of animation, "how I should like to
thank him, he who saved you first, and who has now saved us!"

"Of course, my boy," replied Pencroft, "so would I and all of us. I am not
inquisitive, but I would give one of my eyes to see this individual face to face! It
seems to me that he must be handsome, tall, strong, with a splendid beard,
radiant hair, and that he must be seated on the clouds, a great ball in his hands!"

"But, Pencroft," answered Spilett, "you are describing a picture of the
Creator."

"Possibly, Mr Spilett," replied the sailor, "but that is how I imagine him!"

"And you, Ayrton?" asked the engineer.

"Captain Harding," replied Ayrton, "I can give you no better advice in this


matter. Whatever you do will be best, when you wish me to join you in your
researches, I am ready to follow you."

"I thank you, Ayrton," answered Cyrus Harding, "but I should like a more
direct answer to the question I put to you. You are our companion; you have
already endangered your life several times for us, and you, as well as the rest,
ought to be consulted in the matter of any important decision. Speak, therefore."

"Captain Harding," replied Ayrton, "I think that we ought to do everything to
discover this unknown benefactor. Perhaps he is alone. Perhaps he is suffering.
Perhaps he has a life to be renewed. I, too, as you said, have a debt of gratitude
to pay him. It was he, it could be only he who must have come to Tabor Island,
who found there the wretch you knew, and who made known to you that there
was an unfortunate man there to be saved! Therefore it is, thanks to him, that I
have become a man again. No, I will never forget him!"

"That is settled, then," said Cyrus Harding. "We will begin our researches as
soon as possible. We will not leave a corner of the island unexplored. We will
search into its most secret recesses, and will hope that our unknown friend will
pardon us in consideration of our intentions!"

For several days the colonists were actively employed in haymaking and
harvest. Before putting their project of exploring the yet unknown parts of the
island into execution, they wished to get all possible work finished. It was also
the time for collecting the various vegetables from the Tabor Island plants. All
was stowed away, and happily there was no want of room in Granite House, in
which they might have housed all the treasures of the island. The products of the
colony were there, methodically arranged, and in a safe place, as may be
believed, sheltered as much from animals as from man.

There was no fear of damp in the middle of that thick mass of granite. Many
natural excavations situated in the upper passage were enlarged either by pick-
axe or mine, and Granite House thus became a general warehouse, containing all
the provisions, arms, tools, and spare utensils--in a word, all the stores of the
colony.

As to the guns obtained from the brig, they were pretty pieces of ordnance,
which, at Pencroft's entreaty, were hoisted by means of tackle and pulleys, right
up into Granite House; embrasures were made between the windows, and the
shining muzzles of the guns could soon be seen through the granite cliff. From
this height they commanded all Union Bay. It was like a little Gibraltar, and any
vessel anchored off the islet would inevitably be exposed to the fire of this aerial
battery.

"Captain," said Pencroft one day, it was the 8th of November, "now that our
fortifications are finished, it would be a good thing if we tried the range of our


guns."

"Do you think that is useful?" asked the engineer.

"It is more than useful, it is necessary! Without that how are we to know to
what distance we can send one of those pretty shot with which we are provided?"

"Try them, Pencroft," replied the engineer. "However, I think that in making
the experiment, we ought to employ, not the ordinary powder, the supply of
which, I think, should remain untouched, but the pyroxile which will never fail
us."

"Can the cannon support the shock of the pyroxile?" asked the reporter, who
was not less anxious than Pencroft to try the artillery of Granite House.

"IT believe so. However," added the engineer, "we will be prudent."

The engineer was right in thinking that the guns were of excellent make.
Made of forged steel, and breech-loaders, they ought consequently to be able to
bear a considerable charge, and also have an enormous range. In fact, as regards
practical effect, the transit described by the ball ought to be as extended as
possible, and this tension could only be obtained under the condition that the
projectile should be impelled with a very great initial velocity.

"Now," said Harding to his companions, "the initial velocity is in proportion
to the quantity of powder used. In the fabrication of these pieces, everything
depends on employing a metal with the highest possible power of resistance, and
steel is incontestably that metal of all others which resists the best. I have,
therefore, reason to believe that our guns will bear without risk the expansion of
the pyroxile gas, and will give excellent results."

"We shall be a great deal more certain of that when we have tried them!"
answered Pencroft.

It is unnecessary to say that the four cannons were in perfect order. Since
they had been taken from the water, the sailor had bestowed great care upon
them. How many hours he had spent, in rubbing, greasing, and polishing them,
and in cleaning the mechanism! And now the pieces were as brilliant as if they
had been on board a frigate of the United States' Navy.

On this day, therefore, in presence of all the members of the colony,
including Master Jup and Top, the four cannon were successively tried. They
were charged with pyroxile, taking into consideration its explosive power,
which, as has been said, is four times that of ordinary powder: the projectile to
be fired was cylindro-conic.

Pencroft, holding the end of the quick-match, stood ready to fire.

At Harding's signal, he fired. The shot, passing over the islet, fell into the sea
at a distance which could not be calculated with exactitude.

The second gun was pointed at the rocks at the end of Flotsam Point, and the


shot, striking a sharp rock nearly three miles from Granite House, made it fly
into splinters. It was Herbert who had pointed this gun and fired it, and very
proud he was of his first shot. Pencroft only was prouder than he! Such a shot,
the honour of which belonged to his dear boy.

The third shot, aimed this time at the downs forming the upper side of Union
Bay, struck the sand at a distance of four miles, then having ricocheted, was lost
in the sea in a cloud of spray.

For the fourth piece Cyrus Harding slightly increased the charge, so as to try
its extreme range. Then, all standing aside for fear of its bursting, the match was
lighted by means of a long cord.

A tremendous report was heard, but the piece had held good, and the
colonists rushing to the windows, saw the shot graze the rocks of Mandible
Cape, nearly five miles from Granite House, and disappear in Shark Gulf.

"Well, captain,” exclaimed Pencroft, whose cheers might have rivalled the
reports themselves, "what do you say of our battery? All the pirates in the Pacific
have only to present themselves before Granite House! Not one can land there
now without our permission!"

"Believe me, Pencroft," replied the engineer, "it would be better not to have
to make the experiment."

"Well," said the sailor, "what ought to be done with regard to those six
villains who are roaming about the island? Are we to leave them to overrun our
forests, our fields, our plantations. These pirates are regular jaguars, and it seems
to me we ought not to hesitate to treat them as such! What do you think,
Ayrton?" added Pencroft, turning to his companion.

Ayrton hesitated at first to reply, and Cyrus Harding regretted that Pencroft
had so thoughtlessly put this question. And he was much moved when Ayrton
replied in a humble tone--

"I have been one of those jaguars, Mr Pencroft. I have no right to speak."

And with a slow step he walked away.

Pencroft understood.

"What a brute I am!" he exclaimed. "Poor Ayrton! He has as much right to
speak here as any one!"

"Yes," said Gideon Spilett, "but his reserve does him honour, and it is right to
respect the feeling which he has about his sad past."

"Certainly, Mr Spilett," answered the sailor, "and there is no fear of my doing
so again. I would rather bite my tongue off than cause Ayrton any pain! But to
return to the question. It seems to me that these ruffians have no right to any pity,
and that we ought to rid the island of them as soon as possible."

"Is that your opinion, Pencroft?" asked the engineer.


"Quite my opinion."

"And before hunting them mercilessly, you would not wait until they had
committed some fresh act of hostility against us?"

"Isn't what they have done already enough?" asked Pencroft, who did not
understand these scruples.

"They may adopt other sentiments!" said Harding, "and perhaps repent."

"They repent!" exclaimed the sailor, shrugging his shoulders.

"Pencroft, think of Ayrton!" said Herbert, taking the sailor's hand. "He
became an honest man again!"

Pencroft looked at his companions one after the other. He had never thought
of his proposal being met with any objection. His rough nature could not allow
that they ought to come to terms with the rascals who had landed on the island
with Bob Harvey's accomplices, the murderers of the crew of the Speedy; and he
looked upon them as wild beasts which ought to be destroyed without delay and
without remorse.

"Come!" said he. "Everybody is against me! You wish to be generous to
those villains! Very well; I hope we mayn't repent it!"

"What danger shall we run," said Herbert, "if we take care to be always on
our guard!"

"Hum!" observed the reporter, who had not given any decided opinion.
"They are six and well-armed. If they each lay hid in a corner, and each fired at
one of us, they would soon be masters of the colony!"

"Why have they not done so?" said Herbert. "No doubt because it was not
their interest to do it. Besides, we are six also."

"Well, well!" replied Pencroft, whom no reasoning could have convinced.
"Let us leave these good people to do what they like, and don't think anything
more about them!"

"Come, Pencroft," said Neb, "don't make yourself out so bad as all that!
Suppose one of these unfortunate men were here before you, within good range
of your gun, you would not fire."

"I would fire on him as I would on a mad dog, Neb," replied Pencroft coldly.

"Pencroft," said the engineer, "you have always shown much deference to
my advice; will you, in this matter, yield to me?"

"I will do as you please, Captain Harding,” answered the sailor, who was not
at all convinced.

"Very well, wait, and we will not attack them unless we are attacked first."

Thus their behaviour towards the pirates was agreed upon, although Pencroft
augured nothing good from it. They were not to attack them, but were to be on
their guard. After all, the island was large and fertile. If any sentiment of honesty


yet remained in the bottom of their hearts, these wretches might perhaps be
reclaimed. Was it not their interest in the situation in which they found
themselves to begin a new life? At any rate, for humanity's sake alone, it would
be right to wait. The colonists would no longer, as before, be able to go and
come without fear. Hitherto they had only wild beasts to guard against, and now
six convicts of the worst description, perhaps, were roaming over their island. It
was serious, certainly, and to less brave men, it would have been security lost!
No matter! At present, the colonists had reason on their side against Pencroft.
Would they be right in the future? That remained to be seen.


CHAPTER SIX.

EXPEDITIONS PLANNED--AYRTON AT THE CORRAL--VISIT TO
PORT BALLOON-- PENCROFT'S OBSERVATIONS ON BOARD THE
BONADVENTURE--DESPATCH SENT TO THE CORRAL--NO REPLY
FROM AYRTON--DEPARTURE THE NEXT DAY--THE REASON WHY THE
WIRE DID NOT WORK--A REPORT.

However, the chief business of the colonists was to make that complete
exploration of the island which had been decided upon, and which would have
two objects: to discover the mysterious being whose existence was now
indisputable, and at the same time to find out what had become of the pirates,
what retreat they had chosen, what sort of life they were leading, and what was
to be feared from them. Cyrus Harding wished to set out without delay; but as
the expedition would be of some days' duration, it appeared best to load the cart
with different materials and tools in order to facilitate the organisation of the
encampments. One of the onagers, however, having hurt its leg, could not be
harnessed at present, and a few days' rest was necessary. The departure was,
therefore, put off for a week, until the 20th of November. The month of
November in this latitude corresponds to the month of May in the northern
zones. It was, therefore, the fine season. The sun was entering the tropic of
Capricorn, and gave the longest days in the year. The time was, therefore, very
favourable for the projected expedition, which, if it did not accomplish its
principal object, would at any rate be fruitful in discoveries, especially of natural
productions, since Harding proposed to explore those dense forests of the Far
West, which stretched to the extremity of the Serpentine Peninsula.

During the nine days which preceded their departure, it was agreed that the
work on Prospect Heights should be finished off.

Moreover, it was necessary for Ayrton to return to the corral, where the
domesticated animals required his care. It was decided that he should spend two


days there, and return to Granite House after having liberally supplied the
stables.

As he was about to start, Harding asked him if he would not like one of them
to accompany him, observing that the island was less safe than formerly. Ayrton
replied that this was unnecessary, as he was enough for the work, and that
besides he apprehended no danger. If anything occurred at the corral, or in the
neighbourhood, he could instantly warn the colonists by sending a telegram to
Granite House.

Ayrton departed at dawn on the 9th, taking the cart drawn by one onager, and
two hours after, the electric wire announced that he had found all in order at the
corral.

During these two days Harding busied himself in executing a project which
would completely guard Granite House against any surprise. It was necessary to
completely conceal the opening of the old outlet, which was already walled up
and partly hidden under grass and plants, at the southern angle of Lake Grant.
Nothing was easier, since if the level of the lake was raised two or three feet, the
opening would be quite beneath it. Now, to raise this level they had only to
establish a dam at the two openings made by the lake, and by which were fed
Creek Glycerine and Falls River.

The colonists worked with a will, and the two dams, which besides did not
exceed eight feet in width by three in height, were rapidly erected by means of
well-cemented blocks of stone.

This work finished, it would have been impossible to guess that at that part
of the lake, there existed a subterranean passage through which the overflow of
the lake formerly escaped.

Of course the little stream which fed the reservoir of Granite House and
worked the lift had been carefully preserved, and the water could not fail. The
lift once raised, this sure and comfortable retreat would be safe from any
surprise.

This work had been so quickly done, that Pencroft, Gideon Spilett, and
Herbert found time to make an expedition to Port Balloon. The sailor was very
anxious to know if the little creek in which the Bonadventure was moored, had
been visited by the convicts.

"These gentlemen," he observed, "landed on the south coast, and if they
followed the shore, it is to be feared that they may have discovered the little
harbour, and in that case, I wouldn't give half-a-dollar for our Bonadventure."

Pencroft's apprehensions were not without foundation, and a visit to Port
Balloon appeared to be very desirable. The sailor and his companions set off on
the 10th of November, after dinner, well-armed. Pencroft, ostentatiously slipping


two bullets into each barrel of his rifle, shook his head in a way which betokened
nothing good to any one who approached too near to him, whether "man or
beast," as he said. Gideon Spilett and Herbert also took their guns, and about
three o'clock all three left Granite House.

Neb accompanied them to the turn of the Mercy, and after they had crossed,
he raised the bridge. It was agreed that a gun-shot should announce the colonists’
return, and that at the signal Neb should return and re-establish the
communication between the two banks of the river.

The little band advanced directly along the road which led to the southern
coast of the island. This was only a distance of three miles and a half, but Gideon
Spilett and his companions took two hours to traverse it. They examined all the
border of the road, the thick forest, as well as Tabor Marsh. They found no trace
of the fugitives who, no doubt, not having yet discovered the number of the
colonists, or the means of defence which they had at their disposal, had gained
the less accessible parts of the island.

Arrived at Port Balloon, Pencroft saw with extreme satisfaction that the
Bonadventure was tranquilly floating in the narrow creek. However, Port
Balloon was so well hidden amongst high rocks that it could scarcely be
discovered either from the land or the sea.

"Come," said Pencroft, "the blackguards have not been there yet. Long grass
suits reptiles best, and evidently we shall find them in the Far West."

"And it's very lucky, for if they had found the Bonadventure," added Herbert,
"they would have gone off in her, and we should have been prevented from
returning to Tabor Island."

"Indeed," remarked the reporter, "it will be important to take a document
there which will make known the situation of Lincoln Island, and Ayrton's new
residence, in case the Scotch yacht returns to fetch him."

"Well, the Bonadventure is always there, Mr Spilett," answered the sailor.
"She and her crew are ready to start at a moment's notice!"

"IT think, Pencroft, that that is a thing to be done after our exploration of the
island is finished. It is possible after all that the stranger, if we manage to find
him, may know as much about Tabor Island as about Lincoln Island. Do not
forget that he is certainly the author of the document, and he may, perhaps, know
how far we may count on the return of the yacht!"

"But!" exclaimed Pencroft, "who in the world can he be? The fellow knows
us and we know nothing about him! If he is a simple castaway, why should he
conceal himself? We are honest men, I suppose, and the society of honest men
isn't unpleasant to any one. Did he come here voluntarily? Can he leave the
island if he likes? Is he here still? Will he remain any longer?"


Chatting thus, Pencroft, Gideon Spilett, and Herbert got on board and looked
about the deck of the Bonadventure. All at once, the sailor having examined the
bitts to which the cable of the anchor was secured--

"Hallo," he cried, "this is queer!"

"What is the matter, Pencroft?" asked the reporter.

"The matter is, that it was not I who made this knot!"

And Pencroft showed a rope which fastened the cable to the bitt itself.

"What, it was not you?" asked Gideon Spilett.

"No! I can swear to it. This is a reef knot, and I always make a running
bowline."

"You must be mistaken, Pencroft."

"IT am not mistaken!" declared the sailor. "My hand does it so naturally, and
one's hand is never mistaken!"

"Then can the convicts have been on board?" asked Herbert.

"I know nothing about that," answered Pencroft, "but what is certain, is that
some one has weighed the Bonadventure's anchor and dropped it again! And
look here, here is another proof! The cable of the anchor has been run out, and
its service is no longer at the hawse-hole. I repeat that some one has been using
our vessel!"

"But if the convicts had used her, they would have pillaged her, or rather
gone off with her."

"Gone off! where to--to Tabor Island?" replied Pencroft. "Do you think they
would risk themselves in a boat of such small tonnage?"

"We must, besides, be sure that they know of the islet," rejoined the reporter.

"However that may be," said the sailor, "as sure as my name is Bonadventure
Pencroft, of the Vineyard, our Bonadventure has sailed without us!"

The sailor was so positive that neither Gideon Spilett nor Herbert could
dispute his statement. It was evident that the vessel had been moved, more or
less, since Pencroft had brought her to Port Balloon. As to the sailor, he had not
the slightest doubt that the anchor had been raised and then dropped again. Now,
what was the use of these two manoeuvres, unless the vessel had been employed
in some expedition?

"But how was it we did not see the Bonadventure pass in sight of the island?"
observed the reporter, who was anxious to bring forward every possible
objection.

"Why, Mr Spilett," replied the sailor, "they would only have to start in the
night with a good breeze, and they would be out of sight of the island in two
hours."

"Well," resumed Gideon Spilett, "I ask again, what object could the convicts


have had in using the Bonadventure, and why, after they had made use of her,
should they have brought her back to port?"

"Why, Mr Spilett," replied the sailor, "we must put that among the
unaccountable things, and not think anything more about it. The chief thing is
that the Bonadventure was there, and she is there now. Only, unfortunately, if the
convicts take her a second time, we shall very likely not find her again in her
place!"

"Then, Pencroft," said Herbert, "would it not be wisest to bring the
Bonadventure off to Granite House?"

"Yes and no," answered Pencroft, "or rather no. The mouth of the Mercy is a
bad place for a vessel, and the sea is heavy there."

"But by hauling her up on the sand, to the foot of the Chimneys?"

"Perhaps yes," replied Pencroft. "At any rate, since we must leave Granite
House for a long expedition, I think the Bonadventure will be safer here during
our absence, and we shall do best to leave her here until the island is rid of these
blackguards."

"That is exactly my opinion,” said the reporter. "At any rate in the event of
bad weather, she will not be exposed here as she would be at the mouth of the
Mercy."

"But suppose the convicts pay her another visit," said Herbert.

"Well, my boy," replied Pencroft, "not finding her here, they would not be
long in finding her on the sands of Granite House, and, during our absence,
nothing could hinder them from seizing her! I agree, therefore, with Mr Spilett,
that she must be left in Port Balloon. But, if on our return we have not rid the
island of those rascals, it will be prudent to bring our boat to Granite House,
until the time when we need not fear any unpleasant visits."

"That's settled. Let us be off," said the reporter.

Pencroft, Herbert, and Gideon Spilett, on their return to Granite House, told
the engineer all that had passed, and the latter approved of their arrangements
both for the present and the future. He also promised the sailor that he would
study that part of the channel situated between the islet and the coast; so as to
ascertain if it would not be possible to make an artificial harbour there by means
of dams. In this way, the Bonadventure would be always within reach, under the
eyes of the colonists, and if necessary, under lock and key.

That evening a telegram was sent to Ayrton, requesting him to bring from the
corral a couple of goats, which Neb wished to acclimatise to the plateau.
Singularly enough, Ayrton did not acknowledge the receipt of the despatch, as he
was accustomed to do. This could not but astonish the engineer. But it might be
that Ayrton was not at that moment in the corral, or even that he was on his way


back to Granite House. In fact, two days had already passed since his departure,
and it had been decided that on the evening of the 10th or at the latest the
morning of the 11th, he should return. The colonists waited, therefore, for Ayrton
to appear on Prospect Heights. Neb and Herbert even watched at the bridge so as
to be ready to lower it the moment their companion presented himself.

But up to ten in the evening, there were no signs of Ayrton. It was, therefore,
judged best to send a fresh despatch, requiring an immediate reply.

The bell of the telegraph at Granite House remained mute.

The colonists' uneasiness was great. What had happened? Was Ayrton no
longer at the corral, or if he was still there, had he no longer control over his
movements? Could they go to the corral in this dark night?

They consulted. Some wished to go, the others to remain.

"But," said Herbert, "perhaps some accident had happened to the telegraphic
apparatus, so that it works no longer?"

"That may be," said the reporter.

"Wait till to-morrow," replied Cyrus Harding. "It is possible, indeed, that
Ayrton has not received our despatch, or even that we have not received his."

They waited, of course not without some anxiety.

At dawn of day, the 11th of November, Harding again sent the electric
current along the wire and received no reply.

He tried again: the same result.

"Off to the corral," said he.

"And well-armed!" added Pencroft.

It was immediately decided that Granite House should not be left alone and
that Neb should remain there. After having accompanied his friends to Creek
Glycerine, he raised the bridge; and waiting behind a tree he watched for the
return of either his companions or Ayrton.

In the event of the pirates presenting themselves and attempting to force the
passage, he was to endeavour to stop them by firing on them, and as a last
resource he was to take refuge in Granite House, where, the lift once raised, he
would be in safety.

Cyrus Harding, Gideon Spilett, Herbert, and Pencroft were to repair to the
corral, and if they did not find Ayrton, search the neighbouring woods.

At six o'clock in the morning, the engineer and his three companions had
passed Creek Glycerine, and Neb posted himself behind a small mound crowned
by several dragoniners on the left bank of the stream.

The colonists, after leaving the plateau of Prospect Heights, immediately
took the road to the corral. They shouldered their guns, ready to fire on the
smallest hostile demonstration. The two rifles and the two guns had been loaded


with ball.

The wood was thick on each side of the road and might easily have
concealed the convicts, who owing to their weapons would have been really
formidable.

The colonists walked rapidly and in silence. Top preceded them, sometimes
running on the road, sometimes taking a ramble into the wood, but always quiet
and not appearing to fear anything unusual. And they could be sure that the
faithful dog would not allow them to be surprised, but would bark at the least
appearance of danger.

Cyrus Harding and his companions followed beside the road the wire which
connected the corral with Granite House. After walking for nearly two miles,
they had not as yet discovered any explanation of the difficulty. The posts were
in good order, the wire regularly expended. However, at that moment the
engineer observed that the wire appeared to be slack, and on arriving at post
Number 74, Herbert, who was in advance stopped, exclaiming--

"The wire is broken!"

His companions hurried forward and arrived at the spot where the lad was
standing. The post was rooted up and lying across the path. The unexpected
explanation of the difficulty was here, and it was evident that the despatches
from Granite House had not been received at the corral, nor those from the corral
at Granite House.

"Tt wasn't the wind that blew down this post," observed Pencroft.

"No," replied Gideon Spilett. "The earth has been dug up round its foot, and
it has been torn up by the hand of man."

"Besides, the wire is broken," added Herbert, showing that the wire had been
snapped.

"Is the fracture recent?" asked Harding.

"Yes," answered Herbert, "it has certainly been done quite lately."

"To the corral! to the corral!" exclaimed the sailor.

The colonists were now half way between Granite House and the corral,
having still two miles and a half to go. They pressed forward with redoubled
speed.

Indeed, it was to be feared that some serious accident had occurred in the
corral. No doubt, Ayrton might have sent a telegram which had not arrived, but
this was not the reason why his companions were so uneasy, for, a more
unaccountable circumstance, Ayrton, who had promised to return the evening
before, had not reappeared. In short, it was not without a motive that all
communication had been stopped between the corral and Granite House, and
who but the convicts could have any interest in interrupting this communication?


The settlers hastened on, their hearts oppressed with anxiety. They were
sincerely attached to their new companion. Were they to find him struck down
by the hands of those of whom he was formerly the leader?

Soon they arrived at the place where the road led along the side of a little
stream which flowed from the Red Creek and watered the meadows of the
corral. They then moderated their pace so that they should not be out of breath at
the moment when a struggle might be necessary. Their guns were in their hands
ready cocked. The forest was watched on every side. Top uttered sullen groans
which were rather ominous.

At last the palisade appeared through the trees. No trace of any damage could
be seen. The gate was shut as usual. Deep silence reigned in the corral. Neither
the accustomed bleating of the sheep nor Ayrton's voice could be heard.

"Let us enter," said Cyrus Harding.

And the engineer advanced, whilst his companions, keeping watch about
twenty paces behind him, were ready to fire at a moment's notice.

Harding raised the inner latch of the gate and was about to push it back,
when Top barked loudly. A report sounded and was responded to by a cry of
pain.

Herbert, struck by a bullet, lay stretched on the ground.


CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE REPORTER AND PENCROFT IN THE CORRAL--HERBERT'S
WOUND--THE SAILOR'S DESPAIR--CONSULTATION BETWEEN THE
REPORTER AND THE ENGINEER--MODE OF TREATMENT--HOPE NOT
ABANDONED--HOW IS NEB TO BE WARNED--A SURE AND FAITHFUL
MESSENGER--NEB'S REPLY.

At Herbert's cry Pencroft, letting his gun fall, rushed towards him.

"They have killed him!" he cried. "My boy! They have killed him!"

Cyrus Harding and Gideon Spilett ran to Herbert.

The reporter listened to ascertain if the poor lad's heart was still beating.

"He lives," said he; "but he must be carried--"

"To Granite House? that is impossible!" replied the engineer.

"Into the corral, then!" said Pencroft.

"In a moment," said Harding.

And he ran round the left corner of the palisade. There he found a convict
who, aiming at him, sent a ball through his hat. In a few seconds, before he had
even time to fire his second barrel, he fell, struck to the heart by Harding's
dagger, more sure even than his gun.


During this time, Gideon Spilett and the sailor hoisted themselves over the
palisade, leapt into the enclosure, threw down the props which supported the
inner door, ran into the empty house, and soon poor Herbert was lying on
Ayrton's bed. In a few moments, Harding was by his side.

On seeing Herbert senseless, the sailor's grief was terrible. He sobbed, he
cried, he tried to beat his head against the wall. Neither the engineer nor the
reporter could calm him. They themselves were choked with emotion. They
could not speak.

However, they knew that it depended on them to rescue from death the poor
boy who was suffering beneath their eyes. Gideon Spilett had not passed through
the many incidents by which his life had been chequered without acquiring some
slight knowledge of medicine. He knew a little of everything, and several times
he had been obliged to attend to wounds produced either by a sword-bayonet or
shot. Assisted by Cyrus Harding, he proceeded to render the aid Herbert
required.

The reporter was immediately struck by the complete stupor in which
Herbert lay, a stupor owing either to the haemorrhage, or to the shock, the ball
having struck a bone with sufficient force to produce a violent concussion.

Herbert was deadly pale, and his pulse so feeble that Spilett only felt it beat
at long intervals, as if it was on the point of stopping. These symptoms were
very serious. Herbert's chest was laid bare, and the blood having been staunched
with handkerchiefs, it was bathed with cold water. The contusion, or rather the
contused wound appeared,--an oval below the chest between the third and fourth
ribs. It was there that Herbert had been hit by the bullet.

Cyrus Harding and Gideon Spilett then turned the poor boy over; as they did
so, he uttered a moan so feeble that they almost thought it was his last sigh.

Herbert's back was covered with blood from another contused wound, by
which the ball had immediately escaped.

"God be praised!" said the reporter, "the ball is not in the body, and we shall
not have to extract it.”

"But the heart?" asked Harding.

"The heart has not been touched; if it had been, Herbert would be dead!"

"Dead!" exclaimed Pencroft, with a groan. The sailor had only heard the last
words uttered by the reporter.

"No, Pencroft," replied Cyrus Harding, "no! He is not dead. His pulse still
beats. He has even uttered a moan. But for your boy's sake, calm yourself. We
have need of all our self-possession. Do not make us lose it, my friend."

Pencroft was silent, but a reaction set in, and great tears rolled down his
cheeks.


In the meanwhile, Gideon Spilett endeavoured to collect his ideas, and
proceed methodically. After his examination he had no doubt that the ball,
entering in front, between the seventh and eighth ribs, had issued behind
between the third and fourth. But what mischief had the ball committed in its
passage? What important organs had been reached? A professional surgeon
would have had difficulty in determining this at once, and still more so the
reporter.

However, he knew one thing, this was that he would have to prevent the
inflammatory strangulation of the injured parts, then to contend with the local
inflammation and fever which would result from the wound, perhaps mortal!
Now, what stiptics, what antiphlogistics ought to be employed? By what means
could inflammation be prevented?

At any rate, the most important thing was that the two wounds should be
dressed without delay. It did not appear necessary to Gideon Spilett that a fresh
flow of blood should be caused by bathing them in tepid water, and compressing
their lips. The haemorrhage had been very abundant, and Herbert was already
too much enfeebled by the loss of blood.

The reporter, therefore, thought it best to simply bathe the two wounds with
cold water.

Herbert was placed on his left side, and was maintained in that position.

"He must not be moved," said Gideon Spilett. "He is in the most favourable
position for the wounds in his back and chest to suppurate easily, and absolute
rest is necessary."

"What! can't we carry him to Granite House?" asked Pencroft.

"No, Pencroft," replied the reporter.

"T'll pay the villains off!" cried the sailor, shaking his fist in a menacing
manner.

"Pencroft!" said Cyrus Harding.

Gideon Spilett had resumed his examination of the wounded boy. Herbert
was still so frightfully pale that the reporter felt anxious.

"Cyrus," said he, "I am not a surgeon. I am in terrible perplexity. You must
aid me with your advice, your experience!"

"Take courage, my friend," answered the engineer, pressing the reporter's
hand. "Judge coolly. Think only of this: Herbert must be saved!"

These words restored to Gideon Spilett that self-possession which he had lost
in a moment of discouragement on feeling his great responsibility. He seated
himself close to the bed. Cyrus Harding stood near. Pencroft had torn up his
shirt, and was mechanically making lint.

Spilett then explained to Cyrus Harding that he thought he ought first of all


to stop the haemorrhage, but not close the two wounds, or cause their immediate
cicatrisation, for there had been internal perforation, and the suppuration must
not be allowed to accumulate in the chest.

Harding approved entirely, and it was decided that the two wounds should be
dressed without attempting to close them by immediate coaptation.

And now, did the colonists possess an efficacious agent to act against the
inflammation which might occur?

Yes. They had one, for nature had generously lavished it. They had cold
water, that is to say, the most powerful sedative that can be employed against
inflammation of wounds, the most efficacious therapeutic agent in grave cases,
and the one which is now adopted by all physicians. Cold water has, moreover,
the advantage of leaving the wound in absolute rest, and preserving it from all
premature dressing, a considerable advantage, since it has been found by
experience that contact with the air is dangerous during the first days.

Gideon Spilett and Cyrus Harding reasoned thus with their simple good
sense, and they acted as the best surgeon would have done. Compresses of linen
were applied to poor Herbert's two wounds, and were kept constantly wet with
cold water.

The sailor had at first lighted a fire in the hut, which was not wanting in
things necessary for life. Maple sugar, medicinal plants, the same which the lad
had gathered on the banks of Lake Grant, enabled them to make some refreshing
drinks, which they gave him without his taking any notice of it. His fever was
extremely high, and all that day and night passed without his becoming
conscious.

Herbert's life hung on a thread, and this thread might break at any moment.
The next day, the 12th of November, the hopes of Harding and his companions
slightly revived. Herbert had come out of his long stupor. He opened his eyes, he
recognised Cyrus Harding, the reporter, and Pencroft. He uttered two or three
words. He did not know what had happened. They told him, and Spilett begged
him to remain perfectly still, telling him that his life was not in danger, and that
his wounds would heal in a few days. However, Herbert scarcely suffered at all,
and the cold water with which they were constantly bathed, prevented any
inflammation of the wounds. The suppuration was established in a regular way,
the fever did not increase, and it might now be hoped that this terrible wound
would not involve any catastrophe. Pencroft felt the swelling of his heart
gradually subside. He was like a sister of mercy, like a mother by the bed of her
child.

Herbert dozed again, but his sleep appeared more natural.

"Tell me again that you hope, Mr Spilett," said Pencroft. "Tell me again that


you will save Herbert!"

"Yes, we will save him!" replied the reporter. "The wound is serious, and,
perhaps, even the ball has traversed the lungs, but the perforation of this organ is
not fatal."

"God bless you!" answered Pencroft.

As may be believed, during the four-and-twenty hours they had been in the
corral, the colonists had no other thought than that of nursing Herbert. They did
not think either of the danger which threatened them should the convicts return,
or of the precautions to be taken for the future.

But on this day, whilst Pencroft watched by the sick-bed, Cyrus Harding and
the reporter consulted as to what it would be best to do.

First of all they examined the corral. There was not a trace of Ayrton. Had
the unhappy man been dragged away by his former accomplices? Had he
resisted, and been overcome in the struggle? This last supposition was only too
probable. Gideon Spilett, at the moment he scaled the palisade, had clearly seen
some one of the convicts running along the southern spur of Mount Franklin,
towards whom Top had sprung. It was one of those whose object had been so
completely defeated by the rocks at the mouth of the Mercy. Besides, the one
killed by Harding, and whose body was found outside the enclosure, of course
belonged to Bob Harvey's crew.

As to the corral, it had not suffered any damage. The gates were closed, and
the animals had not been able to disperse in the forest. Nor could they see traces
of any struggle, any devastation, either in the hut, or in the palisade. The
ammunition only, with which Ayrton had been supplied, had disappeared with
him.

"The unhappy man has been surprised," said Harding, "and as he was a man
to defend himself, he must have been overpowered."

"Yes, that is to be feared!" said the reporter. "Then, doubtless, the convicts
installed themselves in the corral where they found plenty of everything, and
only fled when they saw us coming. It is very evident, too, that at this moment
Ayrton, whether living or dead, is not here!"

"We shall have to beat the forest," said the engineer, "and rid the island of
these wretches. Pencroft's presentiments were not mistaken, when he wished to
hunt them as wild beasts. That would have spared us all these misfortunes!"

"Yes," answered the reporter, "but now we have the right to be merciless!"

"At any rate," said the engineer, "we are obliged to wait some time, and to
remain at the corral until we can carry Herbert without danger to Granite
House."

"But Neb?" asked the reporter.


"Neb is in safety."

"But if, uneasy at our absence, he would venture to come?"

"He must not come!" returned Cyrus Harding quickly. "He would be
murdered on the road!"

"It is very probable, however, that he will attempt to rejoin us!"

"Ah, if the telegraph still acted, he might be warned! But that is impossible
now! As to leaving Pencroft and Herbert here alone, we could not do it! Well, I
will go alone to Granite House."

"No, no! Cyrus," answered the reporter, "you must not expose yourself! Your
courage would be of no avail. The villains are evidently watching the corral,
they are hidden in the thick woods which surround it, and if you go we shall
soon have to regret two misfortunes instead of one!"

"But Neb?" repeated the engineer. "It is now four-and-twenty hours since he
has had any news of us! He will be sure to come!"

"And as he will be less on his guard than we should be ourselves," added
Spilett, "he will be killed!"

"Is there really no way of warning him?"

Whilst the engineer thought, his eyes fell on Top, who, going backwards and
forwards, seemed to say--

"Am not I here?"

"Top!" exclaimed Cyrus Harding.

The animal sprang at his master's call.

"Yes, Top will go," said the reporter, who had understood the engineer. "Top
can go where we cannot! He will carry to Granite House the news of the corral,
and he will bring back to us that from Granite House!"

"Quick!" said Harding. "Quick!"

Spilett rapidly tore a leaf from his notebook, and wrote these words:--

"Herbert wounded. We are at the corral. Be on your guard. Do not leave
Granite House. Have the convicts appeared in the neighbourhood? Reply by
Top."

This laconic note contained all that Neb ought to know, and at the same time
asked all the colonists wished to know. It was folded and fastened to Top's collar
in a conspicuous position.

"Top, my dog," said the engineer, caressing the animal, "Neb, Top! Neb! Go,
go!"

Top bounded at these words. He understood, he knew what was expected of
him. The road to the corral was familiar to him. In less than an hour he could
clear it, and it might be hoped that where neither Cyrus Harding nor the reporter
could have ventured without danger, Top, running amongst the grass or in the


wood, would pass unperceived.

The engineer went to the gate of the corral and opened it.

"Neb, Top! Neb!" repeated the engineer, again pointing in the direction of
Granite House.

Top sprang forwards, and almost immediately disappeared.

"He will get there!" said the reporter.

"Yes, and he will come back, the faithful animal!"

"What o'clock is it?" asked Gideon Spilett.

Len

"In an hour he may be here. We will watch for his return."

The gate of the corral was closed. The engineer and the reporter re-entered
the house. Herbert was still in a sleep. Pencroft kept the compresser always wet.
Spilett, seeing there was nothing he could do at that moment, busied himself in
preparing some nourishment, whilst attentively watching that part of the
enclosure against the hill, at which an attack might be expected.

The settlers awaited Top's return with much anxiety. A little before eleven
o'clock, Cyrus Harding and the reporter, rifle in hand, were behind the gate,
ready to open it at the first bark of their dog.

They did not doubt that if Top had arrived safely at Granite House, Neb
would have sent him back immediately.

They had both been there for about ten minutes, when a report was heard,
followed by repeated barks.

The engineer opened the gate, and seeing smoke a hundred feet off in the
wood, he fired in that direction.

Almost immediately Top bounded into the corral, and the gate was quickly
shut.

"Top, Top!" exclaimed the engineer, taking the dog's great honest head
between his hands.

A note was fastened to his neck, and Cyrus Harding read these words, traced
in Neb's large writing:--

"No pirates in the neighbourhood of Granite House. I will not stir. Poor Mr
Herbert!"


CHAPTER EIGHT.

THE CONVICTS IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF THE CORRAL--
PROVISIONAL ESTABLISHMENT--CONTINUATION OF THE
TREATMENT OF HERBERI--PENCROFT'S FIRST REJOICINGS--
CONVERSATION ON PAST EVENTS--WHAT THE FUTURE HAS IN


RESERVE--CYRUS HARDING'S IDEAS ON THIS SUBJECT.

So the convicts were still there, watching the corral, and determined to kill
the settlers one after the other. There was nothing to be done but to treat them as
wild beasts. But great precautions must be taken, for just now the wretches had
the advantage on their side, seeing, and not being seen, being able to surprise by
the suddenness of their attack, yet not to be surprised themselves. Harding made
arrangements, therefore, for living in the corral, of which the provisions would
last for a tolerable length of time. Ayrton's house had been provided with all that
was necessary for existence, and the convicts, scared by the arrival of the
settlers, had not had time to pillage it. It was probable, as Gideon Spilett
observed, that things had occurred as follows:--The six convicts, disembarking
on the island, had followed the southern shore, and after having traversed the
double shore of the Serpentine Peninsula, not being inclined to venture into the
Far West woods, they had reached the mouth of Falls River. From this point, by
following the right bank of the watercourse, they would arrive at the spurs of
Mount Franklin, among which they would naturally seek a retreat, and they
could not have been long in discovering the corral, then uninhabited. There they
had regularly installed themselves, awaiting the moment to put their abominable
schemes into execution. Ayrton's arrival had surprised them, but they had
managed to overpower the unfortunate man, and--the rest may be easily
imagined!

Now, the convicts,--reduced to five, it is true, but well-armed,--were roaming
the woods, and to venture there was to expose themselves to their attacks, which
could be neither guarded against nor prevented.

"Wait! There is nothing else to be done!" repeated Cyrus Harding. "When
Herbert is cured, we can organise a general battue of the island, and have
satisfaction of these convicts. That will be the object of our grand expedition at
the same time--"

"As the search for our mysterious protector," added Gideon Spilett, finishing
the engineer's sentence. "Ah, it must be acknowledged, my dear Cyrus, that this
time his protection was wanting at the very moment when it was most necessary
to us!"

"Who knows?" replied the engineer.

"What do you mean?" asked the reporter.

"That we are not at the end of our trouble yet, my dear Spilett, and that his
powerful invention may, perhaps, have another opportunity of exercising itself.
But that is not the question now. Herbert's life before everything."

This was the colonists’ saddest thought. Several days passed, and the poor
boy's state was happily no worse. Cold water, always kept at a suitable


temperature, had completely prevented the inflammation of the wounds. It even
seemed to the reporter that this water, being slightly sulphurous,--which was
explained by the neighbourhood of the volcano,-- had a more direct action on the
healing. The suppuration was much less abundant, and--thanks to the incessant
care by which he was surrounded!--Herbert returned to life, and his fever abated.
He was besides subjected to a severe diet, and consequently his weakness was
and would be extreme; but there was no want of refreshing drinks, and absolute
rest was of the greatest benefit to him. Cyrus Harding, Gideon Spilett, and
Pencroft had become very skilful in dressing the lad's wounds. All the linen in
the house had been sacrificed. Herbert's wounds, covered with compresses and
lint, were pressed neither too much nor too little, so as to cause their cicatrisation
without determining on inflammatory reaction. The reporter used extreme care
in the dressing, knowing well the importance of it, and repeating to his
companions that which most surgeons willingly admit, that it is perhaps rarer to
see a dressing well done than an operation well performed.

In ten days, on the 22nd of November, Herbert was considerably better. He
had begun to take some nourishment. The colour was returning to his cheeks,
and his bright eyes smiled at his nurses. He talked a little, notwithstanding
Pencraft's efforts, who talked incessantly to prevent him from beginning to
speak, and told him the most improbable stories. Herbert had questioned him on
the subject of Ayrton, whom he was astonished not to see near him, thinking that
he was at the corral. But the sailor, not wishing to distress Herbert, contented
himself by replying that Ayrton had rejoined Neb, so as to defend Granite House.

"Humph!" said Pencroft, "these pirates! they are gentlemen who have no
right to any consideration! And the captain wanted to win them by kindness! I'll
send them some kindness, but in the shape of a good bullet!"

"And have they not been seen again?" asked Herbert.

"No, my boy," answered the sailor, "but we shall find them, and when you
are cured we shall see if the cowards, who strike us from behind, will dare to
meet us face to face!"

"T am still very weak, my poor Pencroft!"

"Well! your strength will return gradually! What's a ball through the chest?
Nothing but a joke! I've seen many, and I don't think much of them!"

At last things appeared to be going on well, and if no complication occurred,
Herbert's recovery might be regarded as certain. But what would have been the
condition of the colonists if his state had been aggravated,--if, for example, the
ball had remained in his body, if his arm or his leg had had to be amputated?

"No," said Spilett more than once, "I have never thought of such a
contingency without shuddering!"


"And yet, if it had been necessary to operate," said Harding one day to him,
"you would not have hesitated?"

"No, Cyrus!" said Gideon Spilett, "but thank God that we have been spared
this complication!"

As in so many other conjectures, the colonists had appealed to the logic of
that simple good sense of which they had made use so often, and once more,
thanks to their general knowledge, it had succeeded! But might not a time come
when all their science would be at fault? They were alone on the island. Now,
men in all states of society are necessary to each other. Cyrus Harding knew this
well, and sometimes he asked himself if some circumstance might not occur
which they would be powerless to surmount. It appeared to him besides, that he
and his companions, till then so fortunate, had entered into an unlucky period.
During the three years and a half which had elapsed since their escape from
Richmond, it might be said that they had had everything their own way. The
island had abundantly supplied them with minerals, vegetables, animals, and as
Nature had constantly loaded them, their science had known how to take
advantage of what she offered them.

The well-being of the colony was therefore complete. Moreover, in certain
occurrences an inexplicable influence had come to their aid! ... But all that could
only be for a time.

In short, Cyrus Harding believed that fortune had turned against them.

In fact, the convicts' ship had appeared in the waters of the island, and if the
pirates had been, so to speak, miraculously destroyed, six of them, at least, had
escaped the catastrophe. They had disembarked on the island, and it was almost
impossible to get at the five who survived. Ayrton had no doubt been murdered
by these wretches, who possessed fire-arms, and at the first use that they had
made of them, Herbert had fallen, wounded almost mortally. Were these the first
blows aimed by adverse fortune at the colonists? This was often asked by
Harding. This was often repeated by the reporter; and it appeared to him also
that the intervention, so strange, yet so efficacious, which till then had served
them so well, had now failed them. Had this mysterious being, whatever he was,
whose existence could not be denied, abandoned the island? Had he in his turn
succumbed?

No reply was possible to these questions. But it must not be imagined that
because Harding and his companion spoke of these things, they were men to
despair. Far from that. They looked their situation in the face, they analysed the
chances, they prepared themselves for any event, they stood firm and straight
before the future, and if adversity was at last to strike them, it would find in them
men prepared to struggle against it.


CHAPTER NINE.

NO NEWS OF NEB--A PROPOSAL FROM PENCROFT AND THE
REPORTER, WHICH IS NOT ACCEPTED--SEVERAL SORTIES BY
GIDEON’ SPILETT--A RAG OF CLOTH--A MESSAGE-- HASTY
DEPARTURE--ARRIVAL ON THE PLATEAU OF PROSPECT HEIGHTS.

The convalescence of the young invalid was regularly progressing. One thing
only was now to be desired, that his state would allow him to be brought to
Granite House. However well built and supplied the corral house was, it could
not be so comfortable as the healthy granite dwelling. Besides, it did not offer
the same security, and its tenants, notwithstanding their watchfulness, were here
always in fear of some shot from the convicts. There, on the contrary, in the
middle of that impregnable and inaccessible cliff, they would have nothing to
fear, and any attack on their persons would certainly fail. They therefore waited
impatiently for the moment when Herbert might be moved without danger from
his wound, and they were determined to make this move, although the
communication through Jacamar Wood was very difficult.

They had no news from Neb, but were not uneasy on that account. The
courageous negro, well intrenched in the depths of Granite House, would not
allow himself to be surprised. Top had not been sent again to him, as it appeared
useless to expose the faithful dog to some shot which might deprive the settlers
of their most useful auxiliary.

They waited, therefore, although they were anxious to be reunited at Granite
House. It pained the engineer to see his forces divided, for it gave great
advantage to the pirates. Since Ayrton's disappearance they were only four
against five, for Herbert could not yet be counted, and this was not the least care
of the brave boy, who well understood the trouble of which he was the cause.

The question of knowing how, in their condition, they were to act against the
pirates, was thoroughly discussed on the 29th of November by Cyrus Harding,
Gideon Spilett, and Pencroft, at a moment when Herbert was asleep and could
not hear them.

"My friends," said the reporter, after they had talked of Neb and of the
impossibility of communicating with him, "I think, like you, that to venture on
the road to the corral would be to risk receiving a gun-shot without being able to
return it. But do you not think that the best thing to be done now is to openly
give chase to these wretches?"

"That is just what I was thinking," answered Pencroft. "I believe we're not
fellows to be afraid of a bullet, and as for me, if Captain Harding approves, I'm


ready to dash into the forest! Why, hang it, one man is equal to another!"

"But is he equal to five?" asked the engineer.

"I will join Pencroft," said the reporter, "and both of us, well-armed and
accompanied by Top--"

"My dear Spilett, and you, Pencroft," answered Harding, "let us reason
coolly. If the convicts were hid in one spot of the island, if we knew that spot,
and had only to dislodge them, I would undertake a direct attack; but is there not
occasion to fear, on the contrary, that they are sure to fire the first shot."

"Well, captain,” cried Pencroft, "a bullet does not always reach its mark."

"That which struck Herbert did not miss, Pencroft," replied the engineer.
"Besides, observe that if both of you left the corral I should remain here alone to
defend it. Do you imagine that the convicts will not see you leave it, that they
will not allow you to enter the forest, and that they will not attack it during your
absence, knowing that there is no one here but a wounded boy and a man?"

"You are right, captain," replied Pencroft, his chest swelling with sullen
anger. "You are right; they will do all they can to retake the corral, which they
know to be well stored; and alone you could not hold it against them."

"Oh, if we were only at Granite House!"

"If we were at Granite House," answered the engineer, "the case would be
very different. There I should not be afraid to leave Herbert with one, whilst the
other three went to search the forests of the island. But we are at the corral, and
it is best to stay here until we can leave it together."

Cyrus Harding's reasoning was unanswerable, and his companions
understood it well.

"If only Ayrton was still one of us!" said Gideon Spilett. "Poor fellow! his
return to social life will have been but of short duration."

"If he is dead," added Pencroft, in a peculiar tone.

"Do you hope, then, Pencroft, that the villains have spared him?" asked
Gideon Spilett.

"Yes, if they had any interest in doing so."

"What! you suppose that Ayrton, finding his old companions, forgetting all
that he owes us--"

"Who knows?" answered the sailor, who did not hazard this shameful
supposition without hesitating.

"Pencroft," said Harding, taking the sailor's arm, "that is a wicked idea of
yours, and you will distress me much if you persist in speaking thus. I will
answer for Ayrton's fidelity."

"And I also," added the reporter quickly.

"Yes, yes, captain, I was wrong," replied Pencroft; "it was a wicked idea


indeed that I had, and nothing justifies it. But what can I do? I'm not in my
senses. This imprisonment in the corral wearies me horribly, and I have never
felt so excited as I do now."

"Be patient, Pencroft," replied the engineer. "How long will it be, my dear
Spilett, before you think Herbert may be carried to Granite House?"

"That is difficult to say, Cyrus," answered the reporter, "for any imprudence
might involve terrible consequences. But his convalescence is progressing, and if
he continues to gain strength, in eight days from now--well, we shall see."

Eight days! That would put off the return to Granite House until the first
days of December. At this time two months of spring had already passed. The
weather was fine, and the heat began to be great. The forests of the island were
in full leaf, and the time was approaching when the usual crops ought to be
gathered. The return to the plateau of Prospect Heights would, therefore, be
followed by extensive agricultural labours, interrupted only by the projected
expedition through the island.

It can, therefore, be well understood how injurious this seclusion in the corral
must be to the colonists.

But if they were compelled to bow before necessity, they did not do so
without impatience.

Once or twice the reporter ventured out into the road and made the tour of
the palisade. Top accompanied him, and Gideon Spilett, his gun cocked, was
ready for any emergency.

He met with no misadventure and found no suspicious traces. His dog would
have warned him of any danger, and, as Top did not bark, it might be concluded
that there was nothing to fear at that moment at least, and that the convicts were
occupied in another part of the island.

However, on his second sortie, on the 27th of November, Gideon Spilett,
who had ventured a quarter of a mile into the wood, towards the south of the
mountains, remarked that Top scented something. The dog had no longer his
unconcerned manner; he went backwards and forwards, ferreting amongst the
grass and bushes as if his smell had revealed some suspicious object to him.

Gideon Spilett followed Top, encouraged him, excited him by his voice,
whilst keeping a sharp look-out, his gun ready to fire, and sheltering himself
behind the trees. It was not probable that Top scented the presence of man, for in
that case, he would have announced it by half-uttered, sullen, angry barks. Now,
as he did not growl, it was because danger was neither near nor approaching.

Nearly five minutes passed thus, Top rummaging, the reporter following him
prudently, when, all at once, the dog rushed towards a thick bush, and drew out a
rag.


It was a piece of cloth, stained and torn, which Spilett immediately brought
back to the corral. There it was examined by the colonists, who found that it was
a fragment of Ayrton's waistcoat, a piece of that felt, manufactured solely by the
Granite House factory.

"You see, Pencroft," observed Harding, "there has been resistance on the part
of the unfortunate Ayrton. The convicts have dragged him away in spite of
himself! Do you still doubt his honesty?"

"No, captain,” answered the sailor, "and I repented of my suspicion a long
time ago! But it seems to me that something may be learned from the incident."

"What is that?" asked the reporter.

"Tt is that Ayrton was not killed at the corral! That they dragged him away
living, since he has resisted. Therefore, perhaps, he is still living!"

"Perhaps, indeed," replied the engineer, who remained thoughtful.

This was a hope, to which Ayrton's companions could still hold. Indeed, they
had before believed that, surprised in the corral, Ayrton had fallen by a bullet, as
Herbert had fallen. But if the convicts had not killed him at first, if they had
brought him living to another part of the island, might it not be admitted that he
was still their prisoner? Perhaps, even, one of them had found in Ayrton his old
Australian companion Ben Joyce, the chief of the escaped convicts. And who
knows but that they had conceived the impossible hope of bringing back Ayrton
to themselves? He would have been very useful to them, if they had been able to
make him turn traitor!

This incident was, therefore, favourably interpreted at the corral, and it no
longer appeared impossible that they should find Ayrton again. On his side, if he
was only a prisoner, Ayrton would no doubt do all he could to escape from the
hands of the villains, and this would be a powerful aid to the settlers!

"At any rate," observed Gideon Spilett, "if happily Ayrton did manage to
escape, he would go directly to Granite House, for he could not know of the
attempt of assassination of which Herbert has been a victim, and consequently
would never think of our being imprisoned in the corral!"

"Oh! I wish that he was there, at Granite House!" cried Pencroft, "and that
we were there, too! For, although the rascals can do nothing to our house, they
may plunder the plateau, our plantations, our poultry-yard!"

Pencroft had become a thorough farmer, heartily attached to his crops. But it
must be said that Herbert was more anxious than any to return to Granite House,
for he knew how much the presence of the settlers was needed there. And it was
he who was keeping them at the corral! Therefore, one idea occupied his mind--
to leave the corral, and when! He believed he could bear removal to Granite
House. He was sure his strength would return more quickly in his room, with the


air and sight of the sea!

Several times he pressed Gideon Spilett, but the latter, fearing, with good
reason, that Herbert's wounds, half healed, might reopen on the way, did not give
the order to start.

However, something occurred which compelled Cyrus Harding and his two
friends to yield to the lad's wish, and God alone knew that this determination
might cause them grief and remorse.

It was the 29th of November, seven o'clock in the evening. The three settlers
were talking in Herbert's room, when they heard Top utter quick barks.

Harding, Pencroft, and Spilett seized their guns and ran out of the house.
Top, at the foot of the palisade, was jumping, barking, but it was with pleasure,
not anger.

"Some one is coming.”

"Yes."

"It is not an enemy!"

"Neb, perhaps?”

"Or Ayrton?"

These words had hardly been exchanged between the engineer and his two
companions when a body leapt over the palisade and fell on the ground inside
the corral.

It was Tup, Master Jup in person, to whom Top immediately gave a most
cordial reception.

"Jup!" exclaimed Pencroft.

"Neb has sent him to us," said the reporter.

"Then," replied the engineer, "he must have some note on him."

Pencroft rushed up to the orang. Certainly if Neb had any important matter to
communicate to his master he could not employ a more sure or more rapid
messenger, who could pass where neither the colonists could, nor even Top
himself.

Cyrus Harding was not mistaken. At Jup's neck hung a small bag, and in this
bag was found a little note traced by Neb's hand.

The despair of Harding and his companions may be imagined when they read
these words:--

"Friday, six o'clock in the morning.

"Plateau invaded by convicts.

"Neb."

They gazed at each other without uttering a word, then they re-entered the
house. What were they to do? The convicts on Prospect Heights! that was
disaster, devastation, ruin.


Herbert, on seeing the engineer, the reporter, and Pencroft re-enter, guessed
that their situation was aggravated, and when he saw Jup, he no longer doubted
that some misfortune menaced Granite House.

"Captain Harding," said he, "I must go; I can bear the journey. I must go."

Gideon Spilett approached Herbert; then, having looked at him--

"Let us go, then!" said he.

The question was quickly decided whether Herbert should be carried on a
litter or in the cart which had brought Ayrton to the corral. The motion of the
litter would have been more easy for the wounded lad, but it would have
necessitated two bearers, that is to say, there would have been two guns less for
defence if an attack was made on the road. Would they not, on the contrary, by
employing the cart leave every arm free? Was it impossible to place the mattress
on which Herbert was lying in it, and to advance with so much care than any jolt
should be avoided? It could be done.

The cart was brought. Pencroft harnessed the onaga. Cyrus Harding and the
reporter raised Herbert's mattress and placed it on the bottom of the cart. The
weather was fine. The sun's bright rays glanced through the trees.

"Are the guns ready?" asked Cyrus Harding.

They were. The engineer and Pencroft, each armed with a double-barrelled
gun, and Gideon Spilett carrying his rifle, had nothing to do but start.

"Are you comfortable, Herbert?" asked the engineer.

"Ah, captain," replied the lad, "don't be uneasy, I shall not die on the road!"

Whilst speaking thus, it could be seen that the poor boy had called up all his
energy, and by the energy of a powerful will had collected his failing strength.

The engineer felt his heart sink painfully. He still hesitated to give the signal
for departure; but that would have driven Herbert to despair--killed him perhaps.

"Forward!" said Harding.

The gate of the corral was opened. Jup and Top, who knew when to be silent,
ran in advance. The cart came out, the gate was reclosed, and the onaga, led by
Pencroft, advanced at a slow pace.

Certainly, it would have been safer to have taken a different road than that
which led straight from the corral to Granite House, but the cart would have met
with great difficulties in moving under the trees. It was necessary, therefore, to
follow this way, although it was well-known to the convicts.

Cyrus Harding and Gideon Spilett walked one on each side of the cart, ready
to answer to any attack. However, it was not probable that the convicts would
have yet left the plateau of Prospect Heights.

Neb's note had evidently been written and sent as soon as the convicts had
shown themselves there. Now, this note was dated six o'clock in the morning,


and the active orang, accustomed to come frequently to the corral, had taken
scarcely three quarters of an hour to cross the five miles which separated it from
Granite House. They would, therefore, be safe at that time, and if there was any
occasion for firing, it would probably not be until they were in the
neighbourhood of Granite House. However, the colonists kept a strict watch. Top
and Jup, the latter armed with his club, sometimes in front, sometimes beating
the wood at the sides of the road, signalised no danger.

The cart advanced slowly under Pencroft's guidance. It had left the corral at
half-past seven. An hour after four out of the five miles had been cleared,
without any incident having occurred. The road was as deserted as all that part of
the Jacamar Wood which lay between the Mercy and the lake. There was no
occasion for any warning. The wood appeared as deserted as on the day when
the colonists first landed on the island.

They approached the plateau. Another mile and they would see the bridge
over Creek Glycerine. Cyrus Harding expected to find it in its place; supposing
that the convicts; would have crossed it, and that, after having passed one of the
streams which enclosed the plateau, they would have taken the precaution to
lower it again, so as to keep open a retreat.

At length an opening in the trees allowed the sea-horizon to be seen. But the
cart continued its progress, for not one of its defenders thought of abandoning it.

At that moment Pencroft stopped the onaga, and in a hoarse voice--

"Oh! the villains!" he exclaimed.

And he pointed to a thick smoke rising from the mill, the sheds, and the
buildings at the poultry-yard.

A man was moving about in the midst of the smoke. It was Neb.

His companions uttered a shout. He heard, and ran to meet them.

The convicts had left the plateau nearly half-an-hour before, having
devastated it!

"And Mr Herbert?" asked Neb.

Gideon Spilett returned to the cart.

Herbert had lost consciousness!


CHAPTER TEN.

HERBERT CARRIED TO GRANITE HOUSE--NEB RELATES ALL
THAT HAS HAPPENED-- HARDING'S VISIT TO THE PLATEAU--RUIN
AND DEVASTATION--THE COLONISTS BAFFLED BY HERBERT'S
ILLNESS--WILLOW BARK--A DEADLY FEVER--TOP BARKS AGAIN!

Of the convicts, the dangers which menaced Granite House, the ruins with


which the plateau was covered, the colonists thought no longer. Herbert's critical
State outweighed all other considerations. Would the removal prove fatal to him
by causing some internal injury? The reporter could not affirm it, but he and his
companions almost despaired of the result. The cart was brought to the bend of
the river. There some branches, disposed as a litter, received the mattress on
which lay the unconscious Herbert. Ten minutes after, Cyrus Harding, Spilett,
and Pencroft were at the foot of the cliff, leaving Neb to take the cart onto the
plateau of Prospect Heights. The lift was put in motion, and Herbert was soon
stretched on his bed in Granite House.

What cares were lavished on him to bring him back to life! He smiled for a
moment on finding himself in his room, but could scarcely even murmur a few
words, so great was his weakness. Gideon Spilett examined his wounds. He
feared to find them reopened, having been imperfectly healed. There was
nothing of the sort. From whence, then, came this prostration? Why was Herbert
so much worse? The lad then fell into a kind of feverish sleep, and the reporter
and Pencroft remained near the bed. During this time, Harding told Neb all that
had happened at the corral, and Neb recounted to his master the events of which
the plateau had just been the theatre.

It was only during the preceding night that the convicts had appeared on the
edge of the forest, at the approaches to Creek Glycerine. Neb, who was watching
near the poultry-yard, had not hesitated to fire at one of the pirates, who was
about to cross the stream; but in the darkness he could not tell whether the man
had been hit or not. At any rate, it was not enough to frighten away the band, and
Neb had only just time to get up to Granite House, where at least he was in
safety.

But what was he to do there? How prevent the devastations with which the
convicts threatened the plateau? Had Neb any means by which to war his
master? And, besides, in what situation were the inhabitants of the corral
themselves? Cyrus Harding and his companions had left on the 11th of
November, and it was now the 29th. It was, therefore, nineteen days since Neb
had had other news than that brought by ‘Top--disastrous news: Ayrton
disappeared, Herbert severely wounded, the engineer, reporter, and sailor, as it
were, imprisoned in the corral!

What was he to do? asked poor Neb. Personally he had nothing to fear, for
the convicts could not reach him in Granite House. But the buildings, the
plantations, all their arrangements at the mercy of the pirates! Would it not be
best to let Cyrus Harding judge of what he ought to do, and to warn him, at least,
of the danger which threatened him?

Neb then thought of employing Jup, and confiding a note to him. He knew


the orang's great intelligence, which had been often put to the proof. Jup
understood the word corral, which had been frequently pronounced before him,
and it may be remembered, too, that he had often driven the cart thither in
company with Pencroft. Day had not yet dawned. The active orang would know
how to pass unperceived through the woods, of which the convicts, besides,
would think he was a native.

Neb did not hesitate. He wrote the note, he tied it to Jup's neck, he brought
the ape to the door of Granite House, from which he let down a long cord to the
ground; then, several times, he repeated these words--

"Jup, Jup! corral, corral!"

The creature understood, seized the cord, glided rapidly down to the beach,
and disappeared in the darkness without the convicts' attention having been in
the least excited.

"You did well, Neb," said Harding; "but perhaps in not warning us you
would have done still better!"

And, in speaking thus, Cyrus Harding thought of Herbert, whose recovery
the removal had so seriously checked.

Neb ended his account. The convicts had not appeared at all on the beach.
Not knowing the number of the island's inhabitants, they might suppose that
Granite House was defended by a large party. They must have remembered that
during the attack by the brig numerous shot had been fired both from the lower
and upper rocks, and no doubt they did not wish to expose themselves. But the
plateau of Prospect Heights was open to them, and not covered by the fire of
Granite House. They gave themselves up, therefore, to their instinct of
destruction,--plundering, burning, devastating everything,--and only retiring half
an hour before the arrival of the colonists, whom they believed still confined in
the corral.

On their retreat, Neb hurried out. He climbed the plateau at the risk of being
perceived and fired at, tried to extinguish the fire which was consuming the
buildings of the poultry-yard, and had struggled, though in vain, against it until
the cart appeared at the edge of the wood.

Such had been these serious events. The presence of the convicts constituted
a permanent source of danger to the settlers in Lincoln Island, until then so
happy, and who might now expect still greater misfortunes.

Spilett remained in Granite House with Herbert and Pencroft, while Cyrus
Harding, accompanied by Neb, proceeded to judge for himself of the extent of
the disaster.

It was fortunate that the convicts had not advanced to the foot of Granite
House. The workshop at the Chimneys would in that case not have escaped


destruction. But after all, this evil would have been more easily reparable than
the ruins accumulated on the plateau of Prospect Heights. Harding and Neb
proceeded towards the Mercy, and ascended its left bank without meeting with
any trace of the convicts; nor on the other side of the river, in the depths of the
wood, could they perceive any suspicious indications.

Besides, it might be supposed that in all probability either the convicts knew
of the return of the settlers to Granite House, by having seen them pass on the
road from the corral, or, after the devastation of the plateau, they had penetrated
into Jacamar Wood, following the course of the Mercy, and were thus ignorant of
their return.

In the former case, they must have returned towards the corral, now without
defenders, and which contained valuable stores.

In the latter, they must have regained their encampment, and would wait an
opportunity to recommence the attack.

It was, therefore, possible to prevent them, but any enterprise to clear the
island was now rendered difficult by reason of Herbert's condition. Indeed, their
whole force would have been barely sufficient to cope with the convicts, and just
now no one could leave Granite House.

The engineer and Neb arrived on the plateau. Desolation reigned
everywhere. The fields had been trampled over; the ears of wheat, which were
nearly full grown, lay on the ground. The other plantations had not suffered less.

The kitchen-garden was destroyed. Happily, Granite House possessed a store
of seed which would enable them to repair these misfortunes.

As to the wall and buildings of the poultry-yard and the onagas' stable, the
fire had destroyed all. A few terrified creatures roamed over the plateau. The
birds, which during the fire had taken refuge on the waters of the lake, had
already returned to their accustomed spot, and were dabbling on the banks.
Everything would have to be reconstructed.

Cyrus Harding's face, which was paler than usual, expressed an internal
anger which he commanded with difficulty, but he did not utter a word. Once
more he looked at his devastated fields, and at the smoke which still rose from
the ruins, then he returned to Granite House.

The following days were the saddest of any that the colonists had passed on
the island! Herbert's weakness visibly increased. It appeared that a more serious
malady, the consequence of the profound physiological disturbance he had gone
through, threatened to declare itself, and Gideon Spilett feared such an
aggravation of his condition that he would be powerless to fight against it!

In fact, Herbert remained in an almost continuous state of drowsiness, and
symptoms of delirium began to manifest themselves. Refreshing drinks were the


only remedies at the colonists' disposal. The fever was not as yet very high, but it
soon appeared that it would probably recur at regular intervals. Gideon Spilett
first recognised this on the 6th of December.

The poor boy, whose fingers, nose, and ears had become extremely pale, was
at first seized with slight shiverings, horripilations, and tremblings. His pulse
was weak and irregular, his skin dry, his thirst intense. To this soon succeeded a
hot fit; his face became flushed; his skin reddened; his pulse quick; then a
profuse perspiration broke out, after which the fever seemed to diminish. The
attack had lasted nearly five hours.

Gideon Spilett had not left Herbert, who, it was only too certain was now
seized by an intermittent fever, and this fever must, be cured at any cost before it
should assume a more serious aspect.

"And in order to cure it," said Spilett to Cyrus Harding, "we need a
febrifuge."

"A febrifuge," answered the engineer. "We have neither Peruvian bark, nor
sulphate of quinine?"

"No," said Gideon Spilett, "but there are willows on the border of the lake,
and the bark of the willow might, perhaps, prove to be a substitute for quinine."

"Let us try it without losing a moment," replied Cyrus Harding.

The bark of the willow has, indeed, been justly considered as a succedaneum
for Peruvian bark, as has also that of the horse-chestnut-tree, the leaf of the holly,
the snake-root, etcetera. It was evidently necessary to make trial of this
substance, although not so valuable as Peruvian bark, and to employ it in its
natural state, since they had no means for extracting its essence.

Cyrus Harding went himself to cut from the trunk of a species of black
willow, a few pieces of bark; he brought them back to Granite House, and
reduced them to a powder, which was administered that same evening to
Herbert.

The night passed without any important change. Herbert was somewhat
delirious, but the fever did not reappear in the night, and did not return either
during the following day.

Pencroft again began to hope. Gideon Spilett said nothing. It might be that
the fever was not quotidian, but tertian, and that it would return next day.
Therefore, he awaited the next day with the greatest anxiety.

It might have been remarked besides that during this period Herbert
remained utterly prostrate, his head weak and giddy. Another symptom alarmed
the reporter to the highest degree. Herbert's liver became congested, and soon a
more intense delirium showed that his brain was also affected.

Gideon Spilett was overwhelmed by this new complication. He took the


engineer aside.

"It is a malignant fever," said he.

"A malignant fever!" cried Harding. "You are mistaken, Spilett. A malignant
fever does not declare itself spontaneously; its germ must previously have
existed."

"IT am not mistaken," replied the reporter. "Herbert no doubt contracted the
germ of this fever in the marshes of the island. He has already had one attack;
should a second come on and should we not be able to prevent a third, he is
lost."

"But the willow bark?"

"That is insufficient," answered the reporter; "and the third attack of a
malignant fever, which is not arrested by means of quinine, is always fatal."

Fortunately, Pencroft heard nothing of this conversation or he would have
gone mad.

It may be imagined what anxiety the engineer and the reporter suffered
during the day of the 7th of December and the following night.

Towards the middle of the day the second attack came on. The crisis was
terrible. Herbert felt himself sinking. He stretched his arms towards Cyrus
Harding, towards Spilett, towards Pencroft. He was so young to die! The scene
was heartrending. They were obliged to send Pencroft away.

The fit lasted five hours. It was evident that Herbert could not survive a third.

The night was frightful. In his delirium Herbert uttered words which went to
the hearts of his companions. He struggled with the convicts, he called to
Ayrton, he poured forth entreaties to that mysterious being,--that powerful
unknown protector,--whose image was stamped upon his mind; then he again fell
into a deep exhaustion which completely prostrated him. Several times Gideon
Spilett thought that the poor boy was dead.

The next day, the 8th of December, was but a succession of the fainting fits.
Herbert's thin hands clutched the sheets. They had administered further doses of
pounded bark, but the reporter expected no result from it.

"If before to-morrow morning we have not given him a more energetic
febrifuge," said the reporter, "Herbert will be dead."

Night arrived--the last night, it was too much to be feared, of the good,
brave, intelligent boy, so far in advance of his years, and who was loved by all as
their own child. The only remedy which existed against this terrible malignant
fever, the only specific which could overcome it, was not to be found in Lincoln
Island.

During the night of the 8th of December, Herbert was seized by a more
violent delirium. His liver was fearfully congested, his brain affected, and


already it was impossible for him to recognise any one.

Would he live until the next day, until that third attack which must infallibly
carry him off? It was not probable. His strength was exhausted, and in the
intervals of fever he lay as one dead.

Towards three o'clock in the morning Herbert uttered a piercing cry. He
seemed to be torn by a supreme convulsion. Neb, who was near him, terrified,
ran into the next room where his companions were watching.

Top, at that moment, barked in a strange manner.

All rushed in immediately and managed to restrain the dying boy, who was
endeavouring to throw himself out of his bed, whilst Spilett, taking his arm, felt
his pulse gradually quicken.

It was five in the morning. The rays of the rising sun began to shine in at the
windows of Granite House. It promised to be a fine day, and this day was to be
poor Herbert's last!

A ray glanced on the table placed near the bed.

Suddenly Pencroft, uttering a cry, pointed to the table.

On it lay a little oblong box, of which the cover bore these words:--

"Sulphate of Quinine."


CHAPTER ELEVEN.

INEXPLICABLE MYSTERY--HERBERT'S CONVALESCENCE--THE
PARTS OF THE ISLAND TO BE EXPLORED--PREPARATIONS FOR
DEPARTURE--FIRST DAY--NIGHT--SECOND DAY--KAURIES--A COUPLE
OF CASSOWARIES--FOOTPRINTS IN THE FOREST--ARRIVAL AT
REPTILE POINT.

Gideon Spilett took the box and opened it. It contained nearly two hundred
grains of a white powder, a few particles of which he carried to his lips. The
extreme bitterness of the substance precluded all doubt; it was certainly the
precious extract of quinine, that pre-eminent antifebrile.

This powder must be administered to Herbert without delay. How it came
there might be discussed later.

"Some coffee!" said Spilett.

In a few moments Neb brought a cup of the warm infusion. Gideon Spilett
threw into it about eighteen grains of quinine, and they succeeded in making
Herbert drink the mixture.

There was still time, for the third attack of the malignant fever had not yet
shown itself. How they longed to be able to add that it would not return!

Besides, it must be remarked, the hopes of all had now revived. The


mysterious influence had been again exerted, and in a critical moment, when
they had despaired of it.

In a few hours Herbert was much calmer. The colonists could now discuss
this incident. The intervention of the stranger was more evident than ever. But
how had he been able to penetrate during the night into Granite House? It was
inexplicable, and, in truth, the proceedings of the genius of the island were not
less mysterious than was that genius himself. During this day the sulphate of
quinine was administered to Herbert every three hours.

The next day some improvement in Herbert's condition was apparent.
Certainly, he was not out of danger, intermittent fevers being subject to frequent
and dangerous relapses, but the most assiduous care was bestowed on him. And
besides, the specific was at hand; nor, doubtless, was he who had brought it far-
distant! and the hearts of all were animated by returning hope.

This hope was not disappointed. Ten days after, on the 20th of December,
Herbert's convalescence commenced.

He was still weak, and strict diet had been imposed upon him, but no access
of fever supervened. And then, the poor boy submitted with such docility to all
the prescriptions ordered him! He longed so to get well!

Pencroft was as a man who has been drawn up from the bottom of an abyss.
Fits of joy approaching to delirium seized him. When the time for the third
attack had passed by, he nearly suffocated the reporter in his embrace. Since
then, he always called him Dr Spilett.

The real doctor, however, remained undiscovered.

"We will find him!" repeated the sailor.

Certainly, this man, whoever he was, might expect a somewhat too energetic
embrace from the worthy Pencroft!

The month of December ended, and with it the year 1867, during which the
colonists of Lincoln Island had of late been so severely tried. They commenced
the year 1868 with magnificent weather, great heat, and a tropical temperature,
delightfully cooled by the sea-breeze. Herbert's recovery progressed, and from
his bed, placed near one of the windows of Granite House, he could inhale the
fresh air, charged with ozone, which could not fail to restore his health. His
appetite returned, and what numberless delicate, savoury little dishes Neb
prepared for him!

"It is enough to make one wish to have a fever oneself!" said Pencroft.

During all this time, the convicts did not once appear in the vicinity of
Granite House. There was no news of Ayrton, and though the engineer and
Herbert still had some hopes of finding him again, their companions did not
doubt but that the unfortunate man had perished. However, this uncertainty could


not last, and when once the lad should have recovered, the expedition, the result
of which must be so important, would be undertaken. But they would have to
wait a month, perhaps, for all the strength of the colony must be put into
requisition to obtain satisfaction from the convicts.

However, Herbert's convalescence progressed rapidly. The congestion of the
liver had disappeared, and his wounds might be considered completely healed.

During the month of January, important work was done on the plateau of
Prospect Heights; but it consisted solely in saving as much as was possible from
the devastated crops, either of corn or vegetables. The grain and the plants were
gathered, so as to provide a new harvest for the approaching half-season. With
regard to rebuilding the poultry-yard, wall, or stables, Cyrus Harding preferred
to wait. Whilst he and his companions were in pursuit of the convicts, the latter
might very probably pay another visit to the plateau, and it would be useless to
give them an opportunity of recommencing their work of destruction. When the
island should be cleared of these miscreants, they would set about rebuilding.
The young convalescent began to get up in the second week of January, at first
for one hour a day, then two, then three. His strength visibly returned, so
vigorous was his constitution. He was now eighteen years of age. He was tall,
and promised to become a man of noble and commanding presence. From this
time his recovery, while still requiring care,--and Dr Spilett was very strict,--
made rapid; progress. Towards the end of the month, Herbert was already
walking about on Prospect Heights, and the beach.

He derived, from several sea-baths, which he took in company with Pencroft
and Neb, the greatest possible benefit. Cyrus Harding thought he might now
settle the day for their departure, for which the 15th of February was fixed. The
nights, very clear at this time of year, would be favourable to the researches they
intended to make all over the island.

The necessary preparations for this exploration were now commenced, and
were important, for the colonists had sworn not to return to Granite House until
their twofold object had been achieved; on the one hand, to exterminate the
convicts, and rescue Ayrton, if he was still living; on the other, to discover who it
was that presided so effectually over the fortunes of the colony.

Of Lincoln Island, the settlers knew thoroughly all the eastern coast from
Claw Cape to the Mandible Capes, the extensive Tadorn Marsh, the
neighbourhood of Lake Grant, Jacamar Wood, between the road to the corral and
the Mercy, the courses of the Mercy and Red Creek, and lastly, the spurs of
Mount Franklin, among which the corral had been established.

They had explored, though only in an imperfect manner, the vast shore of
Washington Bay from Claw Cape to Reptile End, the woody and marshy border


of the west coast, and the interminable downs, ending at the open mouth of
Shark Gulf. But they had in no way surveyed the woods which covered the
Serpentine Peninsula, all to the right of the Mercy, the left bank of Falls River,
and the wilderness of spurs and valleys which supported three quarters of the
base of Mount Franklin, to the east, the north, and the west, and where doubtless
many secret retreats existed. Consequently, many millions of acres of the island
had still escaped their investigations.

It was, therefore, decided that the expedition should be carried through the
Far West, so as to include all that region situated on the right of the Mercy.

It might, perhaps, be better worth while to go direct to the corral, where it
might be supposed that the convicts had again taken refuge, either to pillage or
to establish themselves there. But either the devastation of the corral would have
been an accomplished fact by this time, and it would be too late to prevent it; or
it had been the convicts' interest to intrench themselves there, and there would be
still time to go and turn them out on their return.

Therefore, after some discussion, the first plan was adhered to, and the
settlers resolved to proceed through the wood to Reptile End. They would make
their way with their hatchets, and thus lay the first draft of a road which would
place Granite House in communication with the end of the peninsula for a length
of from sixteen to seventeen miles.

The cart was in good condition. The onagas, well rested, could go a long
journey. Provisions, camp effects, a portable stove, and various utensils were
packed in the cart, as also weapons and ammunition, carefully chosen from the
now complete arsenal of Granite House. But it was necessary to remember that
the convicts were, perhaps, roaming about the woods, and that in the midst of
these thick forests a shot might quickly be fired and received. It was therefore
resolved that the little band of settlers should remain together and not separate
under any pretext whatever.

It was also decided that no one should remain at Granite House. Top and Jup
themselves were to accompany the expedition; the inaccessible dwelling needed
no guard. The 14th of February, eve of the departure, was Sunday. It was
consecrated entirely to repose, and thanksgivings addressed by the colonists to
the Creator. A place in the cart was reserved for Herbert, who, though thoroughly
convalescent, was still a little weak. The next morming, at daybreak, Cyrus
Harding took the necessary measures to protect Granite House from any
invasion. The ladders, which were formerly used for the ascent, were brought to
the Chimneys and buried deep in the sand, so that they might be available on the
return of the colonists, for the machinery of the lift had been taken to pieces, and
nothing of the apparatus remained. Pencroft stayed the last in Granite House in


order to finish this work, and he then lowered himself down by means of a
double rope held below, and which, when once hauled down, left no
communication between the upper landing and the beach.

The weather was magnificent.

"We shall have a warm day of it," said the reporter, laughing.

"Pooh! Dr Spilett," answered Pencroft, "we shall walk under the shade of the
trees and shan't even see the sun!"

"Forward!" said the engineer.

The cart was waiting on the beach before the Chimneys. The reporter made
Herbert take his place in it during the first hours at least of the journey, and the
lad was obliged to submit to his doctor's orders.

Neb placed himself at the onagas' heads. Cyrus Harding, the reporter, and the
sailor, walked in front. Top bounded joyfully along. Herbert offered a seat in his
vehicle to Jup, who accepted it without ceremony. The moment for departure had
arrived, and the little band set out.

The cart first turned the angle of the mouth of the Mercy, then, having
ascended the left bank for a mile, crossed the bridge, at the other side of which
commenced the road to Port Balloon and there the explorers, leaving this road on
their left, entered the cover of the immense woods which formed the region of
the Far West.

For the first two miles the widely-scattered trees allowed the cart to pass
with ease; from time to time it became necessary to cut away a few creepers and
bushes, but no serious obstacle impeded the progress of the colonists.

The thick foliage of the trees threw a grateful shade on the ground. Deodars,
douglas-firs, casuarinas, banksias, gum-trees, dragon-trees, and other well-
known species, succeeded each other far as the eye could reach. The feathered
tribes of the island were all represented--tetras, jacamars, pheasants, lories, as
well as the chattering cockatoos, parrots, and paroquets. Agouties, kangaroos,
and capybaras fled swiftly at their approach; and all this reminded the settlers of
the first excursions they had made on their arrival at the island.

"Nevertheless," observed Cyrus Harding, "I notice that these creatures, both
birds and quadrupeds, are more timid than formerly. These woods have,
therefore, been recently traversed by the convicts, and we shall certainly find
some traces of them."

And, in fact, in several places they could distinguish traces, more or less
recent, of the passage of a band of men--here branches broken off the trees,
perhaps to mark out the way; there the ashes of a fire, and footprints in clayey
spots; but nothing which appeared to belong to a settled encampment.

The engineer had recommended his companions to refrain from hunting. The


reports of the fire-arms might give the alarm to the convicts, who were, perhaps,
roaming through the forest. Moreover, the hunters would necessarily ramble
some distance from the cart, which it was dangerous to leave unguarded.

In the after-part of the day, when about six miles from Granite House, their
progress became much more difficult. In order to make their way through some
thickets, they were obliged to cut down trees. Before entering such places
Harding was, careful to send in Top and Jup, who faithfully accomplished their
commission, and when the dog and orang returned without giving any warning,
there was evidently nothing to fear, either from convicts or wild beasts, two
varieties of the animal kingdom, whose ferocious instincts placed them on the
same level. On the evening of the first day the colonists encamped about nine
miles from Granite House, on the border of a little stream falling into the Mercy,
and of the existence of which they had till then been ignorant; it evidently,
however, belonged to the hydrographical system to which the soil owed its
astonishing fertility. The settlers made a hearty meal, for their appetites were
sharpened, and measures were then taken that the night might be passed in
safety. If the engineer had had only to deal with wild beasts, jaguars, or others,
he would have simply lighted fires all round his camp, which would have
sufficed for its defence; but the convicts would be rather attracted than terrified
by the flames, and it was, therefore, better to be surrounded by the profound
darkness of night.

The watch was, however, carefully organised. Two of the settlers were to
watch together, and every two hours it was agreed that they should be relieved
by their comrades. And so, notwithstanding his wish to the contrary, Herbert was
exempted from guard, Pencroft and Gideon Spilett in one party, the engineer and
Neb in another, mounted guard in turns over the camp.

The night, however, was but of few hours. The darkness was due rather to
the thickness of the foliage than to the disappearance of the sun. The silence was
scarcely disturbed by the howling of jaguars and the chattering of the monkeys,
the latter appearing to particularly irritate master Jup. The night passed without
incident, and on the next day, the 15th of February, the journey through the
forest, rather tedious than difficult, was continued. This day they could not
accomplish more than six miles, for every moment they were obliged to cut a
road with their hatchets.

Like true settlers, the colonists spared the largest and most beautiful trees,
which would besides have cost immense labour to fell, and the small ones only
were sacrificed, but the result was that the road took a very winding direction,
and lengthened itself by numerous detours.

During the day Herbert discovered several new specimens not before met


with in the island, such as the tree-fern, with its leaves spread out like the waters
of a fountain, locust-trees, on the long pods of which the onagas browsed
greedily, and which supplied a sweet pulp of excellent flavour. There, too, the
colonists again found groups of magnificent kauries, their cylindrical trunks,
crowned with a cone of verdure, rising to a height of two hundred feet. These
were the tree-kings of New Zealand, as celebrated as the cedars of Lebanon.

As to the fauna, there was no addition to those species already known to the
hunters. Nevertheless, they saw, though unable to get near them, a couple of
those large birds peculiar to Australia, a sort of cassowary, called emu, five feet
in height, and with brown plumage, which belong to the tribe of waders. Top
darted after them as fast as his four legs could carry him, but the emus distanced
him with ease, so prodigious was their speed.

As to the traces left by the convicts, a few more were discovered. Some
footprints found near an apparently recently-extinguished fire were attentively
examined by the settlers. By measuring them one after the other, according to
their length and breadth, the marks of five men's feet were easily distinguished.
The five convicts had evidently camped on this spot; but,--and this was the
object of so minute an examination,--a sixth footprint could not be discovered,
which in that case would have been that of Ayrton.

"Ayrton was not with them!" said Herbert.

"No," answered Pencroft, "and if he was not with them, it was because the
wretches had already murdered him! but then these rascals have not a den to
which they may be tracked like tigers!"

"No," replied the reporter; "it is more probable that they wander at random,
and it is their interest to rove about until the time when they will be masters of
the island!"

"The masters of the island!" exclaimed the sailor; "the masters of the island!"
he repeated, and his voice was choked, as if his throat was seized in an iron
grasp. Then in a calmer tone, "Do you know, Captain Harding," said he, "what
the ball is which I have rammed into my gun?"

"No, Pencroft!"

"Tt is the ball that went through Herbert's chest, and I promise you it won't
miss its mark!"

But this just retaliation would not bring Ayrton back to life, and from the
examination of the footprints left in the ground, they must, alas! conclude that all
hopes of ever seeing him again must be abandoned.

That evening they encamped fourteen miles from Granite House, and Cyrus
Harding calculated that they could not be more than five miles from Reptile
Point.


And, indeed, the next day the extremity of the peninsula was reached, and
the whole length of the forest had been traversed; but there was nothing to
indicate the retreat in which the convicts had taken refuge, nor that, no less
secret, which sheltered the mysterious unknown.


CHAPTER TWELVE.

EXPLORATION OF THE SERPENTINE PENINSULA--ENCAMPMENT
AT THE MOUTH OF FALLS RIVER--GIDEON SPILETT AND PENCROFT
RECONNOITRE--THEIR RETURN-- FORWARD, ALL!--AN OPEN DOOR--
A LIGHTED WINDOW--BY THE LIGHT OF THE MOON!

The next day, the 18th of February, was devoted to the exploration of all that
wooded region forming the shore from Reptile End to Falls River. The colonists
were able to search this forest thoroughly, for, as it was comprised between the
two shores of the Serpentine Peninsula, it was only from three to four miles in
breadth. The trees, both by their height and their thick foliage, bore witness to
the vegetative power of the soil, more astonishing here than in any other part of
the island. One might have said that a corner from the virgin forests of America
or Africa had been transported into this temperate zone. This led them to
conclude that the superb vegetation found a heat in this soil, damp in its upper
layer, but warmed in the interior by volcanic fires, which could not belong to a
temperate climate. The most frequently-occurring trees were kauries and
eucalypti of gigantic dimensions.

But the colonists' object was not simply to admire the magnificent
vegetation. They knew already that in this respect Lincoln Island would have
been worthy to take the first rank in the Canary group, to which the first name
given was that of the Happy Isles. Now, alas! their island no longer belonged to
them entirely; others had taken possession of it, miscreants polluted its shores,
and they must be destroyed to the last man.

No traces were found on the western coast, although they were carefully
sought for. No more footprints, no more broken branches, no more deserted
camps.

"This does not surprise me," said Cyrus Harding to his companions. "The
convicts first landed on the island in the neighbourhood of Flotsam Point, and
they immediately plunged into the Far West forests, after crossing Tadorm Marsh.
They then followed almost the same route that we took on leaving Granite
House. This explains the traces we found in the wood. But, arriving on the shore,
the convicts saw at once that they would discover no suitable retreat there, and it
was then that, going northwards again, they came upon the corral."


"Where they have perhaps returned," said Pencroft.

"IT do not think so," answered the engineer, "for they would naturally suppose
that our researches would be in that direction. The corral is only a store-house to
them, and not a definitive encampment."

"I am of Cyrus' opinion," said the reporter, "and I think that it is among the
spurs of Mount Franklin that the convicts will have made their lair."

"Then, captain, straight to the corral!" cried Pencroft. "We must finish them
off, and till now we have only lost time!"

"No, my friend," replied the engineer; "you forget that we have a reason for
wishing to know if the forests of the Far West do not contain some habitation.
Our exploration has a double object, Pencroft. If, on the one hand, we have to
chastise crime, we have, on the other, an act of gratitude to perform."

"That was well said, captain," replied the sailor; "but, all the same, it is my
opinion that we shall not find that gentleman until he pleases."

And truly Pencroft only expressed the opinion of all. It was probable that the
stranger's retreat was not less mysterious than was he himself.

That evening the cart halted at the mouth of Falls River. The camp was
organised as usual, and the customary precautions were taken for the night.
Herbert, become again the healthy and vigorous lad he was before his illness,
derived great benefit from this life in the open air, between the sea-breezes and
the vivifying air from the forests. His place was no longer in the cart, but at the
head of the troop.


The next day, the 19th of February, the colonists, leaving the shore, where,
beyond the mouth, basalts of every shape were so picturesquely piled up,
ascended the river by its left bank. The road had been already partially cleared in
their former excursions made from the corral to the west coast. The settlers were
now about six miles from Mount Franklin.

The engineer's plan was this:--To minutely survey the valley forming the bed
of the river, and to cautiously approach the neighbourhood of the corral; if the
corral was occupied, to seize it by force; if it was not, to intrench themselves
there and make it the centre of the operations which had for their object the
exploration of Mount Franklin.

This plan was unanimously approved by the colonists, for they were
impatient to regain entire possession of their island.

They made their way along the narrow valley separating two of the largest
spurs of Mount Franklin. The trees, crowded on the river's bank, became rare on
the upper slopes of the mountain. The ground was hilly and rough, very suitable
for ambushes, and over which they did not venture without extreme precaution.
Top and Jup skirmished on the flanks, springing right and left through the thick
brushwood, and emulating each other in intelligence and activity. But nothing
showed that the banks of the stream had been recently frequented--nothing
announced either the presence or the proximity of the convicts. Towards five in
the evening the cart stopped nearly 600 feet from the palisade. A semicircular
screen of trees still hid it.

It was necessary to reconnoitre the corral, in order to ascertain if it was
occupied. To go there openly, in broad daylight, when the convicts were
probably in ambush, would be to expose themselves, as poor Herbert had done,
to the fire-arms of the ruffians. It was better, then, to wait until night came on.

However, Gideon Spilett wished without further delay to reconnoitre the
approaches to the corral, and Pencroft, who was quite out of patience,
volunteered to accompany him.

"No, my friends," said the engineer, "wait till night. I will not allow one of
you to expose himself in open day."

"But, captain," answered the sailor, little disposed to obey.

"I beg you, Pencroft," said the engineer.

"Very well!" replied the sailor, who vented his anger in another way, by
bestowing on the convicts the worst names in his maritime vocabulary.

The colonists remained, therefore, near the cart, and carefully watched the
neighbouring parts of the forest.

Three hours passed thus. The wind had fallen, and absolute silence reigned
under the great trees. The snapping of the smallest twig, a footstep on the dry


leaves, the gliding of a body amongst the grass, would have been heard without
difficulty. All was quiet. Besides, Top, lying on the grass, his head stretched out
on his paws, gave no signs of uneasiness. At eight o'clock the day appeared far
enough advanced for the reconnaissance to be made under favourable
conditions. Gideon Spilett declared himself ready to set out accompanied by
Pencroft. Cyrus Harding consented. Top and Jup were to remain with the
engineer, Herbert, and Neb, for a bark or a cry at a wrong moment would give
the alarm.

"Do not be imprudent," said Harding to the reporter and Pencroft; "you have
not to gain possession of the corral, but only to find out whether it is occupied or
not."

"All right," answered Pencroft.

And the two departed.

Under the trees, thanks to the thickness of their foliage, the obscurity
rendered any object invisible beyond a radius of from thirty to forty feet. The
reporter and Pencroft, halting at any suspicious sound, advanced with great
caution.

They walked a little distance apart from each other so as to offer a less mark
for a shot. And, to tell the truth, they expected every moment to hear a report.
Five minutes after leaving the cart, Gideon Spilett and Pencroft arrived at the
edge of the wood before the clearing beyond which rose the palisade.

They stopped. A few straggling beams still fell on the field clear of trees.
Thirty feet distant was the gate of the corral, which appeared to be closed. This
thirty feet, which it was necessary to cross from the border of the wood to the
palisade, constituted the dangerous zone, to coin a term: in fact, one or more
bullets fired from behind the palisade might knock over any one who ventured
onto this zone. Gideon Spilett and the sailor were not men to draw back, but they
knew that any imprudence on their part, of which they would be the first victims,
would fall afterwards on their companions. If they themselves were killed, what
would become of Harding, Neb, and Herbert?

But Pencroft, excited at feeling himself so near the corral where he supposed
the convicts had taken refuge, was about to press forward, when the reporter
held him back with a grasp of iron.

"In a few minutes it will be quite dark," whispered Spilett in the sailor's ear;
"then will be the time to act."

Pencroft, convulsively clasping the butt-end of his gun, restrained his
eagemess, and waited, swearing to himself.

Soon the last of the twilight faded away. Darkness, which seemed as if it
issued from the dense forest, covered the clearing. Mount Franklin rose like an


enormous screen before the western horizon, and night spread rapidly over all, as
it does in regions of low latitudes. Now was the time.

The reporter and Pencroft, since posting themselves on the edge of the wood,
had not once lost sight of the palisade. The corral appeared to be absolutely
deserted. The top of the palisade formed a line, a little darker than the
surrounding shadow, and nothing disturbed its distinctness. Nevertheless, if the
convicts were there, they must have posted one of their number to guard against
any surprise.

Spilett grasped his companion's hand, and both crept towards the corral, their
guns ready to fire.

They reached the gate without the darkness being illuminated by a single ray
of light.

Pencroft tried to push open the gate, which, as the reporter and he had
supposed, was closed. However, the sailor was able to ascertain that the outer
bars had not been put up. It might, then, be concluded that the convicts were
there in the corral, and that very probably they had fastened the gate in such a
way that it could not be forced open.

Gideon Spilett and Pencroft listened. Not a sound could be heard inside the
palisade. The musmons and the goats, sleeping no doubt in their huts, in no way
disturbed the calm of night.

The reporter and the sailor hearing nothing, asked themselves whether they
had not better scale the palisades and penetrate into the corral. This would have
been contrary to Cyrus Harding's instructions.

It is true that the enterprise might succeed, but it might also fail. Now, if the
convicts were suspecting nothing, if they knew nothing of the expedition against
them, if, lastly, there now existed a chance of surprising them, ought this chance
to be lost by inconsiderately attempting to cross the palisade?

This was not the reporter's opinion. He thought it better to wait until all the
settlers were collected together before attempting to penetrate into the corral.
One thing was certain, that it was possible to reach the palisade without being
seen, and also that it did not appear to be guarded. This point settled, there was
nothing to be done but to return to the cart, where they would consult.

Pencroft probably agreed with this decision, for he followed the reporter
without making any objection when the latter turned back to the wood.

In a few minutes the engineer was made acquainted with the state of affairs.

"Well," said he, after a little thought, "I now have reason to believe that the
convicts are not in the corral."

"We shall soon know," said Pencroft, "when we have scaled the palisade."

"To the corral, my friends!" said Cyrus Harding.


"Shall we leave the cart in the wood?" asked Neb.

"No," replied the engineer, "it is our waggon of ammunition and provisions,
and, if necessary, it would serve as an intrenchment."

"Forward, then!" said Gideon Spilett.

The cart emerged from the wood and began to roll noiselessly towards the
palisade. The darkness was now profound, the silence as complete as when
Pencroft and the reporter crept over the ground. The thick grass completely
muffled their footsteps.

The colonists held themselves ready to fire. Jup, at Pencroft's orders, kept
behind. Neb led Top in a leash, to prevent him from bounding forward.

The clearing soon came in sight. It was deserted. Without hesitating, the little
band moved towards the palisade. In a short space of time the dangerous zone
was passed. Not a shot had been fired. When the cart reached the palisade, it
stopped. Neb remained at the onagas' heads to hold them. The engineer, the
reporter, Herbert, and Pencroft, proceeded to the door, in order to ascertain if it
was barricaded inside. It was open!

"What do you say now?" asked the engineer, turning to the sailor and Spilett.
Both were stupefied.

"I can swear," said Pencroft, "that this gate was shut just now!"

The colonists now hesitated. Were the convicts in the corral when Pencroft
and the reporter made their reconnaissance? it could not be doubted, as the gate
then closed could only have been opened by them. Were they still there, or had
one of their number just gone out?

All these questions presented themselves simultaneously to the minds of the
colonists, but how could they be answered?

At that moment, Herbert, who had advanced a few steps into the enclosure,
drew back hurriedly, and seized Harding's hand.

"What's the matter?” asked the engineer. "Alight!"

"In the house?"

"Yes!"

All five advanced and indeed, through the window fronting them, they saw
glimmering a feeble light. Cyrus Harding made up his mind rapidly. "It is our
only chance," said he to his companions, "of finding the convicts collected in
this house, suspecting nothing! They are in our power! Forward!" The colonists
crossed through the enclosure, holding their guns ready in their hands. The cart
had been left outside under the charge of Jup and Top, who had been prudently
tied to it.

Cyrus Harding, Pencroft, and Gideon Spilett on one side, Herbert and Neb
on the other, going along by the palisade, surveyed the absolutely dark and


deserted corral.

In a few moments they were near the closed door of the house.

Harding signed to his companions not to stir, and approached the window,
then feebly lighted by the inner light. He gazed into the apartment.

On the table burned a lantern. Near the table was the bed formerly used by
Ayrton.

On the bed lay the body of a man.

Suddenly Cyrus Harding drew back, and in a hoarse voice--

"Ayrton!" he exclaimed.

Immediately the door was forced rather than opened, and the colonists
rushed into the room.

Ayrton appeared to be asleep. His countenance showed that he had long and
cruelly suffered. On his wrists and ankles could be seen great bruises.

Harding bent over him.

"Ayrton!" cried the engineer, seizing the arm of the man whom he had just
found again under such unexpected circumstances.

At this exclamation Ayrton opened his eyes, and, gazing at Harding, then at
the others--

"You!" he cried, "you?"

"Ayrton! Ayrton!" repeated Harding.

"Where am I?"

"In the house in the corral!"

"Alone?"

"Yes!"

"But they will come back!" cried Ayrton. "Defend yourselves! defend
yourselves!"

And he fell back exhausted.

"Spilett,” exclaimed the engineer, "we may be attacked at any moment. Bring
the cart into the corral. Then barricade the door, and all come back here."

Pencroft, Neb, and the reporter hastened to execute the engineer's orders.
There was not a moment to be lost. Perhaps even now the cart was in the hands
of the convicts!

In a moment the reporter and his two companions had crossed the corral and
reached the gate of the palisade behind which Top was heard growling sullenly.

The engineer, leaving Ayrton for an instant, came out ready to fire. Herbert
was at his side. Both surveyed the crest of the spur overlooking the corral. If the
convicts were lying in ambush there, they might knock the settlers over one after
the other.

At that moment the moon appeared in the east, above the black curtain of the


forest, and a white sheet of light spread over the interior of the enclosure. The
corral, with its clumps of trees, the little stream which watered it, and its wide
carpet of grass, was suddenly illuminated. From the side of the mountain, the
house and a part of the palisade stood out white in the moonlight. On the
opposite side towards the door, the enclosure remained dark.

A black mass soon appeared. This was the cart entering the circle of light,
and Cyrus Harding could hear the noise made by the door, as his companions
shut it and fastened the interior bars.

But, at that moment, Top, breaking loose, began to bark furiously and rush to
the back of the corral, to the right of the house.

"Be ready to fire, my friends!" cried Harding.

The colonists raised their pieces and waited the moment to fire.

Top still barked, and Jup, running towards the dog, uttered shrill cries.

The colonists followed him, and reached the borders of the little stream,
shaded by large trees. And there, in the bright moonlight, what did they see?
Five corpses, stretched on the bank!

They were those of the convicts who, four months previously, had landed on
Lincoln Island!


CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

AYRTON'S STORY--PLANS OF HIS FORMER ACCOMPLICES--THEIR
INSTALLATION IN THE CORRAL--THE AVENGING JUSTICE OF
LINCOLN ISLAND--THE BONADVENTURE-- RESEARCHES AROUND
MOUNT FRANKLIN--THE UPPER VALLEYS--A SUBTERRANEAN
VOLCANO--PENCROFT'S OPINION--AT THE BOTTOM OF THE CRATER-
-RETURN.

How had it happened? Who had killed the convicts? Was it Ayrton? No, for a
moment before he was dreading their return.

But Ayrton was now in a profound stupor, from which it was no longer
possible to rouse him. After uttering those few words he had again become
unconscious, and had fallen back motionless on the bed.

The colonists, a prey to a thousand confused thoughts, under the influence of
violent excitement, waited all night, without leaving Ayrton's house, or returning
to the spot where lay the bodies of the convicts. It was very probable that Ayrton
would not be able to throw any light on the circumstances under which the
bodies had been found, since he himself was not aware that he was in the corral.
But at any rate he would be in a position to give an account of what had taken
place before this terrible execution. The next day Ayrton awoke from his torpor,


and his companions cordially manifested all the joy they felt, on seeing him
again, almost safe and sound, after a hundred and four days' separation.

Ayrton then in a few words recounted what had happened, or at least as much
as he knew.

The day after his arrival at the corral, on the 10th of last November, at
nightfall, he was surprised by the convicts, who had scaled the palisade. They
bound and gagged him; then he was led to a dark cavern, at the foot of Mount
Franklin, where the convicts had taken refuge.

His death had been decided upon, and the next day the convicts were about
to kill him, when one of them recognised him, and called him by the name which
he bore in Australia. The wretches had no scruples as to murdering Ayrton! They
spared Ben Joyce!

But from that moment Ayrton was exposed to the importunities of his former
accomplices. They wished him to join them again, and relied upon his aid to
enable them to gain possession of Granite House, to penetrate into that hitherto
inaccessible dwelling, and to become masters of the island, after murdering the
colonists!

Ayrton remained firm. The once convict, now repentant and pardoned, would
rather die than betray his companions. Ayrton--bound, gagged, and closely
watched--lived in this cave for four months.

Nevertheless the convicts had discovered the corral a short time after their
arrival in the island, and since then they had subsisted on Ayrton's stores, but did
not live at the corral.

On the 11th of November, two of the villains, surprised by the colonists’
arrival, fired at Herbert, and one of them returned, boasting of having killed one
of the inhabitants of the island; but he returned alone. His companion, as is
known, fell by Cyrus Harding's dagger.

Ayrton's anxiety and despair may be imagined when he learnt the news of
Herbert's death. The settlers were now only four, and, as it seemed, at the mercy
of the convicts. After this event, and during all the time that the colonists,
detained by Herbert's illness, remained in the corral, the pirates did not leave
their cavern, and even after they had pillaged the plateau of Prospect Heights,
they did not think it prudent to abandon it.

The ill-treatment inflicted on Ayrton was now redoubled. His hands and feet
still bore the bloody marks of the cords which bound him day and night. Every
moment he expected to be put to death, nor did it appear possible that he could
escape.

Matters remained thus until the third week of February. The convicts, still
watching for a favourable opportunity, rarely quitted their retreat, and only made


a few hunting excursions, either to the interior of the island, or the south coast.

Ayrton had no further news of his friends, and relinquished all hope of ever
seeing them again. At last, the unfortunate man, weakened by ill-treatment, fell
into a prostration so profound that sight and hearing failed him. From that
moment, that is to say, since the last two days, he could give no information
whatever of what had occurred.

"But, Captain Harding," he added, "since I was imprisoned in that cavern,
how is it that I find myself in the corral?"

"How is it that the convicts are lying yonder dead, in the middle of the
enclosure?" answered the engineer.

"Dead!" cried Ayrton, half rising from his bed, notwithstanding his
weakness.

His companions supported him. He wished to get up, and with their
assistance he did so. They then proceeded together towards the little stream.

It was now broad daylight.

There, on the bank, in the position in which they had been stricken by death
in its most instantaneous form, lay the corpses of the five convicts!

Ayrton was astounded. Harding and his companions looked at him without
uttering a word. On a sign from the engineer, Neb and Pencroft examined the
bodies, already stiffened by the cold.

They bore no apparent trace of any wound.

Only, after carefully examining them, Pencroft found on the forehead of one,
on the chest of another, on the back of this one, on the shoulder of that, a little
red spot, a sort of scarcely visible bruise, the cause of which it was impossible to
conjecture.

"Tt is there that they have been struck!" said Cyrus Harding.

"But with what weapon?" cried the reporter.

"A weapon, lightning-like in its effects, and of which we have not the
secret!"

"And who has struck the blow?" asked Pencroft.

"The avenging power of the island," replied Harding, "he who brought you
here, Ayrton, whose influence has once more manifested itself, who does for us
all that which we cannot do for ourselves, and who, his will accomplished,
conceals himself from us."

"Let us make search for him, then!" exclaimed Pencroft.

"Yes, we will search for him," answered Harding; "but we shall not discover
this powerful being who performs such wonders, until he pleases to call us to
him!"

This invisible protection, which rendered their own action unavailing, both


irritated and piqued the engineer. The relative inferiority which it proved was of
a nature to wound a haughty spirit. A generosity evinced in such a manner as to
elude all tokens of gratitude, implied a sort of disdain for those on whom the
obligation was conferred, which in Cyrus Harding's eyes marred, in some
degree, the worth of the benefit.

"Let us search," he resumed, "and God grant that we may some day be
permitted to prove to this haughty protector that he has not to deal with
ungrateful people! What would I not give could we repay him, by rendering him
in our turn, although at the price of our lives, some signal service!"

From this day, the thoughts of the inhabitants of Lincoln Island were solely
occupied with the intended search. Everything incited them to discover the
answer to this enigma, an answer which could only be the name of a man
endowed with a truly inexplicable, and in some degree superhuman power. In a
few minutes, the settlers re-entered the house, where their influence soon
restored to Ayrton his moral and physical energy.

Neb and Pencroft carried the corpses of the convicts into the forest, some
distance from the corral, and buried them deep in the ground.

Ayrton was then made acquainted with the facts which had occurred during
his seclusion. He learnt Herbert's adventures, and through what various trials the
colonists had passed. As to the settlers, they had despaired of ever seeing Ayrton
again, and had been convinced that the convicts had ruthlessly murdered him.

"And now," said Cyrus Harding, as he ended his recital, "a duty remains for
us to perform. Half of our task is accomplished, but although the convicts are no
longer to be feared, it is not owing to ourselves that we are once more masters of
the island."

"Well!" answered Gideon Spilett, "let us search all this labyrinth of the spurs
of Mount Franklin. We will not leave a hollow, not a hole unexplored! Ah! if
ever a reporter found himself face to face with a mystery, it is I who now speak
to you, my friends!"

"And we will not return to Granite House until we have found our
benefactor," said Herbert.

"Yes," said the engineer, "we will do all that it is humanly possible to do, but
I repeat we shall not find him until he himself permits us."

"Shall we stay at the corral?" asked Pencroft.

"We shall stay here," answered Harding. "Provisions are abundant, and we
are here in the very centre of the circle we have to explore. Besides, if necessary,
the cart will take us rapidly to Granite House."

"Good!" answered the sailor. "Only I have a remark to make."

"What is it?"


"Here is the fine season getting on, and we must not forget that we have a
voyage to make."

"A voyage?" said Gideon Spilett.

"Yes, to Tabor Island," answered Pencroft. "It is necessary to carry a notice
there to point out the position of our island and say that Ayrton is here in case the
Scotch yacht should come to take him off. Who knows if it is not already too
late?"

"But, Pencroft," asked Ayrton, "how do you intend to make this voyage?"

"In the Bonadventure."

"The Bonadventure!" exclaimed Ayrton. "She no longer exists."

"My Bonadventure exists no longer!" shouted Pencroft, bounding from his
seat.

"No," answered Ayrton. "The convicts discovered her in her little harbour
only eight days ago, they put to sea in her, and--"

"And?" said Pencroft, his heart beating.

"And not having Bob Harvey to steer her, they ran on the rocks, and the
vessel went to pieces."

"Oh, the villains, the cut-throats, the infamous scoundrels!" exclaimed
Pencroft.

"Pencroft," said Herbert, taking the sailor's hand, "we will build another
Bonadventure--a larger one. We have all the iron-work--all the rigging of the
brig at our disposal."

"But do you know," returned Pencroft, "that it will take at least five or six
months to build a vessel of from thirty to forty tons?"

"We can take our time," said the reporter, "and we must give up the voyage
to Tabor Island for this year."

"Oh, my Bonadventure! my poor Bonadventure!" cried Pencroft, almost
broken-hearted at the destruction of the vessel of which he was so proud.

The loss of the Bonadventure was certainly a thing to be lamented by the
colonists, and it was agreed that this loss should be repaired as soon as possible.
This settled, they now occupied themselves with bringing their researches to
bear on the most secret parts of the island.

The exploration was commenced at daybreak on the 19th of February, and
lasted an entire week. The base of the mountain, with its spurs and their
numberless ramifications, formed a labyrinth of valleys and elevations. It was
evident that there, in the depths of these narrow gorges, perhaps even in the
interior of Mount Franklin itself, was the proper place to pursue their researches.
No part of the island could have been more suitable to conceal a dwelling whose
occupant wished to remain unknown. But so irregular was the formation of the


valleys that Cyrus Harding was obliged to conduct the exploration in a strictly
methodical manner.

The colonists first visited the valley opening to the south of the volcano, and
which first received the waters of Falls River. There Ayrton showed them the
cavern where the convicts had taken refuge, and in which he had been
imprisoned until his removal to the corral. This cavern was just as Ayrton had
left it. They found there a considerable quantity of ammunition and provisions,
conveyed thither by the convicts in order to form a reserve.

The whole of the valley bordering on the cave, shaded by fir and other trees,
was thoroughly explored, and on turning the point of the south-western spur, the
colonists entered a narrower gorge similar to the picturesque columns of basalt
on the coast. Here the trees were fewer. Stones took the place of grass. Goats and
musmons gambolled among the rocks. Here began the barren part of the island.
It could already be seen that, of the numerous valleys branching off at the base
of Mount Franklin, three only were wooded and rich in pasturage like that of the
corral, which bordered on the west on the Falls River valley, and on the east on
the Red Creek valley. These two streams, which lower down became rivers by
the absorption of several tributaries, were formed by all the springs of the
mountain and thus caused the fertility of its southern part. As to the Mercy, it
was more directly fed from ample springs concealed under the cover of Jacamar
Wood, and it was by springs of this nature, spreading in a thousand streamlets,
that the soil of the Serpentine Peninsula was watered.

Now, of these three well-watered valleys, either might have served as a
retreat to some solitary who would have found there everything necessary for
life. But the settlers had already explored them, and in no part had they
discovered the presence of man.

Was it then in the depths of those barren gorges, in the midst of the piles of
rock, in the rugged northern ravines, among the streams of lava, that this
dwelling and its occupant would be found?

The northern part of Mount Franklin was at its base composed solely of two
valleys, wide, not very deep, without any appearance of vegetation, strewn with
masses of rock, paved with lava, and varied with great blocks of mineral. This
region required a long and careful exploration. It contained a thousand cavities,
comfortless no doubt, but perfectly concealed and difficult of access.

The colonists even visited dark tunnels, dating from the volcanic period, still
black from the passage of the fire, and penetrated into the depths of the
mountain. They traversed these sombre galleries, waving lighted torches; they
examined the smallest excavations; they sounded the shallowest depths, but all
was dark and silent. It did not appear that the foot of man had ever before


trodden these ancient passages, or that his arm had ever displaced one of these
blocks, which remained as the volcano had cast them up above the waters, at the
time of the submersion of the island.

However, although these passages appeared to be absolutely deserted, and
the obscurity was complete, Cyrus Harding was obliged to confess that absolute
silence did not reign there.

On arriving at the end of one of these gloomy caverns, extending several
hundred feet into the interior of the mountain, he was surprised to hear a deep
rumbling noise, increased in intensity by the sonorousness of the rocks.

Gideon Spilett, who accompanied him, also heard these distant mutterings,
which indicated a revivification of the subterranean fires. Several times both
listened, and they agreed that some chemical process was taking place in the
bowels of the earth.

"Then the volcano is not totally extinct?" said the reporter.

"It is possible that since our exploration of the crater," replied Cyrus
Harding, "some change has occurred. Any volcano, although considered extinct,
may evidently again burst forth."

"But if an eruption of Mount Franklin occurred," asked Spilett, "would there
not be some danger to Lincoln Island?"

"I do not think so," answered the reporter. "The crater--that is to say, the
safety-valve, exists, and the overflow of smoke and lava would escape, as it did
formerly, by its customary outlet."

"Unless the lava opened a new way for itself towards the fertile parts of the
island!"

"And why, my dear Spilett," answered Cyrus Harding, "should it not follow
the road naturally traced out for it?"

"Well, volcanoes are capricious," returned the reporter.

"Notice," answered the engineer, "that the inclination of Mount Franklin
favours the flow of water towards the valleys which we are exploring just now.
To turn aside this flow, an earthquake would be necessary to change the
mountain's centre of gravity."

"But an earthquake is always to be feared at these times," observed Gideon
Spilett.

"Always," replied the engineer, "especially when the subterranean forces
begin to awake, as they risk meeting with some obstruction, after a long rest.
Thus, my dear Spilett, an eruption would be a serious thing for us, and it would
be better that the volcano should not have the slightest desire to wake up. But we
could not prevent it, could we? At any rate, even if it should occur, I do not think
Prospect Heights would be seriously threatened. Between them and the


mountain, the ground is considerably depressed, and if the lava should ever take
a course towards the lake, it would be cast on the downs and the neighbouring
parts of Shark Gulf."

"We have not yet seen any smoke at the top of the mountain, to indicate an
approaching eruption,” said Gideon Spilett.

"No," answered Harding, "not a vapour escapes from the crater, for it was
only yesterday that I attentively surveyed the summit. But it is probable that at
the lower part of the chimney, time may have accumulated rocks, cinders,
hardened lava, and that this valve of which I spoke, may at any time become
overcharged. But at the first serious effort, every obstacle will disappear, and you
may be certain, my dear Spilett, that neither the island, which is the boiler, nor
the volcano, which is the chimney, will burst under the pressure of gas.
Nevertheless, I repeat, it would be better that there should not be an eruption."

"And yet we are not mistaken," remarked the reporter. "Mutterings can be
distinctly heard in the very bowels of the volcano!"

"You are right," said the engineer, again listening attentively. "There can be
no doubt of it. A commotion is going on there, of which we can neither estimate
the importance nor the ultimate result."

Cyrus Harding and Spilett, on coming out, rejoined their companions, to
whom they made known the state of affairs.

"Very well!" cried Pencroft, "the volcano wants to play his pranks! Let him
try, if he likes! He will find his master!"

"Who?" asked Neb.

"Our good genius, Neb, our good genius, who will shut his mouth for him, if
he so much as pretends to open it!"

As may be seen, the sailor's confidence in the tutelary deity of his island was
absolute, and, certainly, the occult power, manifested until now in so many
inexplicable ways, appeared to be unlimited; but also it knew how to escape the
colonists' most minute researches, for, in spite of all their efforts, in spite of the
more than zeal,--the obstinacy,-- with which they carried on their exploration,
the retreat of the mysterious being could not be discovered.

From the 19th to the 25th of February the circle of investigation was
extended to all the northern region of Lincoln Island, whose most secret nooks
were explored. The colonists even went the length of tapping every rock. The
search was extended to the extreme verge of the mountain. It was explored thus
to the very summit of the truncated cone terminating the first row of rocks, then
to the upper ridge of the enormous hat, at the bottom of which opened the crater.

They did more; they visited the gulf, now extinct, but in whose depths the
rumbling could be distinctly heard. However, no sign of smoke or vapour, no


heating of the rock, indicated an approaching eruption. But neither there, nor in
any other part of Mount Franklin, did the colonists find any traces of him of
whom they were in search.

Their investigations were then directed to the downs. They carefully
examined the high lava-cliffs of Shark Gulf from the base to the crest, although
it was extremely difficult to reach even the level of the gulf. No one!--nothing!

In short, in these two words was summed up so much fatigue uselessly
expended, so much energy producing no result, that somewhat of anger mingled
with the discomfiture of Cyrus Harding and his companions.

It was now time to think of returning, for these researches could not be
prolonged indefinitely. The colonists were certainly right in believing that the
mysterious being did not reside on the surface of the island, and the wildest
fancies haunted their excited imaginations. Pencroft and Neb, particularly, were
not contented with the mystery, but allowed their imaginations to wander into the
domain of the supernatural.

On the 25th of February the colonists re-entered Granite House, and by
means of the double cord, carried by an arrow to the threshold of the door, they
re-established communication between their habitation and the ground.

A month later they commemorated, on the 25th of March, the third
anniversary of their arrival on Lincoln Island.


CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THREE YEARS HAVE PASSED--THE NEW VESSEL--WHAT IS
AGREED ON--PROSPERITY OF THE COLONY--THE DOCK YARD--COLD
OF THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE--WASHING = LINEN--MOUNT
FRANKLIN.

Three years had passed away since the escape of the prisoners from
Richmond, and how often during those three years had they spoken of their
country, always present in their thoughts!

They had no doubt that the civil war was at an end, and to them it appeared
impossible that the just cause of the North had not triumphed. But what had been
the incidents of this terrible war? How much blood had it not cost? How many of
their friends must have fallen in the struggle? They often spoke of these things,
without as yet being able to foresee the day when they would be permitted once
more to see their country. To return thither, were it but for a few days, to renew
the social link with the inhabited world, to establish a communication between
their native land and their island, then to pass the longest, perhaps the best,
portion of their existence in this colony founded by them, and which would then


be dependent of their country, was this a dream impossible to realise?

There were only two ways of accomplishing it--either a ship must appear off
Lincoln Island, or the colonists must themselves build a vessel strong enough to
sail to the nearest land.

"Unless," said Pencroft, "our good genius himself provides us with the
means of returning to our country."

And, really, had any one told Pencroft and Neb that a ship of 300 tons was
waiting for them in Shark Gulf or at Port Balloon, they would not even have
made a gesture of surprise. In their state of mind nothing appeared improbable.

But Cyrus Harding, less confident, advised them to confine themselves to
fact, and more especially so with regard to the building of a vessel--a really
urgent work, since it was for the purpose of depositing, as soon as possible, at
Tabor Island a document indicating Ayrton's new residence.

As the Bonadventure no longer existed, six months at least would be
required for the construction of a new vessel. Now winter was approaching, and
the voyage could not be made before the following spring.

"We have time to get everything ready for the fine season," remarked the
engineer, who was consulting with Pencroft about these matters. "I think,
therefore, my friend, that since we have to rebuild our vessel it will be best to
give her larger dimensions. The arrival of the Scotch yacht at Tabor Island is
very uncertain. It may even be that, having arrived several months ago, she has
again sailed after having vainly searched for some trace of Ayrton. Will it not
then be best to build a ship which, if necessary, could take us either to the
Polynesian Archipelago or to New Zealand? What do you think?"

"I think, captain," answered the sailor; "I think that you are as capable of
building a large vessel as a small one. Neither the wood nor the tools are
wanting. It is only a question of time."

"And how many months would be required to build a vessel of from 250 to
300 tons?" asked Harding.

"Seven or eight months at least," replied Pencroft. "But it must not be
forgotten that winter is drawing near, and that in severe frost wood is difficult to
work. We must calculate on several weeks' delay, and if our vessel is ready by
next November we may think ourselves very lucky."

"Well," replied Cyrus Harding, "that will be exactly the most favourable time
for undertaking a voyage of any importance, either to Tabor Island or to a more
distant land."

"So it will, captain," answered the sailor. "Make out your plans then; the
workmen are ready, and I imagine that Ayrton can lend us a good helping hand."

The colonists, having been consulted, approved the engineer's plan, and it


was, indeed, the best thing to be done. It is true that the construction of a ship of
from two to three hundred tons would be great labour, but the colonists had
confidence in themselves, justified by their previous success.

Cyrus Harding then busied himself in drawing the plan of the vessel and
making the model. During this time his companions employed themselves in
felling and carting trees to furnish the ribs, timbers, and planks. The forest of the
Far West supplied the best oaks and elms. They took advantage of the opening
already made on their last excursion to form a practicable road, which they
named the Far West Road, and the trees were carried to the Chimneys, where the
dockyard was established. As to the road in question, the choice of trees had
rendered its direction somewhat capricious, but that at the same time facilitated
the access to a large part of the Serpentine Peninsula.

It was important that the trees should be quickly felled and cut up, for they
could not be used while yet green, and some time was necessary to allow them to
get seasoned. The carpenters, therefore, worked vigorously during the month of
April, which was troubled only by a few equinoctial gales of some violence.
Master Jup aided them dexterously, either by climbing to the top of a tree to
fasten the ropes or by lending his stout shoulders to carry the lopped trunks.

All this timber was piled up under a large shed, built near the Chimneys, and
there awaited the time for use.

The month of April was tolerably fine, as October often is in the northern
zone. At the same time other work was actively continued, and soon all trace of
devastation disappeared from the plateau of Prospect Heights. The mill was
rebuilt, and new buildings rose in the poultry-yard. It had appeared necessary to
enlarge their dimensions, for the feathered population had _ increased
considerably. The stable now contained five onagas, four of which were well
broken, and allowed themselves to be either driven or ridden, and a little colt.
The colony now possessed a plough, to which the onagas were yoked like
regular Yorkshire or Kentucky oxen. The colonists divided their work, and their
arms never tired. Then who could have enjoyed better health than these workers,
and what good humour enlivened the evenings in Granite House as they formed
a thousand plans for the future!

As a matter of course Ayrton shared the common lot in every respect, and
there was no longer any talk of his going to live at the corral. Nevertheless he
was still sad and reserved, and joined more in the work than in the pleasures of
his companions. But he was a valuable workman at need--strong, skilful,
ingenious, intelligent. He was esteemed and loved by all, and he could not be
ignorant of it.

In the meanwhile the corral was not abandoned. Every other day one of the


settlers, driving the cart or mounted on an onaga, went to look after the flock of
musmons and goats and bring back the supply of milk required by Neb. These
excursions at the same time afforded opportunities for hunting. Therefore
Herbert and Gideon Spilett, with Top in front, traversed more often than their
companions the road to the corral, and with the capital guns which they carried,
capybaras, agouties, kangaroos, and wild pigs for large game, ducks, tetras,
grouse, jacamars, and snipe for small, were never wanting in the house. The
produce of the warren, of the oyster-bed, several turtles which were taken,
excellent salmon which came up the Mercy, vegetables from the plateau, wild
fruit from the forest, were riches upon riches, and Neb, the head cook, could
scarcely by himself store them away.

The telegraphic wire between the corral and Granite House had of course
been repaired, and it was worked whenever one or other of the settlers was at the
corral and found it necessary to spend the night there. Besides, the island was
safe now and no attacks were to be feared, at any rate from men.

However, that which had happened might happen again. A descent of pirates,
or even of escaped convicts, was always to be feared. It was possible that
companions or accomplices of Bob Harvey had been in the secret of his plans,
and might be tempted to imitate him. The colonists, therefore, were careful to
observe the sea around the island, and every day their telescope swept the
horizon enclosed by the Union and Washington Bays. When they went to the
corral they examined the sea to the west with no less attention, and by climbing
the spur their gaze extended over a large section of the western horizon.

Nothing suspicious was discerned, but still it was necessary for them to be on
their guard.

The engineer one evening imparted to his friends a plan which he had
conceived for fortifying the corral. It appeared prudent to him to heighten the
palisade and to flank it with a sort of block-house, which, if necessary, the
settlers could hold against the enemy. Granite House might, by its very position,
be considered impregnable; therefore the corral with its buildings, its stores, and
the animals it contained, would always be the object of pirates, whoever they
were, who might land on the island, and should the colonists be obliged to shut
themselves up there they ought also to be able to defend themselves without any
disadvantage. This was a project which might be left for consideration, and they
were, besides, obliged to put off its execution until the next spring.

About the 15th of May the keel of the new vessel lay along the dockyard,
and soon the stem and stern-post, mortised at each of its extremities, rose almost
perpendicularly. The keel, of good oak, measured 110 feet in length, this
allowing a width of five-and-twenty feet to the midship beam. But this was all


the carpenters could do before the arrival of the frosts and bad weather. During
the following week they fixed the first of the stern timbers, but were then
obliged to suspend work.

During the last days of the month the weather was extremely bad. The wind
blew from the east, sometimes with the violence of a tempest. The engineer was
somewhat uneasy on account of the dockyard sheds--which, besides, he could
not have established in any other place near to Granite House--for the islet only
imperfectly sheltered the shore from the fury of the open sea, and in great storms
the waves beat against the very foot of the granite cliff.

But, very fortunately, these fears were not realised. The wind shifted to the
south-east, and there the beach of Granite House was completely covered by
Flotsam Point.

Pencroft and Ayrton, the most zealous workmen at the new vessel, pursued
their labour as long as they could. They were not men to mind the wind tearing
at their hair, nor the rain wetting them to the skin, and a blow from a hammer is
worth just as much in bad as in fine weather. But when a severe frost succeeded
this wet period, the wood, its fibres acquiring the hardness of iron, became
extremely difficult to work, and about the 10th of June ship-building was obliged
to be entirely discontinued.

Cyrus Harding and his companions had not omitted to observe how severe
was the temperature during the winters of Lincoln Island. The cold was
comparable to that experienced in the States of New England, situated at almost
the same distance from the equator. In the northern hemisphere, or at any rate in
the part occupied by British America and the north of the United States, this
phenomenon is explained by the flat conformation of the territories bordering on
the pole, and on which there is no intumescence of the soil to oppose any
obstacle to the north winds; here, in Lincoln Island, this explanation would not
suffice.

"Tt has even been observed," remarked Harding one day to his companions,
"that in equal latitudes the islands and coast regions are less tried by the cold
than inland countries. I have often heard it asserted that the winters of Lombardy,
for example, are not less rigorous than those of Scotland, which results from the
sea restoring during the winter the heat which it received during the summer.
Islands are, therefore, in a better situation for benefiting by this restitution."

"But then, Captain Harding,” asked Herbert, "why does Lincoln Island
appear to escape the common law?"

"That is difficult to explain," answered the engineer. "However, I should be
disposed to conjecture that this peculiarity results from the situation of the island
in the southern hemisphere, which, as you know, my boy, is colder than the


northern hemisphere."

"Yes," said Herbert, "and icebergs are met with in lower latitudes in the south
than in the north of the Pacific."

"That is true," remarked Pencroft, "and when I have been serving on board
whalers I have seen icebergs off Cape Horn."

"The severe cold experienced in Lincoln Island," said Gideon Spilett, "may
then perhaps be explained by the presence of floes or icebergs comparatively
near to Lincoln Island."

"Your opinion is very admissible indeed, my dear Spilett," answered Cyrus
Harding, "and it is evidently to the proximity of icebergs that we owe our
rigorous winters. I would draw your attention also to an entirely physical cause,
which renders the southern colder than the northern hemisphere. In fact, since
the sun is nearer to this hemisphere during the summer, it is necessarily more
distant during the winter. This explains then the excess of temperature in the two
seasons, for, if we find the winters very cold in Lincoln Island, we must not
forget that the summers here, on the contrary, are very hot."

"But why, if you please, captain," asked Pencroft, knitting his brows, "why
should our hemisphere, as you say, be so badly divided? It isn't just, that!"

"Friend Pencroft," answered the engineer, laughing, "whether just or not, we
must submit to it, and here lies the reason for this peculiarity. The earth does not
describe a circle round the sun, but an ellipse, as it must by the laws of rational
mechanics. Now, the earth occupies one of the centres of the ellipse, and
consequently, at the time of its transfer, it is further from the sun, that is to say, at
its apogee, and at another time nearer, that is to say, at its perigee. Now it
happens that it is during the winter of the southern countries that it is at its most
distant point from the sun, and consequently, in a situation for those regions to
feel the greatest cold. Nothing can be done to prevent that, and men, Pencroft,
however learned they may be, can never change anything of the cosmographical
order established by God Himself."

"And yet," added Pencroft, persisting, "the world is very learned. What a big
book, captain, might be made with all that is known!"

"And what a much bigger book still with all that is not known!" answered
Harding.

At last, for one reason or another, the month of June brought the cold with its
accustomed intensity, and the settlers were often confined to Granite House. Ah!
how wearisome this imprisonment was to them, and more particularly to Gideon
Spilett.

"Look here," said he to Neb one day, "I would give you by notarial deed all
the estates which will come to me some day, if you were a good-enough fellow


to go, no matter where, and subscribe to some newspaper for me! Decidedly the
thing that is most essential to my happiness is the knowing every morning what
has happened the day before in other places than this!"

Neb began to laugh.

"Pon my word," he replied, "the only thing I think about is my daily work!"

The truth was that indoors as well as out there was no want of work.

The colony of Lincoln Island was now at its highest point of prosperity,
achieved by three years of continued hard work. The destruction of the brig had
been a new source of riches. Without speaking of the complete rig which would
serve for the vessel now on the stocks, utensils and tools of all sorts, weapons
and ammunition, clothes and instruments, were now piled in the store-rooms of
Granite House. It had not even been necessary to resort again to the manufacture
of the coarse felt materials. Though the colonists had suffered from cold during
their first winter, the bad season might now come without their having any
reason to dread its severity. Linen was plentiful also, and besides, they kept it
with extreme care. From chloride of sodium, which is nothing else than sea salt,
Cyrus Harding easily extracted the soda and chlorine. The soda, which it was
easy to change into carbonate of soda, and the chlorine, of which he made
chloride of lime, were employed for various domestic purposes, and especially
in bleaching linen. Besides, they did not wash more than four times a year, as
was done by families in the olden time, and it may be added, that Pencroft and
Gideon Spilett, whilst waiting for the postman to bring him his newspaper,
distinguished themselves as washermen.

So passed the winter months, June, July, and August. They were very severe,
and the average observations of the thermometer did not give more than eight
degrees of Fahrenheit. It was therefore lower in temperature than the preceding
winter. But then, what splendid fires blazed continually on the hearths of Granite
House, the smoke marking the granite wall with long, zebra-like streaks! Fuel
was not spared, as it grew naturally a few steps from them. Besides, the chips of
the wood destined for the construction of the ship enabled them to economise the
coal, which required more trouble to transport.

Men and animals were all well. Master Jup was a little chilly, it must be
confessed. This was perhaps his only weakness, and it was necessary to make
him a well-wadded dressing-gown. But what a servant he was, clever, zealous,
indefatigable, not indiscreet, not talkative, and he might have been with reason
proposed as a model for all his biped brothers in the Old and the New World!

"As for that," said Pencroft, "when one has four hands at one's service, of
course one's work ought to be done so much the better!"

And indeed the intelligent creature did it well.


During the seven months which had passed since the last researches made
round the mountain, and during the month of September, which brought back
fine weather, nothing was heard of the genius of the island. His power was not
manifested in any way. It is true that it would have been inutile, for no incident
occurred to put the colonists to any painful trial.

Cyrus Harding even observed that if by chance the communication between
the unknown and the tenants of Granite House had ever been established through
the granite, and if Top's instinct had as it were felt it, there was no further sign of
it during this period. The dog's growling had entirely ceased, as well as the
uneasiness of the orang. The two friends--for they were so--no longer prowled
round the opening of the inner well, nor did they bark or whine in that singular
way which from the first the engineer had noticed. But could he be sure that this
was all that was to be said about this enigma, and that he should never arrive at a
solution? Could he be certain that some conjuncture would not occur which
would bring the mysterious personage on the scene? Who could tell what the
future might have in reserve?

At last the winter was ended, but an event, the consequences of which might
be serious, occurred in the first days of the returning spring.

On the 7th of September, Cyrus Harding, having observed the crater, saw
smoke curling round the summit of the mountain, its first vapours rising in the
air.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

THE AWAKENING OF THE VOLCANO--THE FINE SEASON--
CONTINUATION OF WORK--THE EVENING OF THE 15TH OF
OCTOBER--A TELEGRAM--A QUESTION--AN ANSWER-- DEPARTURE
FOR THE CORRAL--THE NOTICE--THE ADDITIONAL WIRE--THE
BASALT COAST--AT HIGH TIDE--AT LOW TIDE--THE CAVERN--A
DAZZLING LIGHT.

The colonists, warned by the engineer, left their work and gazed in silence at
the summit of Mount Franklin.

The volcano had awoke, and the vapour had penetrated the mineral layer
heaped up at the bottom of the crater. But would the subterranean fires provoke
any violent eruption? This was an event which could not be foreseen. However,
even while admitting the possibility of an eruption, it was not probable that the
whole of Lincoln Island would suffer from it. The flow of volcanic matter is not
always disastrous, and the island had already undergone this trial, as was shown
by the streams of lava hardened on the northern slopes of the mountain. Besides,


from the shape of the crater--the opening broken in the upper edge--the matter
would be thrown to the side opposite the fertile regions of the island.

However, the past did not necessarily answer for the future. Often, at the
summit of volcanoes, the old craters close and new ones open. This has occurred
in the two hemispheres--at Etna, Popocatepetl, at Orizaba-- and on the eve of an
eruption there is everything to be feared. In fact, an earthquake--a phenomenon
which often accompanies volcanic eruptions--is enough to change the interior
arrangement of a mountain, and to open new outlets for the burning lava.

Cyrus Harding explained these things to his companions, and, without
exaggerating the state of things, he told them all the pros and cons. After all they
could not prevent it. It did not appear likely that Granite House would be
threatened unless the ground was shaken by an earthquake. But the corral would
be in great danger should a new crater open in the southern side of Mount
Franklin.

From that day the smoke never disappeared from the top of the mountain,
and it could even be perceived that it increased in height and thickness, without
any flame mingling in its heavy volumes. The phenomenon was still
concentrated in the lower part of the central crater.

However, with the fine days work had been continued. The building of the
vessel was hastened as much as possible, and, by means of the waterfall on the
shore, Cyrus Harding managed to establish an hydraulic saw-mill, which rapidly
cut up the trunks of trees into planks and joists. The mechanism of this apparatus
was as simple as those used in the rustic saw-mills of Norway. A first horizontal
movement to move the piece of wood, a second vertical movement to move the
saw--this was all that was wanted; and the engineer succeeded by means of a
wheel, two cylinders, and pulleys properly arranged. Towards the end of the
month of September the skeleton of the vessel, which was to be rigged as a
schooner, lay in the dockyard. The ribs were almost entirely completed, and, all
the timbers having been sustained by a provisional band, the shape of the vessel
could already be seen. This schooner, sharp in the bows, very slender in the
after-part, would evidently be suitable for a long voyage, if wanted; but laying
the planking would still take a considerable time. Very fortunately, the iron-work
of the pirate brig had been saved after the explosion. From the planks and
injured ribs Pencroft and Ayrton had extracted the bolts and a large quantity of
copper nails. It was so much work saved for the smiths, but the carpenters had
much to do.

Ship-building was interrupted for a week for the harvest, the haymaking, and
the gathering in of the different crops on the plateau. This work finished, every
moment was devoted to finishing the schooner. When night came the workmen


were really quite exhausted. So as not to lose any time they had changed the
hours for their meals; they dined at twelve o'clock, and only had their supper
when daylight failed them. They then ascended to Granite House, when they
were always ready to go to bed.

Sometimes, however, when the conversation bore on some interesting
subject the hour for sleep was delayed for a time. The colonists then spoke of the
future, and talked willingly of the changes which a voyage in the schooner to
inhabited lands would make in their situation. But always, in the midst of these
plans, prevailed the thought of a subsequent return to Lincoln Island. Never
would they abandon this colony, founded with so much labour and with such
success, and to which a communication with America would afford a fresh
impetus. Pencroft and Neb especially hoped to end their days there.

"Herbert," said the sailor, "you will never abandon Lincoln Island?"

"Never, Pencroft, and especially if you make up your mind to stay there."

"That was made up long ago, my boy," answered Pencroft. "I shall expect
you. You will bring me your wife and children, and I shall make jolly little chaps
of your youngsters!"

"That's agreed," replied Herbert, laughing and blushing at the same time.

"And you, Captain Harding," resumed Pencroft enthusiastically, "you will be
still the governor of the island! Ah! how many inhabitants could it support? Ten
thousand at least!"

They talked in this way, allowing Pencroft to run on, and at last the reporter
actually started a newspaper--the New Lincoln Herald!

So is man's heart. The desire to perform a work which will endure, which
will survive him, is the origin of his superiority over all other living creatures
here below. It is this which has established his dominion, and this it is which
justifies it, over all the world.

After that, who knows if Jup and Top had not themselves their little dream of
the future.

Ayrton silently said to himself that he would like to see Lord Glenarvan
again and show himself to all restored.

One evening, on the 15th of October, the conversation was prolonged later
than usual. It was nine o'clock. Already, long badly-concealed yawns gave
warning of the hour of rest, and Pencroft was proceeding towards his bed, when
the electric bell, placed in the dining-room, suddenly rang.

All were there, Cyrus Harding, Gideon Spilett, Herbert, Ayrton, Pencroft,
Neb. Therefore none of the colonists were at the corral.

Cyrus Harding rose. His companions stared at each other, scarcely believing
their ears.


"What does that mean?" cried Neb. "Was it the devil who rang it?"

No one answered.

"The weather is stormy," observed Herbert. "Might not its influence of
electricity--"

Herbert did not finish his phrase. The engineer, towards whom all eyes were
turned, shook his head negatively.

"We must wait," said Gideon Spilett. "If it is a signal, whoever it may be who
has made it, he will renew it."

"But who do you think it is?" cried Neb. "Who?" answered Pencroft, "but he-


W


The sailor's sentence was cut short by a new tinkle of the bell.

Harding went to the apparatus, and sent this question to the corral:--

"What do you want?"

A few moments later the needle, moving on the alphabetic dial, gave this
reply to the tenants of Granite House:--

"Come to the corral immediately."

"At last!" exclaimed Harding.

Yes! At last! The mystery was about to be unveiled. The colonists’ fatigue
had disappeared before the tremendous interest which was about to urge them to
the corral, and all wish for rest had ceased. Without having uttered a word, in a
few moments they had left Granite House, and were standing on the beach. Jup
and Top alone were left behind. They could do without them.

The night was black. The new moon had disappeared at the same time as the
sun. As Herbert had observed great stormy clouds formed a lowering and heavy
vault, preventing any star rays. A few lightning-flashes, reflections from a distant
storm, illuminated the horizon.

It was possible that a few hours later the thunder would roll over the island
itself. The night was very threatening. But however deep the darkness was, it
would not prevent them from finding the familiar road to the corral.

They ascended the left bank of the Mercy, reached the plateau, passed the
bridge over Creek Glycerine, and advanced through the forest.

They walked at a good pace, a prey to the liveliest emotions. There was no
doubt but that they were now going to learn the long-searched-for answer to the
enigma, the name of that mysterious being, so deeply concemed in their life, so
generous in his influence, so powerful in his action! Must not this stranger have
indeed mingled with their existence, have known the smallest details, have heard
all that was said in Granite House, to have been able always to act in the very
nick of time?

Every one, wrapped up in his own reflections, pressed forward. Under the


arch of trees the darkness was such that the edge of the road even could not be
seen. Not a sound in the forest. Both animals and birds, influenced by the
heaviness of the atmosphere, remained motionless and silent. Not a breath
disturbed the leaves. The footsteps of the colonists alone resounded on the
hardened ground.

During the first quarter of an hour the silence was only interrupted by this
remark from Pencroft:--

"We ought to have brought a torch."

And by this reply from the engineer:--

"We shall find one at the corral."

Harding and his companions had left Granite House at twelve minutes past
nine. At forty-seven minutes past nine they had traversed three out of the five
miles which separated the mouth of the Mercy from the corral.

At that moment sheets of lightning spread over the island and illumined the
dark trees. The flashes dazzled and almost blinded them. Evidently the storm
would not be long in bursting forth.

The flashes gradually became brighter and more rapid. Distant thunder
growled in the sky. The atmosphere was stifling.

The colonists proceeded as if they were urged onwards by some irresistible
force.

At ten o'clock a vivid flash showed them the palisade, and as they reached
the gate the storm burst forth with tremendous fury.

In a minute the corral was crossed, and Harding stood before the hut.

Probably the house was occupied by the stranger, since it was from thence
that the telegram had been sent. However, no light shone through the window.

The engineer knocked at the door.

No answer.

Cyrus Harding opened the door, and the settlers entered the room, which was
perfectly dark. A light was struck by Neb, and in a few moments the lantern was
lighted and the light thrown into every corner of the room.

There was no one there. Everything was in the state in which it had been left.

"Have we been deceived by an illusion?" murmured Cyrus Harding.

No! that was not possible! The telegram had clearly said--

"Come to the corral immediately."

They approached the table specially devoted to the use of the wire.
Everything was in order--the pile and the box containing it, as well as all the
apparatus.

"Who came here the last time?" asked the engineer.

"I did, captain," answered Ayrton.


"And that was--"

"Four days ago."

"Ah! a note!" cried Herbert, pointing to a paper lying on the table.

On this paper were written these words in English:--

"Follow the new wire."

"Forward!" cried Harding, who understood that the despatch had not been
sent from the corral, but from the mysterious retreat, communicating directly
with Granite House by means of a supplementary wire joined to the old one.

Neb took the lighted lantern, and all left the corral. The storm then burst
forth with tremendous violence. The interval between each lightning-flash and
each thunder-clap diminished rapidly. The summit of the volcano, with its plume
of vapour, could be seen by occasional flashes.

There was no telegraphic communication in any part of the corral between
the house and the palisade; but the engineer, running straight to the first post,
saw by the light of a flash a new wire hanging from the isolater to the ground.

"There it is!" said he.

This wire lay along the ground, and was surrounded with an isolating
substance like a submarine cable, so as to assure the free transmission of the
current. It appeared to pass through the wood and the southern spurs of the
mountain, and consequently it ran towards the west.

"Follow it!" said Cyrus Harding.

And the settlers immediately pressed forward, guided by the wire.

The thunder continued to roar with such violence that not a word could be
heard. However, there was no occasion for speaking, but to get forward as fast as
possible.

Cyrus Harding and his companions then climbed the spur rising between the
corral valley and that of Falls River, which they crossed at its narrowest part.
The wire, sometimes stretched over the lower branches of the trees, sometimes
lying on the ground, guided them surely. The engineer had supposed that the
wire would perhaps stop at the bottom of the valley, and that the stranger's
retreat would be there.

Nothing of the sort. They were obliged to ascend the south-western spur, and
re-descend on that arid plateau terminated by the strangely-wild basalt cliff.
From time to time one of the colonists stooped down and felt for the wire with
his hands; but there was now no doubt that the wire was running directly towards
the sea. There, to a certainty, in the depths of those rocks, was the dwelling so
long sought for in vain.

The sky was literally on fire. Flash succeeded flash. Several struck the
summit of the volcano in the midst of the thick smoke. It appeared there as if the


mountain was vomiting flame. At a few minutes to eleven the colonists arrived
on the high cliff overlooking the ocean to the west. The wind had risen. The surf
roared 500 feet below.

Harding calculated that they had gone a mile and a half from the coral.

At this point the wire entered among the rocks, following the steep side of a
narrow ravine. The settlers followed it at the risk of occasioning a fall of the
slightly-balanced rocks, and being dashed into the sea. The descent was
extremely perilous, but they did not think of the danger; they were no longer
masters of themselves, and an irresistible attraction drew them towards this
mysterious place as the magnet draws iron.

Thus they almost unconsciously descended this ravine, which even in broad
daylight would have been considered impracticable.

The stones rolled and sparkled like fiery balls when they crossed through the
gleams of light. Harding was first--Ayrton last. On they went, step by step. Now
they slid over the slippery rock; then they struggled to their feet and scrambled
on.

At last the wire touched the rocks on the beach. The colonists had reached
the bottom of the basalt cliff.

There appeared a narrow ridge, running horizontally and parallel with the
sea. The settlers followed the wire along it. They had not gone a hundred paces
when the ridge by a moderate incline sloped down to the level of the sea.

The engineer seized the wire and found that it disappeared beneath the
waves.

His companions were stupefied.

A cry of disappointment, almost a cry of despair, escaped them! Must they
then plunge beneath the water and seek there for some submarine cavern? In
their excited state they would not have hesitated to do it.

The engineer stopped them.

He led his companions to a hollow in the rocks, and there--

"We must wait," said he. "The tide is high. At low-water the way will be
open."

"But what can make you think--" asked Pencroft.

"He would not have called us if the means had been wanting to enable us to
reach him!"

Cyrus Harding spoke in a tone of such thorough conviction that no objection
was raised. His remark, besides, was logical. It was quite possible that an
opening, practicable at low-water, though hidden now by the high tide, opened at
the foot of the cliff.

There was some time to wait. The colonists remained silently crouching in a


deep hollow. Rain now began to fall in torrents. The thunder was re-echoed
among the rocks with a grand sonorousness.

The colonists' emotion was great. A thousand strange and extraordinary ideas
crossed their brains, and they expected some grand and superhuman apparition,
which alone could come up to the notion they had formed of the mysterious
genius of the island.

At midnight, Harding, carrying the lantern, descended to the beach to
reconnoitre.

The engineer was not mistaken. The beginning of an immense excavation
could be seen under the water. There the wire, bending at a right angle, entered
the yawning gulf.

Cyrus Harding returned to his companions, and said simply--

"In an hour the opening will be practicable."

"Tt is there, then?" said Pencroft.

"Did you doubt it?" returned Harding.

"But this cavern must be filled with water to a certain height," observed
Herbert.

"Either the cavern will be completely dry," replied Harding, "and in that case
we can traverse it on foot, or it will not be dry, and some means of transport will
be put at our disposal."

An hour passed. All climbed down through the rain to the level of the sea.
There was now eight feet of the opening above the water. It was like the arch of
a bridge, under which rushed the foaming water.

Leaning forward, the engineer saw a black object floating on the water. He
drew it towards him. It was a boat, moored to some interior projection of the
cave. This boat was iron-plated. Two oars lay at the bottom.

"Jump in!" said Harding.

In a moment the settlers were in the boat. Neb and Ayrton took the oars,
Pencroft the rudder. Cyrus Harding in the bows, with the lantern, lighted the
way.

The elliptical roof, under which the boat at first passed, suddenly rose; but
the darkness was too deep, and the light of the lantern too slight, for either the
extent, length, height, or depth of the cave to be ascertained. Solemn silence
reigned in this basaltic cavern. Not a sound could penetrate into it, even the
thunder peals could not pierce its thick sides.

Such immense caves exist in various parts of the world, natural crypts dating
from the geological epoch of the globe. Some are filled by the sea; others
contain entire lakes in their sides. Such is Fingal's Cave, in the island of Staffa,
one of the Hebrides; such are the caves of Morgat, in the bay of Douarucuez, in


Brittany, the caves of Bonifacier, in Corsica, those of Lyse-Fjord, in Norway;
such are the immense Mammoth caverns in Kentucky, 500 feet in height, and
more than twenty miles in length! In many parts of the globe, nature has
excavated these caverns, and preserved them for the admiration of man.

Did the cavern which the settlers were now exploring extend to the centre of
the island? For a quarter of an hour the boat had been advancing, making
detours, indicated to Pencroft by the engineer in short sentences, when all at
once--

"More to the right!" he commanded. The boat, altering its course, came up
alongside the right wall. The engineer wished to see if the wire still ran along the
side. The wire was there fastened to the rock. "Forward!" said Harding.

And the two oars, plunging into the dark waters, urged the boat onwards.

On they went for another quarter of an hour, and a distance of half-a-mile
must have been cleared from the mouth of the cave, when Harding's voice was
again heard. "Stop!" said he.

The boat stopped, and the colonists perceived a bright light illuminating the
vast cavern, so deeply excavated in the bowels of the island, of which nothing
had ever led them to suspect the existence.

At a height of a hundred feet rose the vaulted roof, supported on basalt
shafts. Irregular arches, strange mouldings, appeared on the columns erected by
nature in thousands from the first epochs of the formation of the globe. The
basalt pillars, fitted one into the other, measured from forty to fifty feet in height,
and the water, calm in spite of the tumult outside, washing their base. The
brilliant focus of light, pointed out by the engineer, touched every point of rock,
and flooded the walls with light. By reflection the water reproduced the brilliant
sparkles, so that the boat appeared to be floating between two glittering zones.

They could not be mistaken in the nature of the irradiation thrown from the
centre light, whose clear rays broke all the angles, all the projections of the
cavern. This light proceeded from an electric source, and its white colour
betrayed its origin. It was the sun of this cave, and it filled it entirely.

At a sign from Cyrus Harding the oars again plunged into the water, causing
a regular shower of gems, and the boat was urged forward towards the light,
which was now not more than half a cable's length distant.

At this place the breadth of the sheet of water measured nearly 350 feet, and
beyond the dazzling centre could be seen an enormous basaltic wall, blocking up
any issue on that side. The cavern widened here considerably, the sea forming a
little lake. But the roof, the side walls, the end cliff, all the prisms, all the peaks,
were flooded with the electric fluid, so that the brilliancy belonged to them, and
as if the light issued from them.


In the centre of the lake a long cigar-shaped object floated on the surface of
the water, silent, motionless. The brilliancy which issued from it escaped from
its sides as from two kilns heated to a white heat. This apparatus, similar in
shape to an enormous whale, was about 250 feet long, and rose about ten or
twelve above the water.

The boat slowly approached it. Cyrus Harding stood up in the bows. He
gazed, a prey to violent excitement. Then, all at once, seizing the reporter's arm--

"It is he! It can only be he!" he cried, "he!--"

Then, falling back on the seat, he murmured a name which Gideon Spilett
alone could hear.

The reporter evidently knew this name, for it had a wonderful effect upon
him, and he answered in a hoarse voice--

"He! an outlawed man!"

"He!" said Harding.

At the engineer's command the boat approached this singular floating
apparatus. The boat touched the left side, from which escaped a ray of light
through a thick glass.

Harding and his companions mounted on the platform. An open hatchway
was there. All darted down the opening.

At the bottom of the ladder was a deck, lighted by electricity. At the end of
this deck was a door, which Harding opened.

A richly-ornamented room, quickly traversed by the colonists, was joined to
a library, over which a luminous ceiling shed a flood of light.

At the end of the library a large door, also shut, was opened by the engineer.

An immense saloon--a sort of museum, in which were heaped up, with all
the treasures of the mineral world, works of art, marvels of industry-- appeared
before the eyes of the colonists, who almost thought themselves suddenly
transported into a land of enchantment.

Stretched on a rich sofa they saw a man, who did not appear to notice their
presence.

Then Harding raised his voice, and to the extreme surprise of his
companions, he uttered these words--

"Captain Nemo, you asked for us! We are here."


CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

CAPTAIN NEMO--HIS FIRST WORDS--THE HISTORY OF THE
RECLUSE--HIS ADVENTURES--HIS SENTIMENTS--HIS COMRADES--
SUBMARINE LIFE--ALONE--THE LAST REFUGE OF THE NAUTILUS IN


LINCOLN ISLAND--THE MYSTERIOUS GENIUS OF THE ISLAND.

At these words the reclining figure rose, and the electric light fell upon his
countenance; a magnificent head, the forehead high, the glance commanding,
beard white, hair abundant and falling over the shoulders.

His hand rested upon the cushion of the divan from which he had just risen.
He appeared perfectly calm. It was evident that his strength had been gradually
undermined by illness, but his voice seemed yet powerful, as he said in English,
and in a tone which evinced extreme surprise--

"Sir, Ihave no name."

"Nevertheless, I know you!" replied Cyrus Harding.

Captain Nemo fixed his penetrating gaze upon the engineer as though he
were about to annihilate him.

Then, falling back amid the pillows of the divan--

"After all, what matters now?" he murmured; "I am dying!"

Cyrus Harding drew near the captain, and Gideon Spilett took his hand-- it
was of a feverish heat. Ayrton, Pencroft, Herbert, and Neb, stood respectfully
apart in an angle of the magnificent saloon, whose atmosphere was saturated
with the electric fluid.

Meanwhile Captain Nemo withdrew his hand, and motioned the engineer
and the reporter to be seated.

All regarded him with profound emotion. Before them they beheld that being
whom they had styled the "genius of the island," the powerful protector whose
intervention, in so many circumstances, had been so efficacious, the benefactor
to whom they owed such a debt of gratitude! Their eyes beheld a man only, and a
man at the point of death, where Pencroft and Neb had expected to find an
almost supernatural being!

But how happened it that Cyrus Harding had recognised Captain Nemo?
Why had the latter so suddenly risen on hearing this name uttered, a name which
he had believed known to none?

The captain had resumed his position on the divan, and leaning on his arm,
he regarded the engineer, seated near him.

"You know the name I formerly bore, sir?" he asked.

"I do," answered Cyrus Harding, "and also that of this wonderful submarine
vessel--"

"The Nautilus?" said the captain, with a faint smile.

"The Nautilus!"

"But do you--do you know who I am?"

"T do."

"It is nevertheless many years since I have held any communication with the


inhabited world; three long years have I passed in the depths of the sea, the only
place where I have found liberty! Who then can have betrayed my secret?"

"A man who was bound to you by no tie, Captain Nemo, and who,
consequently, cannot be accused of treachery."

"The Frenchman who was cast on board my vessel by chance sixteen years
since?"

"The same."

"He and his two companions did not then perish in the Maelstrom, in the
midst of which the Nautilus was struggling."

"They escaped, and a book has appeared under the title of Twenty Thousand
Leagues under the Sea, which contains your history."

"The history of a few months only of my life!" interrupted the captain
impetuously.

"It is true," answered Cyrus Harding, "but a few months of that strange life
have sufficed to make you known--"

"As a great criminal, doubtless!" said Captain Nemo, a haughty smile curling
his lips. "Yes, a rebel, perhaps an outlaw against humanity!"

The engineer was silent.

"Well, sir?"

"It is not for me to judge you, Captain Nemo," answered Cyrus Harding, "at
any rate as regards your past life. I am, with the rest of the world, ignorant of the
motives which induced you to adopt this strange mode of existence, and I cannot
judge of effects without knowing their causes; but what I do know is, that a
beneficent hand has constantly protected us since our arrival on Lincoln Island,
that we all owe our lives to a good, generous, and powerful being, and that this
being so powerful, good and generous, Captain Nemo, is yourself!"

"Tt is I," answered the captain simply.

The engineer and reporter rose. Their companions had drawn near, and the
gratitude with which their hearts were charged was about to express itself in their
gestures and words.

Captain Nemo stopped them by a sign, and in a voice which betrayed more
emotion than he doubtless intended to show.

"Wait till you have heard all," he said. [See Note 1.]

And the captain, in a few concise sentences, ran over the events of his life.

His narrative was short, yet he was obliged to summon up his whole
remaining energy to arrive at the end. He was evidently contending against
extreme weakness. Several times Cyrus Harding entreated him to repose for a
while, but he shook his head as a man to whom the morrow may never come,
and when the reporter offered his assistance--


"Tt is useless," he said; "my hours are numbered."

Captain Nemo was an Indian, the Prince Dakkar, son of a rajah of the then
independent territory of Bundelkund. His father sent him, when ten years of age,
to Europe, in order that he might receive an education in all respects complete,
and in the hopes that by his talents and knowledge he might one day take a
leading part in raising his long degraded and heathen country to a level with the
nations of Europe.

From the age of ten years to that of thirty Prince Dakkar, endowed by Nature
with her richest gifts of intellect, accumulated knowledge of every kind, and in
science, literature, and art his researches were extensive and profound.

He travelled over the whole of Europe. His rank and fortune caused him to
be everywhere sought after; but the pleasures of the world had for him no
attractions. Though young and possessed of every personal advantage, he was
ever grave--sombre even--devoured by an unquenchable thirst for knowledge,
and cherishing in the recesses of his heart the hope that he might become a great
and powerful ruler of a free and enlightened people.

Still, for long the love of science triumphed over all other feelings. He
became an artist deeply impressed by the marvels of art, a philosopher to whom
no one of the higher sciences was unknown, a statesman versed in the policy of
European courts. To the eyes of those who observed him superficially he might
have passed for one of those cosmopolitans, curious of knowledge, but
disdaining action; one of those opulent travellers, haughty and cynical, who
move incessantly from place to place, and are of no country.

This artist, this philosopher, this man was, however, still cherishing the hope
instilled into him from his earliest days.

Prince Dakkar returned to Bundelkund in the year 1849. He married a noble
Indian lady, who was imbued with an ambition not less ardent than that by which
he was inspired. Two children were born to them, whom they tenderly loved. But
domestic happiness did not prevent him from seeking to carry out the object at
which he aimed. He waited an opportunity. At length, as he vainly fancied, it
presented itself.

Instigated by princes equally ambitious and less sagacious and more
unscrupulous than he was, the people of India were persuaded that they might
successfully rise against their English rulers, who had brought them out of a state
of anarchy and constant warfare and misery, and had established peace and
prosperity in their country. Their ignorance and gross superstition made them the
facile tools of their designing chiefs.

In 1857 the great sepoy revolt broke out. Prince Dakkar, under the belief that
he should thereby have the opportunity of attaining the object of his long-


cherished ambition, was easily drawn into it. He forthwith devoted his talents
and wealth to the service of this cause. He aided it in person; he fought in the
front ranks; he risked his life equally with the humblest of the wretched and
misguided fanatics; he was ten times wounded in twenty engagements, seeking
death but finding it not, when at length the sanguinary rebels were utterly
defeated, and the atrocious mutiny was brought to an end.

Never before had the British power in India been exposed to such danger,
and if, as they had hoped, the sepoys had received assistance from without, the
influence and supremacy in Asia of the United Kingdom would have been a
thing of the past.

The name of Prince Dakkar was at that time well-known. He had fought
openly and without concealment. A price was set upon his head, but he managed
to escape from his pursuers.

Civilisation never recedes; the law of necessity ever forces it onwards. The
sepoys were vanquished, and the land of the rajahs of old fell again under the
rule of England.

Prince Dakkar, unable to find that death he courted, returned to the mountain
fastnesses of Bundelkund. There, alone in the world, overcome by
disappointment at the destruction of all his vain hopes, a prey to profound
disgust for all human beings, filled with hatred of the civilised world, he realised
the wreck of his fortune, assembled some score of his most faithful companions,
and one day disappeared, leaving no trace behind.

Where, then, did he seek that liberty denied him upon the inhabited earth?
Under the waves, in the depths of the ocean, where none could follow.

The warrior became the man of science. Upon a deserted island of the Pacific
he established his dockyard, and there a submarine vessel was constructed from
his designs. By methods which will at some future day be revealed he had
rendered subservient the illimitable forces of electricity, which, extracted from
inexhaustible sources, was employed for all the requirements of his floating
equipage, as a moving, lighting, and heating agent. The sea, with its countless
treasures, its myriads of fish, its numberless wrecks, its enormous mammalia,
and not only all that nature supplied, but also all that man had lost in its depths,
sufficed for every want of the prince and his crew--and thus was his most ardent
desire accomplished, never again to hold communication with the earth. He
named his submarine vessel the Nautilus, called himself simply Captain Nemo,
and disappeared beneath the seas.

During many years this strange being visited every ocean, from pole to pole.
Outcast of the inhabited earth in these unknown worlds he gathered incalculable
treasures. The millions lost in the Bay of Vigo, in 1702, by the galleons of Spain,


furnished him with a mine of inexhaustible riches which he devoted always,
anonymously, in favour of those nations who fought for the independence of
their country. [See Note 2.]

For long, however, he had held no communication with his fellow-creatures,
when, during the night of the 6th of November, 1866, three men were cast on
board his vessel. They were a French professor, his servant, and a Canadian
fisherman. These three men had been hurled overboard by a collision which had
taken place between the Nautilus and the United States frigate Abraham Lincoln,
which had chased her.

Captain Nemo learnt from this professor that the Nautilus, taken now for a
gigantic mammal of the whale species, now for a submarine vessel carrying a
crew of pirates, was sought for in every sea.

He might have returned these three men to the ocean, from whence chance
had brought them in contact with his mysterious existence. Instead of doing this
he kept them prisoners, and during seven months they were enabled to behold all
the wonders of a voyage of twenty thousand leagues under the sea.

One day, the 22nd of June, 1867, these three men, who knew nothing of the
past history of Captain Nemo, succeeded in escaping in one of the Nautilus's
boats. But as at this time the Nautilus was drawn into the vortex of the
Maelstrom, off the coast of Norway, the captain naturally believed that the
fugitives, engulfed in that frightful whirlpool, found their death at the bottom of
the abyss. He was ignorant that the Frenchman and his two companions had been
miraculously cast on shore, that the fishermen of the Loffoden Islands had
rendered them assistance, and that the professor, on his return to France, had
published that work in which seven months of the strange and eventful
navigation of the Nautilus were narrated and exposed to the curiosity of the
public.

For a long time after this, Captain Nemo continued to live thus, traversing
every sea. But one by one his companions died, and found their last resting-place
in their cemetery of coral, in the bed of the Pacific. At last Captain Nemo
remained the solitary survivor of all those who had taken refuge with him in the
depths of the ocean.

He was now sixty years of age. Although alone, he succeeded in navigating
the Nautilus towards one of those submarine caverns which had sometimes
served him as a harbour.

One of these ports was hollowed beneath Lincoln Island, and at this moment
furnished an asylum to the Nautilus.

The captain had now remained there six years, navigating the ocean no
longer, but awaiting death, and that moment when he should rejoin his former


companions, when by chance he observed the descent of the balloon which
carried the prisoners of the Confederates. Clad in his diving-dress he was
walking beneath the water at a few cables' length from the shore of the island,
when the engineer had been thrown into the sea. Moved by a feeling of
compassion the captain saved Cyrus Harding.

His first impulse was to fly from the vicinity of the five castaways; but his
harbour of refuge was closed, for in consequence of an elevation of the basalt,
produced by the influence of volcanic action, he could no longer pass through
the entrance of the vault. Though there was sufficient depth of water to allow a
light craft to pass the bar, there was not enough for the Nautilus, whose draught
of water was considerable.

Captain Nemo was compelled, therefore, to remain. He observed these men
thrown without resources upon a desert island, but had no wish to be himself
discovered by them. By degrees he became interested in their efforts when he
saw them honest, energetic, and bound to each other by the ties of friendship. As
if despite his wishes, he penetrated all the secrets of their existence. By means of
the diving-dress he could easily reach the well in the interior of Granite House,
and climbing by the projections of rock to its upper orifice he heard the colonists
as they recounted the past, and studied the present and future. He learnt from
them the tremendous conflict of America with America itself, for the abolition of
slavery. Yes, these men were worthy to reconcile Captain Nemo with that
humanity which they represented so nobly in the island.

Captain Nemo had saved Cyrus Harding. It was he also who had brought
back the dog to the Chimneys, who rescued Top from the waters of the lake, who
caused to fall at Flotsam Point the case containing so many things useful to the
colonists, who conveyed the canoe back into the stream of the Mercy, who cast
the cord from the top of Granite House at the time of the attack by the baboons,
who made known the presence of Ayrton upon Tabor Island, by means of the
document enclosed in the bottle, who caused the explosion of the brig by the
shock of a torpedo placed at the bottom of the canal, who saved Herbert from a
certain death by bringing the sulphate of quinine; and finally, it was he who had
killed the convicts with the electric balls, of which he possessed the secret, and
which he employed in the chase of submarine creatures. Thus were explained so
many apparently supernatural occurrences, and which all proved the generosity
and power of the captain.

Nevertheless, this noble misanthrope longed to benefit his proteges still
further. There yet remained much useful advice to give them, and, his heart
being softened by the approach of death, he invited, as we are aware, the
colonists of Granite House to visit the Nautilus, by means of a wire which


connected it with the corral. Possibly he would not have done this had he been
aware that Cyrus Harding was sufficiently acquainted with his history to address
him by the name of Nemo.

The captain concluded the narrative of his life. Cyrus Harding then spoke; he
recalled all the incidents which had exercised so beneficent an influence upon
the colony, and in the names of his companions and himself thanked the
generous being to whom they owed so much.

But Captain Nemo paid little attention; his mind appeared to be absorbed by
one idea, and without taking the proffered hand of the engineer--

"Now, sir," said he, "now that you know my history, your judgment!"

In saying this, the captain evidently alluded to an important incident
witnessed by the three strangers thrown on board his vessel, and which the
French professor had related in his work, causing a profound and terrible
sensation. Some days previous to the flight of the professor and his two
companions, the Nautilus, being chased by a frigate in the north of the Atlantic,
had hurled herself as a ram upon this frigate, and sunk her without mercy.

Cyrus Harding understood the captain's allusion, and was silent.

"It was an enemy's frigate," exclaimed Captain Nemo, transformed for an
instant into the Prince Dakkar, "an enemy's frigate! It was she who attacked me--
I was in a narrow and shallow bay--the frigate barred my way--and I sank her!"

A few moments of silence ensued; then the captain demanded--

"What think you of my life, gentlemen?"

Cyrus Harding extended his hand to the ci-devant prince and replied gravely,
"Sir, your error was in supposing that the past can be resuscitated, and in
contending against inevitable progress. It is one of those errors which some
admire, others blame; which God alone can judge. He who is mistaken in an
action which he sincerely believes to be right may be an enemy, but retains our
esteem. Your error is one that we may admire, and your name has nothing to fear
from the judgment of history, which does not condemn heroic folly, but its
results."

The old man's breast swelled with emotion, and raising his hand to heaven--

"Was I wrong, or in the right?" he murmured.

Cyrus Harding replied, "All great actions return to God, from whom they are
derived. Captain Nemo, we, whom you have succoured, shall ever mourn your
loss."

Herbert, who had drawn near the captain, fell on his knees and kissed his
hand.

A tear glistened in the eyes of the dying man. "My child," he said, "may God
bless you!"


Note 1. The history of Captain Nemo has, in fact, been published under the
title of Twenty Thousand Leagues under the Sea. Here, therefore, will apply the
observation already made as to the adventures of Ayrton with regard to the
discrepancy of dates. Readers should therefore refer to the note already
published on this point.

Note 2. This refers to the insurrection of the Candiotes, who were, in fact
largely assisted by Captain Nemo.


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

LAST MOMENTS OF CAPTAIN NEMO--WISHES OF THE DYING
MAN--A PARTING GIFT TO HIS FRIENDS OF A DAY--CAPTAIN NEMO'S
COFFIN--ADVICE TO THE COLONISTS-- THE SUPREME MOMENT--AT
THE BOTTOM OF THE SEA.

Day had returned. No ray of light penetrated into the profundity of the
cavern. It being high-water, the entrance was closed by the sea. But the artificial
light, which escaped in long streams from the skylights of the Nautilus, was as
vivid as before, and the sheet of water shone around the floating vessel.

An extreme exhaustion now overcame Captain Nemo, who had fallen back
upon the divan. It was useless to contemplate removing him to Granite House,
for he had expressed his wish to remain in the midst of those marvels of the
Nautilus which millions could not have purchased, and to await there for that
death which was swiftly approaching.

During a long interval of prostration, which rendered him almost
unconscious, Cyrus Harding and Gideon Spilett attentively observed the
condition of the dying man. It was apparent that his strength was gradually
diminishing. That frame, once so robust, was now but the fragile tenement of a
departing soul. All of life was concentrated in the heart and head.

The engineer and reporter consulted in whispers. Was it possible to render
any aid to the dying man? Might his life, if not saved, be prolonged for some
days? He himself had said that no remedy could avail, and he awaited with
tranquillity that death which had for him no terrors.

"We can do nothing," said Gideon Spilett.

"But of what is he dying?" asked Pencroft.

"Life is simply fading out," replied the reporter.

"Nevertheless," said the sailor, "if we moved him into the open air, and the
light of the sun, he might perhaps recover."


"No, Pencroft," answered the engineer, "it is useless to attempt it. Besides,
Captain Nemo would never consent to leave his vessel. He has lived for a dozen
years on board the Nautilus, and on board the Nautilus he desires to die."

Without doubt Captain Nemo heard Cyrus Harding's reply, for he raised
himself slightly, and in a voice more feeble, but always intelligible--

"You are right, sir," he said. "I shall die here--it is my wish; and therefore I
have a request to make of you."

Cyrus Harding and his companions had drawn near the divan, and now
arranged the cushions in such a manner as to better support the dying man.

They saw his eyes wander over all the marvels of this saloon, lighted by the
electric rays which fell from the arabesques of the luminous ceiling. He
surveyed, one after the other, the pictures hanging from the splendid tapestries of
the partitions, the chef-d'oeuvres of the Italian, Flemish, French, and Spanish
masters; the statues of marble and bronze on their pedestals; the magnificent
organ, leaning against the after-partition; the aquarium, in which bloomed the
most wonderful productions of the sea--marine plants, zoophytes, chaplets of
pearls of inestimable value; and, finally, his eyes rested on this device, inscribed
over the pediment of the museum--the motto of the Nautilus--

"Mobilis in mobile."

His glance seemed to rest fondly for the last time on these masterpieces of art
and of nature, to which he had limited his horizon during a sojourn of so many
years in the abysses of the seas.

Cyrus Harding respected the captain's silence, and waited till he should
speak.

After some minutes, during which, doubtless, he passed in review his whole
life, Captain Nemo turned to the colonists and said--

"You consider yourselves, gentlemen, under some obligations to me?"

"Captain, believe us that we would give our lives to prolong yours."

"Promise, then,” continued Captain Nemo, "to carry out my last wishes, and I
shall be repaid for all I have done for you."

"We promise," said Cyrus Harding.

And by this promise he bound both himself and his companions.

"Gentlemen," resumed the captain, "to-morrow I shall be dead."

Herbert was about to utter an exclamation, but a sign from the captain
arrested him.

"To-morrow I shall die, and I desire no other tomb than the Nautilus. It is my
grave! All my friends repose in the depths of the ocean; their resting-place shall
be mine."

These words were received with profound silence.


"Pay attention to my wishes,” he continued. "The Nautilus is imprisoned in
this grotto, the entrance of which is blocked up; but, although egress is
impossible, the vessel may at least sink in the abyss, and there bury my
remains."

The colonists listened reverently to the words of the dying man.

"To-morrow, after my death, Mr Harding," continued the captain, "yourself
and companions will leave the Nautilus, for all the treasures it contains must
perish with me. One token alone will remain with you of Prince Dakkar, with
whose history you are now acquainted. That coffer yonder contains diamonds of
the value of many millions, most of them mementoes of the time when, husband
and father, I thought happiness possible for me, and a collection of pearls
gathered by my friends and myself in the depths of the ocean. Of this treasure, at
a future day, you may make good use. In the hands of such men as yourself and
your comrades, Captain Harding, money will never be a source of danger. From
on high I shall still participate in your enterprises, and I fear not but that they
will prosper."

After a few moments’ repose, necessitated by his extreme weakness, Captain
Nemo continued--

"To-morrow you will take the coffer, you will leave the saloon, of which you
will close the door; then you will ascend onto the deck of the Nautilus, and you
will lower the main-hatch so as entirely to close the vessel."

"Tt shall be done, captain,” answered Cyrus Harding.

"Good. You will then embark in the canoe which brought you hither; but,
before leaving the Nautilus, go to the stern and there open two large stop-cocks
which you will find upon the waterline. The water will penetrate into the
reservoirs, and the Nautilus will gradually sink beneath the water to repose at the
bottom of the abyss."

And, comprehending a gesture of Cyrus Harding, the captain added--

"Fear nothing! You will but bury a corpse!"

Neither Cyrus Harding nor his companions ventured to offer any observation
to Captain Nemo. He had expressed his last wishes, and they had nothing to do
but to conform to them.

"I have your promise, gentlemen?" added Captain Nemo.

"You have, captain," replied the engineer.

The captain thanked the colonists by a sign, and requested them to leave him
for some hours. Gideon Spilett wished to remain near him, in the event of a
crisis coming on, but the dying man refused, saying, "I shall live until to-
morrow, sir."

All left the saloon, passed through the library and the dining-room, and


arrived forward, in the machine-room, where the electrical apparatus was
established, which supplied not only heat and light but the mechanical power of
the Nautilus.

The Nautilus was a masterpiece, containing masterpieces within itself, and
the engineer was struck with astonishment.

The colonists mounted the platform, which rose seven or eight feet above the
water. There they beheld a thick glass lenticular covering, which protected a kind
of large eye, from which flashed forth light. Behind this eye was apparently a
cabin containing the wheels of the rudder, and in which was stationed the
helmsman, when he navigated the Nautilus over the bed of the ocean, which the
electric rays would evidently light up to a considerable distance.

Cyrus Harding and his companions remained for a time silent, for they were
vividly impressed by what they had just seen and heard, and their hearts were
deeply touched by the thought that he whose arm had so often aided them, the
protector whom they had known but a few hours, was at the point of death.

Whatever might be the judgment pronounced by posterity upon the events of
this, so to speak, extra-human existence, the character of Prince Dakkar would
ever remain as one of those whose memory time can never efface.

"What a man!" said Pencroft. "Is it possible that he can have lived at the
bottom of the sea? And it seems to me that perhaps he has not found peace there
any more than elsewhere."

"The Nautilus," observed Ayrton, "might have enabled us to leave Lincoln
Island and reach some inhabited country."

"Good Heavens!" exclaimed Pencroft, "I for one would never risk myself in
such a craft. To sail on the seas, good; but under the seas, never!"

"I believe, Pencroft," answered the reporter, "that the navigation of a
submarine vessel such as the Nautilus ought to be very easy, and that we should
soon become accustomed to it. There would be no storms, no lee-shore to fear.
At some feet beneath the surface the waters of the ocean are as calm as those of
a lake."

"That may be," replied the sailor, "but I prefer a gale of wind on board a
well-found craft. A vessel is built to sail on the sea, and not beneath it."

"My friends," said the engineer, "it is useless, at any rate as regards the
Nautilus, to discuss the question of submarine vessels. The Nautilus is not ours,
and we have not the right to dispose of it. Moreover, we could in no case avail
ourselves of it. Independently of the fact that it would be impossible to get it out
of this cavern, whose entrance is now closed by the uprising of the basaltic
rocks, Captain Nemo's wish is that it shall be buried with him. His wish is our
law, and we will fulfil it."


After a somewhat prolonged conversation, Cyrus Harding and _ his
companions again descended to the interior of the Nautilus. There they took
some refreshment and returned to the saloon.

Captain Nemo had somewhat rallied from the prostration which had
overcome him, and his eyes shone with their wonted fire. A faint smile even
curled his lips.

The colonists drew around him.

"Gentlemen," said the captain, "you are brave and honest men. You have
devoted yourselves to the common weal. Often have I observed your conduct. I
have esteemed you--I esteem you still! Your hand, Mr Harding!"

Cyrus Harding gave his hand to the captain, who clasped it affectionately.

"Tt is well!" he murmured.

He resumed--

"But enough of myself. I have to speak concerning yourselves, and this
Lincoln Island, upon which you have taken refuge. You desire to leave it?"

"To return, captain!" answered Pencroft quickly.

"To return, Pencroft?" said the captain, with a smile. "I know, it is true, your
love for this island. You have helped to make it what it now is, and it seems to
you a paradise!"

"Our project, captain,” interposed Cyrus Harding, "is to annex it to the
United States, and to establish for our shipping a port so fortunately situated in
this part of the Pacific."

"Your thoughts are with your country, gentlemen," continued the captain;
"your toils are for her prosperity and glory. You are right. One's native land!--
there should one live! there die! And I! I die far from all I loved!"

"You have some last wish to transmit," said the engineer with emotion,
"some souvenir to send to those friends you have left in the mountains of India?"

"No, Captain Harding; no friends remain to me! I am the last of my race, and
to all whom I have known I have long been as are the dead.-- But to return to
yourselves. Solitude, isolation, are painful things, and beyond human endurance.
I die of having thought it possible to live alone! You should, therefore, dare all in
the attempt to leave Lincoln Island, and see once more the land of your birth. I
am aware that those wretches have destroyed the vessel you had built."

"We propose to construct a vessel," said Gideon Spilett, "sufficiently large to
convey us to the nearest land; but if we should succeed, sooner or later we shall
return to Lincoln Island. We are attached to it by too many recollections ever to
forget it."

"Tt is here that we have known Captain Nemo," said Cyrus Harding.

"It is here only that we can make our home!" added Herbert.


"And here shall I sleep the sleep of eternity, if--" replied the captain.

He paused for a moment, and, instead of completing the sentence, said
simply--

"Mr Harding, I wish to speak with you--alone!"

The engineer's companions, respecting the wish of the dying man, retired.

Cyrus Harding remained but a few minutes alone with Captain Nemo, and
soon recalled his companions; but he said nothing to them of the private matters
which the dying man had confided to him.

Gideon Spilett now watched the captain with extreme care. It was evident
that he was no longer sustained by his moral energy, which had lost the power of
reaction against his physical weakness.

The day closed without change. The colonists did not quit the Nautilus for a
moment. Night arrived, although it was impossible to distinguish it from day in
the cavern.

Captain Nemo suffered no pain, but he was visibly sinking. His noble
features, paled by the approach of death, were perfectly calm. Inaudible words
escaped at intervals from his lips, bearing upon various incidents of his
chequered career. Life was evidently ebbing slowly, and his extremities were
already cold.

Once or twice more he spoke to the colonists who stood around him, and
smiled on them with that last smile which continues after death.

At length, shortly after midnight, Captain Nemo by a supreme effort
succeeded in folding his arms across his breast, as if wishing in that attitude to
compose himself for death.

By one o'clock his glance alone showed signs of life. A dying light gleamed
in those eyes once so brilliant. Then, murmuring the words, "God and my
country!" he quietly expired.

Cyrus Harding, bending low, closed the eyes of him who had once been the
Prince Dakkar, and was now not even Captain Nemo.

Herbert and Pencroft sobbed aloud. Tears fell from Ayrton's eyes. Neb was
on his knees by the reporter's side, motionless as a statue.

Then Cyrus Harding, extending his hand over the forehead of the dead, said
solemnly--

"May his soul be with God! Let us pray!"

Some hours later the colonists fulfilled the promise made to the captain by
carrying out his dying wishes.

Cyrus Harding and his companions quitted the Nautilus, taking with them the
only memento left them by their benefactor, that coffer which contained wealth
amounting to millions.


The marvellous saloon, still flooded with light, had been carefully closed.
The iron door leading on deck was then securely fastened in such a manner as to
prevent even a drop of water from penetrating to the interior of the Nautilus.

The colonists then descended into the canoe, which was moored to the side
of the submarine vessel.

The canoe was now brought round to the stern. There, at the waterline, were
two large stop-cocks, communicating with the reservoirs employed in the
submersion of the vessel.

The stop-cocks were opened, the reservoirs filled, and the Nautilus, slowly
sinking, disappeared beneath the surface of the lake.

But the colonists were yet able to follow its descent through the waves. The
powerful light it gave forth lighted up the translucent water, while the cavern
became gradually obscure. At length this vast effusion of electric light faded
away, and soon after the Nautilus, now the tomb of Captain Nemo, reposed in its
ocean bed.


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

REFLECTIONS OF THE COLONISTS--THEIR LABOURS OF
RECONSTRUCTION RESUMED-- THE 1ST OF JANUARY 1869--A CLOUD
OVER THE SUMMIT OF THE VOLCANO--FIRST WARNINGS OF AN
ERUPTION--AYRTON AND CYRUS HARDING AT THE CORRAL--
EXPLORATION OF THE DAKKAR GROTTO--WHAT CAPTAIN NEMO
HAD CONFIDED TO THE ENGINEER.

At break of day the colonists regained in silence the entrance of the cavern,
to which they gave the name of "Dakkar Grotto," in memory of Captain Nemo.
It was now low-water, and they passed without difficulty under the arcade,
washed on the right by the sea.

The canoe was left here, carefully protected from the waves. As an excess of
precaution, Pencroft, Neb, and Ayrton drew it up on a little beach which
bordered one of the sides of the grotto, in a spot where it could run no risk of
harm.

The storm had ceased during the night. The last low mutterings of the
thunder died away in the west. Rain fell no longer, but the sky was yet obscured
by clouds. On the whole, this month of October, the first of the southern spring,
was not ushered in by satisfactory tokens, and the wind had a tendency to shift
from one point of the compass to another, which rendered it impossible to count
upon settled weather.

Cyrus Harding and his companions, on leaving Dakkar Grotto, had taken the


road to the corral. On their way Neb and Herbert were careful to preserve the
wire which had been laid down by the captain between the corral and the grotto,
and which might at a future time be of service.

The colonists spoke but little on the road. The various incidents of the night
of the 15th October had left a profound impression on their minds. The unknown
being whose influence had so effectually protected them, the man whom their
imagination had endowed with supernatural powers, Captain Nemo, was no
more. His Nautilus and he were buried in the depths of the abyss. To each one of
them their existence seemed even more isolated than before. They had been
accustomed to count upon the intervention of that power which existed no
longer, and Gideon Spilett, and even Cyrus Harding, could not escape this
impression. Thus they maintained a profound silence during their journey to the
corral.

Towards nine in the morning the colonists arrived at Granite House.

It had been agreed that the construction of the vessel should be actively
pushed forward, and Cyrus Harding more than ever devoted his time and labour
to this object. It was impossible to divine what future lay before them. Evidently
the advantage to the colonists would be great of having at their disposal a
substantial vessel, capable of keeping the sea even in heavy weather, and large
enough to attempt, in case of need, a voyage of some duration. Even if, when
their vessel should be completed, the colonists should not resolve to leave
Lincoln Island as yet, in order to gain either one of the Polynesian archipelagos
of the Pacific or the shores of New Zealand, they might at least, sooner or later,
proceed to Tabor Island, to leave there the notice relating to Ayrton. This was a
precaution rendered indispensable by the possibility of the Scotch yacht
reappearing in those seas, and it was of the highest importance that nothing
should be neglected on this point.

The works were then resumed. Cyrus Harding, Pencroft, and Ayrton, assisted
by Neb, Gideon Spilett, and Herbert, except when unavoidably called off by
other necessary occupations, worked without cessation. It was important that the
new vessel should be ready in five months--that is to say, by the beginning of
March--if they wished to visit Tabor Island before the equinoctial gales rendered
the voyage impracticable. Therefore the carpenters lost not a moment. Moreover,
it was unnecessary to manufacture rigging, that of the Speedy having been saved
entire, so that the hull only of the vessel needed to be constructed.

The end of the year 1868 found them occupied by these important labours, to
the exclusion of almost all others. At the expiration of two months and a half the
ribs had been set up and the first planks adjusted. It was already evident that the
plans made by Cyrus Harding were admirable, and that the vessel would behave


well at sea.

Pencroft brought to the task a devouring energy, and scrupled not to grumble
when one or the other abandoned the carpenter's axe for the gun of the hunter. It
was nevertheless necessary to keep up the stores of Granite House, in view of
the approaching winter. But this did not satisfy Pencroft. The brave honest sailor
was not content when the workmen were not at the dockyard. When this
happened he grumbled vigorously, and, by way of venting his feelings, did the
work of six men.

The weather was very unfavourable during the whole of the summer season.
For some days the heat was overpowering, and the atmosphere, saturated with
electricity, was only cleared by violent storms. It was rarely that the distant
growling of the thunder could not be heard, like a low but incessant murmur,
such as is produced in the equatorial regions of the globe.

The ist of January, 1869, was signalised by a storm of extreme violence, and
the thunder burst several times over the island. Large trees were struck by the
electric fluid and shattered, and among others one of those gigantic micocouliers
which shaded the poultry-yard at the southern extremity of the lake. Had this
meteor any relation to the phenomena going on in the bowels of the earth? Was
there any connection between the commotion of the atmosphere and that of the
interior of the earth? Cyrus Harding was inclined to think that such was the case,
for the development of these storms was attended by the renewal of volcanic
symptoms.

It was on the 3rd of January that Herbert, having ascended at daybreak to the
plateau of Prospect Heights to harness one of the onagas, perceived an enormous
hat-shaped cloud rolling from the summit of the volcano.

Herbert immediately apprised the colonists, who at once joined him in
watching the summit of Mount Franklin.

"Ah!" exclaimed Pencroft, "those are not vapours this time! It seems to me
that the giant is not content with breathing; he must smoke!"

This figure of speech employed by the sailor exactly expressed the changes
going on at the mouth of the volcano. Already for three months had the crater
emitted vapours more or less dense, but which were as yet produced only by an
internal ebullition of mineral substances. But now the vapours were replaced by
a thick smoke, rising in the form of a greyish column, more than three hundred
feet in width at its base, and which spread like an immense mushroom to a
height of from seven to eight hundred feet above the summit of the mountain.

"The fire is in the chimney," observed Gideon Spilett.

"And we can't put it out!" replied Herbert.

"The volcano ought to be swept," observed Neb, who spoke as if perfectly


serious.

"Well said, Neb!" cried Pencroft, with a shout of laughter; "and you'll
undertake the job, no doubt?"

Cyrus Harding attentively observed the dense smoke emitted by Mount
Franklin, and even listened, as if expecting to hear some distant muttering. Then,
turning towards his companions, from whom he had gone somewhat apart, he
said--

"The truth is, my friends, we must not conceal from ourselves that an
important change is going forward. The volcanic substances are no longer in a
state of ebullition, they have caught fire, and we are undoubtedly menaced by an
approaching eruption."

"Well, captain,” said Pencroft, "we shall witness the eruption; and if it is a
good one, we'll applaud it. I don't see that we need concern ourselves further
about the matter."

"It may be so," replied Cyrus Harding, "for the ancient track of the lava is
still open; and thanks to this, the crater has hitherto overflowed towards the
north. And yet--"

"And yet, as we can derive no advantage from an eruption, it might be better
it should not take place," said the reporter.

"Who knows?" answered the sailor. "Perhaps there may be some valuable
substance in this volcano, which it will spout forth, and which we may turn to
good account!"

Cyrus Harding shook his head with the air of a man who augured no good
from the phenomenon whose developments had been so sudden. He did not
regard so lightly as Pencroft the results of an eruption. If the lava, in
consequence of the position of the crater, did not directly menace the wooded
and cultivated parts of the island, other complications might present themselves.
In fact, eruptions are not unfrequently accompanied by earthquakes; and an
island of the nature of Lincoln Island formed of substances so varied, basalt on
one side, granite on the other, lava on the north, rich soil on the south, substances
which consequently could not be firmly attached to each other, would be
exposed to the risk of disintegration. Although, therefore, the spreading of the
volcanic matter might not constitute a serious danger, any movement of the
terrestrial structure which should shake the island might entail the gravest
consequences.

"Tt seems to me,” said Ayrton, who had reclined so as to place his ear to the
ground, "it seems to me that I can hear a dull, rumbling sound, like that of a
wagon loaded with bars of iron."

The colonists listened with the greatest attention, and were convinced that


Ayrton was not mistaken. The rumbling was mingled with a subterranean roar,
which formed a sort of rinforzando, and died slowly away, as if some violent
storm had passed through the profundities of the globe. But no explosion,
properly so termed, could be heard. It might therefore be concluded that the
vapours and smoke found a free passage through the central shaft; and that the
safety-valve being sufficiently large, no convulsion would be produced, no
explosion was to be apprehended.

"Well, then!" said Pencroft, "are we not going back to work? Let Mount
Franklin smoke, groan, bellow, or spout forth fire and flame as much as it
pleases, that is no reason why we should be idle! Come, Ayrton, Neb, Herbert,
Captain Harding, Mr Spilett, every one of us must turn to at our work to-day! We
are going to place the keelson, and a dozen pair of hands would not be too many.
Before two months I want our new Bonadventure--for we shall keep the old
name, shall we not?--to float on the waters of Port Balloon! Therefore there is
not an hour to lose!"

All the colonists, their services thus requisitioned by Pencroft, descended to
the dockyard, and proceeded to place the keelson, a thick mass of wood which
forms the lower portion of a ship and unites firmly the timbers of the hull. It was
an arduous undertaking, in which all took part.

They continued their labours during the whole of this day, the 3rd of January,
without thinking further of the volcano, which could not, besides, be seen from
the shore of Granite House. But once or twice, large shadows, veiling the sun,
which described its diurnal arc through an extremely clear sky, indicated that a
thick cloud of smoke passed between its disc and the island. The wind, blowing
on the shore, carried all these vapours to the westward. Cyrus Harding and
Gideon Spilett remarked these sombre appearances, and from time to time
discussed the evident progress of the volcanic phenomena, but their work went
on without interruption. It was, besides, of the first importance from every point
of view, that the vessel should be finished with the least possible delay. In
presence of the eventualities which might arise, the safety of the colonists would
be to a great extent secured by their ship. Who could tell that it might not prove
some day their only refuge?

In the evening, after supper, Cyrus Harding, Gideon Spilett, and Herbert,
again ascended the plateau of Prospect Heights. It was already dark, and the
obscurity would permit them to ascertain if flames or incandescent matter
thrown up by the volcano were mingled with the vapour and smoke accumulated
at the mouth of the crater.

"The crater is on fire!" said Herbert, who, more active than his companions,
first reached the plateau.


Mount Franklin, distant about six miles, now appeared like a gigantic torch,
around the summit of which turned fuliginous flames. So much smoke, and
possibly scoriae and cinders were mingled with them, that their light gleamed
but faintly amid the gloom of the night. But a kind of lurid brilliancy spread over
the island, against which stood out confusedly the wooded masses of the heights.
Immense whirlwinds of vapour obscured the sky, through which glimmered a
few stars.

"The change is rapid!" said the engineer. "That is not surprising," answered
the reporter. "The re-awakening of the volcano already dates back some time.
You may remember, Cyrus, that the first vapours appeared about the time we
searched the sides of the mountain to discover Captain Nemo's retreat. It was, if I
mistake not, about the 15th of October."

"Yes," replied Herbert, "two months and a half ago!"

"The subterranean fires have therefore been smouldering for ten weeks,"
resumed Gideon Spilett, "and it is not to be wondered at that they now break out
with such violence!"

"Do not you feel a certain vibration of the soil?" asked Cyrus Harding.

"Yes," replied Gideon Spilett, "but there is a great difference between that
and an earthquake."

"I do not affirm that we are menaced with an earthquake," answered Cyrus
Harding, "may God preserve us from that! No; these vibrations are due to the
effervescence of the central fire. The crust of the earth is simply the shell of a
boiler, and you know that such a shell, under the pressure of steam, vibrates like
a sonorous plate. It is this effect which is being produced at this moment."

"What magnificent flames!" exclaimed Herbert.

At this instant a kind of bouquet of flames shot forth from the crater, the
brilliancy of which was visible even through the vapours. Thousands of
luminous sheets and barbed tongues of fire were cast in various directions.
Some, extending beyond the dome of smoke, dissipated it, leaving behind an
incandescent powder. This was accompanied by successive explosions,
resembling the discharge of a battery of mitrailleuses.

Cyrus Harding, the reporter, and Herbert, after spending an hour on the
plateau of Prospect Heights, again descended to the beach, and returned to
Granite House. The engineer was thoughtful and preoccupied, so much so,
indeed, that Gideon Spilett inquired if he apprehended any immediate danger, of
which the eruption might directly or indirectly be the cause.

"Yes, and no," answered Cyrus Harding.

"Nevertheless," continued the reporter, "would not the greatest misfortune
which could happen to us be an earthquake which would overturn the island?


Now, I do not suppose that this is to be feared, since the vapours and lava have
found a free outlet."

"True," replied Cyrus Harding, "and I do not fear an earthquake in the sense
in which the term is commonly applied to convulsions of the soil provoked by
the expansion of subterranean gases. But other causes may produce great
disasters."

"How so, my dear Cyrus?"

"I am not certain. I must consider. I must visit the mountain. In a few days I
shall learn more on this point."

Gideon Spilett said no more, and soon, in spite of the explosions of the
volcano, whose intensity increased, and which were repeated by the echoes of
the island, the inhabitants of Granite House were sleeping soundly.

Three days passed by--the 4th, 5th, and 6th of January. The construction of
the vessel was diligently continued, and without offering further explanations the
engineer pushed forward the work with all his energy. Mount Franklin was now
hooded by a sombre cloud of sinister aspect, and, amid the flames, vomited forth
incandescent rocks, some of which fell back into the crater itself. This caused
Pencroft, who would only look at the matter in the light of a joke, to exclaim--

"Ah! the giant is playing at cup and ball; he is a conjuror."

In fact, the substances thrown up fell back again into the abyss, and it did not
seem that the lava, though swollen by the internal pressure, had yet risen to the
orifice of the crater. At any rate, the opening on the north-east, which was partly
visible, poured out no torrent upon the northern slope of the mountain.

Nevertheless, however pressing was the construction of the vessel, other
duties demanded the presence of the colonists on various portions of the island.
Before everything it was necessary to go to the corral, where the flocks of
musmons and goats were enclosed, and replenish the provision of forage for
those animals. It was accordingly arranged that Ayrton should proceed thither the
next day, the 7th of January; and as he was sufficient for the task, to which he
was accustomed, Pencroft and the rest were somewhat surprised on hearing the
engineer say to Ayrton--

"As you are going to-morrow to the corral I will accompany you."

"But, Captain Harding," exclaimed the sailor, "our working days will not be
many, and if you go also we shall be two pair of hands short!"

"We shall return to-morrow," replied Cyrus Harding, "but it is necessary that
I should go to the corral. I must learn how the eruption is progressing."

"The eruption! always the eruption!" answered Pencroft, with an air of
discontent. "An important thing, truly, this eruption! I trouble myself very little
about it."


Whatever might be the sailor's opinion, the expedition projected by the
engineer was settled for the next day. Herbert wished to accompany Cyrus
Harding, but he would not vex Pencroft by his absence.

The next day, at dawn, Cyrus Harding and Ayrton, mounting the cart drawn
by two onagas, took the road to the corral and set off at a round trot.

Above the forest were passing large clouds, to which the crater of Mount
Franklin incessantly added fuliginous matter. These clouds, which rolled heavily
in the air, were evidently composed of heterogeneous substances. It was not
alone from the volcano that they derived their strange opacity and weight.
Scorias, in a state of dust, like powdered pumice-stone, and greyish ashes as
small as the finest feculae, were held in suspension in the midst of their thick
folds. These ashes are so fine that they have been observed in the air for whole
months. After the eruption of 1783 in Iceland for upwards of a year the
atmosphere was thus charged with volcanic dust through which the rays of the
sun were only with difficulty discernible.

But more often this pulverised matter falls, and this happened on the present
occasion. Cyrus Harding and Ayrton had scarcely reached the corral when a sort
of black snow like fine gunpowder fell, and instantly changed the appearance of
the soil. Trees, meadows, all disappeared beneath a covering several inches in
depth. But, very fortunately, the wind blew from the north-east, and the greater
part of the cloud dissolved itself over the sea.

"This is very singular, Captain Harding," said Ayrton.

"It is very serious," replied the engineer. "This powdered pumice-stone, all
this mineral dust, proves how grave is the convulsion going forward in the lower
depths of the volcano."

"But can nothing be done?"

"Nothing, except to note the progress of the phenomenon. Do you, therefore,
Ayrton, occupy yourself with the necessary work at the corral. In the meantime I
will ascend just beyond the source of Red Creek and examine the condition of
the mountain upon its northern aspect. Then--"

"Well, Captain Harding?"

"Then we will pay a visit to Dakkar Grotto. I wish to inspect it. At any rate I
will come back for you in two hours."

Ayrton then proceeded to enter the corral, and, while waiting the engineer's
return, busied himself with the musmons and goats, which seemed to feel a
certain uneasiness in presence of these first signs of an eruption.

Meanwhile Cyrus Harding ascended the crest of the eastern spur, passed Red
Creek, and arrived at the spot where he and his companions had discovered a
sulphureous spring at the time of their first exploration.


How changed was everything! Instead of a single column of smoke he
counted thirteen, forced through the soil as if violently propelled by some piston.
It was evident that the crust of the earth was subjected in this part of the globe to
a frightful pressure. The atmosphere was saturated with gases and carbonic acid,
mingled with aqueous vapours. Cyrus Harding felt the volcanic tufa with which
the plain was strewn, and which were but pulverised cinders hardened into solid
blocks by time, tremble beneath him, but he could discover no traces of fresh
lava.

The engineer became more assured of this when he observed all the northern
part of Mount Franklin. Pillars of smoke and flame escaped from the crater; a
hail of scorias fell on the ground; but no current of lava burst from the mouth of
the volcano, which proved that the volcanic matter had not yet attained the level
of the superior orifice of the central shaft.

"But I would prefer that it were so," said Cyrus Harding to himself. "At any
rate, I should then know that the lava had followed its accustomed track. Who
can say that they may not take a new course? But the danger does not consist in
that! Captain Nemo foresaw it clearly! No, the danger does not lie there!"

Cyrus Harding advanced towards the enormous causeway whose
prolongation enclosed the narrow Shark Gulf. He could now sufficiently
examine on this side the ancient channels of the lava. There was no doubt in his
mind that the most recent eruption had occurred at a far-distant epoch.

He then returned by the same way, listening attentively to the subterranean
mutterings which rolled like long-continued thunder, interrupted by deafening
explosions. At nine in the morning he reached the corral.

Ayrton awaited him.

"The animals are cared for, Captain Harding," said Ayrton.

"Good, Ayrton."

"They seem uneasy, Captain Harding."

"Yes, instinct speaks through them, and instinct is never deceived."

"Are you ready?"

"Take a lamp, Ayrton," answered the engineer; "we will start at once."

Ayrton did as desired. The onagas, unharnessed, roamed in the corral. The
gate was secured on the outside, and Cyrus Harding, preceding Ayrton, took the
narrow path which led westward to the shore.

The soil they walked upon was choked with the pulverised matter fallen from
the cloud. No quadruped appeared in the woods. Even the birds had fled.
Sometimes a passing breeze raised the covering of ashes, and the two colonists,
enveloped in a whirlwind of dust, lost sight of each other. They were then careful
to cover their eyes and mouths with handkerchiefs, for they ran the risk of being


blinded and suffocated.

It was impossible for Cyrus Harding and Ayrton, with these impediments, to
make rapid progress. Moreover, the atmosphere was close, as if the oxygen had
been partly burnt up, and had become unfit for respiration. At every hundred
paces they were obliged to stop to take breath. It was therefore past ten o'clock
when the engineer and his companion reached the crest of the enormous mass of
rocks of basalt and porphyry which composed the north-west coast of the island.

Ayrton and Cyrus Harding commenced the descent of this abrupt declivity,
following almost step for step the difficult path which, during that stormy night,
had led them to Dakkar Grotto. In open day the descent was less perilous, and,
besides, the bed of ashes which covered the polished surface of the rock enabled
them to make their footing more secure.

The ridge at the end of the shore, about forty feet in height, was soon
reached. Cyrus Harding recollected that this elevation gradually sloped towards
the level of the sea. Although the tide was at present low, no beach could be
seen, and the waves, thickened by the volcanic dust, beat upon the basaltic rocks.

Cyrus Harding and Ayrton found without difficulty the entrance to Dakkar
Grotto, and paused for a moment at the last rock before it.

"The iron boat should be there,” said the engineer.

"It is here, Captain Harding," replied Ayrton, drawing towards him the
fragile craft, which was protected by the arch of a vault.

"On board, Ayrton!"

The two colonists stepped into the boat. A slight undulation of the waves
carried it farther under the low arch of the crypt, and there Ayrton, with the aid
of flint and steel, lighted the lamp. He then took the oars, and the lamp having
been placed in the bow of the boat, so that its rays fell before them, Cyrus
Harding took the helm and steered through the shades of the grotto.

The Nautilus was there no longer to illuminate the cavern with its electric
light. Possibly it might not yet be extinguished, but no ray escaped from the
depths of the abyss in which reposed all that was mortal of Captain Nemo.

The light afforded by the lamp, although feeble, nevertheless enabled the
engineer to advance slowly, following the wall of the cavern. A deathlike silence
reigned under the vaulted roof, or at least in the anterior portion, for soon Cyrus
Harding distinctly heard the rumbling which proceeded from the bowels of the
mountain.

"That comes from the volcano," he said.

Besides these sounds, the presence of chemical combinations was soon
betrayed by their powerful odour, and the engineer and his companion were
almost suffocated by sulphureous vapours.


"This is what Captain Nemo feared," murmured Cyrus Harding, changing
countenance. "We must go to the end, notwithstanding."

"Forward!" replied Ayrton, bending to his oars and directing the boat towards
the head of the cavern.

Twenty-five minutes after entering the mouth of the grotto the boat reached
the extreme end.

Cyrus Harding then, standing up, cast the light of the lamp upon the walls of
the cavern which separated it from the central shaft of the volcano. What was the
thickness of this wall? It might be ten feet or a hundred feet--it was impossible to
say. But the subterranean sounds were too perceptible to allow of the supposition
that it was of any great thickness.

The engineer, after having explored the wall at a certain height horizontally,
fastened the lamp to the end of an oar, and again surveyed the basaltic wall at a
greater elevation.

There, through scarcely visible clefts and joinings, escaped a pungent
vapour, which infected the atmosphere of the cavern. The wall was broken by
large cracks, some of which extended to within two or three feet of the water's
edge.

Cyrus Harding thought for a brief space. Then he said in a low voice--

"Yes! the captain was right! The danger lies there, and a terrible danger!"

Ayrton said not a word, but, upon a sign from Cyrus Harding, resumed the
oars, and half an hour later the engineer and he reached the entrance of Dakkar
Grotto.


CHAPTER NINETEEN.

CYRUS HARDING GIVES AN ACCOUNT OF HIS EXPLORATION--
THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE SHIP PUSHED FORWARD--A LAST VISIT
TO THE CORRAL--THE BATTLE BETWEEN FIRE AND WATER--ALL
THAT REMAINS OF THE ISLAND--IT IS DECIDED TO LAUNCH THE
VESSEL--THE NIGHT OF THE 8TH OF MARCH.

The next day, the 8th of January, after a day and night passed at the corral,
where they left all in order, Cyrus Harding and Ayrton arrived at Granite House.

The engineer immediately called his companions together, and informed
them of the imminent danger which threatened Lincoln Island, and from which
no human power could deliver them.

"My friends," he said, and his voice betrayed the depth of his emotion, "our
island is not among those which will endure while this earth endures. It is
doomed to more or less speedy destruction, the cause of which it bears within


itself, and from which nothing can save it."

The colonists looked at each other, then at the engineer. They did not clearly
comprehend him.

"Explain yourself, Cyrus!" said Gideon Spilett.

"I will do so," replied Cyrus Harding, "or rather I will simply afford you the
explanation which, during our few minutes of private conversation, was given
me by Captain Nemo."

"Captain Nemo!" exclaimed the colonists.

"Yes, and it was the last service he desired to render us before his death!"

"The last service!" exclaimed Pencroft, "the last service! You will see that
though he is dead he will render us others yet!"

"But what did the captain say?" inquired the reporter.

"I will tell you, my friends," said the engineer. "Lincoln Island does not
resemble the other islands of the Pacific, and a fact of which Captain Nemo has
made me cognisant must sooner or later bring about the subversion of its
foundation."

"Nonsense! Lincoln Island, it can't be!" cried Pencroft, who, in spite of the
respect he felt for Cyrus Harding, could not prevent a gesture of incredulity.

"Listen, Pencroft," resumed the engineer, "I will tell you what Captain Nemo
communicated to me, and which I myself confirmed yesterday, during the
exploration of Dakkar Grotto. This cavern stretches under the island as far as the
volcano, and is only separated from its central shaft by the wall which terminates
it. Now, this wall is seamed with fissures and clefts which already allow the
sulphureous gases generated in the interior of the volcano to escape."

"Well?" said Pencroft, his brow suddenly contracting.

"Well, then, I saw that these fissures widen under the internal pressure from
within, that the wall of basalt is gradually giving way, and that after a longer or
shorter period it will afford a passage to the waters of the lake which fill the
cavern."

"Good!" replied Pencroft, with an attempt at pleasantry. "The sea will
extinguish the volcano, and there will be an end of the matter!"

"Not so!" said Cyrus Harding, "should a day arrive when the sea, rushing
through the wall of the cavern, penetrates by the central shaft into the interior of
the island to the boiling lava, Lincoln Island will that day be blown into the air--
just as would happen to the island of Sicily were the Mediterranean to precipitate
itself into Mount Etna."

The colonists made no answer to these significant words of the engineer.
They now understood the danger by which they were menaced.

It may be added that Cyrus Harding had in no way exaggerated the danger to


be apprehended. Many persons have formed an idea that it would be possible to
extinguish volcanoes, which are almost always situated on the shores of a sea or
lake, by opening a passage for the admission of the water. But they are not aware
that this would be to incur the risk of blowing up a portion of the globe, like a
boiler whose steam is suddenly expanded by intense heat. The water, rushing
into a cavity whose temperature might be estimated at thousands of degrees,
would be converted into steam with a sudden energy which no enclosure could
resist.

It was not therefore doubtful that the island, menaced by a frightful and
approaching convulsion, would endure only so long as the wall of Dakkar Grotto
itself should endure. It was not even a question of months, nor of weeks; but of
days, it might be of hours.

The first sentiment which the colonists felt was that of profound sorrow.
They thought not so much of the peril which menaced themselves personally, but
of the destruction of the island which had sheltered them, which they had
cultivated, which they loved so well, and had hoped to render so flourishing. So
much effort ineffectually expended, so much labour lost.

Pencroft could not prevent a large tear from rolling down his cheek, nor did
he attempt to conceal it.

Some further conversation now took place. The chances yet in favour of the
colonists were discussed; but finally it was agreed that there was not an hour to
be lost, that the building and fitting of the vessel should be pushed forward with
their utmost energy, and that this was the sole chance of safety for the inhabitants
of Lincoln Island.

All hands, therefore, set to work on the vessel. What could it now avail to
sow, to reap, to hunt, to increase the stores of Granite House? The contents of the
store-house and outbuildings contained more than sufficient to provide the ship
for a voyage, however long might be its duration. But it was imperative that the
ship should be ready to receive them before the inevitable catastrophe should
arrive.

Their labours were now carried on with feverish ardour. By the 23rd of
January the vessel was half-decked over. Up to this time no change had taken
place in the summit of the volcano. Vapour and smoke mingled with flames and
incandescent stones were thrown up from the crater. But during the night of the
23rd, in consequence of the lava attaining the level of the first stratum of the
volcano, the hat-shaped cone which formed over the latter disappeared. A
frightful sound was heard. The colonists at first thought the island was rent
asunder, and rushed out of Granite House.

This occurred about two o'clock in the morning.


The sky appeared on fire. The superior cone, a mass of rock a thousand feet
in height, and weighing thousands of millions of pounds, had been thrown down
upon the island, making it tremble to its foundation. Fortunately, this cone
inclined to the north, and had fallen upon the plain of sand and tufa stretching
between the volcano and the sea. The aperture of the crater being thus enlarged
projected towards the sky a glare so intense that by the simple effect of reflection
the atmosphere appeared red-hot. At the same time a torrent of lava, bursting
from the new summit, poured out in long cascades, like water escaping from a
vase too full, and a thousand tongues of fire crept over the sides of the volcano.

"The corral! the corral!" exclaimed Ayrton.

It was, in fact, towards the corral that the lava was rushing, as the new crater
faced the east, and consequently the fertile portions of the island, the springs of
Red Creek and Jacamar Wood, were menaced with instant destruction.

At Ayrton's cry the colonists rushed to the onagas' stables. The cart was at
once harnessed. All were possessed by the same thought--to hasten to the corral
and set at liberty the animals it enclosed.

Before three in the morning they arrived at the corral. The cries of the
terrified musmons and goats indicated the alarm which possessed them. Already
a torrent of burning matter and liquefied minerals fell from the side of the
mountain upon the meadows as far as the side of the palisade. The gate was burst
open by Ayrton, and the animals, bewildered with terror, fled in all directions.

An hour afterwards the boiling lava filled the corral, converting into vapour
the water of the little rivulet which ran through it, burning up the house like dry
grass, and leaving not even a post of the palisade to mark the spot where the
corral once stood.

To contend against this disaster would have been folly--nay, madness. In
presence of Nature's grand convulsions man is powerless.

It was now daylight--the 24th of January. Cyrus Harding and his
companions, before returning to Granite House, desired to ascertain the probable
direction this inundation of lava was about to take. The soil sloped gradually
from Mount Franklin to the east coast, and it was to be feared that, in spite of the
thick Jacamar Wood, the torrent would reach the plateau of Prospect Heights.

"The lake will cover us," said Gideon Spilett.

"I hope so!" was Cyrus Harding's only reply.

The colonists were desirous of reaching the plain upon which the superior
cone of Mount Franklin had fallen, but the lava arrested their progress. It had
followed, on one side, the valley of Red Creek, and on the other that of Falls
River, evaporating those watercourses in its passage. There was no possibility of
crossing the torrent of lava; on the contrary, the colonists were obliged to retreat


before it. The volcano, without its crown, was no longer recognisable,
terminated as it was by a sort of flat table which replaced the ancient crater.
From two openings in its southern and eastern sides an unceasing flow of lava
poured forth, thus forming two distinct streams. Above the new crater a cloud of
smoke and ashes, mingled with those of the atmosphere, massed over the island.
Loud peals of thunder broke, and could scarcely be distinguished from the
rumblings of the mountain, whose mouth vomited forth ignited rocks, which,
hurled to more than a thousand feet, burst in the air like shells. Flashes of
lightning rivalled in intensity the volcano's eruption.

Towards seven in the moming the position was no longer tenable by the
colonists, who accordingly took shelter in the borders of Jacamar Wood. Not
only did the projectiles begin to rain around them, but the lava, overflowing the
bed of Red Creek, threatened to cut off the road to the corral. The nearest rows
of trees caught fire, and their sap, suddenly transformed into vapour, caused
them to explode with loud reports, whilst others, less moist, remained unhurt in
the midst of the inundation.

The colonists had again taken the road to the corral. They proceeded but
slowly, frequently looking back; but, in consequence of the inclination of the
soil, the lava gained rapidly in the east, and as its lower waves became solidified,
others at boiling heat covered them immediately.

Meanwhile, the principal stream of Red Creek valley became more and more
menacing. All this portion of the forest was on fire, and enormous wreaths of
smoke rolled over the trees, whose trunks were already consumed by the lava.
The colonists halted near the lake, about half a mile from the mouth of Red
Creek. A question of life or death was now to be decided.

Cyrus Harding, accustomed to the consideration of important crises, and
aware that he was addressing men capable of hearing the truth, whatever it might
be, then said--

"Either the lake will arrest the progress of the lava, and a part of the island
will be preserved from utter destruction, or the stream will overrun the forests of
the Far West, and not a tree or plant will remain on the surface of the soil. We
shall have no prospect but that of starvation upon these barren rocks--a death
which will probably be anticipated by the explosion of the island."

"In that case," replied Pencroft, folding his arms and stamping his foot,
"what's the use of working any longer on the vessel?"

"Pencroft," answered Cyrus Harding, "we must do our duty to the last!"

At this instant the river of lava, after having broken a passage through the
noble trees it devoured in its course, reached the borders of the lake. At this
point there was an elevation of the soil which, had it been greater, might have


sufficed to arrest the torrent.

"To work!" cried Cyrus Harding.

The engineer's thought was at once understood. It might be possible to dam,
as it were, the torrent, and thus compel it to pour itself into the lake.

The colonists hastened to the dockyard. They returned with shovels, picks,
axes, and by means of banking the earth with the aid of fallen trees they
succeeded in a few hours in raising an embankment three feet high and some
hundreds of paces in length. It seemed to them, when they had finished, as if
they had scarcely been working more than a few minutes.

It was not a moment too soon. The liquefied substances soon after reached
the bottom of the barrier. The stream of lava swelled like a river about to
overflow its banks, and threatened to demolish the sole obstacle which could
prevent it from overrunning the whole Far West. But the dam held firm, and after
a moment of terrible suspense the torrent precipitated itself into Grant Lake from
a height of twenty feet.

The colonists, without moving or uttering a word, breathlessly regarded this
strife of the two elements.

What a spectacle was this conflict between water and fire! What pen could
describe the marvellous horror of this scene--what pencil could depict it? The
water hissed as it evaporated by contact with the boiling lava. The vapour
whirled in the air to an immeasurable height, as if the valves of an immense
boiler had been suddenly opened. But, however considerable might be the
volume of water contained in the lake, it must eventually be absorbed, because it
was not replenished, whilst the stream of lava, fed from an inexhaustible source,
rolled on without ceasing new waves of incandescent matter.

The first waves of lava which fell in the lake immediately solidified, and
accumulated so as speedily to emerge from it. Upon their surface fell other
waves, which in their turn became stone, but a step nearer the centre of the lake.
In this manner was formed a pier which threatened to gradually fill up the lake,
which could not overflow, the water displaced by the lava being evaporated. The
hissing of the water rent the air with a deafening sound, and the vapour, blown
by the wind, fell in rain upon the sea. The pier became longer and longer, and the
blocks of lava piled themselves one on another. Where formerly stretched the
calm waters of the lake now appeared an enormous mass of smoking rocks, as if
an upheaving of the soil had formed immense shoals. Imagine the waters of the
lake aroused by a hurricane, then suddenly solidified by an intense frost, and
some conception may be formed of the aspect of the lake three hours after the
irruption of this irresistible torrent of lava.

This time water would be vanquished by fire.


Nevertheless it was a fortunate circumstance for the colonists that the
effusion of lava should have been in the direction of Lake Grant. They had
before them some days' respite. The plateau of Prospect Heights, Granite House,
and the dockyard were for the moment preserved. And these few days it was
necessary to employ them in planking, carefully caulking the vessel, and
launching her. The colonists would then take refuge on board the vessel, content
to rig her after she should be afloat on the waters. With the danger of an
explosion which threatened to destroy the island there could be no security on
shore. The walls of Granite House, once so sure a retreat, might at any moment
fall in upon them.

During the six following days, from the 25th to the 30th of January, the
colonists accomplished as much of the construction of their vessel as twenty men
could have done. They hardly allowed themselves a moment's repose, and the
glare of the flames which shot from the crater enabled them to work night and
day. The flow of lava continued, but perhaps less abundantly. This was fortunate,
for Lake Grant was almost entirely choked up, and if more lava should
accumulate it would inevitably spread over the plateau of Prospect Heights, and
thence upon the beach.

But if the island was thus partially protected on this side, it was not so with
the western part.

In fact, the second stream of lava, which had followed the valley of Falls
River, a valley of great extent, the land on both sides of the creek being flat, met
with no obstacle. The burning liquid had then spread through the forest of the
Far West. At this period of the year, when the trees were dried up by a tropical
heat, the forest caught fire instantaneously, in such a manner that the
conflagration extended itself both by the trunks of the trees and by their higher
branches, whose interlacement favoured its progress. It even appeared that the
current of flame spread more rapidly among the summits of the trees than the
current of lava at their bases.

Thus it happened that the wild animals, jaguars, wild boars, cabybaras,
koulas, and game of every kind, mad with terror, had fled to the banks of the
Mercy and to the Tadorn Marsh, beyond the road to Port Balloon. But the
colonists were too much occupied with their task to pay any attention to even the
most formidable of these animals. They had abandoned Granite House, and
would not even take shelter at the Chimneys, but encamped under a tent, near the
mouth of the Mercy.

Each day Cyrus Harding and Gideon Spilett ascended the plateau of Prospect
Heights. Sometimes Herbert accompanied them, but never Pencroft, who could
not bear to look upon the prospect of the island now so utterly devastated.


It was, in truth, a heartrending spectacle. All the wooded part of the island
was now completely bare. One single clump of green trees raised their heads at
the extremity of Serpentine Peninsula. Here and there were a few grotesque
blackened and branchless stumps. The site of the devastated forest was even
more barren than Tadorn Marsh. The irruption of the lava had been complete.
Where formerly sprang up that charming verdure, the soil was now nothing but a
savage mass of volcanic tufa. In the valleys of the Falls and Mercy rivers no
drop of water now flowed towards the sea, and should Lake Grant be entirely
dried up, the colonists would have no means of quenching their thirst. But,
fortunately, the lava had spared the southern corner of the lake, containing all
that remained of the drinkable water of the island. Towards the north-west stood
out the rugged and well-defined outlines of the sides of the volcano, like a
gigantic claw hovering over the island. What a sad and fearful sight, and how
painful to the colonists, who, from a fertile domain covered with forests,
irrigated by watercourses, and enriched by the produce of their toils, found
themselves, as it were, transported to a desolate rock, upon which, but for their
reserves of provisions, they could not even gather the means of subsistence!

"It is enough to break one's heart!" said Gideon Spilett, one day.

"Yes, Spilett," answered the engineer. "May God grant us the time to
complete this vessel, now our sole refuge!"

"Do not you think, Cyrus, that the violence of the eruption has somewhat
lessened? The volcano still vomits forth lava, but somewhat less abundantly, if I
mistake not."

"It matters little," answered Cyrus Harding. "The fire is still burning in the
interior of the mountain, and the sea may break in at any moment. We are in the
condition of passengers whose ship is devoured by a conflagration which they
cannot extinguish, and who know that sooner or later the flames must reach the
powder-magazine. To work, Spilett, to work, and let us not lose an hour!"

During eight days more, that is to say until the 7th of February, the lava
continued to flow, but the eruption was confined within the previous limits.
Cyrus Harding feared above all lest the liquefied matter should overflow the
shore, for in that event the dockyard could not escape. Moreover, about this time
the colonists felt in the frame of the island vibrations which alarmed them to the
highest degree.

It was the 20th of February. Yet another month must elapse before the vessel
would be ready for sea. Would the island hold together till then? The intention of
Pencroft and Cyrus Harding was to launch the vessel as soon as the hull should
be complete. The deck, the upper-works, the interior woodwork and the rigging,
might be finished afterwards, but the essential point was that the colonists should


have an assured refuge away from the island. Perhaps it might be even better to
conduct the vessel to Port Balloon, that is to say, as far as possible from the
centre of eruption, for at the mouth of the Mercy, between the islet and the wall
of granite, it would run the risk of being crushed in the event of any convulsion.
All the exertions of the voyagers were therefore concentrated upon the
completion of the hull.

Thus the 3rd of March arrived, and they might calculate upon launching the
vessel in ten days.

Hope revived in the hearts of the colonists, who had, in this fourth year of
their sojourn on Lincoln Island, suffered so many trials. Even Pencroft lost in
some measure the sombre taciturnity occasioned by the devastation and ruin of
his domain. His hopes, it is true, were concentrated upon his vessel.

"We shall finish it," he said to the engineer, "we shall finish it, captain, and it
is time, for the season is advancing and the equinox will soon be here. Well, if
necessary, we must put in to Tabor Island to spend the winter. But think of Tabor
Island after Lincoln Island. Ah, how unfortunate! Who could have believed it
possible?"

"Let us get on," was the engineer's invariable reply.

And they worked away without losing a moment.

"Master," asked Neb, a few days later, "do you think all this could have
happened if Captain Nemo had been still alive?"

"Certainly, Neb," answered Cyrus Harding.

"I, for one, don't believe it!" whispered Pencroft to Neb.

"Nor I!" answered Neb seriously.

During the first week of March appearances again became menacing.
Thousands of threads like glass, formed of fluid lava, fell like rain upon the
island. The crater was again boiling with lava which overflowed the back of the
volcano. The torrent flowed along the surface of the hardened tufa, and
destroyed the few meagre skeletons of trees which had withstood the first
eruption. The stream flowing this time towards the south-west shore of Lake
Grant, stretched beyond Creek Glycerine, and invaded the plateau of Prospect
Heights. This last blow to the work of the colonists was terrible. The mill, the
buildings of the inner court, the stables, were all destroyed. The affrighted
poultry fled in all directions. Top and Jup showed signs of the greatest alarm, as
if their instinct warned them of an impending catastrophe. A large number of the
animals of the island had perished in the first eruption. Those which survived
found no refuge but Tadorn Marsh, save a few to which the plateau of Prospect
Heights afforded an asylum. But even this last retreat was now closed to them,
and the lava-torrent, flowing over the edge of the granite wall, began to pour


down upon the beach its cataracts of fire. The sublime horror of this spectacle
passed all description. During the night it could only be compared to a Niagara
of molten fluid, with its incandescent vapours above and its boiling masses
below.

The colonists were driven to their last entrenchment, and although the upper
seams of the vessel were not yet caulked, they decided to launch her at once.

Pencroft and Ayrton therefore set about the necessary preparations for the
launch, which was to take place the morning of the next day, the 9th of March.

But, during the night of the 8th an enormous column of vapour escaping
from the crater rose with frightful explosions to a height of more than three
thousand feet. The wall of Dakkar Grotto had evidently given way under the
pressure of the gases, and the sea, rushing through the central shaft into the
igneous gulf, was at once converted into vapour. But the crater could not afford a
sufficient outlet for this vapour. An explosion, which might have been heard at a
distance of a hundred miles, shook the air. Fragments of mountains fell into the
Pacific, and, in a few minutes, the ocean rolled over the spot where Lincoln
Island once stood.


CHAPTER TWENTY.

AN ISOLATED ROCK IN THE PACIFIC--THE LAST REFUGE OF THE
COLONISTS OF LINCOLN ISLAND--DEATH THEIR ONLY PROSPECT--
UNEXPECTED SUCCOUR--WHY AND HOW IT ARRIVES--A LAST
KINDNESS--AN ISLAND ON TERRA FIRMA--THE TOMB OF CAPTAIN
PRINCE DAKKAR NEMO.

An isolated rock, thirty feet in length, twenty in breadth, scarcely ten from
the water's edge, such was the only solid point which the waves of the Pacific
had not engulfed.

It was all that remained of the structure of Granite House! The wall had
fallen headlong and been then shattered to fragments, and a few of the rocks of
the large room were piled one above another to form this point. All around had
disappeared in the abyss; the inferior cone of Mount Franklin, rent asunder by
the explosion; the lava jaws of Shark Gulf, the plateau of Prospect Heights,
Safety Islet, the granite rocks of Port Balloon, the basalts of Dakkar Grotto, the
long Serpentine Peninsula, so distant nevertheless from the centre of the
eruption. All that could now be seen of Lincoln Island was the narrow rock
which now served as a refuge to the six colonists and their dog Top.

The animals had also perished in the catastrophe; the birds, as well as those
representing the fauna of the island--all either crushed or drowned, and the


unfortunate Jup himself had, alas! found his death in some crevice of the soil.

If Cyrus Harding, Gideon Spilett, Herbert, Pencroft, Neb, and Ayrton had
survived, it was because, assembled under their tent, they had been hurled into
the sea at the instant when the fragments of the island rained down on every side.

When they reached the surface they could only perceive, at half a cable's
length, this mass of rocks, towards which they swam and on which they found
footing.

On this barren rock they had now existed for nine days. A few provisions
taken from the magazine of Granite House before the catastrophe, a little fresh
water from the rain which had fallen in a hollow of the rock, was all that the
unfortunate colonists possessed. Their last hope, the vessel, had been shattered to
pieces. They had no means of quitting the reef; no fire, nor any means of
obtaining it. It seemed that they must inevitably perish.

This day, the 18th of March, there remained only provisions for two days,
although they limited their consumption to the bare necessaries of life. All their
science and intelligence could avail them nothing in their present position. They
were in the hand of God.

Cyrus Harding was calm, Gideon Spilett more nervous, and Pencroft, a prey
to sullen anger, walked to and fro on the rock. Herbert did not for a moment quit
the engineer's side as if demanding from him that assistance he had no power to
give. Neb and Ayrton were resigned to their fate.

"Ah, what a misfortune! what a misfortune!" often repeated Pencroft. "If we
had but a walnut-shell to take us to Tabor Island! But we have nothing, nothing!"

"Captain Nemo did right to die," said Neb.

During the five ensuing days Cyrus Harding and his unfortunate companions
husbanded their provisions with the most extreme care, eating only what would
prevent them from succumbing to starvation. Their weakness was extreme.
Herbert and Neb began to show symptoms of delirium.

Under these circumstances was it possible for them to retain even the shadow
of a hope? No! What was their sole remaining chance? That a vessel should
appear in sight off the rock? But they knew only too well from experience that
no ships ever visited this part of the Pacific. Could they calculate that, by a truly
providential coincidence, the Scotch yacht would arrive precisely at this time in
search of Ayrton at Tabor Island? It was scarcely probable; and, besides,
supposing she should come there, as the colonists had not been able to deposit a
notice pointing out Ayrton's change of abode, the commander of the yacht, after
having explored Tabor Island without result, would again set sail and return to
lower latitudes.

No! no hope of being saved could be retained, and a horrible death, death


from hunger and thirst, awaited them upon this rock.

Already they were stretched on the rock, inanimate, and no longer conscious
of what passed around them. Ayrton alone, by a supreme effort, from time to
time raised his head, and cast a despairing glance over the desert ocean.

But on the morning of the 24th of March Ayrton's arms were extended
towards a point in the horizon; he raised himself, at first on his knees, then
upright, and his hand seemed to make a signal.

A sail was in sight off the rock. She was evidently not without an object. The
reef was the mark for which she was making in a direct line, under all steam, and
the unfortunate colonists might have made her out some hours before if they had
had the strength to watch the horizon.

"The Duncan!" murmured Ayrton--and fell back without sign of life.

When Cyrus Harding and his companions recovered consciousness, thanks to
the attention lavished upon them, they found themselves in the cabin of a
steamer, without being able to comprehend how they had escaped death.

A word from Ayrton explained everything.

"The Duncan!" he murmured.

"The Duncan!" exclaimed Cyrus Harding. And raising his hand to Heaven,
he said, "Oh! Almighty God! mercifully hast Thou preserved us!"

It was, in fact, the Duncan, Lord Glenarvan's yacht, now commanded by
Robert, son of Captain Grant, who had been despatched to Tabor Island to find
Ayrton, and bring him back to his native land after twelve years of expiation.

The colonists were not only saved, but already on the way to their native
country.

"Captain Grant," asked Cyrus Harding, "who can have suggested to you the
idea, after having left Tabor Island, where you did not find Ayrton, of coming a
hundred miles farther north-east?"

"Captain Harding,” replied Robert Grant, "it was in order to find, not only
Ayrton, but yourself and your companions."

"My companions and myself?"

"Doubtless, at Lincoln Island."

"At Lincoln Island!" exclaimed in a breath Gideon Spilett, Herbert, Neb, and
Pencroft, in the highest degree astonished.

"How could you be aware of the existence of Lincoln Island?" inquired
Cyrus Harding, "it is not even named in the charts."

"I knew of it from a document left by you on Tabor Island," answered Robert
Grant.

"A document?" cried Gideon Spilett.

"Without doubt, and here it is," answered Robert Grant, producing a paper


which indicated the longitude and latitude of Lincoln Island, "the present
residence of Ayrton and five American colonists."

"It is Captain Nemo!" cried Cyrus Harding, after having read the notice, and
recognised that the handwriting was similar to that of the paper found at the
corral.

"Ah!" said Pencroft, "it was then he who took our Bonadventure and
hazarded himself alone to go to Tabor Island!"

"In order to leave this notice," added Herbert.

"I was then right in saying," exclaimed the sailor, "that even after his death
the captain would render us a last service."

"My friends," said Cyrus Harding, in a voice of the profoundest emotion,
"may the God of mercy have had pity on the soul of Captain Nemo, our
benefactor!"

The colonists uncovered themselves at these last words of Cyrus Harding,
and murmured the name of Captain Nemo.

Then Ayrton, approaching the engineer, said simply, "Where should this
coffer be deposited?"

It was the coffer which Ayrton had saved at the risk of his life, at the very
instant that the island had been engulfed, and which he now faithfully handed to
the engineer.

"Ayrton! Ayrton!" said Cyrus Harding, deeply touched. Then, addressing
Robert Grant, "Sir," he added, "you left behind you a criminal; you find in his
place a man who has become honest by penitence, and whose hand I am proud to
clasp in mine."

Robert Grant was now made acquainted with the strange history of Captain
Nemo and the colonists of Lincoln Island. Then, observations being taken of
what remained of this shoal, which must henceforward figure on the charts of the
Pacific, the order was given to make all sail.

A few weeks afterwards the colonists landed in America, and found their
country once more at peace after the terrible conflict in which right and justice
had triumphed.

Of the treasures contained in the coffer left by Captain Nemo to the colonists
of Lincoln Island, the larger portion was employed in the purchase of a vast
territory in the State of Iowa. One pearl alone, the finest, was reserved from the
treasure and sent to Lady Glenarvan in the name of the castaways restored to
their country by the Duncan.

There, upon this domain, the colonists invited to labour, that is to say, to
wealth and happiness, all those to whom they had hoped to offer the hospitality
of Lincoln Island. There was founded a vast colony to which they gave the name


of that island sunk beneath the waters of the Pacific. A river was there called the
Mercy, a mountain took the name of Mount Franklin, a small lake was named
Lake Grant, and the forests became the forests of the Far West. It might have
been an island on terra firma.

There, under the intelligent hands of the engineer and his companions,
everything prospered. Not one of the former colonists of Lincoln Island was
absent, for they had sworn to live always together. Neb was with his master;
Ayrton was there ready to sacrifice himself for all; Pencroft was more a farmer
than he had even been a sailor; Herbert, who completed his studies under the
superintendence of Cyrus Harding; and Gideon Spilett, who founded the New
Lincoln Herald, the best-informed journal in the world.

There Cyrus Harding and his companions received at intervals visits from
Lord and Lady Glenarvan, Captain John Mangles and his wife, the sister of
Robert Grant, Robert Grant himself, Major McNab, and all those who had taken
part in the history both of Captain Grant and Captain Nemo.

There, to conclude, all were happy, united in the present as they had been in
the past; but never could they forget that island upon which they had arrived
poor and friendless, that island which, during four years, had supplied all their
wants, and of which there remained but a fragment of granite washed by the
waves of the Pacific, the tomb of him who had borne the name of Captain Nemo.

FINIS.


THE SURVIVORS OF THE CHANCELLOR.
DIARY OF J.R.KAZALLON, PASSENGER.


By Jules Verne


CHAPTER I.

CHARLESTON, SEPTEMBER 27th, 1869.--It is high tide, and three o'clock
in the afternoon when we leave the Battery-quay; the ebb carries us off shore,
and as Captain Huntly has hoisted both main and top sails, the northerly breeze
drives the "Chancellor" briskly across the bay. Fort Sumter ere long is doubled,
the sweeping batteries of the mainland on our left are soon passed, and by four
o'clock the rapid current of the ebbing tide has carried us through the harbour-
mouth.

But as yet we have not reached the open sea; we have still to thread our way
through the narrow channels which the surge has hollowed out amongst the
sand-banks. The captain takes a south-west course, rounding the lighthouse at
the corner of the fort; the sails are closely trimmed; the last sandy point is safely
coasted, and at length, at seven o'clock in the evening; we are out free upon the
wide Atlantic.

The "Chancellor" is a fine square-rigged three-master, of 900 tons burden,
and belongs to the wealthy Liverpool firm of Laird Brothers. She is two years
old, is sheathed and secured with copper, her decks being of teak, and the base of
all her masts, except the mizzen, with all their fittings, being of iron. She is
registered first class A I, and is now on her third voyage between Charleston and
Liverpool. As she wended her way through the channels of Charleston harbour,
it was the British flag that was lowered from her mast-head; but without colours
at all, no sailor could have hesitated for a moment in telling her nationality,--for
English she was, and nothing but English from her waterline upwards to the
truck of her masts.

I must now relate how it happens that I have taken my passage on board the
"Chancellor" on her return voyage to England. At present there is no direct
steamship service between South Carolina and Great Britain, and all who wish to
cross must go either northwards to New York or southwards to New Orleans. It
is quite true that if I had chosen to start from New York I might have found
plenty of vessels belonging to English, French, or Hamburg lines, any of which
would have conveyed me by a rapid voyage to my destination; and it is equally
true that if I had selected New Orleans for my embarkation I could readily have
reached Europe by one of the vessels of the National Steam Navigation
Company, which join the French Transatlantic line of Colon and Aspinwall. But
it was fated to be otherwise.

One day, as I was loitering about the Charleston quays, my eye lighted upon


this vessel. There was something about the "Chancellor" that pleased me, and a
kind of involuntary impulse took me on board, where I found the internal
arrangements perfectly comfortable. Yielding to the idea that a voyage in a
sailing vessel had certain charms beyond the transit in a steamer, and reckoning
that with wind and wave in my favour there would be little material difference in
time; considering, moreover, that in these low latitudes the weather in early
autumn is fine and unbroken, I came to my decision, and proceeded forthwith to
secure my passage by this route to Europe.

Have I done right or wrong? Whether I shall have reason to regret my
determination is a problem to be solved in the future. However, I will begin to
record the incidents of our daily experience, dubious as I feel whether the lines
of my chronicle will ever find a reader.


CHAPTER II.

SEPTEMBER 28th.--John Silas Huntly, the captain of the "Chancellor," has
the reputation of being an experienced navigator of the Atlantic. He is a
Scotchman, a native of Dundee, and is about fifty years of age. He is of middle
height and slight build, and has a small head, which he has a habit of holding a
little over his left shoulder. I do not pretend to be much of a physiognomist, but I
am inclined to believe that my few hours' acquaintance with our captain has
given me considerable insight into his character. That he is a good seaman and
thoroughly understands his duties I could not for a moment venture to deny; but
that he is a man of resolute temperament, or that he possesses the amount of
courage that would render him, physically or morally, capable of coping with
any great emergency, I confess I cannot believe. I observe a certain heaviness
and dejection about his whole carriage. His wavering glances, the listless
motions of his hands, and his slow, unsteady gait, all seem to me to indicate a
weak and sluggish disposition. He does not appear as though he could be
energetic enough ever to be stubborn; he never frowns, sets his teeth, or clenches
his fist. There is something enigmatical about him; however, I shall study him
closely and do what I can to understand the man who, as commander of a vessel,
should be to those around him "second only to God."

Unless I am greatly mistaken there is another man on board who, if
circumstances should require it, would take the more prominent position--I mean
the mate. I have hitherto, however, had such little opportunity of observing his
character, that I must defer saying more about him at present.

Besides the captain and this mate, whose name is Robert Curtis, our crew
consists of Walter, the lieutenant, the boatswain, and fourteen sailors, all English


or Scotch, making eighteen altogether, a number quite sufficient for working a
vessel of 900 tons burden. Up to this time my sole experience of their
capabilities is, that under the command of the mate, they brought us skillfully
enough through the narrow channels of Charleston; and I have no reason to
doubt but that they are well up to their work.

My list of the ship's officials is incomplete unless I mention Hobart, the
steward, and Jynxstrop, the negro cook.

In addition to these, the "Chancellor" carries eight passengers, including
myself. Hitherto, the bustle of embarkation, the arrangement of cabins, and all
the variety of preparations inseparable from starting on a voyage for at least
twenty or five-and-twenty days have precluded the formation of any
acquaintanceships; but the monotony of the voyage, the close proximity into
which we must be thrown, and the natural curiosity to know something of each
other's affairs, will doubtless lead us in due time to an interchange of ideas. Two
days have elapsed and I have not even seen all the passengers. Probably sea-
sickness has prevented some of them from making their appearance at the
common table. One thing, however, I do know; namely, that there are two ladies
occupying the stern-cabins, the windows of which are in the aft-board of the
vessel.

I have seen the ship's list and subjoin a list of the passengers. They are as
follow:--Mr. and Mrs. Kear, Americans, of Buffalo. Miss Herbey, a young
English lady, companion to Mrs. Kear. M. Letourneur and his son Andre,
Frenchmen, of Havre. William Falsten, a Manchester engineer. John Ruby, a
Cardiff merchant; and myself, J. R. Kazallon, of London.


CHAPTER III.

SEPTEMBER 29th.--Captain Huntly's bill of lading, that is to say, the
document that describes the "Chancellor's" cargo and the conditions of transport,
is couched in the following terms:--

"BRONSFIELD AND CO., AGENTS, CHARLESTON.

"I, John Silas Huntly, of Dundee, Scotland, commander of the ship
‘Chancellor,’ of about 900 tons burden, now at Charleston, do purpose, by the
blessing of God, at the earliest convenient season, and by the direct route, to sail
for the port of Liverpool, where I shall obtain my discharge. I do hereby
acknowledge that I have received from you, Messrs. Bronsfield and Co.,
Commission Agents, Charleston, and have placed the same under the gun-deck
of the aforesaid ship, seventeen hundred bales of cotton, of the estimated value
of 26,0001., all in good condition, marked and numbered as in the margin; which


goods I do undertake to transport to Liverpool, and there to deliver, free from
injury (save only such injury as shall have been caused by the chances of the
sea), to Messrs. Laird Brothers, or to their order, or to their representative, who
shall on due delivery of the said freight pay me the sum of 2000I. inclusive,
according to the charter-party and damages in addition, according to the usages
and customs of the sea.

"And for the fulfillment of the above covenant, I have pledged and do pledge
my person, my property, and my interest in the vessel aforesaid, with all its
appurtenances. In witness whereof, I have signed three agreements, all of the
same purport; on the condition that when the terms of one are accomplished, the
other two shall be absolutely null and void.

"Given at Charleston, September 13th, 1869,

"J. S. HUNTLY."

From the foregoing document it will be understood that the "Chancellor" is
conveying 1700 bales of cotton to Liverpool; that the shippers are Bronsfield, of
Charleston, and the consignees are Laird Brothers, of Liverpool. The ship was
constructed with the especial design of carrying cotton, and the entire hold, with
the exception of a very limited space reserved for passengers’ luggage, is closely
packed with the bales, The lading was performed with the utmost care, each bale
being pressed into its proper place by the aid of screw-jacks, so that the whole
freight forms one solid and compact mass; not an inch of space is wasted, and
the vessel is thus made capable of carrying her full complement of cargo.


CHAPTER IV.

SEPTEMBER 30th to OCTOBER 6th.--The "Chancellor" is a rapid sailer,
and more than a match for many a vessel of the same dimensions. She scuds
along merrily in the freshening breeze, leaving in her wake, far as the eye can
reach, a long white line of foam as well defined as a delicate strip of lace
stretched upon an azure ground.

The Atlantic is not visited by many gales, and I have every reason to believe
that the rolling and pitching of the vessel no longer incommode any of the
passengers, who are all more or less accustomed to the sea. A vacant seat at our
table is now very rare; we are beginning to know something about each other,
and our daily life, in consequence, is becoming somewhat less monotonous.

M. Letourneur, our French fellow-passenger, often has a chat with me. He is
a fine tall man, about fifty years of age, with white hair and a grizzly beard. To
say the truth, he looks older than he really is: his drooping head, his dejected
manner, and his eye, ever and again suffused with tears, indicate that he is


haunted by some deep and abiding sorrow. He never laughs; he rarely even
smiles, and then only on his son: his countenance ordinarily bearing a look of
bitterness tempered by affection, while his general expression is one of caressing
tenderness. It excites an involuntary commiseration to learn that M. Letourneur
is consuming himself by exaggerated reproaches on account of the infirmity of
an afflicted son.

Andre Letourneur is about twenty years of age, with a gentle, interesting
countenance, but, to the irrepressible grief of his father, is a hopeless cripple. His
left leg is miserably deformed, and he is quite unable to walk without the
assistance of a stick. It is obvious that the father's life is bound up with that of his
son; his devotion is unceasing; every thought, every glance is for Andre; he
seems to anticipate his most trifling wish, watches his slightest movement, and
his arm is ever ready to support or otherwise assist the child whose sufferings he
more than shares.

M. Letourneur seems to have taken a peculiar fancy to myself, and
constantly talks about Andre. This morning, in the course of conversation, I
said,--

"You have a good son, M. Letourneur. I have just been talking to him. He is a
most intelligent young man."

"Yes, Mr. Kazallon," replied M. Letourneur, brightening up into a smile, "his
afflicted frame contains a noble mind. He is like his mother, who died at his
birth."

"He is full of reverence and love for you, sir," I remarked.

"Dear boy!" muttered the father half to himself. "Ah, Mr. Kazallon," he
continued, "you do not know what it is to a father to have a son a cripple, beyond
hope of cure."

"M. Letourneur,” I answered, "you take more than your share of the affliction
which has fallen upon you and your son. That M. Andre is entitled to the very
greatest commiseration no one can deny; but you should remember, that after all
a physical infirmity is not so hard to bear as mental grief. Now, I have watched
your son pretty closely, and unless I am much mistaken there is nothing, that
troubles him so much as the sight of your own sorrow."

"But I never let him see it," he broke in hastily. "My sole thought is how to
divert him. I have discovered, that in spite of his physical weakness, he delights
in travelling; so for the last few years we have been constantly on the move. We
first went all over Europe, and are now returning from visiting the principal
places in the United States. I never allowed my son to go to college, but
instructed him entirely myself, and these travels, I hope, will serve to complete
his education. He is very intelligent, and has a lively imagination, and I am


sometimes tempted to hope that in contemplating the wonders of nature he
forgets his own infirmity."

"Yes, sir, of course he does," I assented.

"But," continued M. Letourneur, taking my hand, "although, perhaps, HE
may forget, I can never forget. Ah, sir, do you suppose that Andre can ever
forgive his parents for bringing him into the world a cripple?"

The remorse of the unhappy father was very distressing, and I was about to
say a few kind words of sympathy when Andre himself made his appearance. M.
Letourneur hastened toward him and assisted him up the few steep steps that led
to the poop.

As soon as Andre was comfortably seated on one of the benches, and his
father had taken his place by his side, I joined them, and we fell into
conversation upon ordinary topics, discussing the various points of the
"Chancellor," the probable length of the passage, and the different details of our
life on board. I find that M. Letourneur's estimate of Captain Huntly's character
very much coincided with my own, and that, like me, he is impressed with the
man's undecided manner and sluggish appearance. Like me, too, he has formed a
very favourable opinion of Robert Curtis, the mate, a man of about thirty years
of age, of great muscular power, with a frame and a will that seem ever ready for
action.

Whilst we were still talking of him, Curtis himself came on deck, and as I
watched his movements I could not help being struck with his physical
development; his erect and easy carriage, his fearless glance and slightly
contracted brow all betokened a man of energy, thoroughly endowed with the
calmness and courage that are indispensable to the true sailor. He seems a kind-
hearted fellow, too, and is always ready to assist and amuse young Letourneur,
who evidently enjoys his company. After he had scanned the weather and
examined the trim of the sails, he joined our party and proceeded to give us some
information about those of our fellow-passengers with whom at present we have
made but slight acquaintance.

Mr. Kear, the American, who is accompanied by his wife, has made a large
fortune in the petroleum springs in the United States. He is a man of about fifty,
a most uninteresting companion, being overwhelmed with a sense of his own
wealth and importance, and consequently supremely indifferent to all around
him. His hands are always in his pockets, and the chink of money seems to
follow him wherever he goes. Vain and conceited, a fool as well as an egotist, he
struts about like a peacock showing its plumage, and to borrow the words of the
physiognomist Gratiolet, "il se flaire, il se savoure, il se goute." Why he should
have taken his passage on board a mere merchant vessel instead of enjoying the


luxuries of a Transatlantic steamer, I am altogether at a loss to explain.

The wife is an insignificant, insipid woman, of about forty years of age. She
never reads, never talks, and I believe I am not wrong in saying, never thinks.
She seems to look without seeing, and listen without hearing, and her sole
occupation consists in giving her orders to her companion, Miss Herbey, a young
English girl of about twenty.

Miss Herbey is extremely pretty. Her complexion is fair and her eyes deep
blue, whilst her pleasing countenance is altogether free from that insignificance
of feature which is not unfrequently alleged to be characteristic of English
beauty. Her mouth would be charming if she ever smiled, but exposed as she is
to the ridiculous whims and fancies of a capricious mistress, her lips rarely relax
from their ordinary grave expression. Yet humiliating as her position must be,
she never utters a word of open complaint, but quietly and gracefully performs
her duties accepting without a murmur the paltry salary which the bumptious
petroleum-merchant condescends to allow her.

The Manchester engineer, William Falsten, looks like a thorough
Englishman. He has the management of some extensive hydraulic works in
South Carolina, and is now on his way to Europe to obtain some improved
apparatus, and more especially to visit the mines worked by centrifugal force,
belonging to the firm of Messrs. Cail. He is forty-five years of age, with all his
interests so entirely absorbed by his machinery that he seems to have neither a
thought nor a care beyond his mechanical calculations. Once let him engage you
in conversation, and there is no chance of escape; you have no help for it but to
listen as patiently as you can until he has completed the explanation of his
designs.

The last of our fellow-passengers, Mr. Ruby, is the type of a vulgar
tradesman. Without any originality or magnanimity in his composition, he has
spent twenty years of his life in mere buying and selling, and as he has generally
contrived to do business at a profit, he has realized a considerable fortune. What
he is going to do with the money, he does not seem able to say: his ideas do not
go beyond retail trade, his mind having been so long closed to all other
impressions that it appears incapable of thought or reflection on any subject
besides. Pascal says, "L'homme est visiblement fait pour penser. C'est toute sa
dignite et tout-son merite;" but to Mr. Ruby the phrase seems altogether
inapplicable.


CHAPTER V.
OCTOBER /7th.--This is the tenth day since we left Charleston, and I should


think our progress has been very rapid. Robert Curtis, the mate, with whom I
continue to have many a friendly chat, informed me that we could not be far off
Cape Hatteras in the Bermudas; the ship's bearings, he said were lat. 32deg.
20min. N. and long. 64deg. 50min. W., so that he had every reason to believe
that we should sight St. George's Island before night.

"The Bermudas!" I exclaimed. "But how is it we are off the Bermudas? I
should have thought that a vessel sailing from Charleston to Liverpool, would
have kept northwards, and have followed the track of the Gulf Stream."

"Yes, indeed; sir," replied Curtis, "that is the usual course; but you see that
this time the captain hasn't chosen to take it."

"But why not?" I persisted.

"That's not for me to say, sir; he ordered us eastwards, and eastwards we go."

"Haven't you called his attention to it?" I inquired.

Curtis acknowledged that he had already pointed out what an unusual route
they were taking, but that the captain had said that he was quite aware what he
was about. The mate made no further remark; but the knit of his brow, as he
passed his hand mechanically across his forehead, made me fancy that he was
inclined to speak out more strongly.

"All very well, Curtis," I said, "but I don't know what to think about trying
new routes. Here we are at the 7th of October, and if we are to reach Europe
before the bad weather sets in, I should suppose there is not a day to be lost."

"Right, sir, quite right; there is not a day to be lost."

Struck by his manner, I ventured to add, "Do you mind, Mr. Curtis giving me
your honest opinion of Captain Huntly?"

He hesitated a moment, and then replied shortly, "He is my captain, sir."

This evasive answer of course put an end to any further interrogation on my
part, but it only set me thinking the more.

Curtis was not mistaken. At about three o'clock the lookout man sung out
that there was land to windward, and descried what seemed as if it might be a
line of smoke in the north-east horizon. At six, I went on deck with M.
Letourneur and his son, and we could then distinctly make out the low group of
the Bermudas, encircled by their formidable chain of breakers.

"There," said Andre Letourneur to me, as we stood gazing at the distant land,
"there lies the enchanted Archipelago, sung by your poet Moore. The exile
Waller, too, as long ago as 1643, wrote an enthusiastic panegyric on the islands,
and I have been told that at one time English ladies would wear no other bonnets
than such as were made of the leaves of the Bermuda palm."

"Yes," I replied, "the Bermudas were all the rage in the seventeenth century,
although latterly they have fallen into comparative oblivion."


"But let me tell you, M. Andre," interposed Curtis, who had as usual joined
our party, "that although poets may rave, and be as enthusiastic as they like about
these islands, sailors will tell a different tale. The hidden reefs that lie in a
semicircle about two or three leagues from shore make the attempt to land a very
dangerous piece of business. And another thing, I know. Let the natives boast as
they will about their splendid climate, they, are visited by the most frightful
hurricanes. They get the fag-end of the storms that rage over the Antilles; and
the fag-end of a storm is like the tail of a whale; it's just the strongest bit of it. I
don't think you'll find a sailor listening much to your poets,--your Moores, and
your Wallers."

"No, doubt you are right, Mr. Curtis," said Andre, smiling, "but poets are like
proverbs; you can always find one to contradict another. Although Waller and
Moore have chosen to sing the praises of the Bermudas, it has been supposed
that Shakspeare was depicting them in the terrible scenes that are found in "The
Tempest."

The whole vicinity of these islands is beyond a question extremely perilous
to mariners. Situated between the Antilles and Nova Scotia, the Bermudas have
ever since their discovery belonged to the English, who have mainly used them
for a military station. But this little archipelago, comprising some hundred and
fifty different isles and islets, is destined to increase, and that, perhaps, on a
larger scale than has yet been anticipated. Beneath the waves there are
madrepores, in infinity of number, silently but ceaselessly pursuing their labours;
and with time, that fundamental element in nature's workings, who shall tell
whether these may not gradually build up island after island, which shall unite
and form another continent?

I may mention that there was not another of our fellow-passengers who took
the trouble to come on deck and give a glance at this strange cluster of islands.
Miss Herbey, it is true, was making an attempt to join us, but she had barely
reached the poop, when Mrs. Kear's languid voice was heard recalling her for
some trifling service to her side.


CHAPTER VI.

OCTOBER 8th to OCTOBER 13th.--The wind is blowing hard from the
north-east; and the "Chancellor" under low-reefed top-sail and fore-sail, and
labouring against a heavy sea, has been obliged to be brought ahull. The joists
and girders all creak again until one's teeth are set on edge. I am the only
passenger not remaining below; but I prefer being on deck notwithstanding the
driving rain, fine as dust, which penetrates to my very skin. We have been driven


along in this fashion for the best part of two days; the "stiffish breeze" has
gradually freshened into "a gale;" the top-gallants have been lowered, and, as I
write, the wind is blowing with a velocity of fifty or sixty miles an hour.
Although the "Chancellor" has many good points, her drift is considerable, and
we have been carried far to the south we can only guess at our precise position,
as the cloudy atmosphere entirely precludes us from taking the sun's altitude.

All along throughout this period, my fellow-passengers are totally ignorant
of the extraordinary course that we are taking England lies to the NORTH-
EAST, yet we are sailing directly SOUTH-EAST, and Robert Curtis owns that he
is quite bewildered; he cannot comprehend why the captain, ever since this
north-easterly gale has been blowing, should persist in allowing the ship to drive
to the south, instead of tacking to the north-west until she gets into better
quarters.

I was alone with Curtis to-day upon the poop, and could not help saying to
him "Curtis, is your captain mad?"

"Perhaps, sir, I might be allowed to ask what YOU think upon that matter,"
was his cautious reply.

"Well to say the truth," I answered, "I can hardly tell; but I confess there is
every now and then a wandering in his eye, and an odd look on his face that I do
not like. Have you ever sailed with him before?"

"No; this is our first voyage together. Again last night I spoke to him about
the route we were taking, but he only said he knew all about it, and that it was all
right."

"What do Lieutenant Walter and your boatswain think of it all?" I inquired.

"Think; why they think just the same as I do," replied the mate; "but if the
captain chooses to take the ship to China we should obey his orders."

"But surely," I exclaimed, "there must be some limit to your obedience!
Suppose the man is actually mad, what then?"

"If he should be mad enough, Mr. Kazallon, to bring the vessel into any real
danger, I shall know what to do."

With this assurance I am forced to be content. Matters, however, have taken
a different turn to what I bargained for when I took my passage on board the
"Chancellor." The weather has become worse and worse. As I have already said,
the ship under her large low-reefed top-sail and fore stay-sail has been brought
ahull, that is to say, she copes directly with the wind, by presenting her broad
bows to the sea; and so we go on still drift, drift, continually to the south.

How southerly our course has been is very apparent; for upon the night of the
11th we fairly entered upon that portion of the Atlantic which is known as the
Sargassos Sea. An extensive tract of water is this, enclosed by the warm current


of the Gulf Stream, and thickly covered with the wrack, called by the Spaniards
"sargasso," the abundance of which so seriously impeded the progress of
Columbus's vessels on his first voyage across the ocean.

Each moming at daybreak the Atlantic has presented an aspect so
remarkable, that at my solicitation, M. Letourneur and his son have ventured
upon deck to witness the unusual spectacle. The squally gusts make the metal
shrouds vibrate like harp-strings; and unless we were on our guard to keep our
clothes wrapped tightly to us, they would have been torn off our backs in shreds.
The scene presented to our eyes is one of strangest interest. The sea, carpeted
thickly with masses of prolific fucus, is a vast unbroken plain of vegetation,
through which the vessel makes her way as a plough. Long strips of seaweed
caught up by the wind become entangled in the rigging, and hang between the
masts in festoons of verdure; whilst others, varying from two to three hundred
feet in length, twine themselves up to the very mast-heads, from whence they
float like streaming pendants. For many hours now, the "Chancellor" has been
contending with this formidable accumulation of algae; her masts are circled
with hydrophytes; her rigging is wreathed everywhere with creepers, fantastic as
the untrammelled tendrils of a vine, and as she works her arduous course, there
are times when I can only compare her to an animated grove of verdure making
its mysterious way over some illimitable prairie.


CHAPTER VII.

OCTOBER 14th.--At last we are free from the sea of vegetation, the
boisterous gale has moderated into a steady breeze, the sun is shining brightly,
the weather is warm and genial, and thus, two reefs in her top-sails, briskly and
merrily sails the "Chancellor."

Under conditions so favourable, we have been able to take the ship's
bearings: our latitude, we find, is 21deg. 33min. N., our longitude 50deg. 17min.
W.

Incomprehensible altogether is the conduct of Captain Huntly. Here we are,
already more than ten degrees south of the point from which, we started, and yet
still we are persistently following a south-easterly course! I cannot bring myself
to the conclusion that the man is mad. I have had various conversations with
him: he has always spoken rationally and sensibly. He shows no tokens of
insanity. Perhaps his case is one of those in which insanity is partial, and where
the mania is of a character which extends only to the matters connected with his
profession. Yet it is unaccountable.

I can get nothing out of Curtis; he listens coldly whenever I allude to the


subject, and only repeats what he has said before, that nothing short of an overt
act of madness on the part of the captain could induce him to supersede the
captain's authority and that the imminent peril of the ship could alone justify him
in taking so decided a measure.

Last evening I went to my cabin about eight o'clock, and after an hour's
reading by the light of my cabin-lamp, I retired to my berth and was soon asleep.
Some hours later I was aroused by an unaccustomed noise on deck. There were
heavy footsteps hurrying to and fro, and the voices of the men were loud and
eager, as if the crew were agitated by some strange disturbance. My first
impression was, that some tacking had been ordered which rendered it needful to
fathom the yards; but the vessel continuing to lie to starboard convinced me that
this was not the origin of the commotion, I was curious to know the truth, and
made all haste I could to go on deck; but before I was ready, the noise had
ceased. I heard Captain Huntly return to his cabin, and accordingly I retired
again to my own berth. Whatever may have been the meaning of the manoeuvre,
I cannot tell; it did not seem to have resulted in any improvement in the ship's
pace; still it must be owned there was not much wind to speed us along.

At six o'clock this morning I mounted the poop and made as keen a scrutiny
as I could of everything on board. Everything appeared as usual. The
"Chancellor" was running on the larboard tack, and carried low-sails, top-sails,
and gallant-sails. Well braced she was; and under a fresh, but not uneasy breeze,
was making no less than eleven knots an hour.

Shortly afterwards M. Letourneur and Andre came an deck. The young man
enjoyed the early morning air, laden with its briny fragrance, and I assisted him
to mount the poop. In answer to my inquiry as to whether they had been
disturbed by any bustle in the night, Andre replied that he did not wake at all,
and had heard nothing.

"I am glad, my boy," said his father, "that you have slept so soundly. I heard
the noise of which Mr. Kazallon speaks. It must have; been about three o'clock
this morning, and it seemed to me as though they were shouting. I thought I
heard them say, 'Here, quick, look to the hatches!’ but as nobody was called up, I
presumed that nothing serious was the matter."

As he spoke I cast my eye at the panel-slides, which fore and aft of the main-
mast open into the hold. They seemed to be all close as usual, but I now
observed for the first time that they were covered with heavy tarpauling.
Wondering; in my own mind what could be the reason for these extra
precautions I did not say anything to M. Letourneur, but determined to wait until
the mate should come on watch, when he would doubtless give me, I thought, an
explanation of the mystery.


The sun rose gloriously, with every promise of a fine dry day. The waning
moon was yet above the western horizon, for as it still wants three days to her
last quarter she does not set until 10.57 am. On consulting my almanac, I find
that there will be a new moon on the 24th, and that on that day, little as it may
affect us here in mid ocean, the phenomenon of the high sygyzian tides will take
place on the shores of every continent and island.

At the breakfast hour M. Letourneur and Andre went below for a cup of tea,
and I remained on the poop alone. As I expected, Curtis appeared, that he might
relieve Lieutenant Walter of the watch. I advanced to meet him, but before he
even wished me good morning, I saw him cast a quick and searching glance
upon the deck, and then, with a slightly contracted brow, proceed to examine the
state of the weather and the trim of the sails.

"Where is Captain Huntly?" he said to Walter.

"IT have seen nothing of him," answered the lieutenant "is there anything
fresh up?"

"Nothing, whatever," was the curt reply.

They then conversed for a few moments in an undertone, and I could see that
Walter by his gesture gave a negative answer to some question which the mate
had asked him. "Send me the boatswain, Walter," said Curtis aloud as the
lieutenant moved away.

The boatswain immediately appeared, and another conversation was carried
on in whispers. The man repeatedly shook his head as he replied to Curtis's
inquiries, and then, in obedience to orders, called the men who were on watch,
and made them plentifully water the tarpauling that covered the great hatchway.

Curious to fathom the mystery I went up to Curtis and began to talk to him
upon ordinary topics, hoping that he would himself introduce the subject that
was uppermost in my mind; finding, however, that he did not allude to it; I asked
him point blank.

"What was the matter in the night, Curtis?"

He looked at me steadily, but made no reply.

"What was it?" I repeated. "M. Letourneur and myself were both of us
disturbed by a very unusual commotion overhead."

"Oh, a mere nothing," he said at length; "the man at the helm had made a
false move, and we had to pipe hands to brace the ship a bit; but it was soon all
put to rights. It was nothing, nothing at all."

I said no more; but I cannot resist the impression that Robert Curtis has not
acted with me in his usual straightforward manner.


CHAPTER VIII.

OCTOBER 15th to OCTOBER 18th.--The wind is still in the north-east.
There is no change in the "Chancellor's" course, and to an unprejudiced eye all
would appear to be going on as usual. But I have an uneasy consciousness that
something is not quite right. Why should the hatchways be so hermetically
closed as though a mutinous crew was imprisoned between decks? I cannot help
thinking too that there is something in the sailors so constantly standing in
groups and breaking off their talk so suddenly whenever we approach; and
several times I have caught the word "hatches" which arrested M. Letourneur's
attention on the night of the disturbance.

On the 15th, while I was walking on the forecastle, I overheard one of the
sailors, aman named Owen say to his mates,--

"Now I just give you all warning that I am not going to wait until the last
minute. Every one for himself, say I."

"Why, what do you mean to do?" asked Jynxstrop, the cook.

"Pshaw!" said Owen, "do you suppose that longboats were only made for
porpoises?”

Something at that moment occurred to interrupt the conversation, and I heard
no more. It occurred to me whether there was not some conspiracy among the
crew, of which probably Curtis had already detected the symptoms. I am quite
aware that some sailors are most rebelliously disposed, and require to be ruled
with a rod of iron.

Yesterday and to-day I have observed Curtis remonstrating somewhat
vehemently with Captain Huntly, but there is no obvious result arising from their
interviews; the Captain apparently being bent upon some purpose, of which it is
only too manifest that the mate decidedly disapproves.

Captain Huntly is undoubtedly labouring under strong nervous excitement;
and M. Letourneur has more than once remarked how silent he has become at
meal-times; for although Curtis continually endeavours to start some subject of
general interest, yet neither Mr. Falsten, Mr. Kear, nor Mr. Ruby are the men to
take it up, and consequently the conversation flags hopelessly, and soon drops.
The passengers too are now, with good cause, beginning to murmur at the length
of the voyage, and Mr. Kear, who considers that the very elements ought to yield
to his convenience, lets the captain know by his consequential and haughty
manner that he holds him responsible for the delay.

During the course of yesterday the mate gave repeated orders for the deck to
be watered again and again, and although as a general rule this is a business
which is done, once for all, in the early morning, the crew did not utter a word of
complaint at the additional work thus imposed upon them. The tarpaulins on the


hatches have thus been kept continually wet, so that their close and heavy texture
is rendered quite impervious to the air, The "Chancellor's" pumps afford a
copious supply of water, so that I should not suppose that even the daintiest and
most luxurious craft belonging to an aristocratic yacht-club was ever subject to a
more thorough scouring. I tried to reconcile myself to the belief that it was the
high temperature of the tropical regions upon which we are entering, that
rendered such extra sousings a necessity, and recalled to my recollection how,
during the night of the 13th, I had found the atmosphere below deck so stifling
that in spite of the heavy swell I was obliged to open the porthole of my cabin,
on the starboard side, to get a breath of air.

This morning at daybreak I went on deck. The sun had scarcely risen, and the
air was fresh and cool, in strange contrast to the heat which below the poop had
been quite oppressive. The sailors as usual were washing the deck, A great sheet
of water, supplied continuously by the pumps was rolling in tiny wavelets, and
escaping now to starboard, now to larboard through the scupper-holes. After
watching the men for a while as they ran about bare-footed, I could not resist the
desire to join them, so taking off my shoes and stockings I proceeded to dabble
in the flowing water.

Great was my amazement to find the deck perfectly hot to my feet! Curtis
heard my exclamation of surprise, and before I could put my thoughts into
words, said,--

"Yes! there is fire on board!"


CHAPTER IX.

OCTOBER 19th.--Everything, then, is clear. The uneasiness of the crew,
their frequent conferences, Owen's mysterious words, the constant scourings of
the deck and the oppressive heat of the cabins which had been noticed even by
my fellow-passengers, all are explained.

After his grave communication, Curtis remained silent. I shivered with a
thrill of horror; a calamity the most terrible that can befall a voyager stared me in
the face, and it was some seconds before I could recover sufficient composure to
inquire when the fire was first discovered.

"Six days ago," replied the mate.

"Six days ago!" I exclaimed; "why, then, it was that night."

"Yes," he said, interrupting me; "it was the night you heard the disturbance
upon deck. The men on watch noticed a slight smoke issuing from the large
hatchway and immediately called Captain Huntly and myself. We found beyond
all doubt, that the cargo was on fire, and what was worse, that there was no


possibility of getting at the seat of the combustion. What could we do? Why; we
took the only precaution that was practicable under the circumstances, and
resolved most carefully to exclude every breath of air from penetrating into the
hold, For some time I hoped that we had been successful. I thought that the fire
was stifled; but during the last three days there is every reason to make us know
that it has been gaining strength. Do what we will, the deck gets hotter and
hotter, and unless it were kept constantly wet, it would be unbearable to the feet.
But I am glad, Mr. Kazallon," he added; "that you have made the discovery. It is
better that you should know it."

I listened in silence, I was now fully aroused to the gravity of the situation
and thoroughly comprehended how we were in the very face of a calamity which
it seemed that no human power could avert.

"Do you know what has caused the fire?" I presently inquired.

"It probably arose," he answered, "from the spontaneous combustion of the
cotton. The case is rare, but it is far from unknown. Unless the cotton is perfectly
dry when it is shipped, its confinement in a damp or ill-ventilated hold will
sometimes cause it to ignite; and I have no doubt it is this that has brought about
our misfortune."

"But after all," I said, "the cause matters very little. Is there no remedy? Is
there nothing to be done?"

"Nothing; Mr. Kazallon," he said. "As I told you before, we have adopted the
only possible measure within our power to check the fire. At one time I thought
of knocking a hole in the ship's timbers just on her waterline, and letting in just
as much water as the pumps could afterwards get rid of again; but we found the
combustion was right in the middle of the cargo and that we should be obliged to
flood the entire hold before we could get at the right place. That scheme
consequently was no good. During the night, I had the deck bored in various
places and water poured down through the holes; but that again seemed all of no
use. There is only one thing that can be done; we must persevere in excluding
most carefully every breath of outer air, so that perhaps the conflagration
deprived of oxygen may smoulder itself out. That is our only hope."

"But, you say the fire is increasing?"

"Yes; and that shows that in spite of all our care there is some aperture which
we have not been able to discover, by which, somehow or other, air gets into the
hold."

"Have you ever heard of a vessel surviving such circumstances?" I asked.

"Yes, Mr. Kazallon," said Curtis; "it is not at all an unusual thing for ships
laden with cotton to arrive at Liverpool or Havre with a portion of their cargo
consumed; and I have myself known more than one captain run into port with his


deck scorching his very feet, and who, to save his vessel and the remainder of
his freight has been compelled to unload with the utmost expedition. But, in such
cases, of course the fire has been more or less under control throughout the
voyage; with us, it is increasing day by day, and I tell you I am convinced there
is an aperture somewhere which has escaped our notice."

"But would it not be advisable for us to retrace our course, and make for the
nearest land?"

"Perhaps it would,” he answered. "Walter and I, and the boatswain, are going
to talk the matter over seriously with the captain to-day. But, between ourselves,
I have taken the responsibility upon myself; I have already changed the tack to
the south-west; we are now straight before the wind, and consequently we are
sailing towards the coast."

"I need hardly ask," I added; "whether any of the other passengers are at all
aware of the imminent danger in which we are placed."

"None of them," he said; "not in the least; and I hope you will not enlighten
them. We don't want terrified women and cowardly men to add to our
embarrassment; the crew are under orders to keep a strict silence on the subject.
Silence is indispensable."

I promised to keep the matter a profound secret, as I fully entered into
Curtis's views as to the absolute necessity for concealment.


CHAPTER X.

OCTOBER 20th AND 21st.--The "Chancellor" is now crowded with all the
canvas she can carry, and at times her top-masts threaten to snap with the
pressure. But Curtis is ever on the alert; he never leaves his post beside the man
at the helm, and without compromising the safety of the vessel, he contrives by
tacking to the breeze, to urge her on at her utmost speed.

All day long on the 20th, the passengers were assembled on the poop.
Evidently they found the heat of the cabins painfully oppressive, and most of
them lay stretched upon benches and quietly enjoyed the gentle rolling of the
vessel. The increasing heat of the deck did not reveal itself to their well-shod
feet and the constant scouring of the boards did not excite any suspicion in their
torpid minds. M. Letourneur, it is true, did express his surprise that the crew of
an ordinary merchant vessel should be distinguished by such extraordinary
cleanliness, but as I replied to him in a very casual tone, he passed no further
remark. I could not help regretting that I had given Curtis my pledge of silence,
and longed intensely to communicate the melancholy secret to the energetic
Frenchman; for at times when I reflect upon the eight-and-twenty victims who


may probably, only too soon, be a prey to the relentless flames, my heart seems
ready to burst.

The important consultation between captain, mate, lieutenant, and boatswain
has taken place. Curtis has confided the result to me. He says that Huntly, the
captain, is completely demoralized; he has lost all power and energy; and
practically leaves the command of the ship to him. It is now certain the fire is
beyond control, and that sooner or later it will burst out in full violence The
temperature of the crew's quarters has already become almost unbearable. One
solitary hope remained; it is that we may reach the shore before the final
catastrophe occurs. The Lesser Antilles are the nearest land; and although they
are some five or six hundred miles away, if the wind remains north-east there is
yet a chance of reaching them in time.

Carrying royals and studding-sails, the "Chancellor" during the last four-and-
twenty hours has held a steady course. M. Letourneur is the only one of all the
passengers who has remarked the change of tack; Curtis however, has set all
speculation on his part to rest by telling him that he wanted to get ahead of the
wind, and that he was tacking to the west to catch a favourable current.

To-day, the 21st, all has gone on as usual; and as far as the observation of the
passengers has reached, the ordinary routine has been undisturbed. Curtis
indulges the hope even yet that by excluding the air, the fire may be stifled
before it ignites the general cargo; he has hermetically closed every accessible
aperture, and has even taken the precaution of plugging the orifices of the
pumps, under the impression that their suction-tubes, running as they do to the
bottom of the hold, may possibly be channels for conveying some molecules of
air. Altogether, he considers it a good sign that the combustion has not betrayed
itself by some external issue of smoke.

The day would have passed without any incident worth recording if I had not
chanced to overhear a fragment of a conversation which demonstrated that our
situation hitherto precarious enough, had now become most appalling.

As I was sitting on the poop, two of my fellow-passengers, Falsten, the
engineer, and Ruby, the merchant whom I had observed to be often in company,
were engaged in conversation almost close to me. What they said was evidently
not intended for my hearing, but my attention was directed towards them by
some very emphatic gestures of dissatisfaction on the part of Falsten, and I could
not forbear listening to what followed.

"Preposterous! shameful!" exclaimed Falsten; "nothing could be more
imprudent."

"Pooh! pooh!" replied Ruby; "it's all right; it is not the first time I have done
i


"But don't you know that any shock at any time might cause an explosion?"

"Oh, it's all properly secured," said Ruby, "tight enough; I have no fears on
that score, Mr. Falsten."

"But why," asked Falsten, "did you not inform the captain?"

"Just because if I had informed him, he would not have taken the case on
board."

The wind dropped for a few seconds; and for a brief interval I could not
catch what passed; but I could see that Falsten continued to remonstrate, whilst
Ruby answered by shrugging his shoulders. At length I heard Falsten say,--


"Well, at any rate the captain must be informed of this, and the package shall
be thrown overboard. I don't want, to be blown up."

I started. To what could the engineer be alluding? Evidently he had not the
remotest suspicion that the cargo was already on fire. In another moment the
words "picrate of potash" brought me to my feet? and with an involuntary
impulse I rushed up to Ruby, and seized him by the shoulder.

"Is there picrate of potash on board?" I almost shrieked.

"Yes," said Falsten, "a case containing thirty pounds."

"Where is it?" I cried.

"Down in the hold, with the cargo."


CHAPTER XI.

What my feelings were I cannot describe; but it was hardly in terror so much
as with a kind of resignation that I made my way to Curtis on the forecastle, and
made him aware that the alarming character of our situation was now complete,
as there was enough explosive matter on board to blow up a mountain. Curtis
received the information as coolly as it was delivered, and after I had made him
acquainted with all the particulars said,--

"Not a word of this must be mentioned to any one else, Mr. Kazallon, where
is Ruby now?"

"On the poop,” I said.

"Will you then come with me, sir?"

Ruby and Falsten were sitting just as I had left them. Curtis walked straight
up to Ruby, and asked him whether what he had been told was true.

"Yes, quite true," said Ruby, complacently, thinking that the worst that could
befall him would be that he might be convicted of a little smuggling.

I observed that Curtis was obliged for a moment or two to clasp his hands
tightly together behind his back to prevent himself from seizing the unfortunate
passenger by the throat; but suppressing his indignation, he proceeded quietly,
though sternly, to interrogate him about the facts of the case. Ruby only
confirmed what I had already told him. With characteristic Anglo-Saxon
incautiousness he had brought on board with the rest of his baggage, a case
containing no less than thirty pounds of picrate, and had allowed the explosive
matter to be stowed in the hold with as little compunction as a Frenchman would
feel in smuggling a single bottle of wine. He had not informed the captain of the
dangerous nature of the contents of the package, because he was perfectly aware
that he would have been refused permission to bring the package on board.

"Any way," he said, with a shrug of his shoulders, "you can't hang me for it;


and if the package gives you so much concer, you are quite at liberty to throw it
into the sea. My luggage is insured."

I was beside myself with fury, and not being endowed with Curtis's reticence
and self-control, before he could interfere to stop me, I cried out,--

"You fool! don't you know that there is fire on board?"

In an instant I regretted my words. Most earnestly I wished them unuttered,
But it was too late: their effect upon Ruby was electrical. He was paralyzed with
terror his limbs stiffened convulsively; his eye was dilated; he gasped for breath,
and was speechless. All of a sudden he threw up his arms and, as though he
momentarily expected an explosion, he darted down from the poop, and paced
frantically up and down the deck, gesticulating like a madman, and shouting,--

"Fire on board! Fire! Fire!"

On hearing the outcry, all the crew, supposing that the fire had now in reality
broken out, rushed on deck; the rest of the passengers soon joined them, and the
scene that ensued was one of the utmost confusion. Mrs. Kear fell down
senseless on the deck, and her husband, occupied in looking after himself, left
her to the tender mercies of Miss Herbey. Curtis endeavoured to silence Ruby's
ravings, whilst I, in as few words as I could, made M. Letourneur aware of the
extent to which the cargo was on fire. The father's first thought was for Andre
but the young man preserved an admirable composure, and begged his father not
to be alarmed, as the danger was not immediate. Meanwhile the sailors had
loosened all the tacklings of the long-boat; and were preparing to launch it, when
Curtis's voice was heard peremptorily bidding them to desist; he assured them
that the fire had made no further progress; that Mr. Ruby had been unduly
excited and not conscious of what he had said; and he pledged his word that
when the right moment should arrive he would allow them all to leave the ship;
but that moment, he said, had not yet come.

At the sound of a voice which they had learned to honour and respect, the
crew paused in their operations, and the long-boat remained suspended in its
place. Fortunately, even Ruby himself in the midst of his ravings, had not
dropped a word about the picrate that had been deposited in the hold; for
although the mate had a power over the sailors that Captain Huntly had never
possessed, I feel certain that if the true state of the case had been known, nothing
on earth would have prevented some of them, in their consternation, from
effecting an escape. As it was, only Curtis, Falsten, and myself were cognizant
of the terrible secret.

As soon as order was restored, the mate and, I joined Falsten on the poop,
where he had remained throughout the panic, and where we found him with
folded arms, deep in thought, as it might be, solving some hard mechanical


problem. He promised, at my request, that he would reveal nothing of the new
danger to which we were exposed through Ruby's imprudence. Curtis himself
took the responsibility of informing Captain Huntly of our critical situation.

In order to insure complete secrecy, it was necessary to secure the person of
the unhappy Ruby, who, quite beside himself, continued to rave up and down the
deck with the incessant cry of "Fire! fire!" Accordingly Curtis gave orders to
some of his men to seize him and gag him; and before he could make any
resistance the miserable man was captured and safely lodged in confinement in
his own cabin.


CHAPTER XII.

OCTOBER 22nd.--Curtis has told the captain everything; for he persists in
ostensibly recognizing him as his superior officer, and refuses to conceal from
him our true situation. Captain Huntly received the communication in perfect
silence, and merely passing his hand across his forehead as though to, banish
some distressing thought, re-entered his cabin without a word.

Curtis, Lieutenant Walter, Falsten, and myself have been discussing the
chances of our safety, and I am surprised to find with how much composure we
can all survey our anxious predicament.

"There is no doubt" said Curtis, "that we must abandon all hope of arresting
the fire; the heat towards the bow has already become well-nigh unbearable, and
the time must come when the flames will find a vent through the deck. If the sea
is calm enough for us to make use of the boats, well and good; we shall of course
get quit of the ship as quietly as we can; if on the other hand, the weather should
be adverse, or the wind be boisterous, we must stick to our place, and contend
with the flames to the very last; perhaps, after all, we shall fare better with the
fire as a declared enemy than as a hidden one."

Falsten and I agreed with what he said, but I pointed out to him that he had
quite overlooked the fact of there being thirty pounds of combustible matter in
the hold.

"No" he gravely replied, "I have not forgotten it, but it is a circumstance of
which I do not trust myself to think I dare not run the risk of admitting air into
the hold by going down to search for the powder, and yet I know not at what
moment it may explode. No; it is a matter that I cannot take at all into my
reckoning, it must remain in higher hands than mine."

We bowed our heads in a silence which was solemn. In the present state of
the weather, immediate flight was, we knew, impossible.

After a considerable pause, Falsten, as calmly as though he were delivering


some philosophic dogma, observed,--

"The explosion, if I may use the formula of science, is not necessary, but
contingent."

"But tell me, Mr. Falsten," I asked, "is it possible for picrate of potash to
ignite without concussion?"

"Certainly it is," replied the engineer. "Under-ordinary circumstances, picrate
of potash although not MORE inflammable than common powder, yet possesses
the same degree of inflammability."

We now prepared to go on deck. As we left the saloon, in which we had been
sitting, Curtis seized my hand.

"Oh, Mr. Kazallon," he exclaimed, "if you only knew the bitterness of the
agony I feel at seeing this fine vessel doomed to be devoured by flames, and at
being so powerless to save her." Then quickly recovering himself, he continued,
"But I am forgetting myself; you, if no other, must know what I am suffering. It
is all over now," he said more cheerfully.

"Is our condition quite desperate?" I asked.

"It is just this," he answered deliberately "we are over a mine, and already
the match has been applied to the train. How long that train may be, 'tis not for
me to say." And with these words he left me.

The other passengers, in common with the crew, are still in entire ignorance
of the extremity of peril to which we are exposed, although they are all aware
that there is fire in the hold. As soon as the fact was announced, Mr. Kear, after
communicating to Curtis his instructions that he thought he should have the fire
immediately extinguished and intimating that he held him responsible for all
contingencies that might happen, retired to his cabin, where he has remained
ever since, fully occupied in collecting and packing together the more cherished
articles of his property and without the semblance of a care or a thought for his
unfortunate wife, whose condition, in spite of her ludicrous complaints, was
truly pitiable. Miss Herbey, however, is unrelaxing in her attentions, and the
unremitted diligence with which she fulfills her offices of duty, commands my
highest admiration.

OCTOBER 23rd.--This morning, Captain Huntly sent for Curtis into his
cabin, and the mate has since made me acquainted with what passed between
them.

"Curtis," began the captain, his haggard eye betraying only too plainly some
mental derangement, "I am a sailor, am I not?"

"Certainly, captain," was the prompt acquiescence of the mate.

"I do not know how it is," continued the captain, "but I seem bewildered; I
cannot recollect anything. Are we not bound for Liverpool? Ah! yes! of course.


And have we kept a north-easterly direction since we left?"

"No, sir, according to your orders we have been sailing south-east, and here
we are in the tropics."

"And what is the name of the ship?"

"The 'Chancellor,' sir."

"Yes, yes, the 'Chancellor,' so it is. Well, Curtis, I really can't take her back to
the north. I hate the sea, the very sight of it makes me ill, I would much rather
not leave my cabin."

Curtis went on to tell me how he had tried to persuade him that with a little
time and care he would soon recover his indisposition, and feel himself again;
but the captain had interrupted him by saying,--

"Well, well; we shall see by-and-by; but for the present you must take this
for my positive order; you must, from this time, at once take the command of the
ship, and act just as if I were not on board. Under present circumstances, I can
do nothing. My brain is all in a whirl, you cannot tell what I am suffering;" and
the unfortunate man pressed both his hands convulsively against his forehead.

"I weighed the matter carefully for a moment," added Curtis, "and seeing
what his condition too truly was, I acquiesced in all that he required and
withdrew, promising him that all his orders should be obeyed."

After hearing these particulars, I could not help remarking how fortunate it
was that the captain had resigned of his own accord, for although he might not
be actually insane, it was very evident that his brain was in a very morbid
condition.

"I succeed him at a very critical moment;" said Curtis thoughtfully; "but I
shall endeavour to do my duty."

A short time afterwards he sent for the boatswain, and ordered him to
assemble the crew at the foot of the mainmast. As soon as the men were
together, he addressed them very calmly, but very firmly.

"My men," he said, "I have to tell you that Captain Huntly, on account of the
dangerous situation in which circumstances have placed us, and for other reasons
known to myself, has thought right to resign his command to me. From this time
forward, I am captain of this vessel."

Thus quietly and simply the change was effected, and we have the
satisfaction of knowing that the "Chancellor" is now under the command of a
conscientious, energetic man, who will shirk nothing that he believes to be for
our common good. M. Letourneur, Andre, Mr. Falsten, and myself immediately
offered him our best wishes, in which Lieutenant Walter and the boatswain most
cordially joined.

The ship still holds her course south-west and Curtis crowds on all sail and


makes as speedily as possible for the nearest of the Lesser Antilles.


CHAPTER XIII.

OCTOBER 24th to 29th.--For the last five days the sea has been very heavy,
and although the "Chancellor" sails with wind and wave in her favour, yet her
progress is considerably impeded. Here on board this veritable fireship I cannot
help contemplating with a longing eye this vast ocean that surrounds us. The
water supply should be all we need.

"Why not bore the deck?" I said to Curtis. "Why not admit the water by tons
into the hold? What could be the harm? The fire would be quenched; and what
would be easier than to pump the water out again?"

"I have already told you, Mr. Kazallon," said Curtis, "that the very moment
we admit the air, the flames will rush forth to the very top of the masts. No; we
must have courage and patience; we must wait. There is nothing whatever to be
done, except to close every aperture."

The fire continued to progress even more rapidly than we had hitherto
suspected. The heat gradually drove the passengers nearly all, on deck, and the
two stern cabins, lighted, as I said, by their windows in the aft-board were the
only quarters below that were inhabitable. Of these Mrs. Kear occupied one, and
Curtis reserved the other for Ruby, who, a raving maniac, had to be kept rigidly
under restraint. I went down occasionally to see him, but invariably found him in
a state of abject terror, uttering horrible shrieks, as though possessed with the
idea that he was being scorched by the most excruciating heat.

Once or twice, too, I looked in upon the ex-captain. He was always calm and
spoke quite rationally upon any subject except his own profession; but in
connexion with that he prated away the merest nonsense. He suffered greatly, but
steadily declined all my offers of attention, and pertinaciously refused to leave
his cabin.

To-day, an acrid, nauseating smoke made its way through the panellings that
partition off the quarters of the crew. At once Curtis ordered the partition to be
enveloped in wet tarpaulin, but the fumes penetrated even this, and filled the
whole neighbourhood of the ship's bows with a reeking vapour that was
positively stifling. As we listened, too, we could hear a dull rumbling sound, but
we were as mystified as ever to comprehend where the air could have entered
that was evidently fanning the flames. Only too certainly, it was now becoming a
question not of days nor even of hours before we must be prepared for the final
catastrophe. The sea was still running high, and escape by the boats was plainly
impossible. Fortunately, as I have said, the mainmast and the mizzen are of iron;


otherwise the heat at their base would long ago have brought them down and our
chances of safety would have been much imperiled; but by crowding on sail the
"Chancellor" in the full north-east wind continued to make her way with
undiminished speed.

It is now a fortnight since the fire was first discovered, and the proper
working of the ship has gradually become a more and more difficult matter.
Even with thick shoes any attempt to walk upon deck up to the forecastle was
soon impracticable, and the poop, simply because its door is elevated somewhat
above the level of the hold, is now the only available standing-place. Water
began to lose its effect upon the scorched and shrivelling planks; the resin oozed
out from the knots in the wood, the seams burst open, and the tar, melted by the
heat, followed the rollings of the vessel, and formed fantastic patterns about the
deck.

Then to complete our perplexity, the wind shifted suddenly round to the
north-west, whence it blew a perfect hurricane. To no purpose did Curtis do
everything in his power to bring the ship ahull; every effort was vain; the
"Chancellor" could not bear her trysail, so there was nothing to be done but to let
her go with the wind, and drift further and further from the land for which we are
longing so eagerly.

To-day, the 29th, the tempest seemed to reach its height; the waves appeared
to us mountains high, and dashed the spray most violently across the deck. A
boat could not live for a moment in such a sea.

Our situation is terrible. We all wait in silence, some few on the forecastle,
the great proportion of us on the poop. As for the picrate, for the time we have
quite forgotten its existence; indeed it might almost seem as though its explosion
would come as a relief, for no catastrophe, however terrible, could far exceed the
torture of our suspense.

While he had still the remaining chance, Curtis rescued from the store-room
such few provisions as the heat of the compartment allowed him to obtain; and a
lot of cases of salt meat and biscuits, a cask of brandy, some barrels of fresh
water, together with some sails and wraps, a compass and other instruments are
now lying packed in a mass all ready for prompt removal to the boats whenever
we Shall be obliged to leave the ship.

About eight o'clock in the evening, a noise is heard, distinct even above the
raging of the hurricane. The panels of the deck are upheaved, and volumes of
black smoke issue upwards as if from a safety-valve. An universal consternation
seizes one and all: we must leave the volcano which is about to burst beneath our
feet. The crew run to Curtis for orders. He hesitates; looks first at the huge and
threatening waves; looks then at the boats. The long-boat is there, suspended


right along the centre of the deck; but it is impossible to approach it now; the
yawl, however, hoisted on the starboard side, and the whaleboat suspended aft,
are still available. The sailors make frantically for the yawl.

"Stop, stop,” shouts Curtis; "do you mean to cut off our last and only chance
of safety? Would you launch a boat in such a sea as this?"

A few of them, with Owen at their head, give no heed to what he says.
Rushing to the poop, and seizing a cutlass, Curtis shouts again,--

"Touch the tackling of the davit, one of you; only touch it, and I'll cleave
your skull."

Awed by his determined manner, the men retire, some clambering into the
shrouds, whilst others mount to the very top of the masts.

At eleven o'clock, several loud reports are heard, caused by the bursting
asunder of the partitions of the hold. Clouds of smoke issue from the front,
followed by a long tongue of lambent flame that seems to encircle the mizzen-
mast. The fire now reaches to the cabin occupied by Mrs. Kear, who, shrieking
wildly, is brought on deck by Miss Herbey. A moment more, and Silas Huntly
makes his appearance, his face all blackened with the grimy smoke; he bows to
Curtis, as he passes, and then proceeds in the calmest manner to mount the aft-
shrouds, and installs himself at the very top of the mizzen.

The sight of Huntly recalls to my recollection the prisoner still below, and
my first impulse is to rush to the staircase and do what I can to set him free. But
the maniac has already eluded his confinement, and with singed hair and his
clothes already alight, rushes upon deck. Like a salamander he passes across the
burning deck with unscathed feet, and glides through the stifling smoke with
unchoked breath. Not a sound escapes his lips.

Another loud report; the long-boat is shivered into fragments; the middle
panel bursts the tarpaulin that covered it, and a stream of fire, free at length from
the restraint that had held it, rises half-mast high.

"The picrate! the picrate!" shrieks the madman; "we shall all be blown up!
the picrate will blow us all up."

And in an instant, before we can get near him, he has hurled himself, through
the open hatchway, down into the fiery furnace below.


CHAPTER XIV.

OCTOBER 29th:--NIGHT.--The scene, as night came on, was terrible
indeed. Notwithstanding the desperateness of our situation, however, there was
not one of us so paralyzed by fear, but that we fully realized the horror of it all.

Poor Ruby, indeed, is lost and gone, but his last words were productive of


serious consequences. The sailors caught his cry of "Picrate, picrate!" and being
thus for the first time made aware of the true nature of their peril, they resolved
at every hazard to accomplish their escape. Beside themselves with terror, they
either did not or would not, see that no boat could brave the tremendous waves
that were raging around, and accordingly they made a frantic rush towards the
yawl. Curtis again made a vigorous endeavour to prevent them, but this time all
in vain; Owen urged them on, and already the tackling was loosened, so that the
boat was swung over to the ship's side, For a moment it hung suspended in mid-
air, and then, with a final effort from the sailors, it was quickly lowered into the
sea. But scarcely had it touched the water, when it was caught by an enormous
wave which, recoiling with resistless violence, dashed it to atoms against the
"Chancellor's" side.

The men stood aghast; they were dumbfoundered. Long-boat and yawl both
gone, there was nothing now remaining to us but a small whaleboat. Not a word
was spoken; not a sound was heard but the hoarse whistling of the wind, and the
mournful roaring of the flames. From the centre of the ship, which was hollowed
out like a furnace, there issued a column of sooty vapour that ascended to the
sky. All the passengers, and several of the crew, took refuge in the aft-quarters of
the poop. Mrs. Kear was lying senseless on one of the hen-coops, with Miss
Herbey sitting passively at her side; M. Letourneur held his son tightly clasped
to his bosom. I saw Falsten calmly consult his watch, and note down the time in
his memorandum-book, but I was far from sharing his, composure, for I was
overcome by a nervous agitation that I could not suppress.

As far as we knew, Lieutenant Walter, the boatswain, and such of the crew as
were not with us, were safe in the bow; but it was impossible to tell how they
were faring because the sheet of fire intervened like a curtain, and cut off all
communication between stem and stern.

I broke the dismal silence, saying "All over now, Curtis."

"No, sir, not yet," he replied, "now that the panel is open we will set to work,
and pour water with all our might down into the furnace, and may be, we shall
put it out, even yet."

"But how can you work your pumps while the deck is burning? and how can
you get at your men beyond that sheet of flame?"

He made no answer to my impetuous questions, and finding that he had
nothing more to say, I repeated that it was all over now.

After a pause, he said, "As long as a plank of the ship remains to stand on,
Mr. Kazallon, I shall not give up my hope."

But the conflagration raged with redoubled fury, the sea around us was
lighted with a crimson glow, and the clouds above shone with a lurid glare. Long


jets of fire darted across the hatchways, and we were forced to take refuge on the
taffrail at the extreme end of the poop. Mrs. Kear was laid in the whaleboat that
hung from the stern, Miss Herbey persisting to the last in retaining her post by
her side.

No pen could adequately portray the horrors of this fearful night. The
"Chancellor" under bare poles, was driven, like a gigantic fireship with frightful
velocity across the raging ocean; her very speed as it were, making common
cause with the hurricane to fan the fire that was consuming her. Soon there could
be no alternative between throwing ourselves into the sea, or perishing in the
flames.

But where, all this time, was the picrate? perhaps, after all, Ruby had
deceived us and there was no volcano, such as we dreaded, below our feet.

At half-past eleven, when the tempest seems at its very height there is heard
a peculiar roar distinguishable even above the crash of the elements. The sailors
in an instant recognize its import.

"Breakers to starboard!" is the cry.

Curtis leaps on to the netting, casts a rapid glance at the snow-white billows,
and turning to the helmsman shouts with all his might "Starboard the helm!"

But it is too late. There is a sudden shock; the ship is caught up by an
enormous wave; she rises upon her beam ends; several times she strikes the
ground; the mizzen-mast snaps short off level with the deck, falls into the sea,
and the "Chancellor" is motionless.


CHAPTER XV.

THE NIGHT OF THE 29th CONTINUED.--It was not yet midnight; the
darkness was most profound, and we could see nothing. But was it probable that
we had stranded on the coast of America?

Very shortly after the ship had thus come to a standstill a clanking of chains
was heard proceeding from her bows.

"That is well," said Curtis; "Walter and the boatswain have cast both the
anchors. Let us hope they will hold."

Then, clinging to the netting, he clambered along the starboard side, on
which the ship had heeled, as far as the flames would allow him. He clung to the
holdfasts of the shrouds, and in spite of the heavy seas that dashed against the
vessel he maintained his position for a considerable time, evidently listening to
some sound that had caught his ear in the midst of the tempest. In about a quarter
of an hour he returned to the poop.

"Heaven be praised!" he said, "the water is coming in, and perhaps may get


the better of the fire."

"True," said I, "but what then?"

"That," he replied, "is a question for by-and-by. We can now only think of
the present."

Already I fancied that the violence of the flames was somewhat abated, and
that the two opposing elements were in fierce contention. Some plank in the
ship's side was evidently stove in, admitting free passage for the waves. But how,
when the water had mastered the fire, should we be able to master the water?
Our natural course would be to use the pumps, but these, in the very midst of the
conflagration, were quite unavailable.

For three long hours, in anxious suspense, we watched and watched, and
waited. Where we were we could not tell. One thing alone was certain: the tide
was ebbing beneath us, and the waves were relaxing in their violence. Once let
the fire be extinguished, and then, perhaps, there would be room to hope that the
next high tide would set us afloat.

Towards half-past four in the morning the curtain of fire and smoke, which
had shut off communication between the two extremities of the ship, became less
dense, and we could faintly distinguish that party of the crew who had taken
refuge in the forecastle; and before long, although it was impracticable to step
upon the deck, the lieutenant and the boatswain contrived to clamber over the
gunwale, along the rails, and joined Curtis on the poop.

Here they held a consultation, to which I was admitted. They were all of
opinion that nothing could be done until daylight should give us something of an
idea of our actual position. If we then found that we were near the shore, we
would, weather permitting, endeavour to land, either in the boat or upon a raft.
If, on the other hand, no land were in sight, and the "Chancellor" were
ascertained to be stranded on some isolated reef, all we could do would be to get
her afloat, and put her into condition for reaching the nearest coast. Curtis told us
that it was long since he had been able to take any observation of altitude, but
there was no doubt the north-west wind had driven us far to the south; and he
thought, as he was ignorant of the existence of any reef in this part of the
Atlantic, that it was just possible that we had been driven on to the coast of some
portion of South America.

I reminded him that we were in momentary expectation of an explosion, and
suggested that it would be advisable to abandon the ship and take refuge on the
reef. But he would not hear of such a proceeding, said that the reef would
probably be covered at high tide, and persisted in the original resolution, that no
decided action could be taken before the daylight appeared.

I immediately reported this decision of the captain to my fellow passengers.


None of them seem to realize the new danger to which the "Chancellor" may be
exposed by being cast upon an unknown reef, hundreds of miles it may be from
land. All are for the time possessed with one idea, one hope; and that is, that the
fire may now be quenched and the explosion averted.

And certainly their hopes seem in a fair way of being fulfilled. Already the
raging flames that poured forth from the hatches have given place to dense black
smoke, and although occasionally some fiery streaks dart across the dusky
fumes, yet they are instantly extinguished. The waves are doing what pumps and
buckets could never have effected; by their inundation they are steadily stifling
the fire which was as steadily spreading to the whole bulk of the 1700 bales of
cotton.


CHAPTER XVI.

OCTOBER 30th.--At the first gleam of daylight we eagerly scanned the
southern and western horizons, but the morning mists limited our view. Land
was nowhere to be seen. The tide was now almost at its lowest ebb, and the
colour of the few peaks of rock that jutted up around us showed that the reef on
which we had stranded was of basaltic formation. There were now only about six
feet of water around the "Chancellor," though with a full freight she draws about
fifteen. It was remarkable how far she had been carried on to the shelf of rock,
but the number of times that she had touched the bottom before she finally ran
aground left us no doubt that she had been lifted up and borne along on the top
of an enormous wave. She now lies with her stern considerably higher than her
bows, a position which renders walking upon the deck anything but an easy
matter; moreover as the tide-receded she heeled over so much to larboard that at
one time Curtis feared she would altogether capsize; that fear, however, since the
tide has reached its lowest mark, has happily proved groundless.

At six o'clock some violent blows were felt against the ship's side, and at the
same time a voice was distinguished, shouting loudly, "Curtis! Curtis!"
Following the direction of the cries we saw that the broken mizzen-mast was
being washed against the vessel, and in the dusky morning twilight we could
make out the figure of a man clinging to the rigging. Curtis, at the peril of his
life, hastened to bring the man on board, It proved to be none other than Silas
Huntly, who, after being carried overboard with the mast, had thus, almost by a
miracle, escaped a watery grave. Without a word of thanks to his deliverer, the
ex-captain, passive, like an automaton, passed on and took his seat in the most
secluded corner of the poop. The broken mizzen may, perhaps, be of service to
us at some future time, and with that idea it has been rescued from the waves and


lashed securely to the stern.

By this time it was light enough to see for a distance of three miles round;
but as yet nothing could be discerned to make us think that we were near a coast.
The line of breakers ran for about a mile from south-west to north-east, and two
hundred fathoms to the north of the ship an irregular mass of rocks formed a
small islet. This islet rose about fifty feet above the sea, and was consequently
above the level of the highest tides; whilst a sort of causeway, available at low
water, would enable us to reach the island, if necessity required. But there the
reef ended; beyond it the sea again resumed its sombre hue, betokening deep
water. In all probability, then, this was a solitary shoal, unattached to a shore, and
the gloom of a bitter disappointment began to weigh upon our spirits.

In another hour the mists had totally disappeared, and it was broad daylight. I
and M. Letourneur stood watching Curtis as he continued eagerly to scan the
western horizon. Astonishment was written on his countenance; to him it
appeared perfectly incredible that, after our course for so long had been due
south from the Bermudas, no land should be in sight. But not a speck, however
minute, broke the clearly-defined line that joined sea and sky. After a time Curtis
made his way along the netting to the shrouds, and swung himself quickly up to
the top of the mainmast. For several minutes he remained there examining the
open space around, then seizing one of the backstays he glided down and
rejoined us on the poop.

"No land in sight," he said, in answer to our eager looks of inquiry.

At this point Mr. Kear interposed, and in a gruff, ill-tempered tone, asked
Curtis where we were. Curtis replied that he did not know.

"You don't know, sir? Then all I can say is that you ought to know!"
exclaimed the petroleum merchant.

"That may be, sir; but at present I am as ignorant of our whereabouts as you
are yourself," said Curtis.

"Well," said Mr. Kear, "just please to know that I don't want to stay for ever
on your everlasting ship, so I beg you will make haste and start off again."

Curtis condescended to make no other reply than a shrug of the shoulders,
and turning away he informed M. Letourneur and myself that if the sun came out
he intended to take its altitude and find out to what part of the ocean we had
been driven. His next care was to distribute preserved meat and biscuit amongst
the passengers and crew already half fainting with hunger and fatigue, and then
he set to work to devise measures for setting the ship afloat.

The conflagration was greatly abated; no flames now appeared, and although
some black smoke still issued from the interior, yet its volume was far less than
before. The first step was to discover how much water had entered the hold. The


deck was still too hot to walk upon; but after two hours' irrigation the boards
became sufficiently cool for the boatswain to proceed to take some soundings,
and he shortly afterwards announced that there were five feet of water below.
This the captain determined should not be pumped out at present, as he wanted it
thoroughly to do its duty before he got rid of it.

The next subject for consideration was whether it would be advisable to
abandon the vessel, and to take refuge on the reef. Curtis thought not; and the
lieutenant and the boatswain agreed with him. The chances of an explosion were
greatly diminished, as it had been ascertained that the water had reached that part
of the hold in which Ruby's luggage had been deposited; while, on the other
hand, in the event of rough weather, our position even upon the most elevated
points of rock might be very critical. It was accordingly resolved that both
passengers and crew were Safest on board.

Acting upon this decision we proceeded to make a kind of encampment on
the poop, and the few mattresses that were rescued uninjured have been given up
for the use of the two ladies. Such of the crew as had saved their hammocks have
been told to place them under the forecastle where they would have to stow
themselves as best they could, their ordinary quarters being absolutely
uninhabitable.

Fortunately, although the store-room has been considerably exposed to the
heat, its contents are not very seriously damaged, and all the barrels of water and
the greater part of the provisions are quite intact. The stack of spare sails, which
had been packed away in front, is also free from injury. The wind has dropped
considerably since the early morning, and the swell in the sea is far less heavy.
On the whole our spirits are reviving, and we begin to think we may yet find a
way out of our troubles.

M. Letourneur, his son, and I, have just had a long conversation about the
ship's officers. We consider their conduct, under the late trying circumstances, to
have been most exemplary, and their courage, energy, and endurance to have
been beyond all praise. Lieutenant Walter, the boatswain, and Dowlas the
carpenter have all alike distinguished themselves, and made us feel that they are
men to be relied on. As for Curtis, words can scarcely be found to express our
admiration of his character; he is the same as he has ever been, the very life of
his crew, cheering them on by word or gesture; finding an expedient for every
difficulty, and always foremost in every action.

The tide turned at seven this morning, and by eleven all the rocks were
submerged, none of them being visible except the cluster of those which formed
the rim of a small and almost circular basin from 250 to 300 feet in diameter, in
the north angle of which the ship is lying. As the tide rose the white breakers


disappeared, and the sea, fortunately for the "Chancellor," was pretty calm;
otherwise the dashing of the waves against her sides, as she lies motionless,
might have been attended by serious consequences.

As might be supposed, the height of the water in the hold increased with the
tide from five feet to nine; but this was rather a matter for congratulation,
inasmuch as it sufficed to inundate another layer of cotton.

At half-past eleven the sun, which had been behind the clouds since ten
o'clock, broke forth brightly. The captain, who had already in the morning been
able to calculate an horary angle, now prepared to take the meridian altitude, and
succeeded at midday in making his observation most satisfactorily. After retiring
for a short time to calculate the result; he returned to the poop and announced
that we are in lat; 18deg. 5min. N. and long. 45deg. 53min. W., but that the reef
on which we are aground is not marked upon the charts. The only explanation
that can be given for the omission is that the islet must be of recent formation,
and has been caused by some subterranean volcanic disturbance. But whatever
may be the solution of the mystery, here we are 800 miles from land; for such,
on consulting the map, we find to be the actual distance to the coast of Guiana,
which is the nearest shore. Such is the position to which we have been brought,
in the first place, by Huntly's senseless obstinacy, and, secondly, by the furious
north-west gale.

Yet, after all, the captain's communication does not dishearten us. As I said
before, our spirits are reviving. We have escaped the peril of fire; the fear of
explosion is past and gone; and oblivious of the fact that the ship with a hold full
of water is only too likely to founder when she puts out to sea, we feel a
confidence in the future that forbids us to despond.

Meanwhile Curtis prepares to do all that common sense demands. He
proposes, when the fire is quite extinguished, to throw overboard the whole, or
the greater portion of the cargo, including of course, the picrate; he will next
plug up the leak, and then, with a lightened ship, he will take advantage of the
first high tide to quit the reef as speedily as possible.


CHAPTER XVII.

OCTOBER 30th.--Once again I talked to M. Letourneur about our situation,
and endeavoured to animate him with the hope that we should not be detained
for long in our present predicament; but he could not be brought to take a very
sanguine view of our prospects.

"But surely," I protested, "it will not be difficult to throw overboard a few
hundred bales of cotton; two or three days at most will suffice for that."


"Likely enough," he replied, "when the business is once begun; but you must
remember, Mr. Kazallon, that the very heart of the cargo is still smouldering, and
that it will still be several days before any one will be able to venture into the
hold. Then the leak, too, that has to be caulked; and, unless it is stopped up very
effectually, we shall be only doomed most certainly to perish at sea. Don't, then,
be deceiving yourself; it must be three weeks at least before you can expect to
put out to sea. I can only hope meanwhile that the weather will continue
propitious; it wouldn't take many storms to knock the ‘Chancellor,’ shattered as
she is, completely into pieces."

Here, then, was the suggestion of a new danger to which we were to be
exposed; the fire might be extinguished, the water might be got rid of by the
pumps, but, after all, we must be at the mercy of the wind and waves; and,
although the rocky island might afford a temporary refuge from the tempest,
what was to become of passengers and crew if the vessel should be reduced to a
total wreck? I made no remonstrance, however, to this view of our case, but
merely asked M. Letourneur if he had confidence in Robert Curtis?

"Perfect confidence," he answered; "and I acknowledge it most gratefully, as
a providential circumstance, that Captain Huntly had given him the command in
time. Whatever man can do I know that Curtis will not leave undone to extricate
us from our dilemma."

Prompted by this conversation with M. Letoumeur I took the first
opportunity of trying to ascertain from Curtis himself, how long he reckoned we
should be obliged to remain upon the reef; but he merely replied, that it must
depend upon circumstances, and that he hoped the weather would continue
favourable. Fortunately the barometer is rising steadily, and there is every sign of
a prolonged calm.

Meantime Curtis is taking active measures for totally extinguishing the fire.
He is at no great pains to spare the cargo, and as the bales that lie just above the
level of the water are still a-light he has resorted to the expedient of thoroughly
saturating the upper layers of the cotton, in order that the combustion may be
stifled between the moisture descending from above and that ascending from
below. This scheme has brought the pumps once more into requisition. At
present the crew are adequate to the task of working them, but I and some of our
fellow passengers are ready to offer our assistance whenever it shall be
necessary.

With no immediate demand upon our labour, we are thrown upon our own
resources for passing our time. Letourneur, Andre and myself, have frequent
conversations; I also devote an hour or two to my diary. Falsten holds little
communication with any of us, but remains absorbed in his calculations, and


amuses himself by tracing mechanical diagrams with ground-plan, section,
elevation, all complete. It would be a happy inspiration if he could invent some
mighty engine that could set us all afloat again. Mr. and Mrs. Kear, too, hold
themselves aloof from their fellow passengers, and we are not sorry to be
relieved from the necessity of listening to their incessant grumbling;
unfortunately, however, they carry off Miss Herbey with them, so that we enjoy
little or nothing of the young lady's society. As for Silas Huntly, he has become a
complete nonentity; he exists, it is true, but merely, it would seem, to vegetate.

Hobart, the steward, an obsequious, sly sort of fellow, goes through his
routine of duties just as though the vessel were pursuing her ordinary course;
and, as usual, is continually falling out with Jynxstrop, the cook, an impudent,
ill-favoured negro, who interferes with the other sailors in a manner which, I
think, ought not to be allowed.

Since it appears likely that we shall have abundance of time on our hands, I
have proposed to M. Letourneur and his son that we shall together explore the
reef on which we are stranded. It is not very probable that we shall be able to
discover much about the origin of this strange accumulation of rock, yet the
attempt will at least occupy us for some hours, and will relieve us from the
monotony of our confinement on board. Besides, as the reef is not marked in any
of the maps, I could not but believe that it would be rendering a service to
hydrography if we were to take an accurate plan of the rocks, of which Curtis
could afterwards verify the true position by a second observation made with a
closer precision than the one he has already taken.

M. Letourneur agrees to my proposal, Curtis has promised to let us have the
boat and some sounding-lines, and to allow one of the sailors to accompany us;
so to-morrow morning, we hope to make our little voyage of investigation.


CHAPTER XVIII.

OCTOBER 31st to NOVEMBER 5th.--Our first proceeding on the morning
of the 31st was to make the proposed tour of the reef, which is about a quarter of
a mile long. With the aid of our sounding-lines we found that the water was
deep, right up to the very rocks, and that no shelving shores prevented us
coasting along them. There was not a shadow of doubt as to the rock being of
purely volcanic origin, upheaved by some mighty subterranean convulsion. It is
formed of blocks of basalt, arranged in perfect order, of which the regular prisms
give the whole mass the effect of being one gigantic crystal; and the remarkable
transparency of the sea enabled us plainly to observe the curious shafts of the
prismatic columns that support the marvelous substructure.


"This is indeed a singular island," said M. Letourneur; "evidently it is of
quite a recent origin."

"Yes, father," said Andre, "and I should think it has been caused by a
phenomenon similar to those which produced the Julia Island, off the coast of
Sicily, or the group of the Santorini, in the Grecian Archipelago. One could
almost fancy that it had been created expressly for the ‘Chancellor’ to stand
upon."

"It is very certain," I observed, "that some upheaving has lately taken place.
This is by no means an unfrequented part of the Atlantic, so that it is not at all
likely that it could have escaped the notice of sailors if it had been always in
existence; yet it is not marked even in the most modern charts. We must try and
explore it thoroughly and give future navigators the benefit of our observations."

"But, perhaps, it will disappear as it came," said Andre. "You are no doubt
aware, Mr. Kazallon, that these volcanic islands sometimes have a very
transitory existence. Not impossibly, by the time it gets marked upon the maps it
may no longer be here.”

"Never mind, my boy," answered his father, "it is better to give warning of a
danger that does not exist than overlook one that does. I daresay the sailors will
not grumble much, if they don't find a reef where we have marked one."

"No, I daresay not, father," said Andre "and after all this island is very likely
as firm as a continent. However, if it is to disappear, I expect Captain Curtis
would be glad to see it take its departure as soon as possible after he has finished
his repairs; it would save him a world of trouble in getting his ship afloat."

"Why, what a fellow you are Andre!" I said, laughing, "I believe you would
like to rule Nature with a magic wand; first of all, you would call up a reef from
the depth of the ocean to give the 'Chancellor' time to extinguish her flames, and
then you would make it disappear just that the ship might be free again."

Andre smiled; then, in a more serious tone, he expressed his gratitude for the
timely help that had been vouchsafed us in our hour of need.

The more we examined the rocks that formed the base of the little island, the
more we became convinced that its formation was quite recent, Not a mollusk,
not a tuft of seaweed was found clinging to the sides of the rocks; not a germ had
the wind carried to its surface, not a bird had taken refuge amidst the crags upon
its summits. To a lover of natural history, the spot did not yield a single point of
interest; the geologist alone would find subject of study in the basaltic mass.

When we reached the southern point of the island I proposed that we should
disembark. My companions readily assented, young Letourneur jocosely
observing that if the little island was destined to vanish, it was quite right that it
should first be visited by human beings. The boat was accordingly brought


alongside, and we set, foot upon the reef, and began to ascend the gradual slope
that leads to its highest elevation.

The walking was not very rough, and as Andre could get along tolerably well
without the assistance of an arm, he led the way, his father and I following close
behind. A quarter of an hour sufficed to bring us to the loftiest point in the islet,
when we Seated ourselves on the basaltic prism that crowned its summit.

Andre took a sketch-book from his pocket, and proceeded to make a drawing
of the reef. Scarcely had he completed the outline when his father exclaimed,--

"Why, Andre, you have drawn a ham!"

"Something uncommonly like it, I confess," replied Andre. "I think we had
better ask Captain Curtis to let us call our island Ham Rock."

"Good," said I; "though sailors will need to keep it at a respectful distance,
for they will scarcely find that their teeth are strong enough to tackle with it."

M. Letourneur was quite correct; the outline of the reef as it stood clearly
defined against the deep green water resembled nothing so much, as a fine York
ham, of which the little creek, where the "Chancellor" had been stranded,
corresponded to the hollow place above the knuckle. The tide at this time was
low, and the ship now lay heeled over very much to the starboard side, the few
points of rock that emerged in the extreme south of the reef plainly marking the
narrow passage through which she had been forced before she finally ran
aground.

As soon as Andre had finished his sketch we descended by a slope as gradual
as that by which we had come up, and made our way towards the west. We had
not gone very far when a beautiful grotto, perfect as an architectural structure,
arrested our attention, M. Letourneur and Andre who have visited the Hebrides,
pronounced it to be a Fingal's cave in miniature; a Gothic chapel that might form
a fit vestibule for the cathedral cave of Staffa. The basaltic rocks had cooled
down into the same regular concentric prisms; there was the same dark canopied
roof with its interstices filled up with its yellow lutings; the same precision of
outline in the prismatic angles, sharp as though chiselled by a sculptor's hand;
the same sonorous vibration of the air across the basaltic rocks, of which the
Gaelic poets have feigned that the harps of the Fingal minstrelsy were made. But
whereas at Staffa the floor of the cave is always covered with a sheet of water,
here the grotto was beyond the reach of all but the highest waves, whilst the
prismatic shafts themselves formed quite a solid pavement.

After remaining nearly an hour in our newly-discovered grotto we returned
to the "Chancellor," and communicated the result of our explorations to Curtis,
who entered the island upon his chart by the name that Andre Letourneur had
proposed.


Since its discovery we have not permitted a day to pass without spending
some time in our Ham Rock grotto. Curtis has taken an opportunity of visiting it,
but he is too preoccupied with other matters to have much interest to spare for
the wonders of nature. Falsten, too, came once and examined the character of the
rocks, knocking and chipping them about with all the mercilessness of a
geologist. Mr. Kear would not trouble himself to leave the ship; and although I
asked his wife to join us in one of our excursions she declined, upon the plea that
the fatigue, as well as the inconvenience of embarking in the boat, would be
more than she could bear.

Miss Herbey, only too thankful to escape even for an hour from her
capricious mistress, eagerly accepted M. Letourneur's invitation to pay a visit to
the reef but to her great disappointment Mrs. Kear at first refused point-blank to
allow her to leave the ship. I felt intensely annoyed, and resolved to intercede in
Miss Herbey's favour; and as I had already rendered that self-indulgent lady
sundry services which she thought she might probably be glad again to accept, I
gained my point, and Miss Herbey has several times been permitted to
accompany us across the rocks, where the young girl's delight at her freedom has
been a pleasure to behold.

Sometimes we fish along the shore, and, then enjoy a luncheon in the grotto,
whilst the basalt columns vibrate like harps to the breeze. This arid reef, little as
it is, compared with the cramped limits of the "Chancellor's" deck is like some
vast domain; soon there will be scarcely a stone with which we are not familiar,
scarcely a portion of its surface which we have not merrily trodden, and I am
sure that when the hour of departure arrives we shall leave it with regret.

In the course of conversation, Andre Letourneur one day happened to say
that he believed the island of Staffa belonged to the Macdonald family, who let it
for the small sum of 12 pounds a year.

"I suppose then," said Miss Herbey, "that we should hardly get more than
half-a-crown a year for our pet little island."

"IT don't think you would get a penny for it, Miss Herbey; but are you
thinking of taking a lease?" I said, laughing.

"Not at present," she said; then added, with a half-suppressed sigh, "and yet
it is a place where I have seemed to know what it is to be really happy."

Andre murmured some expression of assent, and we all felt that there was
something touching in the words of the orphaned, friendless girl who had found
her long-lost sense of happiness on a lonely rock in the Atlantic.


CHAPTER XIX.


NOVEMBER 6th to NOVEMBER 15th.--For the first five days after the
"Chancellor" had run aground, there was a dense black smoke continually rising
from the hold; but it gradually diminished until the 6th of November, when we
might consider that the fire was extinguished. Curtis, nevertheless, deemed it
prudent to persevere in working the pumps, which he did until the entire hull of
the ship, right up to the deck, had been completely inundated.

The rapidity, however, with which the water, at every retreat of the tide,
drained off to the level of the sea, was an indication that the leak must be of
considerable magnitude; and such, on investigation, proved to be the case. One
of the sailors, named Flaypole, dived one day at low water to examine the extent
of the damage, and found that the hole was not much less than four feet square,
and was situated thirty feet fore of the helm, and two feet above the rider of the
keel; three planks had been stoved in by a sharp point of rock, and it was only a
wonder that the violence with which the heavily-laden vessel had been thrown
ashore did not result in the smashing in of many parts besides.

As it would be a couple of days or more before the hold would be in a
condition for the bales of cotton to be removed for the carpenter to examine the
damage from the interior of the ship, Curtis employed the interval in having the
broken mizzen-mast repaired. Dowlas the carpenter, with considerable skill,
contrived to mortice it into its former stump, and made the junction thoroughly
secure by strong iron-belts and bolts. The shrouds, the stays and backstays, were
then carefully refitted, some of the sails were changed, and the whole of the
running rigging was renewed. Injury, to some extent, had been done to the poop
and to the crew's lockers, in the front; but time and labour were all that were
wanted to make them good; and with such a will, did every one set to work that
it was not long before all the cabins were again available for use.

On the 8th the unlading of the ship commenced. Pulleys and tackling were
put over the hatches, and passengers and crew together proceeded to haul up the
heavy bales which had been deluged so frequently by water that the cotton was
all but spoiled. One by one the sodden bales were placed in the boat to be
transported to the reef. After the first layer of cotton had been removed it
became necessary to drain off part of the water that filled the hold. For this
purpose the leak in the side had somehow or other to be stopped, and this was an
operation which was cleverly accomplished by Dowlas and Flaypole, who
contrived to dive at low tide and nail a sheet of copper over the entire hole. This,
however, of itself would have been utterly inadequate to sustain the pressure that
would arise from the action of the pumps; so Curtis ordered that a number of the
bales should be piled up inside against the broken planks. The scheme succeeded
very well, and as the water got lower and lower in the hold the men were


enabled to resume their task of unlading.

Curtis thinks it quite probable that the leaks may be mended from the
interior. By far the best way of repairing the damage would be to careen the ship,
and to shift the planking, but the appliances are wanting for such an undertaking;
moreover, any bad weather which might occur while the ship was on her flank
would only too certainly be fatal to her altogether. But the captain has very little
doubt that by some device or other he shall manage to patch up the hole in such
a way as will insure our reaching land in safety.

After two days' toil the water was entirely reduced and without further
difficulty the unlading was completed. All of us, including even Andre
Letourneur, have been taking our turn at the pumps, for the work is so extremely
fatiguing that the crew require some occasional respite; arms and back soon
become strained and weary with the incessant swing of the handles, and I can
well understand the dislike which sailors always express to the labour.

One thing there is which is much in our favour; the ship lies on a firm and
solid bottom, and we have the satisfaction of knowing that we are not contending
with a flood that encroaches faster than it can be resisted. Heaven grant that we
may not be called to make like efforts, and to make them hopelessly, for a
foundering ship!


CHAPTER XX.

NOVEMBER 15th to 20th.--The examination of the hold has at last been
made. Amongst the first things that were found was the case of picrate, perfectly
intact; having neither been injured by the water, nor of course reached by the
flames. Why it was not at once pitched into the sea I cannot say; but it was
merely conveyed to the extremity of the island, and there it remains.

While they were below, Curtis and Dowlas made themselves acquainted with
the full extent of the mischief that had been done by the conflagration. They
found that the deck and the cross-beams that supported it had been much less
injured than they expected, and the thick, heavy planks had only been scorched
very superficially. But the action of the fire on the flanks of the ship had been of
a much more serious character; a long portion of the inside boarding had been
burnt away, and the very ribs of the vessel were considerably damaged; the
oakum caulkings had all started away from the butt-ends and seams; so much so
that it was little short of a miracle that the whole ship had not long since gaped
completely open.

The captain and the carpenter returned to the deck with anxious faces. Curtis
lost no time in assembling passengers and crew, and announcing to them the


facts of the case.

"My friends," he said, "I am here to tell you that the 'Chancellor’ has
sustained far greater injuries than we suspected, and that her hull is very
seriously damaged. If we had been stranded anywhere else than on a barren reef,
that may at any time be overwhelmed by a tempestuous sea I should not have
hesitated to take the ship to pieces, and construct a smaller vessel that might
have carried us safely to land; but I dare not run the risk of remaining here. We
are now 800 miles from the coast of Paramaribo, the nearest portion of Dutch
Guiana, and in ten or twelve days, if the weather should be favourable, I believe
we could reach the shore. What I now propose to do is to stop the leak by the
best means we can command, and make at once for the nearest port."

As no better plan seemed to suggest itself, Curtis's proposal was
unanimously accepted Dowlas and his assistants immediately set to work to
repair the charred framework of the ribs, and to stop the leak; they took care
thoroughly to caulk from the outside all the seams that were above low water
mark; lower than that they were unable to work, and had to content themselves
with such repairs as they could effect in the interior. But after all the pains there
is no doubt the "Chancellor" is not fit for a long voyage, and would be
condemned as unseaworthy at any port at which we might put in.

To-day, the 20th, Curtis having done all that human power could do to repair
his ship, determined to put her to sea.

Ever since the "Chancellor" had been relieved of her cargo, and of the water
in her hold, she had been able to float in the little natural basin into which she
had been driven. The basin was enclosed on either hand by rocks that remained
uncovered even at high water, but was sufficiently wide to allow the vessel to
turn quite round at its broadest part, and by means of hawsers fastened on the
reef to be brought with her bows towards the south; while, to prevent her being
carried back on to the reef, she has been anchored fore and aft.

To all appearance, then, it seemed as though it would be an easy matter to put
the "Chancellor" to sea; if the wind were favourable the sails would be hoisted, if
otherwise, she would have to be towed through the narrow passage. All seemed
simple. But unlooked-for difficulties had yet to be surmounted.

The mouth of the passage is guarded by a kind of ridge of basalt, which at
high tide we knew was barely covered with sufficient water to float the
"Chancellor," even when entirely unfreighted. To be sure she had been carried
over the obstacle once before, but then, as I have already said, she had been
caught up by an enormous wave, and might have been said to be LIFTED over
the barrier into her present position. Besides, on that ever-memorable night,
there had not only been the ordinary spring-tide, but an equinoctial tide, such a


one as could not be expected to occur again for many months. Waiting was out
of the question; so Curtis determined to run the risk, and to take advantage of the
spring-tide, which would occur to-day, to make an attempt to get the ship,
lightened as she was, over the bar; after which, he might ballast her sufficiently
to sail.

The wind was blowing from the north-west, and consequently right in the
direction of the passage. The captain, however, after a consultation, preferred to
tow the ship over the ridge, as he considered it was scarcely safe to allow a
vessel of doubtful stability at full sail to charge an obstacle that would probably
bring her to a dead lock. Before the operation was commenced, Curtis took the
precaution of having an anchor ready in the stern, for, in the event of the attempt
being unsuccessful, it would be necessary to bring the ship back to her present
moorings. Two more anchors were next carried outside the passage, which was
not more than two hundred feet in length. The chains were attached to the
windlass, the sailors worked away at the handspikes, and at four o'clock in the
afternoon the "Chancellor" was in motion.

High tide would be at twenty minutes past four, and at ten minutes before
that time the ship had been hauled as far as her sea-range would allow; her keel
grazed the ridge, and her progress was arrested. When the lowest part of her
stern, however, just cleared the obstruction, Curtis deemed that there was no
longer any reason why the mechanical action of the wind should not be brought
to bear and contribute its assistance. Without delay, all sails were unfurled and
trimmed to the wind. The tide was exactly at its height, passengers and crew
together were at the windlass, M. Letourneur, Andre, Falsten, and myself being
at the starboard bar. Curtis stood upon the poop, giving his chief attention to the
sails; the lieutenant was on the forecastle; the boatswain by the helm. The sea
seemed propitiously calm and, as it swelled gently to and fro, lifted the ship
several times.

"Now, my boys," said Curtis in his calm clear voice, "all together! Off!"

Round went the windlass; click, click, clanked the chains as link by link they
were forced through the hawse-holes.

The breeze freshened, and the masts gave to the pressure of the sails, but
round and round we went, keeping time in regular monotony to the sing-song
tune hummed by one of the sailors.

We had gained about twenty feet, and were redoubling our efforts when the
ship grounded again.

And now no effort would avail; all was in vain; the tide began to turn; and
the "Chancellor" would not advance an inch. Was there time to go back? She
would inevitably go to pieces if left balanced upon the ridge. In an instant the


captain has ordered the sails to be furled, and the anchor dropped from the stern.
One moment of terrible anxiety, and all is well.
The "Chancellor" tacks to stern, and glides back into the basin, which is once
more her prison.
"Well, captain,” says the boatswain, "what's to be done now?"
"I don't know" said Curtis, "but we shall get across somehow."


CHAPTER XXI.

NOVEMBER 21st to 24th.--There was assuredly no time to be lost before
we ought to leave Ham Rock reef. The barometer had been falling ever since the
morming, the sea was getting rougher, and there was every symptom that the
weather, hitherto so favourable, was on the point of breaking; and in the event of
a gale the "Chancellor" must inevitably be dashed to pieces on the rocks.

In the evening, when the tide was quite low, and the rocks uncovered, Curtis,
the boatswain, and Dowlas went to examine the ridge which had proved so
serious an obstruction, Falsten and I accompanied them. We came to the
conclusion that the only way of effecting a passage was by cutting away the
rocks with pikes over a surface measuring ten feet by six. An extra depth of nine
or ten inches would give a sufficient gauge, and the channel might be accurately
marked out by buoys; in this way it was conjectured the ship might be got over
the ridge and so reach the deep water beyond.

"But this basalt is as hard as granite," said the boatswain; "besides, we can
only get at it at low water, and consequently could only work at it for two hours
out of the twenty-four."

"All the more reason why we should begin at once, boatswain," said Curtis.

"But if it is to take us a month, captain, perhaps by that time the ship may be
knocked to atoms. Couldn't we manage to blow up the rock? we have got some
powder on board."

"Not enough for that;" said the boatswain.

"You have something better than powder," said Falsten.

"What's that?" asked the captain.

"Picrate of potash," was the reply.

And so the explosive substance with which poor Ruby had so grievously
imperilled the vessel was now to serve her in good stead, and I now saw what a
lucky thing it was that the case had been deposited safely on the reef, instead of
being thrown into the sea.

Picric acid is a crystalline bitter product extracted from coal-tar, and forming,
in combination with potash, a yellow salt known as picrate of potash. The


explosive power of this substance is inferior to that of gun-cotton or of dynamite,
but far greater than that of ordinary gunpowder; one grain of picric powder
producing an effect equal to that of thirteen grains of common powder. Picrate is
easily ignited by any sharp or violent shock, and some gun-priming which we
had in our possession would answer the purpose of setting it alight.

The sailors went off at once for their pikes, and Dowlas and his assistants,
under the direction of Falsten, who, as an engineer, understood such matters,
proceeded to hollow out a mine wherein to deposit the powder. At first we hoped
that everything would be ready for the blasting to take place on the following
morning, but when daylight appeared we found that the men, although they had
laboured with a will, had only been able to work for an hour at low water and
that four tides must ebb before the mine had been sunk to the required depth.

Not until eight o'clock on the morning of the 23rd was the work complete.
The hole was bored obliquely in the rock, and was large enough to contain about
ten pounds of explosive matter. Just as the picrate was being introduced into the
aperture, Falsten interposed:--

"Stop," he said, "I think it will be best to mix the picrate with common
powder, as that will allow us to fire the mine with a match instead of the gun-
priming which would be necessary to produce a shock. Besides, it is an
understood thing that the addition of gunpowder renders picrate far more
effective in blasting such rocks as this, as then the violence of the picrate
prepares the way for the powder which, slower in its action, will complete the
disseverment of the basalt."

Falsten is not a great talker, but what he does say is always very much to the
point. His good advice was immediately followed; the two substances were
mixed together, and after a match had been introduced the compound was
rammed closely into the hole.

Notwithstanding that the "Chancellor" was at a distance from the rocks that
insured her from any danger of being injured by the explosion, it was thought
advisable that the passengers and crew should take refuge in the grotto at the
extremity of the reef, and even Mr. Kear, in spite of his many objections, was
forced to leave the ship. Falsten, as soon as he had set fire to the match, joined us
in our retreat.

The train was to burn for ten minutes, and at the end of that time the
explosion took place; the report, on account of the depth of the mine, being
muffled, and much less noisy than we had expected. But the operation had been
perfectly successful. Before we reached the ridge we could see that the basalt
had been literally reduced to powder, and that a little channel, already being
filled by the rising tide, had been cut right through the obstacle. A loud hurrah


rang through the air; our prison-doors were opened, and we were prisoners no
more!

At high tide the "Chancellor" weighed anchor and floated out into the open
sea, but she was not in a condition to sail until she had been ballasted; and for
the next twenty-four hours the crew were busily employed in taking up blocks of
stone, and such of the bales of cotton as had sustained the least amount of injury.

In the course of the day, M. Letourneur, Andre, Miss Herbey, and I took a
farewell walk round the reef, and Andre with artistic skill, carved on the wall of
the grotto the word "Chancellor,"--the designation Ham Rock, which we had
given to the reef,--and the date of our running aground. Then we bade adieu to
the scene of our three week's sojourn, where we had passed days that to some at
least of our party will be reckoned as far from being the least happy of their
lives.

At high tide this morning, the 24th, with low, top, and gallant sails all set, the
"Chancellor" started on her onward way, and two hours later the last peak of
Ham Rock had vanished below the horizon.


CHAPTER XXII.

NOVEMBER 24th to DECEMBER Ist.--Here we were then once more at
sea, and although on board a ship of which the stability was very questionable,
we had hopes, if the wind continued favourable, of reaching the coast of Guiana
in the course of a few days.

Our way was south-west and consequently with the wind, and although
Curtis would not crowd on all sail lest the extra speed should have a tendency to
spring the leak afresh, the "Chancellor" made a progress that was quite
satisfactory. Life on board began to fall back into its former routine; the feeling
of insecurity and the consciousness that we were merely retracing our path doing
much, however, to destroy the animated intercourse that would otherwise go on
between passenger and passenger.

The first few days passed without any incident worth recording, then on the
29th, the wind shifted to the north, and it became necessary to brace the yards,
trim the sails, and take a starboard tack. This made the ship lurch very much on
one side, and as Curtis felt that she was labouring far too heavily, he clued up the
top-gallants, prudently reckoning that, under the circumstances, caution was far
more important than speed.

The night came on dark and foggy. The breeze freshened considerably, and,
unfortunately for us, hailed from the north-west. Although we carried no top-
sails at all, the ship seemed to heel over more than ever. Most of the passengers


had retired to their cabins, but all the crew remained on deck, whilst Curtis never
quitted his post upon the poop.

Towards two o'clock in the morning I was myself preparing to go to my
cabin, when Burke, one of the sailors who had been down into the hold, came on
deck with the ominous cry,--

"Two feet of water below."

In an instant Curtis and the boatswain had descended the ladder. The startling
news was only too true; the sea-water was entering the hold, but whether the
leak had sprung afresh, or whether the caulking in some of the seams was
insufficient, it was then impossible to determine; all that could be done was to let
the ship go with the wind and wait for day.

At daybreak they sounded again:--"Three feet of water!" was the report, I
glanced at Curtis, his lips were white, but he had not lost his self-possession. He
quietly informed such of the passengers as were already on deck of the new
danger that threatened us; it was better that they should know the worst, and the
fact could not be long concealed. I told M. Letourneur that I could not help
hoping that there might yet be time to reach the land before the last crisis came.
Falsten was about to give vent to an expression of despair, but he was soon
silenced by Miss Herbey asserting her confidence that all would yet be well.

Curtis at once divided the crew into two sets, and made them work
incessantly, turn and turn about at the pumps. The men applied themselves to
their task with resignation rather than with ardour; the labour was hard and
scarcely repaid them; the pumps were constantly getting out of order, the valves
being choked up by the ashes and bits of cotton that were floating about in the
hold, while every moment that was spent in cleaning or repairing them was so
much time lost.

Slowly, but surely, the water continued to rise, and on the following morning
the soundings gave five feet for its depth, I noticed that Curtis's brow contracted
each time that the boatswain or the lieutenant brought him their report. There
was no doubt it was only a question of time, and not for an instant must the
efforts for keeping down the level be relaxed. Already the ship had sunk a foot
lower in the water, and as her weight increased she no longer rose buoyantly
with the waves, but pitched and rolled considerably.

All yesterday, and last night, the pumping continued; but still the sea gained
upon us. The crew are weary and discouraged, but the second officer and the
boatswain set them a fine example of endurance, and the passengers have now
begun to take their turn at the pumps.

But all are conscious of toiling almost against hope; we are no longer
secured firmly to the solid soil of the Ham Rock reef, but we are floating over an


abyss which daily, nay hourly, threatens to swallow us into its depths.


CHAPTER XXIII.

DECEMBER 2nd and 3rd.--For four hours we have succeeded in keeping the
water in the hold to one level; now, however, it is very evident that the time
cannot be far distant when the pumps will be quite unequal to their task.

Yesterday Curtis, who does not allow himself a minute's rest, made a
personal inspection of the hold. I, with the boatswain and carpenter,
accompanied him. After dislodging some of the bales of cotton we could hear a
splashing, or rather gurgling sound; but whether the water was entering at the
original aperture, or whether it found its way in through a general dislocation of
the seams, we were unable to discover. But whichever might be the case, Curtis
determined to try a plan which, by cutting off communication between the
interior and exterior of the vessel, might, if only for a few hours, render her hull
more watertight. For this purpose he had some strong, well-tarred sails drawn
upwards by ropes from below the keel, as high as the previous leaking-place,
and then fastened closely and securely to the side of the hull. The scheme was
dubious, and the operation difficult, but for a time it was effectual, and at the
close of the day the level of the water had actually been reduced by several
inches. The diminution was small enough, but the consciousness that more water
was escaping through the scupper-holes than was finding its way into the hold
gave us fresh courage to persevere with our work.

The night was dark, but the captain carried all the sail he could, eager to take
every possible advantage of the wind, which was freshening considerably. If he
could have sighted a ship he would have made signals of distress, and would not
have hesitated to transfer the passengers, and even have allowed the crew to
follow, if they were ready to forsake him; for himself his mind was made up, he
should remain on board the "Chancellor" until she foundered beneath his feet.
No sail, however, hove in sight; consequently escape by such means was out of
our power.

During the night the canvas covering yielded to the pressure of the waves,
and this morning, after taking the sounding, the boatswain could not suppress an
oath when he announced "Six feet of water in the hold!"

The ship, then, was filling once again, and already had sunk considerably
below her previous water-line. With aching arms and bleeding hands we worked
harder than ever at the pumps, and Curtis makes those who are not pumping
form a line and pass buckets, with all the speed they can, from hand to hand.

But all in vain! At half-past eight more water is reported in the hold, and


some of the sailors, overcome by despair, refuse to work one minute longer.

The first to abandon his post was Owen, a man whom I have mentioned
before, as exhibiting something of a mutinous spirit, He is about forty years of
age, and altogether unprepossessing in appearance; his face is bare, with the
exception of a reddish beard, which terminates in a point; his forehead is
furrowed with sinister-looking wrinkles, his lips curl inwards, and his ears
protrude, whilst his bleared and bloodshot eyes are encircled with thick red
rings.

Amongst the five or six other men who had struck work, I noticed Jynxstrop
the cook, who evidently shared all Owen's ill feelings.

Twice did Curtis order the men back to the pumps, and twice did Owen,
acting as spokesman for the rest, refuse; and when Curtis made a step forward as
though to approach him, he said savagely,--

"I advise you not to touch me," and walked away to the forecastle.

Curtis descended to his cabin, and almost immediately returned with a
loaded revolver in his hand.

For a moment Owen surveyed the captain with a frown of defiance; but at a
sign from Jynxstrop he seemed to recollect himself; and, with the remainder of
the men, he returned to his work.


CHAPTER XXIV.

DECEMBER 4th.--The first attempt at mutiny being thus happily
suppressed, it is to be hoped that Curtis will succeed as well in future. An
insubordinate crew would render us powerless indeed.

Throughout the night the pumps were kept, without respite, steadily at work,
but without producing the least sensible benefit. The ship became so water-
logged and heavy that she hardly rose at all to the waves, which consequently
often washed over the deck and contributed their part towards aggravating our
case. Our situation was rapidly becoming as terrible as it had been when the fire
was raging in the midst of us; and the prospect of being swallowed by the
devouring billows was no less formidable than that of perishing in the flames.

Curtis kept the men up to the mark, and, willing or unwilling, they had no
alternative but to work on as best they might; but, in spite of all their efforts, the
water perpetually rose, till, at length, the men in the hold who were passing the
buckets found themselves immersed up to their waists and were obliged to come
on deck.

This morning, after a somewhat protracted consultation with Walter and the
boatswain, Curtis resolved to abandon the ship. The only remaining boat was far


too small to hold us all, and it would therefore be necessary to construct a raft
that should carry those who could not find room in her. Dowlas the carpenter,
Mr. Falsten, and ten sailors were told off to put the raft in hand, the rest of the
crew being ordered to continue their work assiduously at the pumps, until the
time came and everything was ready for embarkation.

Hatchet or saw in hand, the carpenter and his assistants made a beginning
without delay by cutting and trimming the spare yards and extra spars to a proper
length. These were then lowered into the sea, which was propitiously calm, so as
to favour the operation (which otherwise would have been very difficult) of
lashing them together into a firm framework, about forty feet long and twenty-
five feet wide, upon which the platform was to be supported.

I kept my own place steadily at the pumps, and Andre Letourneur worked at
my side; I often noticed his father glance at him sorrowfully, as though he
wondered what would become of him if he had to struggle with waves to which
even the strongest man could hardly fail to succumb. But come what may, his
father will never forsake him, and I myself shall not be wanting in rendering him
whatever assistance I can.

Mrs. Kear, who had been for some time in a state of drowsy
unconsciousness, was not informed of the immediate danger, but when Miss
Herbey, looking somewhat pale with fatigue, paid one of her flying visits to the
deck, I warned her to take every precaution for herself and to be ready for any
emergency.

"Thank you, doctor, I am always ready," she cheerfully replied, and returned
to her duties below. I saw Andre follow the young girl with his eyes, and a look
of melancholy interest passed over his countenance.

Towards eight o'clock in the evening the framework for the raft was almost
complete, and the men were lowering empty barrels, which had first been
securely bunged, and were lashing them to the woodwork to insure its floating.

Two hours later and suddenly there arose the startling cry, "We are sinking!
we are sinking!"

Up to the poop rushed Mr. Kear, followed immediately by Falsten and Miss
Herbey, who were bearing the inanimate form of Mrs. Kear. Curtis ran to his
cabin, instantly returning with a chart; a sextant, and a compass in his hand.

The scene that followed will ever be engraven in my memory; the cries of
distress, the general confusion, the frantic rush of the sailors towards the raft that
was not yet ready to support them, can never be forgotten. The whole period of
my life seemed to be concentrated into that terrible moment when the planks
bent below my feet and the ocean yawned beneath me.

Some of the sailors had taken their delusive refuge in the shrouds, and I was


preparing to follow them when a hand was laid upon my shoulder. Turning
round I beheld M. Letourneur, with tears in his eyes, pointing towards his son.
"Yes, my friend," I said, pressing his hand, "we will save him, if possible."

But Curtis had already caught hold of the young man, and was hurrying him
to the mainmast shrouds, when the "Chancellor," which had been scudding along
rapidly with the wind, stopped suddenly, with a violent shock, and began to
settle, The sea rose over my ankles and almost instinctively I clutched at the
nearest rope. All at once, when it seemed all over, the ship ceased to sink, and
hung motionless in mid-ocean.


CHAPTER XXV.

NIGHT OF DECEMBER 4th.--Curtis caught young Letourneur again in his
arms, and running with him across the flooded deck deposited him safely in the
starboard shrouds, whither his father and I climbed up beside him.

I now had time to look about me. The night was not very dark, and I could
see that Curtis had returned to his post upon the poop; whilst in the extreme aft
near the taffrail, which was still above water, I could distinguish the forms of Mr.
and Mrs. Kear, Miss Herbey, and Mr. Falsten The lieutenant and the boatswain
were on the far end of the forecastle; the remainder of the crew in the shrouds
and top-masts.

By the assistance of his father, who carefully guided his feet up the rigging,
Andre was hoisted into the main-top. Mrs. Kear could not be induced to join him
in his elevated position, in spite of being told that if the wind were to freshen she
would inevitably be washed overboard by the waves; nothing could induce her to
listen to remonstrance, and she insisted upon remaining on the poop, Miss
Herbey, of course, staying by her side.

As soon as the captain saw the "Chancellor" was no longer sinking, he set to
work to take down all the sails, yards and all, and the top-gallants, in the hope
that by removing everything that could compromise the equilibrium of the ship
he might diminish the chance of her capsizing altogether.

"But may she not founder at any moment?" I said to Curtis, when I had
joined him for a while upon the poop.

"Everything depends upon the weather," he replied, in his calmest manner;
"that, of course, may change at any hour. One thing, however, is certain, the
‘Chancellor’ preserves her equilibrium for the present."

"But do you mean to say," I further asked, "that she can sail with two feet of
water over her deck?"

"No, Mr. Kazallon, she can't sail, but she can drift with the wind, and if the


wind remains in its present quarter, in the course of a few days we might
possibly sight the coast. Besides, we shall have our raft as a last resource; in a
few hours it will be ready, and at daybreak we can embark."

"You have not then,” I added, "abandoned all hope even yet?" I marvelled at
his composure.

"While there's life there's hope, you know Mr. Kazallon; out of a hundred
chances, ninety-nine may be against us, but perhaps the odd one may be in our
favour. Besides, I believe that our case is not without precedent. In the year 1795
a three-master, the ‘Juno,’ was precisely in the same half-sunk, water-logged
condition as ourselves; and yet with her passengers and crew clinging to her top-
masts she drifted for twenty days, until she came in sight of land, when those
who had survived the deprivation and fatigue were saved. So let us not despair;
let us hold on to the hope that the survivors of the 'Chancellor' may be equally
fortunate."

I was only too conscious that there was not much to be said in support of
Curtis's sanguine view of things, and that the force of reason pointed all the other
way; but I said nothing, deriving what comfort I could from the fact that the
captain did not yet despond of an ultimate rescue.

As it was necessary to be prepared to abandon the ship almost at a moment's
notice, Dowlas was making every exertion to hurry on the construction of the
raft. A little before midnight he was on the point of conveying some planks for
this purpose, when, to his astonishment and horror, he found that the framework
had totally disappeared. The ropes that had attached it to the vessel had snapped
as she became vertically displaced, and probably it had been adrift for more than
an hour.

The crew were frantic at this new misfortune, and shouting "Overboard with
the masts!" they began to cut down the rigging preparatory to taking possession
of the masts for a new raft.

But here Curtis interposed:--

"Back to your places, my men; back to your places. The ship will not sink
yet, so don't touch a rope until I give you leave."

The firmness of the captain's voice brought the men to their senses, and
although some of them could ill disguise their reluctance, all returned to their
posts.

When daylight had sufficiently advanced Curtis mounted the mast, and
looked around for the missing raft; but it was nowhere to be seen. The sea was
far too rough for the men to venture to take out the whaleboat in search of it, and
there was no choice but to set to work and to construct a new raft immediately.

Since the sea has become so much rougher, Mrs. Kear has been induced to


leave the poop, and has managed to join M. Letourneur and his son on the main-
top, where she lies in a state of complete prostration. I need hardly add that Miss
Herbey continues in her unwearied attendance. The space to which these four
people are limited is necessarily very small, nowhere measuring twelve feet
across; to prevent them losing their balance some spars have been lashed from
shroud to shroud, and for the convenience of the two ladies Curtis has contrived
to make a temporary awning of a sail. Mr. Kear has installed himself with Silas
Huntly on the foretop.

A few cases of preserved meat and biscuit and some barrels of water, that
floated between the masts after the submersion of the deck, have been hoisted to
the top-masts and fastened firmly to the stays. These are now our only
provisions.


CHAPTER XXVI.

DECEMBER 5th.--The day was very hot. December in latitude 16deg. N. is
a summer month, and unless a breeze should rise to temper the burning sun, we
might expect to suffer from an oppressive heat.

The sea still remained very rough, and as the heavy waves broke over the
ship as though she were a reef, the foam flew up to the very top-masts, and our
clothes were perpetually drenched by the spray.

The "Chancellor's" hull is three-fourths immerged; besides the three masts
and the bowsprit, to which the whaleboat was suspended, the poop and the
forecastle are the only portions that now are visible; and as the intervening
section of the deck is quite below the water, these appear to be connected only
by the framework of the netting that runs along the vessel's sides.
Communication between the top-masts is extremely difficult, and would be
absolutely precluded, were it not that the sailors, with practised dexterity,
manage to hoist themselves about by means of the stays. For the passengers,
cowering on their narrow and unstable platform, the spectacle of the raging sea
below was truly terrific; every wave that dashed over the ship shook the masts
till they trembled again, and one could venture scarcely to look or to think lest he
should be tempted to cast himself into the vast abyss.

Meanwhile, the crew worked away with all their remaining vigour at the
second raft, for which the top-gallants and yards were all obliged to be
employed; the planks, too, which were continually being loosened and broken
away by the violence of the waves from the partitions of the ship, were rescued
before they had drifted out of reach, and were brought into use. The symptoms
of the ship foundering did not appear to be immediate; so that Curtis insisted


upon the raft being made with proper care to insure its strength; we were still
several hundred miles from the coast of Guiana, and for so long a voyage it was
indispensable to have a structure of considerable solidity. The reasonableness of
this was self-apparent, and as the crew had recovered their assurance they spared
no pains to accomplish their work effectually.

Of all the number, there was but one, an Irishman, named O'Ready, who
seemed to question the utility of all their toil. He shook his head with an oracular
gravity. He is an oldish man, not less than sixty, with his hair and beard bleached
with the storms of many travels. As I was making my way towards the poop, he
came up to me and began talking.

"And why, bedad, I'd like to know, why is it that they'll all be afther lavin' of
the ship?"

He turned his quid with the most serene composure, and continued,--

"And isn't it me myself that's been wrecked nine times already? and sure,
poor fools are they that ever have put their trust in rafts or boats sure and they
found a wathery grave. Nay, nay; while the ould ship lasts, let's stick to her, says
he

Having thus unburdened his mind he relapsed, into silence, and soon went
away.

About three o'clock I noticed that Mr. Kear and Silas Huntly were holding an
animated conversation in the fore top. The petroleum merchant had evidently
some difficulty in bringing the ex-captain round to his opinion, for I, saw him
several times shake his head as he gave long and scrutinizing looks at the sea
and sky. In less than an hour afterwards I saw Huntly let himself down by the
forestays and clamber along to the forecastle where he joined the group of
sailors, and I lost sight of him.

I attached little importance to the incident, and shortly afterwards joined the
party in the main-top, where we continued talking for some hours. The heat was
intense, and if it had not been for the shelter’ afforded by the sail-tent, would
have been unbearable. At five o'clock we took as refreshment some dried meat
and biscuit, each individual being also allowed half a glass of water. Mrs. Kear,
prostrate with fever, could not touch a mouthful; and nothing could be done by
Miss Herbey to relieve her, beyond occasionally moistening her parched lips.
The unfortunate lady suffers greatly, and sometimes I am inclined to think that
she will succumb to the exposure and privation. Not once had her husband
troubled himself about her; but when shortly afterwards I heard him hail some of
the sailors on the forecastle and ask them to help him down from the foretop, I
began to think that the selfish fellow was coming to join his wife.

At first the sailors took no notice of his request, but on his repeating it with


the promise of paying them handsomely for their services, two of them, Burke
and Sandon, swung themselves along the netting into the shrouds, and were soon
at his side.

A long discussion ensued. The men evidently were asking more than Mr.
Kear was inclined to give, and at one time if seemed as though the negotiation
would fall through altogether. But at length the bargain was struck, and I saw Mr.
Kear take a bundle of paper dollars from his waistcoat pocket, and hand a
number of them over to one of the men, The man counted them carefully, and
from the time it took him, I should think that he could not have pocketed
anything less than a hundred dollars.

The next business was to get Mr. Kear down from the foretop, and Burke and
Sandon proceeded to tie a rope round his waist, which they afterwards fastened
to the forestay; then, in a way which provoked shouts of laughter from their
mates, they gave the unfortunate man a shove, and sent him rolling down like a
bundle of dirty clothes on to the forecastle.

I was quite mistaken as to his object. Mr. Kear had no intention of looking
after his wife, but remained by the side of Silas Huntly until the gathering
darkness hid them both from view.

As night drew on, the wind grew calmer, but the sea remained very rough.
The moon had been up ever since four in the afternoon, though she only
appeared at rare intervals between the clouds. Some long lines of vapour on the
horizon were tinged with a rosy glare that foreboded a strong breeze for the
morrow, and all felt anxious to know from which quarter the breeze would come,
for any but a north-easter would bear the frail raft on which we were to embark
far away from land.

About eight o'clock in the evening Curtis mounted to the main-top but he
seemed preoccupied and anxious, and did not speak to any one. He remained for
a quarter of an hour, then after silently pressing my hand, he returned to his old
post.

I laid myself down in the narrow space at my disposal, and tried to sleep; but
my mind was filled with strange forebodings, and sleep was impossible. The
very calmness of the atmosphere was oppressive; scarcely a breath of air
vibrated through the metal rigging, and yet the sea rose with a heavy swell as
though it felt the warnings of a coming tempest.

All at once, at about eleven o'clock, the moon burst brightly forth through a
rift in the clouds, and the waves sparkled again as if illumined by a submarine
glimmer. I start up and look around me. Is it merely imagination? or do I really
see a black speck floating on the dazzling whiteness of the waters, a speck that
cannot be a rock; because it rises and falls with the heaving motion of the


billows? But the moon once again becomes overclouded; the sea, is darkened,
and I return to my uneasy couch close to the larboard shrouds.


CHAPTER XXVII.

DECEMBER 6th.--I must have fallen asleep for a few hours, when at four
o'clock in the morning, I was rudely aroused by the roaring of the wind, and
could distinguish Curtis's voice as he shouted in the brief intervals between the
heavy gusts.

I got up, and holding tightly to the purlin--for the waves made the masts
tremble with their violence--I tried to look around and below me. The sea was
literally raging beneath, and great masses of livid-looking foam were dashing
between the masts, which were oscillating terrifically. It was still dark, and I
could only faintly distinguish two figures on the stern, whom, by the sound of
their voices, that I caught occasionally above the tumult, I made out to be Curtis
and the boatswain.

Just at that moment a sailor, who had mounted to the main-top to do
something to the rigging, passed close behind me.

"What's the matter?" I asked,

"The wind has changed," he answered, adding something which I could not
hear distinctly, but which sounded like "dead against us."

Dead against us! then, thought I, the wind had shifted to the south-west, and
my last night's forebodings had been correct.

When daylight at length appeared, I found the wind although not blowing
actually from the south-west, had veered round to the north-west, a change
which was equally disastrous to us, inasmuch as it was carrying us away from
land. Moreover, the ship had sunk considerably during the night, and there were
now five feet of water above deck; the side netting had completely disappeared,
and the forecastle and the poop were now all but on a level with the sea, which
washed over them incessantly. With all possible expedition Curtis and his crew
were labouring away at their raft, but the violence of the swell materially
impeded their operations, and it became a matter of doubt as to whether the
woodwork would not fall asunder before it could be properly fastened together.

As I watched the men at their work M. Letourneur, with one arm supporting
his son, came and stood by my side.

"Don't you think this main-top will soon give way?" he said, as the narrow
platform on which we stood creaked and groaned with the swaying of the masts.

Miss Herbey heard his words, and pointing towards Mrs. Kear, who was
lying prostrate at her feet, asked what we thought ought to be done.


"We can do nothing but stay where we are," I replied.

"No;" said Andre "this is our best refuge; I hope you are not afraid."

"Not for myself," said the young girl quietly "only for those to whom life is
precious."

At a quarter to eight we heard the boatswain calling to the sailors in the
bows.

"Ay, ay, sir,” said one of the men--O'Ready, I think.

"Where's the whale boat?" shouted the boatswain.

"T don't know, sir. Not with us," was the reply.

"She's gone adrift, then!"

And sure enough the whaleboat was no longer hanging from the bowsprit;
and in a moment the discovery was made that Mr. Kear, Silas Huntly, and three
sailors,--a Scotchman and two Englishmen,--were missing. Afraid that the
"Chancellor" would founder before the completion of the raft, Kear and Huntly
had plotted together to effect their escape, and had bribed the three sailors to
seize the only remaining boat.

This, then, was the black speck that I had seen during the night. The
miserable husband had deserted his wife, the faithless captain had abandoned the
ship that had once been under his command.

"There are five saved, then," said the boatswain.

"Faith, an it's five lost ye'll be maning," said O'Ready; and the state of the sea
fully justified his opinion.

The crew were furious when they heard of the surreptitious flight, and loaded
the fugitives with all the invectives they could lay their tongues to. So enraged
were they at the dastardly trick of which they had been made the dupes, that if
chance should bring the deserters again on board I should be sorry to answer for
the consequences.

In accordance with my advice, Mrs. Kear has not been informed of her
husband's disappearance. The unhappy lady is wasting away with a fever for
which we are powerless to supply a remedy, for the medicine chest was lost
when the ship began to sink. Nevertheless, I do not think we have anything to
regret on that score, feeling as I do, that in a case like Mrs. Kear's, drugs would
be of no avail.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

DECEMBER 6th CONTINUED.--The "Chancellor" no longer maintained
her equilibrium; we felt that she was gradually going down, and her hull was
probably breaking up. The main-top was already only ten feet above the water,


whilst the bowsprit, with the exception of the extreme end, that rose obliquely
from the waves, was entirely covered.

The "Chancellor's" last day, we felt, had come.

Fortunately the raft was all but finished, and unless Curtis preferred to wait
till morning we should be able to embark in the evening.

The raft is a very solid structure. The spars that form the framework are
crossed one above another and lashed together with stout ropes, so that the
whole pile rises a couple of feet above the water. The upper platform is
constructed from the planks that were broken from the ship's sides by the
violence of the waves, and which had not drifted away. The afternoon has been
employed in charging the raft with such provisions, sails, tools, and instruments
as we have been able to save.

And how can I attempt to give any idea of the feelings with which, one and
all, we now contemplated the fate before us? For my own part I was possessed
rather by a benumbed indifference than by any sense of genuine resignation. M.
Letourneur was entirely absorbed in his son, who, in his turn, thought only of his
father; at the same time exhibiting a calm Christian fortitude, which was shown
by no one else of the party except Miss Herbey, who faced her danger with the
same brave composure. Incredible as it may seem, Falsten remained the same as
ever, occupying himself with writing down figures and memoranda in his
pocket-book. Mrs. Kear, in spite of all that Miss Herbey could do for her, was
evidently dying.

With regard to the sailors, two or three of them were calm enough, but the
rest had well-nigh lost their wits. Some of the more ill-disposed amongst them
seemed inclined to run into excesses; and their conduct, under the bad influence
of Owen and Jynxstrop, made it doubtful whether they would submit to control
when once we were limited to the narrow dimensions of the raft. Lieutenant
Walter, although his courage never failed him, was worn out with bodily fatigue,
and obliged to give up all active labour; but Curtis and the boatswain were
resolute, energetic and firm as ever. To borrow an expression from the language
of metallurgic art, they were men "at the highest degree of hardness."

At five o'clock one of our companions in misfortune was released from her
sufferings. Mrs. Kear, after a most distressing illness, through which her young
companion tended her with the most devoted care, has breathed her last. A few
deep sighs and all was over, and I doubt whether the sufferer was ever conscious
of the peril of, her situation.

The night passed on without further incident. Towards morning I touched the
dead woman's hand, and it was cold and stiff. The corpse could not remain any
longer on the main-top, and after Miss Herbey and I had carefully wrapped the


garments about it, with a few short prayers the body of the first victim of our
miseries was committed to the deep.

As the sea closed over the body I heard one of the men in the shrouds say,--

"There goes a carcass that we shall be sorry we have thrown away!"

I looked round sharply. It was Owen who had spoken, But horrible as were
his words, the conviction was forced upon my mind that the day could not be far
distant when we must want for food.


CHAPTER XXIX.

DECEMBER 7th.--The ship was sinking rapidly; the water had risen to the
foretop; the poop and forecastle were completely submerged; the top of the
bowsprit had disappeared, and only the three mast-tops projected from the
waves.

But all was ready on the raft; an erection had been made on the fore to hold a
mast, which was supported by shrouds fastened to the sides of the platform; this
mast carried a large royal.

Perhaps, after all, these few frail planks will carry us to the shore which the
"Chancellor" has failed to reach; at any rate, we cannot yet resign all hope.

We were just on the point of embarking at 7 a.m. when the "Chancellor" all
at once began to sink so rapidly that the carpenter and men who were on the raft
were obliged with all speed to cut the ropes that secured it to the vessel to
prevent it from being swallowed up in the eddying waters. Anxiety, the most
intense, took possession of us all. At the very moment when the ship was
descending into the fathomless abyss, the raft, our only hope of safety, was
drifting off before our eyes. Two of the sailors and an apprentice, beside
themselves with terror, threw themselves headlong into the sea; but it was
evident from the very first that they were quite powerless to combat the winds
and waves. Escape was impossible; they could neither reach the raft, nor return
to the ship. Curtis tied a rope round his waist and tried to swim to their
assistance; but long before he could reach them the unfortunate men, after a vain
struggle for life, sank below the waves and were seen no more. Curtis, bruised
and beaten with the surf that raged about the mast-heads, was hauled back to the
ship.

Meantime, Dowlas and his men, by means of some spars which they used as
Oars, were exerting themselves to bring back the raft, which had drifted about
two cables-lengths away; but, in spite of all their efforts, it was fully an hour,--an
hour which seemed to us, waiting as we were with the water up to the level of
the top-masts, like an eternity--before they succeeded in bringing the raft


alongside, and lashing it once again to the "Chancellor's" mainmast.

Not a moment was then to be lost. The waves were eddying like a whirlpool
around the submerged vessel, and numbers of enormous air-bubbles were rising
to the surface of the water.

The time was come. At Curtis's word "Embark!" we all hurried to the raft.
Andre who insisted upon seeing Miss Herbey go first, was helped safely on to
the platform, where his father immediately joined him. In a very few minutes all
except Curtis and old O'Ready had left the "Chancellor."

Curtis remained standing on the main-top, deeming it not only his duty, but
his right, to be the last to leave the vessel he had loved so well, and the loss of
which he so much deplored.

"Now then, old fellow off of this!" cried the captain to the old Irishman, who
did not move.

"And is it quite sure ye are that she's sinkin?" he said.

"Ay, ay! sure enough, my man; and you'd better look sharp."

"Faith, then, and I think I will;" and not a moment too soon (for the water
was up to his waist) he jumped on to the raft.

Having cast one last, lingering look around him, Curtis then left the ship; the
rope was cut and we went slowly adrift.

All eyes were fixed upon the spot where the "Chancellor" lay foundering.
The top of the mizzen was the first to disappear, then followed the main-top; and
soon, of what had been a noble vessel, not a vestige was to be seen.


CHAPTER XXX.

Will this frail float, forty feet by twenty, bear us in safety? Sink it cannot; the
material of which it is composed is of a kind that must surmount the waves. But
it is questionable whether it will hold together. The cords that bind it will have a
tremendous strain to bear in resisting the violence of the sea. The most sanguine
amongst us trembles to face the future; the most confident dares to think only of
the present. After the manifold perils of the last seventy-two days' voyage all are
too agitated to look forward without dismay to what in all human probability
must be a time of the direst distress.

Vain as the task may seem, I will not pause in my work of registering the
events of our drama, as scene after scene they are unfolded before our eyes.

Of the twenty-eight persons who left Charleston in the "Chancellor," only
eighteen are left to huddle together upon this narrow raft; this number includes
the five passengers, namely M. Letourneur, Andre, Miss Herbey, Falsten, and
myself; the ship's officers, Captain Curtis, Lieutenant Walter, the boatswain,


Hobart the steward, Jynxstrop the cook, and Dowlas the carpenter; and seven
sailors, Austin, Owen, Wilson, O'Ready, Burke, Sandon, and Flaypole.

Such are the passengers on the raft; it is but a brief task to enumerate their
resources.

The greater part of the provisions in the store-room were destroyed at the
time when the ship's deck was submerged, and the small quantity that Curtis has
been able to save will be very inadequate to supply the wants of eighteen people,
who too probably have many days to wait ere they sight either land or a passing
vessel. One cask of biscuit, another of preserved meat, a small keg of brandy,
and two barrels of water complete our store, so that the utmost frugality in the
distribution of our daily rations becomes absolutely necessary.

Of spare clothes we have positively none; a few sails will serve for shelter by
day, and covering by night. Dowlas has his carpenter's tools, we have each a
pocket-knife, and O'Ready an old tin pot; of which he takes the most tender care;
in addition to these, we are in possession of a sextant, a compass, a chart, and a
metal tea-kettle, everything else that was placed on deck in readiness for the first
raft having been lost in the partial submersion of the vessel.

Such then is our situation; critical indeed, but after all perhaps not desperate.
We have one great fear; some there are amongst us whose courage, moral as well
as physical, may give way, and over failing spirits such as these we may have no
control.


CHAPTER XXXI.

DECEMBER 7th CONTINUED.--Our first day on the raft has passed
without any special incident. At eight o'clock this morning Curtis asked our
attention for a moment.

"My friends," he said, "listen to me. Here on this raft, just as when we were
on board the 'Chancellor,' I consider myself your captain; and as your captain, I
expect that all of you will strictly obey my orders. Let me beg of you, one and
all, to think solely of our common welfare; let us work with one heart and with
one soul, and may Heaven protect us!"

After delivering these few words with an emotion that evidenced their
earnestness, the captain consulted his compass, and found that the freshening
breeze was blowing from the north. This was fortunate for us, and no time was
to be lost in taking advantage of it to speed us on our dubious way. Dowlas was
occupied in fixing the mast into the socket that had already been prepared for its
reception, and in order to support it more firmly he placed spurs of wood,
forming arched buttresses, on either side. While he was thus employed the


boatswain and the other seamen were stretching the large royal sail on the yard
that had been reserved for that purpose.

By half-past nine the mast was hoisted, and held firmly in its place by some
shrouds attached securely to the sides of the raft; then the sail was run up and
trimmed to the wind, and the raft began to make a perceptible progress under the
brisk breeze.

As soon as we had once started, the carpenter set to work to contrive some
sort of a rudder, that would enable us to maintain our desired direction. Curtis
and Falsten assisted him with some serviceable suggestions, and in a couple of
hours' time he had made and fixed to the back of the raft a kind of paddle, very
similar to those used by the Malays.

At noon, after the necessary preliminary observations, Curtis took the
altitude of the sun. The result gave lat. 15deg. 7min. N. by long. 49deg. 35min.
W. as our position, which, on consulting the chart, proved to be about 650 miles
north-east of the coast of Paramaribo in Dutch Guiana.

Now even under the most favourable circumstances, with trade-winds and
weather always in our favour, we cannot by any chance hope to make more than
ten or twelve miles a day, so that the voyage cannot possibly be performed under
a period of two months. To be sure there is the hope to be indulged that we may
fall in with a passing vessel, but as the part of the Atlantic into which we have
been driven is intermediate between the tracks of the French and English
Transatlantic steamers either from the Antilles or the Brazils, we cannot reckon
at all upon such a contingency happening in our favour; whilst if a calm should
set in, or worse still, if the wind were to blow from the east, not only two
months, but twice, nay, three times that length of time will be required to
accomplish the passage.

At best, however, our provisions, even though used with the greatest care,
will barely last three months. Curtis has called us into consultation, and as the
working of the raft does not require such labour as to exhaust our physical
strength, all have agreed to submit to a regimen which, although it will suffice to
keep us alive, will certainly not fully satisfy the cravings of hunger and thirst.

As far as we can estimate, we have somewhere about 500 Ibs. of meat and
about the same quantity of biscuit. To make this last for three months we ought
not to consume very much more than 5 lbs. a day of each, which, when divided
among eighteen people, will make the daily ration 5 oz. of meat and 5 oz. of
biscuit for each person. Of water we have certainly not more than 200 gallons,
but by reducing each person's allowance to a pint a day, we hope to eke out that,
too, over the space of three months.

It is arranged that the food shall be distributed under the boatswain's


superintendence every morning at ten o'clock. Each person will then receive his
allowance of meat and biscuit, which may be eaten when and how he pleases.
The water will be given out twice a day--at ten in the morning and six in the
evening; but as the only drinking-vessels in our possession are the tea-kettle and
the old Irishman's tin pot, the water has to be consumed immediately on
distribution. As for the brandy, of which there are only five gallons, it will be
doled out with the strictest limitation, and no one will be allowed to touch it
except with the captain's express permission.

I should not forget that there are two sources from which we may hope to
increase our store. First, any rain that may fall will add to our supply of water,
and two empty barrels have been placed ready to receive it; secondly, we hope to
do something in the way of fishing, and the sailors have already begun to
prepare some lines.

All have mutually agreed to abide by the rules that have been laid down, for
all are fully aware that by nothing but the most precise regimen can we hope to
avert the horrors of famine, and forewarned by the fate, of many who in similar
circumstances have miserably perished, we are determined to do all that
prudence can suggest for husbanding our stores.


CHAPTER XXXII.

DECEMBER 8th to 17th.--When night came we wrapped ourselves in our
sails. For my own part, worn out with the fatigue of the long watch in the top-
mast, I slept for several hours; M. Letourneur and Andre did the same, and Miss
Herbey obtained sufficient rest to relieve the tired expression that her
countenance had lately been wearing. The night passed quietly. As the raft was
not very heavily laden the waves did not break over it at all, and we were
consequently able to keep ourselves perfectly dry. To say the truth, it was far
better for us that the sea should remain somewhat boisterous, for any diminution
in the swell of the waves would indicate that; the wind had dropped, and it was
with a feeling of regret that when the morning came I had to note down "weather
calm" in my journal.

In these low latitudes the heat in the day-time is so intense, and the sun burns
with such an incessant glare, that the entire atmosphere becomes pervaded with a
glowing vapour. The wind, too, blows only in fitful gusts and through long
intervals of perfect calm the sails flap idly and uselessly against the mast. Curtis
and the boatswain, however, are of opinion that we are not entirely dependent on
the wind. Certain indications, which a sailor's eye alone could detect, make them
almost sure that we are being carried along by a westerly current, that flows at


the rate of three or four miles an hour. If they are not mistaken, this is a
circumstance that may materially assist our progress, and at which we can hardly
fail to rejoice, for the high temperature often makes our scanty allowance of
water quite inadequate to allay our thirst.

But with all our hardships I must confess that our condition is far preferable
to what it was when we were still clinging to the "Chancellor." Here at least we
have a comparatively solid platform beneath our feet, and we are relieved from
the incessant dread of being carried down with a foundering vessel. In the day-
time we can move about with a certain amount of freedom, discuss the weather,
watch the sea, and examine our fishing-lines; whilst at night we can rest securely
under the shelter of our sails.

"T really think, Mr. Kazallon," said Andre Letourneur to me a few days after
we had embarked, "that our time on board the raft passes as pleasantly as it did
upon Ham Rock; and the raft has one advantage even over the reef, for it is
capable of motion."

"Yes, Andre," replied, "as long as the wind continues favourable the raft has
decidedly the advantage; but supposing the wind shifts, what then?"

"Oh, we mustn't think about that," he said; "let us keep up our courage while
we can."

I felt that he was right, and that the dangers we had escaped should make us
more hopeful for the future; and I think that nearly all of us are inclined to share
his opinion.

Whether the captain is equally sanguine I am unable to say. He holds himself
very much aloof, and as he evidently feels that he has the great responsibility of
saving other lives than his own, we are reluctant to disturb his silent meditations.

Such of the crew as are not on watch spend the greater portion of their time
in dozing on the fore part of the raft. The aft, by the captain's orders, has been
reserved for the use of us passengers, and by erecting some uprights we have
contrived to make a sort of tent, which affords some shelter from the buming
sun. On the whole our bill of health is tolerably satisfactory. Lieutenant Walter is
the only invalid, and he, in spite of all our careful nursing, seems to get weaker
every day.

Andre Letourneur is the life of our party, and I have never appreciated the
young man so well. His originality of perception makes his conversation both
lively and entertaining and as he talks, his wan and suffering countenance lights
up with an intelligent animation. His father seems to become more devoted to
him than ever, and I have seen him sit for an hour at a time, with his hand resting
on his son's, listening eagerly to his every word.

Miss Herbey occasionally joins in our conversation, but although we all do


our best to make her forget that she has lost those who should have been her
natural protectors, M. Letourneur is the only one amongst us to whom she
speaks without a certain reserve. To him, whose age gives him something of the
authority of a father, she has told the history of her life--a life of patience and
self-denial such as not unfrequently falls to the lot of orphans. She had been, she
said, two years with Mrs. Kear, and although now left alone in the world,
homeless and without resources, hope for the future does not fail her. The young
lady's modest deportment and energy of character command the respect of all on
board, and I do not think that even the coarsest of the sailors has either by word
or gesture acted towards her in a way that she could deem offensive.

The 12th, 13th, and 14th of December passed away without any change in
our condition. The wind continued to blow in irregular gusts, but always in the
same direction, and the helm, or rather the paddle at the back of the raft has
never once required shifting; and the watch, who are posted on the fore, under
orders to examine the sea with the most scrupulous attention, have had no
change of any kind to report.

At the end of a week we found ourselves growing accustomed to our limited
diet, and as we had no manual exertion, and no wear and tear of our physical
constitution, we managed very well. Our greatest deprivation was the short
supply of water, for, as I said before, the unmitigated heat made our thirst at
times very painful.

On the 15th we held high festival. A shoal of fish, of the sparus tribe,
swarmed round the raft, and although our tackle consisted merely of long cords
baited with morsels of dried meat stuck upon bent nails, the fish were so
voracious that in the course of a couple of days we had caught as many as
weighed almost 200lbs., some of which were grilled, and others boiled in sea-
water over a fire made on the fore part of the raft. This marvelous haul was
doubly welcome, inasmuch as it not only afforded us a change of diet, but
enabled us to economize our stores; if only some rain had fallen at the same time
we should have been more than satisfied.

Unfortunately the shoal of fish did not remain long in our vicinity. On the
17th they all disappeared, and some sharks, not less than twelve or fifteen feet
long, belonging to the species of spotted dog-fish, took their place. These
horrible creatures have black backs and fins, covered with white spots and
stripes. Here, on our low raft, we seem almost on a level with them, and more
than once their tails have struck the spars with terrible violence. The sailors
manage to keep them at a distance by means of handspikes, but I shall not be
surprised if they persist in following us, instinctively intelligent that we are
destined to become their prey. For myself, I confess that they give me a feeling


of uneasiness; they seem to me like monsters of ill-omen.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

DECEMBER 18th to 20th.--On the 18th the wind freshened a little, but as it
blew from the same favourable quarter we did not complain, and only took the
precaution of putting an extra support to the mast, so that it should not snap with
the tension of the sail. This done, the raft was carried along with something more
than its ordinary speed, and left a long line of foam in its wake.

In the afternoon the sky became slightly overclouded, and the heat
consequently somewhat less oppressive. The swell made it more difficult for the
raft to keep its balance, and we shipped two or three heavy seas; but the
carpenter managed to make with some planks a kind of wall about a couple of
feet high, which protected us from the direct action of the waves. Our casks of
food and water were secured to the raft with double ropes, for we dared not run
the risk of their being carried overboard, an accident that would at once have
reduced us to the direst distress.

In the course of the day the sailors gathered some of the marine plants known
by the name of sargassos, very similar to those we saw in such profusion
between the Bermudas and Ham Rock. I advised my companions to chew the
laminary tangles, which they would find contained a saccharine juice, affording
considerable relief to their parched lips and throats.

The remainder of the day passed without incident. I should not, however,
omit to mention that the frequent conferences held amongst the sailors,
especially between Owen, Burke, Flaypole, Wilson, and Jynxstrop, the negro,
aroused some uneasy suspicions in my mind. What was the subject of their
conversation I could not discover, for they became silent immediately that a
passenger or one of the officers approached them. When I mentioned the matter
to Curtis I found he had already noticed these secret interviews, and that they
had given him enough concern to make him determined to keep a strict eye upon
Jynxstrop and Owen, who, rascals as they were themselves, were evidently
trying to disaffect their mates.

On the 19th the heat was again excessive. The sky was cloudless, and as
there was not enough wind to fill the sail the raft lay motionless upon the surface
of the water. Some of the sailors found a transient alleviation for their thirst by
plunging into the sea, but as we were fully aware that the water all round was
infested with sharks, none of us was rash enough to follow their example, though
if, as seems likely, we remain long becalmed, we shall probably in time
overcome our fears, and feel constrained to indulge ourselves with a bath.


The health of Lieutenant Walter continues to cause us grave anxiety, the
young man being weakened by attacks of intermittent fever. Except for the loss
of the medicine-chest we might have temporarily reduced this by quinine; but it
is only too evident that the poor fellow is consumptive, and that that hopeless
malady is making ravages upon him that no medicine could permanently arrest.
His sharp dry cough, his short breathing, his profuse perspirations, more
especially in the morning; the pinched-in nose, the hollow cheeks, of which the
general pallour is only relieved by a hectic flush, the contracted lips, the too
brilliant eye and wasted form--all bear witness to a slow but sure decay.

To-day, the 20th, the temperature is as high as ever, and the raft still
motionless. The rays of the sun penetrate even through the shelter of our tent,
where we sit literally gasping with the heat. The impatience with which we
awaited the moment when the boatswain should dole out our meagre allowance
of water, and the eagerness with which those lukewarm drops were swallowed,
can only be realized by those who for themselves have endured the agonies of
thirst.

Lieutenant Walter suffers more than any of us from the scarcity of water, and
I noticed that Miss Herbey reserved almost the whole of her own share for his
use. Kind and compassionate as ever, the young girl does all that lies in her
power to relieve the poor fellow's sufferings.

"Mr. Kazallon," she said to me this moming, "that young man gets
manifestly weaker every day."

"Yes, Miss Herbey," I replied, "and how sorrowful it is that we can do
nothing for him, absolutely nothing."

"Hush!" she said, with her wonted consideration, "perhaps he will hear what
we are saying."

And then she sat down near the edge of the raft, where, with her head resting
on her hands, she remained lost in thought.

An incident sufficiently unpleasant occurred to-day. For nearly an hour
Owen, Flaypole, Burke, and Jynxstrop had been engaged in close conversation
and, although their voices were low, their gestures had betrayed that they were
animated by some strong excitement. At the conclusion of the colloquy Owen
got up and walked deliberately to the quarter of the raft that has been reserved
for the use of the passengers.

"Where are you off to now, Owen?" said the boatswain.

"That's my business," said the man insolently, and pursued his course.

The boatswain was about to stop him, but before he could interfere Curtis
was standing and looking Owen steadily in the face.

"Ah, captain, I've got a word from my mates to say to you," he said, with all


the effrontery imaginable.

"Say on, then,” said the captain coolly.

"We should like to know about that little keg of brandy. Is it being kept for
the porpoises or the officers?"

Finding that he obtained no reply, he went on,--

"Look here, captain, what we want is to have our grog served out every
morning as usual."

"Then you certainly will not,” said the captain.

"What! what!" exclaimed Owen, "don't you mean to let us have our grog?"

"Once and for all, no."

For a moment, with a malicious grin upon his lips, Owen stood confronting
the captain; then, as though thinking better of himself, he turned round and
rejoined his companions, who were still talking together in an undertone.

When I was afterwards discussing the matter with Curtis I asked him
whether he was sure he had done right in refusing the brandy.

"Right!" he cried, "to be sure I have. Allow those men to have brandy! I
would throw it all overboard first."


CHAPTER XXXIV.

DECEMBER 21st.--No further disturbance has taken place amongst the
men. For a few hours the fish appeared again, and we caught a great many of
them, and stored them away in an empty barrel. This addition to our stock of
provisions makes us hope that food, at least, will not fail us.

Usually the nights in the tropics are cool, but to-day, as evening drew on, the
wonted freshness did not return, but the air remained stifling and oppressive,
whilst heavy masses of vapour hung over the water.

There was no moonlight; there would be a new moon at half-past one in the
morning, but the night was singularly dark, except for dazzling flashes of
summer lightning that from time to time illumined the horizon far and wide.
There was, however, no answering roll of thunder, and the silence of the
atmosphere seemed almost awful, For a couple of hours, in the vain hope of
catching a breath of air, Miss Herbey, Andre Letourneur, and I, sat watching the
imposing struggle of the electric vapours. The clouds appeared like embattled
turrets crested with flame, and the very sailors, coarse-minded men as they were,
seemed struck with the grandeur of the spectacle, and regarded attentively,
though with an anxious eye, the preliminary tokens of a coming storm. Until
midnight we kept our seats upon the stern of the raft, whilst the lightning ever
and again shed around us a livid glare similar to that produced by adding salt to


lighted alcohol.

"Are you afraid of a storm, Miss Herbey?" said Andre to the girl.

"No, Mr. Andre, my feelings are always rather those of awe than of fear," she
replied. "I consider a storm one of the sublimest phenomena that we can behold--
don't you think so too?"

"Yes, and especially when the thunder is pealing," he said; "that majestic
rolling, far different to the sharp crash of artillery, rises and falls like the long-
drawn notes of the grandest music, and I can safely say that the tones of the most
accomplished ARTISTE have never moved me like that incomparable voice of
nature."

"Rather a deep bass, though," I said, laughing.

"That may be," he answered; "but I wish we might hear it now, for this silent
lightning is somewhat unexpressive."

"Never mind that, Andre" I said; "enjoy a storm when it comes, if you like,
but pray don't wish for it."

"And why not?" said he; "a storm will bring us wind, you know."

"And water, too," added Miss Herbey, "the water of which we are so
seriously in need."

The young people evidently wished to regard the storm from their own point
of view, and although I could have opposed plenty of common sense to their
poetical sentiments, I said no more, but let them talk on as they pleased for fully
an hour.

Meantime the sky was becoming quite overclouded, and after the zodiacal
constellations had disappeared in the mists that hung round the horizon, one by
one the stars above our heads were veiled in dark rolling masses of vapour, from
which every instant there issued forth sheets of electricity that formed a vivid
background to the dark grey fragments of cloud that floated beneath.

As the reservoir of electricity was confined to the higher strata of the
atmosphere, the lightning was still unaccompanied by thunder; but the dryness of
the air made it a weak conductor. Evidently the fluid could only escape by
terrible shocks, and the storm must ere long burst forth with fearful violence.

This was the opinion of Curtis and the boatswain. The boatswain is only
weather-wise from his experience as a sailor; but Curtis, in addition to his
experience, has some scientific knowledge, and he pointed out to me an
appearance in the sky known to meteorologists as a "cloud-ring," and scarcely
ever seen beyond the regions of the torrid zone, which are impregnated by damp
vapours brought from all quarters of the ocean by the action of the trade-winds.

"Yes, Mr. Kazallon," said Curtis, "our raft has been driven into the region of
storms, of which it has been justly remarked that any one endowed with very


sensitive organs can at any moment distinguish the growlings of thunder."

"Hark!" I said, as I strained my ears to listen, "I think I can hear it now."

"You can," he answered; "yet what you hear is but the first warning of the
storm which, in a couple of hours, will burst upon us with all its fury. But never
mind, we must be ready for it."

Sleep, even if we wished it, would have been impossible in that stifling
temperature. The lightning increased in brilliancy, and appeared from all quarters
of the horizon, each flash covering large arcs, varying from 100deg. to 150deg.,
leaving the atmosphere pervaded by one incessant phosphorescent glow.


The thunder became at length more and more distinct, the reports, if I may
use the expression, being "round," rather than rolling. It seemed almost as
though the sky were padded with heavy clouds of which the elasticity muffled
the sound of the electric bursts.

Hitherto, the sea had been calm, almost stagnant as a pond. Now, however,
long undulations took place, which the sailors recognized, all too well, as being
the rebound produced by a distant tempest. A ship, in such a case, would have
been instantly brought ahull, but no manoeuvring could be applied to our raft,
which could only drift before the blast.

At one o'clock in the morning one vivid flash, followed, after the interval of
a few seconds, by a loud report of thunder, announced that the storm was rapidly
approaching. Suddenly the horizon was enveloped in a vapourous fog, and
seemed to contract until it was close around us. At the same instant the voice of
one of the sailors was heard shouting,--

"A squall! a squall!"


CHAPTER XXXV.

DECEMBER 21st, NIGHT.--The boatswain rushed to the halliards that
supported the sail, and instantly lowered the yard; and not a moment too soon,
for with the speed of an arrow the squall was upon us, and if it had not been for
the sailor's timely warning we must all have been knocked down and probably
precipitated into the sea; as it was, our tent on the back of the raft was carried
away.

The raft itself, however, being so nearly level with the water, had little peril
to encounter from the actual wind; but from the mighty waves now raised by the
hurricane we had everything to dread. At first the waves had been crushed and
flattened as it were by the pressure of the air, but now, as though strengthened by
the reaction, they rose with the utmost fury. The raft followed the motions of the
increasing swell, and was tossed up and down, to and fro, and from side to side
with the most violent oscillations "Lash yourselves tight," cried the boatswain, as
he threw us some ropes; and in a few moments, with Curtis's assistance, M.
Letourneur, Andre, Falsten, and myself were fastened so firmly to the raft, that
nothing but its total disruption could carry us away. Miss Herbey was bound by a
rope passed round her waist to one of the uprights that had supported our tent,
and by the glare of the lightning I could see that her countenance was as serene
and composed as ever.

Then the storm began to rage indeed. Flash followed flash, peal followed
peal in quick succession. Our eyes were blinded, our ears deafened, with the roar


and glare. The clouds above, the ocean beneath, seemed verily to have taken fire,
and several times I saw forked lightnings dart upwards from the crest of the
waves, and mingle with those that radiated from the fiery vault above. A strong
odour of sulphur pervaded the air, but though thunderbolts fell thick around us,
not one had touched our raft.

By two o'clock the storm had reached its height. The hurricane had
increased, and the heavy waves, heated to a strange heat by the general
temperature, dashed over us until we were drenched to the skin. Curtis, Dowlas,
the boatswain, and the sailors did what they could to strengthen the raft with
additional ropes. M. Letourneur placed himself in front of Andre to shelter him
from the waves. Miss Herbey stood upright and motionless as a statue.

Soon dense masses of lurid clouds came rolling up, and a crackling, like the
rattle of musketry, resounded through the air. This was produced by a series of
electrical concussions, in which volleys of hailstones were discharged from the
cloud-batteries above. In fact, as the storm-sheet came in contact with a current
of cold air, hail was formed with great rapidity, and hailstones, large as nuts,
came pelting down, making the platform of the raft re-echo with a metallic ring.

For about half an hour the meteoric shower continued to descend, and during
that time the wind slightly abated in violence; but after having shifted from
quarter to quarter, it once more blew with all its former fury. The shrouds were
broken, but happily the mast, already bending almost double, was removed by
the men from its socket before it should be snapped short off. One gust caught
away the tiller, which went adrift beyond all power of recovery, and the same
blast blew down several of the planks that formed the low parapet on the
larboard side, so that the waves dashed in without hindrance through the breach.

The carpenter and his mates tried to repair the damage, but, tossed from
wave to wave, the raft was inclined to an angle of more than forty-five degrees,
making it impossible for them to keep their footing, and rolling one over another,
they were thrown down by the violent shocks. Why they were not altogether
carried away, why we were not all hurled into the sea, was to me a mystery. Even
if the cords that bound us should retain their hold, it seemed perfectly incredible
that the raft itself should not be overturned, so that we should be carried down
and stifled in the seething waters.

At last, towards three in the morning, when the hurricane seemed to be
raging more fiercely than ever, the raft, caught up on the crest of an enormous
wave, stood literally perpendicularly on its edge. For an instant, by the
illumination of the lightning, we beheld ourselves raised to an incomprehensible
height above the foaming breakers. Cries of terror escaped our lips. All must be
over now! But no; another moment, and the raft had resumed its horizontal


position. Safe, indeed, we were, but the tremendous upheaval was not without its
melancholy consequences. The cords that secured the cases of provisions had
burst asunder. One case rolled overboard, and the side of one of the water-barrels
was Staved in, so that the water which it contained was rapidly escaping. Two of
the sailors rushed forward to rescue the case of preserved meat; but one of them
caught his foot between the planks of the platform, and, unable to disengage it,
the poor fellow stood uttering-cries of distress.

I tried to go to his assistance, and had already untied the cord that was round
me; but I was too late. Another heavy sea dashed over us, and by the light of a
dazzling flash I saw the unhappy man, although he had managed without
assistance to disengage his foot, washed overboard before it was in my power to
get near him. His companion had also disappeared.

The same ponderous wave laid me prostrate on the platform, and as my head
came in collision with the corner of a spar, for a time I lost all consciousness.


CHAPTER XXXVI.

DECEMBER 22nd.--Daylight came at length, and the sun broke through and
dispersed the clouds that the storm had left behind. The struggle of the elements,
while it lasted, had been terrific, but the swoon into which I was thrown by my
fall, prevented me from observing the final incidents of the visitation. All that I
know is, that shortly after we had shipped the heavy sea that I have mentioned, a
shower of rain had the effect of calming the severity of the hurricane, and tended
to diminish the electric tension of the atmosphere.

Thanks to the kind care of M. Letourneur and Miss Herbey, I recovered
consciousness, but I believe that it is to Robert Curtis that I owe my real
deliverance, for he it was that prevented me from being carried away by a
second heavy wave.

The tempest, fierce as it was, did not last more than a few hours; but even in
that short space of time what an irreparable loss we have sustained, and what a
load of misery seems stored up for us in the future!

Of the two sailors who perished in the storm, one was Austin, a fine active
young man of about eight-and-twenty; the other was old O'Ready, the survivor
of so many ship wrecks. Our party is thus reduced to sixteen souls, leaving a
total barely exceeding half the number of those who embarked on board the
"Chancellor" at Charleston.

Curtis's first care had been to take a strict account of the remnant of our
provisions. Of all the torrents of rain that fell in the night we were unhappily
unable to catch a single drop; but water will not fail us yet, for about fourteen


gallons still remain in the bottom of the broken barrel, whilst the second barrel
has not yet been touched. But of food we have next to nothing. The cases
containing the dried meat, and the fish that we had preserved, have both been
washed away, and all that now remains to us is about sixty pounds of biscuit.
Sixty pounds of biscuit between sixteen persons! Eight days, with half a pound a
day apiece, will consume it all.

The day has passed away in silence. A general depression has fallen upon all:
the spectre of famine has appeared amongst us, and each has remained wrapped
in his own gloomy meditations, though each has doubtless but one idea
dominant in his mind.

Once, as I passed near the group of sailors lying on the fore part of the raft, I
heard Flaypole say with a sneer,--

"Those who are going to die had better make haste about it."

"Yes," said Owen, "leave their share of food to others."

At the regular hour each person received his half-pound of biscuit. Some, I
noticed, swallowed it ravenously, others reserved it for another time. Falsten
divided his ration into several portions, corresponding, I believe, to the number
of meals to which he was ordinarily accustomed. What prudence he shows! If
any one survives this misery, I think it will be he.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

DECEMBER 23rd to 30th--After the storm the wind settled back into its old
quarter, blowing pretty briskly from the north-east. As the breeze was all in our
favour it was important to make the most of it, and after Dowlas had carefully
readjusted the mast, the sail was once more hoisted, and we were carried along at
the rate of two or two and a half knots an hour. A new rudder, formed of a spar
and a good-sized plank, has been fitted in the place of the one we lost, but with
the wind in its present quarter it is in little requisition. The platform of the raft
has been repaired, the disjointed planks have been closed by means of ropes and
wedges, and that portion of the parapet that was washed away has been replaced,
so that we are no longer wetted by the waves. In fact, nothing has been left
undone to insure the solidity of our raft, and to render it capable of resisting the
wear and tear of the wind and waves. But the dangers of wind and waves are not
those which we have most to dread.

Together with the unclouded sky came a return of the tropical heat, which
during the preceding days had caused us such serious inconvenience; fortunately
on the 23rd the excessive warmth was somewhat tempered by the breeze, and as
the tent was once again put up, we were able to find shelter under it by turns.


But the want of food was beginning to tell upon us sadly, and our sunken
cheeks and wasted forms were visible tokens of what we were enduring. With
most of us hunger seemed to attack the entire nervous system, and the
constriction of the stomach produced an acute sensation of pain. A narcotic, such
as opium or tobacco, might have availed to soothe, if not to cure, the gnawing
agony; but of sedatives we had none, so the pain must be endured.

One alone there was amongst us who did not feel the pangs of hunger.
Lieutenant Walter seemed as it were to feed upon the fever that raged within
him; but then he was the victim of the most torturing thirst, Miss Herbey, besides
reserving for him a portion of her own insufficient allowance, obtained from the
captain a small extra supply of water, with which every quarter of an hour she
moistened the parched lips of the young man, who almost too weak to speak,
could only express his thanks by a grateful smile. Poor fellow! all our care
cannot avail to save him now; he is doomed, most surely doomed to die.

On the 23rd he seemed to be conscious of his condition, for he made a sign
to me to sit down by his side, and then summoning up all his strength to speak,
he asked me in a few broken words how long I thought he had to live? Slight as
my hesitation was, Walter noticed it immediately.

"The truth,” he said; "tell me the plain truth."

"My dear fellow, I am not a doctor, you know," I began, "and I can scarcely
judge--"

"Never mind," he interrupted, "tell me just what you think."

I looked at him attentively for some moments, then laid my ear against his
chest. In the last few days his malady had made fearfully rapid strides, and it was
only too evident that one lung had already ceased to act, whilst the other was
scarcely capable of performing the work of respiration. The young man was now
suffering from the fever which is the sure symptom of the approaching end in all
tuberculous complaints.

The lieutenant kept his eye fixed upon me with a look of eager inquiry. I
knew not what to say, and sought to evade his question.

"My dear boy," I said, "in our present circumstances not one of us can tell
how long he has to live. Not one of us knows what may happen in the course of
the next eight days."

"The next eight days," he murmured, as he looked eagerly into my face.

And then, turning away his head, he seemed to fall into a sort of doze.

The 24th, 25th, and 26th passed without any alteration in our circumstances,
and strange, nay, incredible as it may sound, we began to get accustomed to our
condition of starvation. Often, when reading the histories of shipwrecks, I have
suspected the accounts to be greatly exaggerated; but now I fully realize their


truth, and marvel when I find on how little nutriment it is possible to exist for so
long a time. To our daily half-pound of biscuit the captain has thought to add a
few drops of brandy, and the stimulant helps considerably to sustain our strength.
If we had the same provisions for two months, or even for one, there might be
room for hope; but our supplies diminish rapidly, and the time is fast
approaching when of food and drink there will be none.

The sea had furnished us with food once, and, difficult as the task of fishing
had now become, at all hazards the attempt must be made again. Accordingly the
carpenter and the boatswain set to work and made lines out of some untwisted
hemp, to which they fixed some nails that they pulled out of the flooring of the
raft, and bent into proper shape. The boatswain regarded his device with evident
satisfaction.

"I don't mean to say," said he to me, "that these nails are first-rate fish-hooks;
but one thing I do know, and that is, with proper bait they will act as well as the
best. But this biscuit is no good at all. Let me but just get hold of one fish, and I
shall know fast enough how to use it to catch some more."

And the true difficulty was how to catch the first fish. It was evident that fish
were not abundant in these waters, nevertheless the lines were cast. But the
biscuit with which they were baited dissolved at once in the water, and we did
not get a single bite. For two days the attempt was made in vain, and as it only
involved what seemed a lavish waste of our only means of subsistence, it was
given up in despair.

To-day, the 30th, as a last resource, the boatswain tried what a piece of
coloured rag might do by way of attracting some voracious fish, and having
obtained from Miss Herbey a little piece of the red shawl she wears, he fastened
it to his hook. But still no success; for when, after several hours, he examined his
lines, the crimson shred was still hanging intact as he had fixed it. The man was
quite discouraged at his failure.

"But there will be plenty of bait before long," he said to me in a solemn
undertone.

"What do you mean?" said I, struck by his significant manner.

"You'll know soon enough,” he answered.

What did he insinuate? The words, coming from a man usually so reserved,
have haunted me all night.


CHAPTER XXXVIII.
JANUARY ist to 5th.--More than three months had elapsed since we left
Charleston in the "Chancellor," and for no less than twenty days had we now


been borne along on our raft at the mercy of the wind and waves. Whether we
were approaching the American coast, or whether we were drifting farther and
farther to sea, it was now impossible to determine, for, in addition to the other
disasters caused by the hurricane, the captain's instruments had been hopelessly
smashed, and Curtis had no longer any compass by which to direct his course,
nor a sextant by which he might make an observation.

Desperate, however, as our condition might be judged, hope did not entirely
abandon our hearts, and day after day, hour after hour were our eyes strained
towards the horizon, and many and many a time did our imagination shape out
the distant land. But ever and again the illusion vanished; a cloud, a mist,
perhaps even a wave, was all that had deceived us; no land, no sail ever broke
the grey line that united sea and sky, and our raft remained the centre of the wide
and dreary waste.

On the 1st of January we swallowed our last morsel of biscuit. The 1st of
January! New Year's Day! What a rush of sorrowful recollections overwhelmed
our minds! Had we not always associated the opening of another year with new
hopes, new plans, and coming joys? And now, where were we? Could we dare to
look at one another, and breathe a new year's greeting?

The boatswain approached me with a peculiar look on his countenance.

"You are surely not going to wish me a happy new year?" I said.

"No indeed, sir," he replied, "I was only going to wish you well through the
first day of it; and that is pretty good assurance on my part, for we have not
another crumb to eat."

True as it was, we scarcely realized the fact of there being actually nothing
until on the following morning the hour came round for the distribution of the
scanty ration, and then, indeed, the truth was forced upon us in a new and
startling light. Towards evening I was seized with violent pains in the stomach,
accompanied by a constant desire to yawn and gape that was most distressing;
but in a couple of hours the extreme agony passed away, and on the 3rd I was
surprised to find that I did not suffer more. I felt, it is true, that there was some
great void within myself, but the sensation was quite as much moral as physical.
My head was so heavy that I could not hold it up; it was swimming with
giddiness, as though I were looking over a precipice.

My symptoms were not shared by all my companions, some of whom
endured the most frightful tortures. Dowlas and the boatswain especially, who
were naturally large eaters, uttered involuntary cries of agony, and were obliged
to gird themselves tightly with ropes to subdue the excruciating pain that was
gnawing their very vitals.

And this was only the second day of our misery! what would we not have


given for half, nay, for a quarter of the meagre ration which a few days back we
had deemed so inadequate to supply our wants, and which now, eked out crumb
by crumb, might, perhaps, serve for several days? In the streets of a besieged
city, dire as the distress may be, some gutter, some rubbish-heap, some corner
may yet be found that will furnish a dry bone or a scrap of refuse that may for a
moment allay the pangs of hunger; but these bare planks, so many times washed
clean by the relentless waves, offer nothing to our eager search, and after every
fragment of food that the wind carried into their interstices has been scraped out
devoured, our resources are literally at an end.

The nights seem even longer than the days. Sleep, when it comes, brings no
relief; it is rather a feverish stupour, broken and disturbed by frightful
nightmares. Last night, however, overcome by fatigue, I managed to rest for
several hours.

At six o'clock this moming I was roused by the sound of angry voices, and,
starting up, I saw Owen and Jynxstrop, with Flaypole, Wilson, Burke, and
Sandon, standing in a threatening attitude. They had taken possession of the
carpenter's tools, and now, armed with hatchets, chisels, and hammers, they were
preparing to attack the captain, the boatswain, and Dowlas. I attached myself in a
moment to Curtis's party. Falsten followed my example, and although our knives
were the only weapons at our disposal, we were ready to defend ourselves to the
very last extremity.

Owen and his men advanced towards us. The miserable wretches were all
drunk, for during the night they had knocked a hole in the brandy-barrel, and had
recklessly swallowed its contents. What they wanted they scarcely seemed to
know, but Owen and Jynxstrop, not quite so much intoxicated as the rest;
seemed to be urging them on to massacre the captain and the officers.

"Down with the captain! Overboard with Curtis! Owen shall take the
command!" they shouted from time to time in their drunken fury; and, armed as
they were, they appeared completely masters of the situation.

"Now, then, down with your arms!" said Curtis sternly, as he advanced to
meet them.

"Overboard with the captain!" howled Owen, as by word and gesture he
urged on his accomplices.

Curtis' pushed aside the excited rascals, and, walking straight up to Owen,
asked him what he wanted.

"What do we want? Why, we want no more captains; we are all equals now."

Poor stupid fool! as though misery and privation had not already reduced us
all to the same level.

"Owen," said the captain once, again, "down with your arms!"


"Come on, all of you," shouted Owen to his companions, without giving the
slightest heed to Curtis's words.

A regular struggle ensued. Owen and Wilson attacked Curtis, who defended
himself with a piece of a spar; Burke and Flaypole rushed upon Falsten and the
boatswain, whilst I was left to confront the negro Jynxstrop, who attempted to
strike me with the hammer which he brandished in his hand. I endeavoured to
paralyze his movements by pinioning his arms, but the rascal was my superior in
muscular strength. After wrestling for a few moments, I felt that he was getting
the mastery over me when all of a sudden he rolled over on to the platform,
dragging me with him. Andre Letourneur had caught hold of one of his legs, and
thus saved my life. Jynxstrop dropped his weapon in his fall; I seized it instantly,
and was about to cleave the fellow's skull, when I was myself arrested by
Andre's hand upon my arm.

By this time the mutineers had been driven back to the forepart of the raft,
and Curtis, who had managed to parry the blows which had been aimed at him,
had caught hold of a hatchet, with which he was preparing to strike at Owen. But
Owen made a sidelong movement to avoid the blow, and the weapon caught
Wilson full in the chest. The unfortunate man rolled over the side of the raft and
instantly disappeared.

"Save him! save him!" shouted the boatswain.

"It's too late; he's dead!" said Dowlas.

"Ah, well! he'll do for--" began the boatswain; but he did not finish his
sentence.

Wilson's death, however, put an end to the fray. Flaypole and Burke were
lying prostrate in a drunken stupour, and Jynxstrop was soon overpowered, and
lashed tightly to the foot of the mast. The carpenter and the boatswain seized
hold of Owen.

"Now then," said Curtis, as he raised his blood-stained hatchet, "make your
peace with God, for you have not a moment to live."

"Oh, you want to eat me, do you?" sneered Owen, with the most hardened
effrontery.

But the audacious reply saved his life; Curtis turned as pale as death, the
hatchet dropped from his hand, and he went and seated himself moodily on the
farthest corner of the raft.


CHAPTER XXXIX.
JANUARY 5th and 6th.--The whole scene made a deep impression on our
minds, and Owen's speech coming as a sort of climax, brought before us our


misery with a force that was well-nigh overwhelming.

As soon as I recovered my composure, I did not forget to thank Andre
Letourneur for the act of intervention that had saved my life.

"Do you thank me for that; Mr. Kazallon?" he said; "it has only served to
prolong your misery."

"Never mind, M. Letourneur,” said Miss Herbey; "you did your duty."

Enfeebled and emaciated as the young girl is, her sense of duty never deserts
her, and although her torn and bedraggled garments float dejectedly about her
body, she never utters a word of complaint, and never loses courage.

"Mr. Kazallon," she said to me, "do you think we are fated to die of hunger?"

"Yes; Miss Herbey, I do," I replied in a hard, cold tone.

"How long do you suppose we have to live?" she asked again.

"I cannot say; perhaps we shall linger on longer than we imagine."

"The strongest constitutions suffer the most, do they not?" she said.

"Yes; but they have one consolation; they die the soonest;" I replied coldly.

Had every spark of humanity died out of my breast that I thus brought the
girl face to face with the terrible truth without a word of hope or comfort? The
eyes of Andre and his father, dilated with hunger, were fixed upon me, and I saw
reproach and astonishment written in their faces.

Afterwards, when we were quite alone, Miss Herbey asked me if I would
grant her a favour.

"Certainly, Miss Herbey; anything you like to ask," I replied; and this time
my manner was kinder and more genial.

"Mr. Kazallon," she said, "I am weaker than you, and shall probably die first.
Promise me that, if I do, you will throw my body into the sea."

"Oh, Miss Herbey," I began, "it was very wrong of me to speak to you as I
did!"

"No, no," she replied, half smiling; "you were quite right. But it is a
weakness of mine; I don't mind what they do with me as long as I am alive, but
when I am dead--" she stopped and shuddered. "Oh, promise me that you will
throw me into, the sea!"

I gave her the melancholy promise, which she acknowledged by pressing my
hand feebly with her emaciated fingers.

Another night passed away. At times my sufferings were so intense that cries
of agony involuntarily escaped my lips; then I became calmer, and sank into a
kind of lethargy. When I awoke, I was surprised to find my companions still
alive.

The one of our party who seems to bear his privations the best is Hobart the
steward, a man with whom hitherto I have had very little to do. He is small, with


a fawning expression remarkable for its indecision, and has a smile which is
incessantly playing round his lips; he goes about with his eyes half-closed, as
though he wished to conceal his thoughts, and there is something altogether false
and hypocritical about his whole demeanour. I cannot say that he bears his
privations without a murmur, for he sighs and moans incessantly; but, with it all,
I cannot but think that there is a want of genuineness in his manner, and that the
privation has not really told upon him as much as it has upon the rest of us. I
have my suspicions about the man, and intend to watch him carefully. To-day,
the 6th, M. Letourneur drew me aside to the stern of the raft, saying that he had a
secret to communicate, but that he wished neither to be seen nor heard speaking
to me. I withdrew with him to the larboard corner of the raft; and, as it was
growing dusk, nobody observed what we were doing.

"Mr. Kazallon," M. Letourneur began in a low voice, "Andre is dying of
hunger: he is growing weaker and weaker, and oh! I cannot, will not see him
die!"

He spoke passionately, almost fiercely, and I fully understood his feelings.
Taking his hand, I tried to reassure him.

"We will not despair yet," I said, "perhaps some passing ship--"

"Ship!" he cried impatiently, "don't try to console me with empty
commonplaces; you know as well as I do that there is no chance of falling in
with a passing ship." Then, breaking off suddenly, he asked,--"How long is it
since my son and all of you have had anything to eat?"

Astonished at his question, I replied that it was now four days since the
biscuit had failed.

"Four days," he repeated; "well, then, it is eight since I have tasted anything.
I have been saving my share for my son."

Tears rushed to my eyes; for a few moments I was unable to speak, and could
only once more grasp his hand in silence.

"What do you want me to do?" I asked at length.

"Hush! not so loud; some one will hear us," he said, lowering his voice, "I
want you to offer it to Andre as though it came from yourself. He would not
accept it from me; he would think I had been depriving myself for him. Let me
implore you to do me this service and for your trouble," and here he gently
stroked my hand, "for your trouble you shall have a morsel for yourself."

I trembled like a child as I listened to the poor father's words, and my heart
was ready to burst when I felt a tiny piece of biscuit slipped into my hand.

"Give it him," M. Letourneur went on under his breath, "give it him; but do
not let any one see you; the monsters would murder you if they knew it. This is
only for to-day; I will give you some more tomorrow."


The poor fellow did not trust me, and well he might not, for I had the greatest
difficulty to withstand the temptation to carry the biscuit to my mouth, But I
resisted the impulse, and those alone who have suffered like me can know what
the effort was.

Night came on with the rapidity peculiar to these low latitudes, and I glided
gently up to Andre and slipped the piece of biscuit into his hand as "a present
from myself." The young man clutched at it eagerly.

"But my father?" he said inquiringly.

I assured him that his father and I had each had our share, and that he must
eat this now, and, perhaps, I should be able to bring him some more another
time. Andre asked no more questions, and eagerly devoured the morsel of food.

So this evening at least, notwithstanding M. Letourneur's offer, I have tasted
nothing.


CHAPTER XL.

JANUARY 7th.--During the last few days since the wind has freshened, the
salt water constantly dashing over the raft has terribly punished the feet and legs
of some of the sailors. Owen, whom the boatswain ever since the revolt kept
bound to the mast, is in a deplorable state, and at our request has been released
from his restraint. Sandon and Burke are also suffering from the severe smarting
caused in this way, and it is only owing to our more sheltered position on the aft-
part of the raft, that we have not; all shared the same inconvenience.

Today the boatswain, maddened by starvation, laid hands upon everything
that met his voracious eyes, and I could hear the grating of his teeth as he
gnawed at fragments of sails and bits of wood, instinctively endeavouring to fill
his stomach by putting the mucus' into circulation at length, by dint of an eager
search, he came upon a piece of leather hanging to one of the spars that
supported the platform. He snatched it off and devoured it greedily, and as it was
animal matter, it really seemed as though the absorption of the substance
afforded him some temporary relief. Instantly we all followed his example; a
leather hat, the rims of caps, in short, anything that contained any animal matter
at all, were gnawed and sucked with the utmost avidity. Never shall I forget the
scene. We were no longer human, the impulses and instincts of brute beasts
seemed to actuate our every movement.

For a moment the pangs of hunger were somewhat allayed; but some of us
revolted against the loathsome food, and were seized either with violent nausea
or absolute sickness. I must be pardoned for giving these distressing details, but
how otherwise can I depict the misery, moral and physical, which we are


enduring? And with it all, I dare not venture to hope that we have reached the
climax of our sufferings.

The conduct of Hobart during the scene that I have just described has only
served to confirm my previous suspicions of him. He took no part in the almost
fiendish energy with which we gnawed at our scraps of leather, and although by
his conduct and perpetual groanings, he might be considered to be dying of
inanition, yet to me he has the appearance of being singularly exempt from the
tortures which we are all enduring. But whether the hypocrite is being sustained,
by some secret store of food, I have been unable to discover.

Whenever the breeze drops the heat is overpowering; but although our
allowance of water is very meagre, at present the pangs of hunger far exceed the
pain of thirst. It has often been remarked that extreme thirst is far less endurable
than extreme hunger. Is it possible that still greater agonies are in store for us? I
cannot, dare not, believe it. Fortunately, the broken barrel still contains a few
pints of water, and the other one has not yet been opened. But I am glad to say
that notwithstanding our diminished numbers, and in spite of some opposition,
the captain has thought right to reduce the daily allowance to half a pint for each
person. As for the brandy, of which there is only a quart now left, it has been
stowed away Safely in the stern of the raft.

This evening has ended the sufferings of another of our companions, making
our number now only fourteen. My attentions and Miss Herbey's nursing could
do nothing for Lieutenant Walter, and about half-past seven he expired in my
arms.

Before he died, in a few broken words he thanked Miss Herbey and myself
for the kindness we had shown him. A crumpled letter fell from his hand, and in
a voice that was scarcely audible from weakness, he said,--

"It is my mother's letter: the last I had from her--she was expecting me home;
but she will never see me more. Oh, put it to my lips--let me kiss it before I die.
Mother! mother! Oh my God!"

I placed the letter in his cold hand, and raised it to his lips; his eye lighted for
a moment; we heard the faint sound of a kiss, and all was over!


CHAPTER XLI.

JANUARY 8th.--All night I remained by the side of the poor fellow's corpse,
and several times Miss Herbey joined me in my mournful watch.

Before daylight dawned the body was quite cold, and as I knew there must
be no delay in throwing it overboard, I asked Curtis to assist me in the sad office.
The body was frightfully emaciated, and I had every hope that it would not float.


As soon as it was quite light, taking every precaution that no one should see
what we were about, Curtis and I proceeded to our melancholy task. We took a
few articles from the lieutenant's pockets, which we purposed, if either of us
should survive, to remit to his mother. But as we wrapped him in his tattered
garments that would have to suffice for his winding-sheet, I started back with a
thrill of horror. The right foot had gone, leaving the leg a bleeding stump!

No doubt that, overcome by fatigue, I must have fallen asleep for an interval
during the night, and some one had taken advantage of my slumber to mutilate
the corpse. But who could have been guilty of so foul a deed! Curtis looked
around with anger flashing In his eye; but all seemed as usual, and the silence
was only broken by a few groans of agony.

But there was no time to be lost; perhaps we were already observed, and
more horrible scenes might be likely to occur. Curtis said a few short prayers,
and we cast the body into the sea. It sank immediately.

"They are feeding the sharks well, and no mistake," said a voice behind me.

I turned round quickly, and found that it was Jynxstrop who had spoken.

As the boatswain now approached, I asked him whether he thought it
possible that any of the wretched men could have taken the dead man's foot.

"Oh yes, I dare say," he replied, in a significant tone "and perhaps they
thought they were right."

"Right! what do you mean?" I exclaimed.

"Well, sir," he said coldly, "isn't it better to eat a dead man than a living
one?"

I was at a loss to comprehend him, and, turning away, laid myself down at
the end of the raft.

Towards eleven o'clock, a most suspicious incident occurred. The boatswain,
who had cast his lines early in the morning, caught three large cod, each more
than thirty inches long, of the species which, when dried, is known by the name
of stock-fish. Scarcely had he hauled them on board, when the sailors made a
dash at them, and it was with the utmost difficulty that Curtis, Falsten, and
myself could restore order, so that we might divide the fish into equal portions.
Three cod were not much amongst fourteen starving persons, but, small as the
quantity was, it was allotted in strictly equal shares. Most of us devoured the
food raw, almost I might say, alive; only Curtis, Andre and Miss Herbey having
the patience to wait until their allowance had been boiled at a fire which they
made with a few scraps of wood. For myself, I confess that I swallowed my
portion of fish just as it was,--raw and bleeding. M. Letourneur followed my
example; the poor man devoured his food like a famished wolf, and it is only a
wonder to me how, after his lengthened fast, he came to be alive at all.


The boatswain's delight at his success was, excessive, and amounted almost
to delirium. I went up to him, and encouraged him to repeat his attempt.

"Oh, yes," he said; "I'll try again. I'll try again."

"And why not try at once," I asked.

"Not now," he said evasively; "the night is the best time for catching large
fish. Besides, I must manage to get some bait, for we have been improvident
enough not to save a single scrap."

"But you have succeeded once without bait; why may you not succeed
again?”

"Oh! I had some very good bait last night," he said. I stared at him in
amazement. He steadily returned my gaze, but said nothing.

"Have you none left?" at last I asked.

"Yes!" he almost whispered and left me without another word.

Our meal, meagre as it had been, served to rally our shattered energies; our
hopes were slightly raised; there was no reason why the boatswain should not
have the same good luck again.

One evidence of the degree to which our spirits were revived was that our
minds were no longer fixed upon the miserable present and hopeless future, but
we began to recall and discuss the past; and M. Letourneur, Andre Mr. Falsten,
and I held a long conversation with the captain about the various incidents of our
eventful voyage, speaking of our lost companions, of the fire, of the stranding of
the ship, of our sojourn on Ham Rock, of the springing of the leak, of our terrible
voyage in the top-masts, of the construction of the raft, and of the storm. All
these things seemed to have happened so long ago, and yet we were living still.
Living, did I say? Ay, if such an existence as ours could be called a life, fourteen
of us were living still. Who would be the next to go? We should then be thirteen.

"An unlucky number!" said Andre with a mournful smile.

During the night the boatswain cast his lines from the stern of the raft, and,
unwilling to trust them to any one else, remained watching them himself. In the
morning I went to ascertain what success had attended his patience. It was
scarcely light, and with eager eyes he was peering down into the water. He had
neither seen nor heard me coming.

"Well, boatswain!" I said, touching him on the shoulder.

He turned round quickly.

"Those villainous sharks have eaten every morsel of my bait," he said, in a
desponding voice.

"And you have no more left?" I asked.

"No more," he said. Then grasping my arm he added, "and that only shows
me that it is no good doing things by halves."


The truth flashed upon me at once, and I laid my hand upon his mouth. Poor
Walter!


CHAPTER XLII.

JANUARY 9th and 10th.--On the 9th the wind dropped, and there was a
dead calm; not a ripple disturbed the surface of the long undulations as they rose
and fell beneath us; and if it were not for the slight current which is carrying us
we know not whither, the raft would be absolutely stationary.

The heat was intolerable; our thirst more intolerable still; and now it was that
for the first time I fully realized how the insufficiency of drink could cause
torture more unendurable than the pangs of hunger. Mouth, throat, pharynx, all
alike were parched and dry, every gland becoming hard as horn under the action
of the hot air we breathed. At my urgent solicitation the captain was for once
induced to double our allowance of water; and this relaxation of the ordinary
rule enabled us to attempt to slake our thirst four times in the day, instead of only
twice. I use the word "attempt" advisedly; for the water at the bottom of the
barrel, though kept covered by a sail, became so warm that it was perfectly flat
and unrefreshing.

It was a most trying day, and the sailors relapsed into a condition of deep
despondency. The moon was nearly full, but when she rose the breeze did not
return. Continuance of high temperature in daytime is a sure proof that we have
been carried far to the south, and here, on this illimitable ocean, we have long
ceased even to look for land; it might almost seem as though this globe of ours
had veritably become a liquid sphere!

To-day we are still becalmed, and the temperature is as high as ever. The air
is heated like a furnace, and the sun scorches like fire. The torments of famine
are all forgotten: our thoughts are concentrated with fevered expectation upon
the longed-for moment when Curtis shall dole out the scanty measure of
lukewarm water that makes up our ration. O for one good draught, even if it
should exhaust the whole supply! At least, it seems as if we then could die in
peace!

About noon we were startled by sharp cries of agony, and looking round I
saw Owen writhing in the most horrible convulsions. I went towards him, for,
detestable as his conduct had been, common humanity prompted me to see
whether I could afford him any relief. But before I reached him, a shout from
Flaypole arrested my attention.

The man was up in the mast, and with great excitement pointing to the east.

"A ship! A ship!" he cried.


In an instant all were on their feet. Even Owen stopped his cries and stood
erect. It was quite true that in the direction indicated by Flaypole there was a
white speck visible upon the horizon. But did it move? Would the sailors with
their keen vision pronounce it to be a sail? A silence the most profound fell upon
us all. I glanced at Curtis as he stood with folded arms intently gazing at the
distant point. His brow was furrowed, and he contracted every feature, as with
half-closed eyes, he concentrated his power of vision upon that one faint spot in
the far-off horizon.

But at length he dropped his arms and shook his head. I looked again, but the
spot was no longer there. If it were a ship, that ship had disappeared; but
probably it had been a mere reflection, or, more likely still, only the crest of
some curling wave.

A deep dejection followed this phantom ray of hope. All returned to their
accustomed places. Curtis alone remained motionless, but his eye no longer
scanned the distant view.

Owen now began to shriek more wildly than ever. He presented truly a most
melancholy sight; he writhed with the most hideous contortions, and had all the
appearance of suffering from tetanus. His throat was contracted by repeated
spasms, his tongue was parched, his body swollen, and his pulse, though feeble,
was rapid and irregular. The poor wretch's symptoms were precisely such as to
lead us to suspect that he had taken some corrosive poison. Of course it was
quite out of our power to administer any antidote; all that we could devise was to
make him swallow something that might act as an emetic. I asked Curtis for a
little of the lukewarm water. As the contents of the broken barrel were now
exhausted, the captain, in order to comply with my request, was about to tap the
other barrel, when Owen started suddenly to his knees, and with a wild,
unearthly shriek, exclaimed,--

"No! no! no! of that water I will not touch a drop."

I supposed he did not understand what we were going to do, and
endeavoured to explain; but all in vain; he persisted in refusing to taste the water
in the second barrel. I then tried to induce vomiting by tickling his uvula, and he
brought off some bluish secretion from his stomach, the character of which
confirmed our previous suspicions--that he had been poisoned by oxide of
copper. We now felt convinced that any efforts on our part to save him would be
of no avail. The vomiting, however, had for the time relieved him, and he was
able to speak.

Curtis and I both implored him to let us know what he had taken to bring
about consequences so serious. His reply fell upon us as a startling blow.

The ill fated wretch had stolen several pints of water from the barrel that had


been untouched, and that water had poisoned him!


CHAPTER XLIII.

JANUARY 1ith to 14th.--Owen's convulsions returned with increased
violence, and in the course of the night he expired in terrible agony. His body
was thrown overboard almost directly; it had decomposed so rapidly that the
flesh had not even consistency enough for any fragments of it to be reserved for
the boatswain to use to bait his lines. A plague the man had been to us in his life;
in his death he was now of no service!

And now, perhaps, still more than ever, did the horror of our situation stare
us in the face. There was no doubt that the poisoned barrel had at some time or
other contained copperas; but what strange fatality had converted it into a water-
cask, or what fatality, stranger still, had caused it to be brought on board the raft,
was a problem that none could solve. Little, however, did it matter now: the fact
was evident; the barrel was poisoned, and of water we had not a drop.

One and all, we fell into the gloomiest silence. We were too irritable to bear
the sound of each other's voices; and it did not require a word, a mere look or
gesture was enough, to provoke us to anger that was little short of madness. How
it was that we did not all become raving maniacs, I cannot tell.

Throughout the 12th no drain of moisture crossed our lips, and not a cloud
arose to warrant the expectation of a passing shower; in the shade, if shade it
might be called, the thermometer would have registered at least 100deg., and,
perhaps, considerably more.

No change next day. The salt water began to chafe my legs, but although the
smarting was at times severe, it was an inconvenience to which I gave little
heed; others who had suffered from the same trouble had become no worse. Oh!
if this water that surrounds us could be reduced to vapour or to ice! its particles
of salt extracted, it would be available for drink. But no! we have no appliances,
and we must suffer on.

At the risk of being devoured by the sharks, the boatswain and two sailors
took a morning bath, and as their plunge seemed to refresh them, I and three of
my companions resolved to follow their example. We had never learnt to swim,
and had to be fastened to the end of a rope and lowered into the water; while
Curtis during the half-hour of our bath, kept a sharp look-out to give warning of
any danger from approaching sharks. No recommendation, however, on our part,
nor any representation of the benefit we felt we had derived, could induce Miss
Herbey to allay her sufferings in the same way.

At about eleven o'clock, the captain came up to me, and whispered in my


eal,--

"Don't say a word, Mr. Kazallon; I do not want to raise false hopes, but I
think I see a ship."

It was as well that the captain had warned me; otherwise, I should have
raised an involuntary shout of joy; as it was, I had the greatest difficulty in
restraining my expressions of delight.

"Look behind to larboard," he continued in an undertone.

Affecting an indifference which I was far from feeling, I cast an anxious
glance to that quarter of the horizon of which he spoke, and there, although mine
is not a nautical eye, I could plainly distinguish the outline of a ship under sail.

Almost at the same moment the boatswain who happened to be looking in
the same direction, raised the cry, "Ship ahoy!"

Whether it was that no one believed it, or whether all energies were
exhausted, certain it is that the announcement produced none of the effects that
might have been expected. Not a soul exhibited the slightest emotion, and it was
only when the boatswain had several times sung out his tidings that all eyes
turned to the horizon. There, most undeniably, was the ship, and the question
rose at once to the minds of all, and to the lips of many, "Would she see us?"

The sailors immediately began discussing the build of the vessel, and made
all sorts of conjectures as to the direction she was taking. Curtis was far more
deliberate in his judgment. After examining her attentively for some time, he
said, "She is a brig running close upon the wind, on the starboard tack, If she
keeps her course for a couple of hours, she will come right athwart our track."

A couple of hours! The words sounded to our ears like a couple of centuries.
The ship might change her course at any moment; closely trimmed as she was, it
was very probable that she was only tacking about to catch the wind, in which
case, as soon as she felt a breeze, she would resume her larboard tack and make
away again. On the other hand, if she were really sailing with the wind, she
would come nearer to us, and there would be good ground for hope.

Meantime, no exertion must be spared, and no means left untried, to make
our position known. The brig was about twelve miles to the east of us, so that it
was out of the question to think of any cries of ours being overheard; but Curtis
gave directions that every possible signal should be made. We had no fire-arms
by which we could attract attention, and nothing else occurred to us beyond
hoisting a flag of distress. Miss Herbey's red shawl, as being of a colour most
distinguishable against the background of sea and sky, was run up to the mast-
head, and was caught by the light breeze that just then was ruffling the surface of
the water. As a drowning man clutches at a straw, so our hearts bounded with
hope every time that our poor flag fluttered in the wind.


For an hour our feelings alternated between hope and despair. The ship was
evidently making her way in the direction of the raft, but every now and then she
seemed to stop, and then our hearts would almost stand still with agony lest she
was going to put about. She carried all her canvas, even to her royals and stay-
sails, but her hull was only partially visible above the horizon.

How slowly she advanced! The breeze was very, very feeble, and perhaps
soon it would drop altogether! We felt that we would give years of our life to
know the result of the coming hour!

At half-past twelve the captain and the boatswain considered that the brig
was about nine miles away; she had, therefore, gained only three miles in an
hour and a half, and it was doubtful whether the light breeze that had been
passing over our heads had reached her at all. I fancied, too, that her sails were
no longer filled, but were hanging loose against her masts. Turning to the
direction of the wind I tried to make out some chance of a rising breeze; but no,
the waves were calm and torpid, and the little puff of air that had aroused our
hopes had died away across the sea.

I stood aft with M. Letourneur, Andre and Miss Herbey, and our glances
perpetually wandered from the distant ship to our captain's face. Curtis stood
leaning against the mast, with the boatswain by his side; their eyes seemed never
for a moment to cease to watch the brig, but their countenances clearly expressed
the varying emotions that passed through their minds. Not a word was uttered,
nor was the silence broken, until the carpenter exclaimed, in accents of despair,--

"She's putting about!"

All started up: some to their knees, others to their feet, The boatswain
dropped a frightful oath. The ship was still nine miles away, and at such a
distance it was impossible for our signal to be seen; our tiny raft, a mere speck
upon the waters, would be lost in the intense irradiation of the sunbeams. If only
we could be seen, no doubt all would be well; no captain would have the
barbarous inhumanity to leave us to our fate; but there had been no chance; only
too well we knew that we had not been within the range of sight.

"My friends," said Curtis, "we must make a fire; it is our last and only
chance."

Some planks were quickly loosened and thrown into a heap upon the fore
part of the raft. They were damp and troublesome to light; but the very dampness
made the smoke more dense, and ere long a tall column of dusky fumes was
rising straight upwards in the air. If darkness should come on before the brig was
completely out of view, the flames we hoped might still be visible. But the hours
passed on; the fire died out; and yet no signs of help.

The temper of resignation now deserted me entirely; faith, hope, confidence-


-all vanished from my mind, and like the boatswain, I swore long and loudly. A
gentle hand was laid upon my arm, and turning round I saw Miss Herbey with
her finger pointing to the sky. I could stand it no longer, but gliding underneath
the tent I hid my face in my hands and wept aloud.

Meanwhile the brig had altered her tack, and was moving slowly to the east.
Three hours later and the keenest eye could not have discerned her top-sails
above the horizon.


CHAPTER XLIV.

JANUARY 15th.--After this further shattering of our excited hopes death
alone now Stares us in the face; slow and lingering as that death may be, sooner
or later it must inevitably come.

To-day some clouds that rose in the west have brought us a few puffs of
wind; and in spite of our prostration, we appreciate the moderation, slight as it is,
in the temperature. To my parched throat the air seemed a little less trying but it
is now seven days since the boatswain took his haul of fish, and during that
period we have eaten nothing even Andre Letourneur finished yesterday the last
morsel of the biscuit which his sorrowful and self-denying father had entrusted
to my charge.

Jynxstrop the negro has broken loose from his confinement, but Curtis has
taken no measures for putting him again under restraint. It is not to be
apprehended that the miserable fellow and his accomplices, weakened as they
are by their protracted fast, will attempt to do us any mischief now.

Some huge sharks made their appearance to-day, cleaving the water rapidly
with their great black fins. The monsters came close up to the edge of the raft,
and Flaypole, who was leaning over, narrowly escaped having his arm snapped
off by one of them. I could not help regarding them as living sepulchres, which
ere long might swallow up our miserable carcasses; yet, withal, I profess that my
feelings were rather those of fascination than of horror.

The boatswain, who stood with clenched teeth and dilated eye, regarded
these sharks from quite another point of view. He thought about devouring the
sharks, not about the sharks devouring him; and if he could succeed in catching
one, I doubt if one of us would reject the tough and untempting flesh. He
determined to make the attempt, and as he had no whirl which he could fasten to
his rope he set to work to find something that might serve as a substitute. Curtis
and Dowlas were consulted, and after a short conversation, during which they
kept throwing bits of rope and spars into the water in order to entice the sharks to
remain by the raft, Dowlas went and fetched his carpenter's tool, which is at once


a hatchet and a hammer. Of this he proposed to make the whirl of which they
were in need, under the hope that either the sharp edge of the adze or the pointed
extremity opposite would stick firmly into the jaws of any shark that might
swallow it. The wooden handle of the hammer was secured to the rope, which, in
its turn, was tightly fastened to the raft.

With eager, almost breathless, excitement we stood watching the
preparations, at the same time using every means in our power to attract the
attention of the sharks. As soon as the whirl was ready the boatswain began to
think about bait; and, talking rapidly to himself, ransacked every corner of the
raft, as though he expected to find some dead body coming opportunely to sight.
But his search ended in nothing; and the only plan that suggested itself was again
to have recourse to Miss Herbey's red shawl, of which a fragment was wrapped
round the head of the hammer. After testing the strength of his line, and
reassuring-himself that it was fastened firmly both to the hammer and to the raft,
the boatswain lowered it into the water.

The sea was quite transparent, and any object was clearly visible to a depth
of two hundred feet below the surface. Leaning over the low parapet of the raft
we looked on in breathless silence, as the scarlet rag, distinct as it was against
the blue mass of water, made its slow descent. But one by one the sharks seemed
to disappear, They could not, however, have gone far away, and it was not likely
that anything in the shape of bait dropped near them would long escape their
keen voracity.

Suddenly, without speaking, the boatswain raised his hand and pointed to a
dark mass skimming along the surface of the water, and making straight in our
direction. It was a shark, certainly not less than twelve feet long. As soon as the
creature was about four fathoms from the raft, the boatswain gently drew in his
line until the whirl was in such a position that the shark must cross right over it;
at the same time he shook the line a little, that he might give the whirl the
appearance, if he could, of being something alive and moving. As the creature
came near, my heart beat violently; I could see its eyes flashing above the waves;
and its gaping jaws, as it turned half over on its back, exhibited long rows of
pointed teeth.

I know not who it was, but some one at that moment uttered an involuntary
cry of horror. The shark came to a standstill, turned about, and escaped quite out
of sight. The boatswain was pale with anger.

"The first man who speaks," he said, "I will kill him on the spot."

Again he applied himself to his task. The whirl again was lowered, this time
to the depth of twenty fathoms, but for half an hour or more not a shark could be
distinguished; but as the waters far below seemed somehow to be troubled I


could not help believing that some of the brutes at least were still there.

All at once, with a violent jerk, the cord was wrested from the boatswain's
hands; firmly attached, however, as it was to the raft, it was not lost. The bait had
been seized by a shark, and the iron had made good its hold upon the creature's
flesh.

"Now, then, my lads," cried the boatswain, "haul away!"

Passengers and sailors, one and all, put forth what strength they had to drag
the rope, but so violent were the creature's struggles that it required all our
efforts (and it is needless to say that they were willing enough) to bring it to the
surface, At length, after exertions that almost exhausted us, the water became
agitated by the violent flappings of the tail and fins; and looking down I saw the
huge carcase of the shark writhing convulsively amidst waves that were stained
with blood.

"Steady! steady!" said the boatswain, as the head appeared above.

The whirl had passed right through the jaw into the middle of the throat; so
that no struggle on the part of the animal could possibly release it. Dowlas seized
his hatchet, ready to despatch the brute the moment if should be landed on the
raft. A short sharp snap was heard. The shark had closed its jaws, and bitten
through the wooden handle of the hammer. Another moment and it had turned
round and was completely gone.

A howl of despair burst from all our lips. All the labour and the patience, all
had been in vain. Dowlas made a few more unsuccessful attempts, but as the
whirl was lost, and they had no means of replacing it, there was no further room
for hope. They did, indeed, lower some cords twisted into running knots, but (as
might have been expected) these only slipped over, without holding, the slimy
bodies of the sharks. As a last resource the boatswain allowed his naked leg to
hang over the side of the raft; the monsters, however, were proof even against
this attraction.

Reduced once again to a gloomy despondency, all turned to their places, to
await the end that cannot now be long deferred.

Just as I moved away I heard the boatswain say to Curtis,--

"Captain, when shall we draw lots?"

The captain made no reply.


CHAPTER XLV.

JANUARY 16th.--If the crew of any passing vessel had caught sight of us as
we lay still and inanimate upon our sail-cloth, they would scarcely, at first sight,
have hesitated to pronounce us dead.


My sufferings were terrible; tongue, lips, and throat were so parched and
swollen that if food had been at hand I question whether I could have swallowed
it. So exasperated were the feelings of us all, however, that we glanced at each
other with looks as savage as though we were about to slaughter and without
delay eat up one another.

The heat was aggravated by the atmosphere being somewhat stormy. Heavy
vapours gathered on the horizon, and there was a look as if it were raining all
around. Longing eyes and gasping mouths turned involuntarily towards the
clouds, and M. Letourneur, on bended knee, was raising his hands, as it might be
in supplication to the relentless skies.

It was eleven o'clock in the morning. I listened for distant rumblings which
might announce an approaching storm, but although the vapours had obstructed
the sun's rays, they no longer presented the appearance of being charged with
electricity. Thus our prognostications ended in disappointment; the clouds, which
in the early morning had been marked by the distinctness of their outline, had
melted one into another and assumed an uniform dull grey tint; in fact, we were
enveloped in an ordinary fog. But was it not still possible that this fog might turn
to rain?

Happily this hope was destined to be realized; for in a very short time,
Dowlas, with a shout of delight, declared that rain was actually coming; and sure
enough, not half a mile from the raft, the dark parallel streaks against the sky
testified that there at least the rain was falling. I fancied I could see the drops
rebounding from the surface of the water. The wind was fresh and bringing the
cloud right on towards us, yet we could not suppress our trepidation lest it;
should exhaust itself before it reached us.

But no: very soon large heavy drops began to fall, and the storm-cloud,
passing over our heads, was outpouring its contents upon us. The shower,
however, was very transient; already a bright streak of light along the horizon
marked the limit of the cloud and warned us that we must be quick to make the
most of what it had to give us. Curtis had placed the broken barrel in the position
that was most exposed, and every sail was spread out to the fullest extent our
dimensions would allow.

We all laid ourselves down flat upon our backs and kept our mouths wide
open. The rain splashed into my face, wetted my lips, and trickled down my
throat. Never can I describe the ecstasy with which I imbibed that renovating
moisture. The parched and swollen glands relaxed, I breathed afresh, and my
whole being seemed revived with a strange and requickened life.

The rain lasted about twenty minutes, when the cloud, still only half
exhausted, passed quite away from over us.


We grasped each other's hands as we rose from the platform on which we
had been lying, and mutual congratulations, mingled with gratitude, poured forth
from our long silent lips. Hope, however evanescent it might be, for the moment
had returned, and we yielded to the expectation that, ere long, other and more
abundant clouds might come and replenish our store.

The next consideration was how to preserve and economize what little had
been collected by the barrel, or imbibed by the outspread sails. It was found that
only a few pints of rain-water had fallen into the barrel to this small quantity the
sailors were about to add what they could by wringing out the saturated sails,
when Curtis made them desist from their intention.

"Stop, stop!" he said, "we must wait a moment; we must see whether this
water from the sails is drinkable."

I looked at him in amazement. Why should not this be as drinkable as the
other? He squeezed a few drops out of one of the folds of a sail into the tin pot,
and put it to his lips. To my surprise, he rejected it immediately, and upon tasting
it for myself I found it not merely brackish, but briny as the sea itself. The fact
was that the canvas had been so long exposed to the action of the waves, that it
had become thoroughly impregnated by salt, which of course was taken up again
by the water that fell upon it. Disappointed we were; but with several pints of
water in our possession, we were not only contented for the present, but
sanguine in our prospect for the future.


CHAPTER XLVI.

JANUARY 17th.--As a natural consequence of the alleviation of our thirst,
the pangs of hunger returned more violently than ever. Although we had no bait,
and even if we had we could not use it for want of a whirl, we could not help
asking whether no possible means could be devised for securing one out of the
many sharks that were still perpetually swarming about the raft. Armed with
knives, like the Indians in the pearl fisheries, was it not practicable to attack the
monsters in their own element? Curtis expressed his willingness personally to
make the attempt, but so numerous were the sharks that we would not for one
moment hear of his risking his life in a venture of which the danger was as great
as the success was doubtful.

By plunging into the sea, or by gnawing at a piece of metal, we could
always, or at least often, do something that cheated us into believing that we
were mitigating the pains of thirst; but with hunger it was different. The
prospect, too, of rain seemed hopeful, whilst for getting food there appeared no
chance; and, as we knew that nothing could compensate for the lack of nutritive


matter, we were soon all cast down again. Shocking to confess, it would be
untrue to deny that we surveyed each other with the eye of an eager longing; and
I need hardly explain to what a degree of savageness the one idea that haunted us
had reduced our feelings.

Ever since the storm-cloud brought us the too transient shower the sky has
been tolerably clear, and although at that time the wind had slightly freshened, it
has since dropped, and the sail hangs idly against our mast. Except for the
trifling relief it brings by modifying the temperature we care little now for any
breeze. Ignorant as we are as to what quarter of the Atlantic we have been
carried by the currents, it matters very little to us from what direction the wind
may blow if only it would bring, in rain or dew, the moisture of which we are so
dreadfully in need.

The moon was entering her last quarter, so that it was dark till nearly
midnight, and the stars were misty, not glowing with that lustre which is so often
characteristic of cool nights. Half frantic with that sense of hunger which
invariably returns with redoubled vigour at the close of every day, I threw
myself, in a kind of frenzy, upon a bundle of sails that was lying on the starboard
of the raft, and leaning over, I tried to get some measure of relief by inhaling the
moist coolness that rarely fails to circulate just above the water. My brain was
haunted by the most horrible nightmares; not that I suppose I was in any way
more distressed than my companions, who were lying in their usual places,
vainly endeavouring to forget their sufferings in sleep.

After a time I fell into a restless, dreamy doze. I was neither asleep nor
awake. How long I remained in that state of stupor I could hardly say, but at
length a strange sensation half brought me to myself. Was I dreaming, or was
there not really some unaccustomed odour floating in the air? My nostrils
became distended, and I could scarcely suppress a cry of astonishment; but some
instinct kept me quiet, and I laid myself down again with the puzzled sensation
sometimes experienced when we have forgotten a word or name. Only a few
minutes, however, had elapsed before another still more savoury puff induced
me to take several long inhalations. Suddenly, the truth seemed to dash across
my mind. "Surely," I muttered to myself "this must be cooked meat that I can
smell."

Again and again I sniffed and became more convinced than ever that my
senses were not deceiving me. But from what part of the raft could the smell
proceed? I rose to my knees, and having satisfied myself that the odour came
from the front, I crept stealthily as a cat under the sails and between the spars in
that direction. Following the promptings of my scent, rather than my vision, like
a bloodhound in the track of his prey, I searched everywhere I could, now


finding, now losing, the smell according to my change of position, or the
dropping of the wind. At length I got the true scent; once for all, so that I could
go straight to the object for which I was in search.

Approaching the starboard angle of the raft, I came to the conclusion that the
smell that had thus keenly excited my cravings was the smell of smoked bacon;
the membranes of my tongue almost bristled with the intenseness of my longing.

Crawling along a little farther, under a thick roll of sail-cloth, I was not long
in securing my prize. Forcing my arm below the roll, I felt my hand in contact
with something wrapped up in paper. I clutched it up, and carried it off to a place
where I could examine it by the help of the light of the moon that had now made
its appearance above the horizon. I almost shrieked for joy. It was a piece of
bacon. True, it did not weigh many ounces, but small as it was it would suffice to
alleviate the pangs of hunger for one day at least. I was just on the point of
raising it to my mouth, when a hand was laid upon my arm. It was only by a
most determined effort that I kept myself from screaming out one instant more,
and I found myself face to face with Hobart.

In a moment I understood all. Plainly this rascal Hobart had saved some
provision from the wreck, upon which he had been subsisting ever since. The
steward had provided for himself, whilst all around him were dying of
starvation. Detestable wretch! This accounts for the inconsistency of his well-to-
do looks and his pitiable groans. Vile hypocrite!

Yet why, it struck me, should I complain? Was not I reaping the benefit of
that secret store that he, for himself, had saved?

But Hobart had no idea of allowing me the peaceable possession of what he
held to be his own. He made a dash at the fragment of bacon, and seemed
determined to wrest it from my grasp. We struggled with each other, but
although our wrestling was very violent, it was very noiseless. We were both of
us aware that it was absolutely necessary that not one of those on board should
know anything at all about the prize for which we were contending. Nor was my
own determination lessened by hearing him groan out that it was his last, his
only morsel. "His!" I thought; "it shall be mine now!"

And still careful that no noise of commotion should arise, I threw him on his
back, and grasping his throat so that it gurgled again, I held him down until, in
rapid mouthfuls, I had swallowed up the last scrap of the food for which we had
fought so hard.

I released my prisoner, and quietly crept back to my own quarters.

And not a soul is aware that I have broken my fast!


CHAPTER XLVII.

JANUARY 18th.--After this excitement I awaited the approach of day with a
strange anxiety. My conscience told me that Hobart had the right to denounce me
in the presence of all my fellow-passengers; yet my alarm was vain. The idea of
my proceedings being exposed by him was quite absurd; in a moment he would
himself be murdered without pity by the crew, if it should be revealed that,
unknown to them, he had been living on some private store which, by
clandestine cunning, he had reserved. But, in spite of my anxiety, I had a longing
for day to come.

The bit of food that I had thus stolen was very small; but small as it was it
had alleviated my hunger, and I was now tortured with remorse, because I had
not shared the meagre morsel with my fellow-sufferers. Miss Herbey, Andre, his
father, all had been forgotten, and from the bottom of my heart I repented of my
cruel selfishness.

Meantime the moon rose high in the heavens, and the first streaks of dawn
appeared. There is no twilight in these low latitudes, and the full daylight came
well nigh at once. I had not closed my eyes since my encounter with the steward,
and ever since the first blush of day I had laboured under the impression that I
could see some unusual dark mass half way up the mast. But although it again
and again caught my eye, it hardly roused my curiosity, and I did not rise from
the bundle of sails on which I was lying to ascertain what it really was. But no
sooner did the rays of the sun fall full upon it than I saw at once that it was the
body of a man, attached to a rope, and swinging to and fro with the motion of the
raft.

A horrible presentiment carried me to the foot of the mast, and, just as I had
guessed, Hobart had hanged himself. I could not for a moment; doubt that it was
I myself that had impelled him to the suicide. A cry of horror had scarcely
escaped my lips, when my fellow-passengers were at my side, and the rope was
cut. Then came the sailors. And what was it that made the group gather so
eagerly around the body? Was it a humane desire to see whether any spark of life
remained? No, indeed; the corpse was cold, and the limbs were rigid; there was
no chance that animation should be restored. What then was it that kept them
lingering so close around? It was only too apparent what they were about to do.

But I did not, could not, look. I refused to take part in the horrible repast that
was proposed. Neither would Miss Herbey, Andre nor his father, consent to
alleviate their pangs of hunger by such revolting means. I know nothing for
certain as to what Curtis did, and I did not venture to inquire; but of the others,--
Falsten, Dowlas, the boatswain, and all the rest,--I know that, to assuage their
cravings, they consented to reduce themselves to the level of beasts of prey; they


were transformed from human beings into ravenous brutes.

The four of us who sickened at the idea of partaking of the horrid meal
withdrew to the seclusion of our tent; it was bad enough to hear; without
witnessing the appalling operation. But, in truth, I had the greatest difficulty in
the world in preventing Andre from rushing out upon the cannibals, and
snatching the odious food from their clutches. I represented to him the
hopelessness of his attempt, and tried to reconcile him by telling him that if they
liked the food they had a right to it. Hobart had not been murdered; he had died
by his own hand; and, after all, as the boatswain had once remarked to me, "it
was better to eat a dead man than a live one."

Do what I would, however, I could not quiet Andre's feeling of abhorrence;
in his disgust and loathing he seemed for the time to have quite forgotten his
own sufferings.

Meanwhile, there was no concealing the truth that we were ourselves dying
of starvation, whilst our eight companions would probably, by their loathsome
diet, escape that frightful destiny. Owing to his secret hoard of provisions Hobart
had been by far the strongest amongst us; he had been supported, so that no
organic disease had affected his tissues, and really might be said to be in good
health when his chagrin drove him to his desperate suicide. But what was I
thinking of! whither were my meditations carrying me away? was it not coming
to pass that the cannibals were rousing my envy instead of exciting my horror?

Very shortly after this I heard Dowlas talking about the possibility of
obtaining salt by evaporating sea-water in the sun; "and then," he added, "we can
salt down the rest."

The boatswain assented to what the carpenter had said, and probably the
suggestion was adopted.

Silence, the most profound, now reigns upon the raft. I presume that nearly
all have gone to sleep. One thing I do know, that they are no longer hungry!


CHAPTER XLVIII.

JANUARY 19th.--All through the day the sky remained unclouded and the
heat intense; and night came on without bringing much sensible moderation in
the temperature. I was unable to get any sleep, and, towards morning, was
disturbed by hearing an angry clamour going on outside the tent; it aroused M.
Letourneur, Andre and Miss Herbey, as much as myself, and we were anxious to
ascertain the cause of the tumult.

The boatswain, Dowlas, and all the sailors were storming at each other in
frightful rage; and Curtis, who had come forward from the stern, was vainly


endeavouring to pacify them.

"But who has done it? we must know who has done it," said Dowlas,
scowling with vindictive passion on the group around him.

"There's a thief," howled out the boatswain, "and he shall be found! Let's
know who has taken it."

"T haven't taken it!" "Nor I!" "Nor I!" cried the sailors one after another.

And then they set to work again to ransack every quarter of the raft; they
rolled every spar aside, they overturned everything on board, and only grew
more and more incensed with anger as their search proved fruitless.

"Can YOU tell us," said the boatswain, coming up to me, "who is the thief?"

"Thief!" I replied. "I don't know what you mean."

And while we were speaking the others all came up together, and told me
that they had looked everywhere else, and that they were going now to search
the tent.

"Shame!" I said. "You ought to allow those whom you know to be dying of
hunger at least to die in peace. There is not one of us who has left the tent all
night. Why suspect us?"

"Now just look here, Mr. Kazallon," said the boatswain, in a voice which he
was endeavouring to calm down into moderation, "we are not accusing you of
anything; we know well enough you, and all the rest of you, had a right to your
shares as much as anybody; but that isn't it. It's all gone somewhere, every bit."

"Yes," said Sandon gruffly; "it's all gone somewheres, and we are a going to
search the tent."

Resistance was useless, and Miss Herbey, M. Letourneur, and Andre were all
turned out.

I confess I was very fearful. I had a strong suspicion that for the sake of his
son, for whom he was ready to venture anything, M. Letourneur had committed
the theft; in that case I knew that nothing would have prevented the infuriated
men from tearing the devoted father to pieces. I beckoned to Curtis for
protection, and he came and stood beside me. He said nothing, but waited with
his hands in his pockets, and I think I am not mistaken in my belief that there
was some sort of a weapon in each.

To my great relief the search was ineffectual. There was no doubt that the
carcase of the suicide had been thrown overboard, and the rage of the
disappointed cannibals knew no bounds.

Yet who had ventured to do the deed! I looked at M. Letourneur and Miss
Herbey; but their countenances at once betrayed their ignorance. Andre turned
his face away, and his eyes did not meet my own. Probably it is he; but, if it be, I
wonder whether he has reckoned up the consequences of so rash an act.


CHAPTER XLIX.

JANUARY 20th to 22nd.--For the day or two after the horrible repast of the
18th those who had partaken of it appeared to suffer comparatively little either
from hunger or thirst; but for the four of us who had tasted nothing, the agony of
suffering grew more and more intense. It was enough to make us repine over the
loss of the provision that had so mysteriously gone; and if any one of us should
die, I doubt whether the survivors would a second time resist the temptation to
assuage their pangs by tasting human flesh.

Before long, all the cravings of hunger began to return to the sailors, and I
could see their eyes greedily glancing upon us, starved as they knew us to be, as
though they were reckoning our hours, and already were preparing to consume
us as their prey.

As is always the case with shipwrecked men, we were tormented by thirst far
more than by hunger; and if, in the height of our sufferings, we had been offered
our choice between a few drops of water and a few crumbs of biscuit, I do not
doubt that we should, without exception, have preferred to take the water.

And what a mockery to our condition did it seem that all this while there was
water, water, nothing but water, everywhere around us! Again and again,
incapable of comprehending how powerless it was to relieve me, I put a few
drops within my lips, but only with the invariable result of bringing on a most
trying nausea, and rendering my thirst more unendurable than before.

Forty-two days had passed since we quitted the sinking "Chancellor." There
could be no hope now; all of us must die, and by the most deplorable of deaths. I
was quite conscious that a mist was gathering over my brain; I felt my senses
sinking into a condition of torpor; I made an effort, but all in vain, to master the
delirium that I was aware was taking possession of my reason. It is out of my
power to decide for how long I lost my consciousness; but when I came to
myself I found that Miss Herbey had folded some wet bandages around my
forehead. I am somewhat better; but I am weakened, mind and body, and I am
conscious that I have not long to live.

A frightful fatality occurred to-day. The scene was terrible. Jynxstrop the
negro went raving mad. Curtis and several of the men tried their utmost to
control him, but in spite of everything he broke loose, and tore up and down the
raft, uttering fearful yells. He had gained possession of a handspike, and rushed
upon us all with the ferocity of an infuriated tiger; how we contrived to escape
mischief from his attacks, I know not. All at once, by one of those unaccountable
impulses of madness, his rage turned against himself. With his teeth and nails he


gnawed and tore away at his own flesh; dashing the blood into our faces, he
shrieked out with a demoniacal grin, "Drink, drink!" and flinging us gory
morsels, kept saying "Eat, eat!" In the midst of his insane shrieks he made a
sudden pause, then dashing back again from the stern to the front, he made a
bound and disappeared beneath the waves.

Falsten, Dowlas, and the boatswain, made a rush that at least they might
secure the body; but it was too late; all that they could see was a crimson circle
in the water, and some huge sharks disporting themselves around the spot.


CHAPTER L.

JANUARY 23rd.--Only eleven of us now remain; and the probability is very
great that every day must now carry off at least its one victim, and perhaps more.
The end of the tragedy is rapidly approaching, and save for the chance, which is
next to an impossibility, of our sighting land, or being picked up by a passing
vessel, ere another week has elapsed not a single survivor of the "Chancellor"
will remain.

The wind freshened considerably in the night, and it is now blowing pretty
briskly from the north-east. It has filled our sail, and the white foam in our wake
is an indication that we are making some progress. The captain reckons that we
must be advancing at the rate of about three miles an hour.

Curtis and Falsten are certainly in the best condition amongst us, and in spite
of their extreme emaciation they bear up wonderfully under the protracted
hardships we have all endured. Words cannot describe the melancholy state to
which poor Miss Herbey bodily is reduced; her whole being seems absorbed into
her soul, but that soul is brave and resolute as ever, living in heaven rather than
on earth. The boatswain, strong, energetic man that he was, has shrunk into a
mere shadow of his former self, and I doubt whether any one would recognize
him to be the same man. He keeps perpetually to one corner of the raft, his head
dropped upon his chest, and his long, bony hands lying upon knees that project
sharply from his worn-out trowsers. Unlike Miss Herbey, his spirit seems to have
sunk into apathy, and it is at times difficult to believe that he is living at all, so
motionless and statue-like does he sit.

Silence continues to reign upon the raft. Not a sound, not even a groan,
escapes our lips. We do not exchange ten words in the course of the day, and the
few syllables that our parched tongue and swollen lips can pronounce are almost
unintelligible. Wasted and bloodless, we are no longer human beings; we are
spectres.


CHAPTER LI.

JANUARY 24th.--I have inquired more than once of Curtis if he has the
faintest idea to what quarter of the Atlantic we have drifted, and each time he has
been unable to give me a decided answer, though from his general observation of
the direction of the wind and currents he imagines that we have been carried
westwards, that is to say, towards the land.

To-day the breeze has dropped entirely, but the heavy swell is still upon the
sea, and is an unquestionable sign that a tempest has been raging at no great
distance. The raft labours hard against the waves, and Curtis, Falsten, and the
boatswain, employ the little energy that remains to them in strengthening the
joints. Why do they give themselves such trouble? Why not let the few frail
planks part asunder, and allow the ocean to terminate our miserable existence?
Certain it seems that our sufferings must have reached their utmost limit, and
nothing could exceed the torture that we are enduring. The sky pours down upon
us a heat like that of molten lead, and the sweat that saturates the tattered clothes
that hang about our bodies goes far to aggravate the agonies of our thirst. No
words of mine can describe this dire distress; these sufferings are beyond human
estimate.

Even bathing, the only means of refreshment that we possessed, has now
become impossible, for ever since Jynxstrop's death the sharks have hung about
the raft in shoals.

To-day I tried to gain a few drops of fresh water by evaporation, but even
with the exercise of the greatest patience, it was with the utmost difficulty that I
obtained enough to moisten a little scrap of linen; and the only kettle that we had
was so old and battered, that it would not bear the fire, so that I was obliged to
give up the attempt in despair.

Falsten is now almost exhausted, and if he survives us at all, it can only be
for a few days. Whenever I raised my head I always failed to see him, but he was
probably lying sheltered somewhere beneath the sails. Curtis was the only man
who remained on his feet, but with indomitable pluck he continued to stand on
the front of the raft, waiting, watching, hoping. To look at him, with his
unflagging energy, almost tempted me to imagine that he did well to hope, but I
dared nor entertain one sanguine thought; and there I lay, waiting, nay, longing
for death.

How many hours passed away thus I cannot tell, but after a time a loud peal
of laughter burst upon my ear Some one else, then, was going mad, I thought;
but the idea did not rouse me in the least. The laughter was repeated with greater
vehemence, but I never raised my head. Presently I caught a few incoherent


words.

"Fields, fields, gardens and trees! Look, there's an inn under the trees! Quick,
quick! brandy, gin, water! a guinea a drop! I'll pay for it! I've lots of money! lots!
lots!"

Poor deluded wretch! I thought again; the wealth of a nation could not buy a
drop of water here. There was silence for a minute, when all of a sudden I heard
the shout of "Land! land!"

The words acted upon me like an electric shock, and, with a frantic effort, I
started to my feet. No land, indeed, was visible, but Flaypole, laughing, singing,
and gesticulating, was raging up and down the raft. Sight, taste and hearing--all
were gone; but the cerebral derangement supplied their place, and in imagination
the maniac was conversing with absent friends, inviting them into the George
Inn at Cardiff, offering them gin, whisky, and, above all water! Stumbling at
every step, and singing in a cracked, discordant voice, he staggered about
amongst us like an intoxicated man. With the loss of his senses all his sufferings
had vanished, and his thirst was appeased. It was hard not to wish to be a
partaker of his hallucination.

Dowlas, Falsten, and the boatswain, seemed to think that the unfortunate
wretch would, like Jynxstrop, put an end to himself by leaping into the sea; but,
determined this time to preserve the body, that it might serve a better purpose
than merely feeding the sharks, they rose and followed the madman everywhere
he went, keeping a strict eye upon his every movement.

But the matter did not end as they expected. As though he were really
intoxicated by the stimulants of which he had been raving, Flaypole at last sank
down in a heap in a comer of the raft, where he lay lost in a heavy slumber.


CHAPTER LII.

JANUARY 25th.--Last night was very misty, and for some unaccountable
reason, one of the hottest that can be imagined. The atmosphere was really so
stifling, that it seemed as if it only required a spark to set it alight. The raft was
not only quite stationary, but did not even rise and fall with any motion of the
waves.

During the night I tried to count how many there were now on board, but I
was utterly unable to collect my ideas sufficiently to make the enumeration.
Sometimes I counted ten, sometimes twelve, and although I knew that eleven,
since Jynxstrop was dead, was the correct number, I could never bring my
reckoning right. Of one thing I felt quite sure, and that was that the number
would very soon be ten. I was convinced that I could myself last but very little


longer. All the events and associations of my life passed rapidly through my
brain, My country, my friends, and my family all appeared as it were in a vision,
and seemed as though they had come to bid me a last farewell.

Towards morning I woke from my sleep, if the languid stupour into which I
had fallen was worthy of that name. One fixed idea had taken possession of my
brain; I would put an end to myself, and I felt a sort of pleasure as I gloated over
the power that I had to terminate my sufferings. I told Curtis, with the utmost
composure, of my intention, and he received the intelligence as calmly as it was
delivered.

"Of course you will do as you please," he said; "for, my own part, I shall not
abandon my post. It is my duty to remain here, and unless death comes to carry
me away, I shall stay where I am to the very last."

The dull grey fog still hung heavily over the ocean, but the sun was evidently
shining above the mist, and would, in course of time, dispel the vapour. Towards
seven o'clock I fancied I heard the cries of birds above my head. The sound was
repeated three times, and as I went up to the captain to ask him about it, I heard
him mutter to himself,--

"Birds! why, that looks as if land were not far off."

But although Curtis might still cling to the hope of reaching land, I knew not
what it was to have one sanguine thought. For me there was neither continent
nor island; the world was one fluid sphere, uniform, monotonous, as in the most
primitive period of its formation. Nevertheless it must be owned that it was with
a certain amount of impatience that I awaited the rising of the mist, for I was
anxious to shake off the phantom fallacies that Curtis's words had suggested to
my mind.

Not till eleven o'clock did the fog begin to break, and as it rolled in heavy
folds along the surface of the water, I could every now and then catch glimpses
of a clear blue sky beyond. Fierce sunbeams pierced the cloud-rifts, scorching
and burning our bodies like red-hot iron; but it was only above our heads that
there was any sunlight to condense the vapour; the horizon was still quite
invisible. There was no wind, and for half an hour longer the fog hung heavily
round the raft; whilst Curtis, leaning against the side, strove to penetrate the
obscurity. At length the sun burst forth in full power, and, sweeping the surface
of the ocean, dispelled the fog, and left the horizon opened to our eyes.

There, exactly as we had seen it for the last six weeks, was the circle that
bounded sea and sky, unbroken, definite, distinct as ever! Curtis gazed with
intensest scrutiny, but did not speak a word. I pitied him sincerely, for he alone
of us all felt that he had not the right to put an end to his misery. For myself I had
fully determined that if I lived till the following day, I would die by my own


hand. Whether my companions were still alive, I hardly cared to know; it
seemed as though days had passed since I had seen them.

Night drew on, but I could not sleep for a moment. Towards two o'clock in
the morning my thirst was so intense that I was unable to suppress loud cries of
agony. Was there nothing that would serve to quench the fire that was burning
within me? What if instead of drinking the blood of others I were to drink my
own? It would be all unavailing, I was well aware, but scarcely had the thought
crossed my mind, than I proceeded to put it into execution. I unclasped my knife,
and, stripping my arm, with a steady thrust I opened a small vein. The blood
oozed out slowly, drop by drop, and as I eagerly swallowed the source of my
very life, I felt that for a moment my torments were relieved, But only for a
moment; all energy had failed my pulses, and almost immediately the blood had
ceased to flow.

How long it seemed before the morming dawned! and when that morning
came it brought another fog, heavy as before that again shut out the horizon. The
fog was hot as the burning steam that issues from a boiler. It was to be my last
day upon earth, and I felt that I would like to press the hand of a friend before I
died. Curtis was standing near, and crawling up to him, I took his hand in my
own. He seemed to know that I was taking my farewell, and with one last
lingering hope he endeavoured to restrain me. But all in vain, my mind was
finally made up.

I should have like to speak once again to M. Letourneur, Andre and Miss
Herbey, but my courage failed me. I knew that the young girl would read my
resolution in my eyes, and that she would speak to me of duty and of God, and
of eternity, and I dared not meet her gaze; and I would not run the risk of being
persuaded to wait until a lingering death should overtake me. I returned to the
back of the raft, and after making several efforts, I managed to get on to my feet.
I cast one long look at the pitiless ocean and the unbroken horizon; if a sail or
the outline of a coast bad broken on my view, I believe that I should only have
deemed myself the victim of an illusion; but nothing of the kind appeared, and
the sea was dreary as a desert.

It was ten o'clock in the morning. The pangs of hunger and the torments of
thirst were racking me with redoubled vigour. All instinct of self-preservation
had left me, and I felt that the hour had come when I must cease to suffer. Just as
I was on the point of casting myself headlong into the sea, a voice, which I
recognized as Dowlas's; broke upon my ear.

"Captain," he said, "we are going to draw lots."

Involuntarily I paused; I did not take my plunge, but returned to my place
upon the raft.


CHAPTER LIII.

JANUARY 26th.--All heard and understood the proposition; in fact, it had
been in contemplation for several days, but no one had ventured to put the idea
into words. However, it was done now; lots were to be drawn, and to each would
be assigned his share of the body of the one ordained by fate to be the victim.
For my own part, I profess that I was quite resigned for the lot to fall upon
myself. I thought I heard Andre Letourneur beg for an exception to be made in
favour of Miss Herbey, but the sailors raised a murmur of dissent. As there were
eleven of us on board, there were ten chances to one in each one's favour, a
proportion which would be diminished if Miss Herbey were excluded, so that the
young lady was forced to take her chance among the rest.

It was then half-past ten, and the boatswain, who had been roused from his
lethargy by what the carpenter had said, insisted that the drawing should take
place immediately. There was no reason for postponing the fatal lottery. There
was not one of us that clung in the least to life, and we knew that at the worst,
whoever should be doomed to die, would only precede the rest by a few days, or
even hours. All that we desired was just once to slake our raging thirst and
moderate our gnawing hunger.

How all the names found their way to the bottom of a hat I cannot tell. Very
likely Falsten wrote them upon a leaf torn from his memorandum-book. But be
that as it may, the eleven names were there, and it was unanimously agreed that
the last name drawn should be the victim.

But who would draw the names? There was hesitation for a moment; then, "I
will," said a voice behind me. Turning round, I beheld M. Letourneur standing
with outstretched hand, and with his long white hair falling over his thin livid
face that was almost sublime in its calmness. I divined at once the reason of this
voluntary offer; I knew that it was the father's devotion in self-sacrifice that led
him to undertake the office.

"As soon as you please," said the boatswain, and handed him the hat.

M. Letourneur proceeded to draw out the folded strips of paper one by one,
and after reading out aloud the name upon it, handed it to its owner.

The first name called was that of Burke, who uttered a cry of delight; then
followed Flaypole and the boatswain. What his name really was I never could
exactly learn. Then came Falsten, Curtis, Sandon. More than half had now been
called, and my name had not yet been drawn. I calculated my remaining chance;
it was still four to one in my favour.

M. Letourneur continued his painful task. Since Burke's first exclamation of


joy not a sound had escaped our lips, but all were listening in breathless silence.
The seventh name was Miss Herbey's, but the young girl heard it without a start.
Then came mine, yes, mine! and the ninth was that of Letourneur.

"Which one?" asked the boatswain.

"Andre," said M. Letourneur.

With one cry Andre fell back senseless. Only two names now remained in
the hat; those of Dowlas and of M. Letourneur himself.

"Go on," almost roared the carpenter, surveying his partner in peril as though
he could devour him. M. Letourneur almost had a smile upon his lips, as he drew
forth the last paper but one, and with a firm, unfaltering voice, marvelous for his
age, unfolded it slowly, and read the name of Dowlas. The carpenter gave a yell
of relief as he heard the word.

M. Letourneur took the last bit of paper from the hat, and without looking at
it, tore it to pieces. But, unperceived by all but myself, one little fragment flew
into a corner of the raft. I crawled towards it and picked it up. On one side of it
was written Andr--; the rest of the word was torn away. M. Letourneur saw what
I had done, and rushing towards me, snatched the paper from my hands, and
flung it into the sea.


CHAPTER LIV.

JANUARY 26th.--I understood it all; the devoted father having nothing more
to give, had given his life for his son.

M. Letourneur was no longer a human being in the eyes of the famished
creatures who were now yearning to see him sacrificed to their cravings. At the
very sight of the victim thus provided, all the tortures of hunger returned with
redoubled violence. With lips distended, and teeth displayed, they waited like a
herd of carnivora until they could attack their prey with brutal voracity; it
seemed almost doubtful whether they would not fall upon him while he was still
alive. It seemed impossible that any appeal to their humanity could, at such a
moment, have any weight; nevertheless, the appeal was made, and, incredible as
it may seem, prevailed.

Just as the boatswain was about to act the part of butcher, and Dowlas stood,
hatchet in hand, ready to complete the barbarous work, Miss Herbey advanced,
or rather crawled, towards them.

"My friends," she pleaded, "will you not wait just one more day? If no land
or ship is in sight tomorrow, then I suppose our poor companion must become
your victim. But allow him one more day; in the name of mercy I entreat, I
implore you."


My heart bounded as she made her pitiful appeal. It seemed to me as though
the noble girl had spoken with an inspiration on her lips, and I fancied that,
perhaps, in super-natural vision she had viewed the coast or the ship of which
she spoke; and one more day was not much to us who had already suffered so
long, and endured so much.

Curtis and Falsten agreed with me, and we all united to support Miss
Herbey's merciful petition. The sailors did not utter a murmur, and the boatswain
in a smothered voice said,--

"Very well, we will wait till daybreak tomorrow," and threw down his
hatchet.

Tomorrow, then, unless land or a sail appear, the horrible sacrifice will be
accomplished. Stifling their sufferings by a strenuous effort, all returned to their
places. The sailors crouched beneath the sails, caring nothing about scanning the
ocean. Food was in store for them tomorrow, and that was enough for them.

As soon as Andre Letourneur came to his senses, his first thought was for his
father, and I saw him count the passengers on the raft. He looked puzzled; when
he lost consciousness there had been only two names left in the hat, those of his
father and the carpenter; and yet M. Letourneur and Dowlas were both there still.
Miss Herbey went up to him and told him quietly that the drawing of the lots had
not yet been finished. Andre asked no further question, but took his father's
hand. M. Letourneur's countenance was calm and serene; he seemed to be
conscious of nothing except that the life of his son was spared, and as the two sat
conversing in an undertone at the back of the raft, their whole existence seemed
bound up in each other.

Meantime, I could not disabuse my mind of the impression caused by Miss
Herbey's intervention. Something told me that help was near at hand, and that we
were approaching the termination of our suspense and misery; the chimeras that
were floating through my brain resolved themselves into realities, so that nothing
appeared to me more certain than that either land or sail, be they miles away,
would be discovered somewhere to leeward.

I imparted my convictions to M. Letoumeur and his son. Andre was as
sanguine as myself; poor boy! he little thinks what a loss there is in store for him
tomorrow. His father listened gravely to all we said, and whatever he might think
in his own mind, he did not give us any discouragement; Heaven, he said, he was
sure would still spare the survivors of the "Chancellor," and then he lavished on
his son caresses which he deemed to be his last.

Some time afterwards, when I was alone with him, M. Letourneur whispered
in my ear,--

"Mr. Kazallon, I commend my boy to your care, and mark you, he must


never know--"

His voice was choked with tears, and he could not finish his sentence.

But I was full of hope, and, without a moment's intermission, I kept my eyes
fixed upon the unbroken horizon, Curtis, Miss Herbey, Falsten, and even the
boatswain, were also eagerly scanning the broad expanse of sea.

Night has come on; but I have still a profound conviction that through the
darkness some ship will approach, and that at daybreak our raft will be observed.


CHAPTER LV.

JANUARY 27th.--I did not close my eyes all night, and was keenly alive to
the faintest sounds, and every ripple of the water, and every murmur of the
waves, broke distinctly on my ear. One thing I noticed and accepted as a happy
omen; not a single shark now lingered-round the raft. The waning moon rose at a
quarter to one, and through the feeble glimmer which she cast across the ocean,
many and many a time I fancied I caught sight of the longed-for sail, lying only
a few cables' lengths away.

But when morning came, the sun rose once again upon a desert ocean, and
my hopes began to fade. Neither ship nor shore had appeared, and as the
shocking hour of execution drew near, my dreams of deliverance melted away; I
shuddered in my very soul as I was brought face to face with the stern reality. I
dared not look upon the victim, and whenever his eyes, so full of calmness and
resignation, met my own, I turned away my head. I felt choked with horror, and
my brain reeled as though I were intoxicated.

It was now six o'clock, and all hope had vanished from my breast; my heart
beat rapidly, and a cold sweat of agony broke out all over me. Curtis and the
boatswain stood by the mast attentively scanning the horizon. The boatswain's
countenance was terrible to look upon; one could see that although he would not
forestall the hour, he was determined not to wait a moment after it arrived. As
for the captain, it was impossible to tell what really passed within his mind; his
face was livid, and his whole existence seemed concentrated in the exercise of
his power of vision. The sailors were crawling about the platform, with their
eyes gleaming, like wild beasts ready to pounce upon their devoted prey.

I could no longer keep my place, and glided along to the front of the raft. The
boatswain was still standing intent on his watch, but all of a sudden, in a voice
that made me start he shouted,--

"Now then, time's up!" and followed by Dowlas, Burke, Flaypole, and
Sandon, ran to the back of the raft. As Dowlas seized the hatchet convulsively,
Miss Herbey could not suppress a cry of terror. Andre started to his feet.


"What are you going to do to my father?" he asked in accents choked with
emotion.

"My boy," said M. Letourneur, "the lot has fallen upon me, and I must die!"

"Never!" shrieked Andre, throwing his arms about his father, "They shall kill
me first. It was I who threw Hobart's body into the sea, and it is I who ought to
die!"

But the words of the unhappy youth had no other effect than to increase the
fury of the men who were so staunchly bent upon their bloody purpose.

"Come, come, no more fuss," said Dowlas, as he tore the young man away
from his father's embrace.

Andre fell upon his back, in which position two of the sailors held him down
so tightly that he could not move, whilst Burke and Sandon carried off their
victim to the front.

All this had taken place much more rapidly than I have been able to describe
it. I was transfixed with horror, and much as I wished to throw myself between
M. Letourneur and his executioners, I seemed to be rooted to the spot where I
was standing.

Meantime the sailors had been taking off some of M. Letourneur's clothes,
and his neck and shoulders were already bare.

"Stop a moment!" he said in a tone in which was the ring of indomitable
courage. "Stop! I don't want to deprive you of your ration; but I suppose you will
not require to eat the whole of me today."

The sailors, taken aback by his suggestion, stared at him with amazement.

"There are ten of you," he went on. "My two arms will give you each a meal;
cut them off for to-day, and tomorrow you shall have the rest of me."

"Agreed!" cried Dowlas; and as M. Letourneur held out his bare arms, quick
as lightning the carpenter raised his hatchet.

Curtis and I could bear this scene no longer; whilst we were alive to prevent
it, this butchery should not be permitted, and we rushed forwards simultaneously
to snatch the victim from his murderers. A furious struggle ensued, and in the
midst of the MELEE I was seized by one of the sailors, and hurled violently into
the sea.

Closing my lips, I tried to die of suffocation in the water; but in spite of
myself, my mouth opened, and a few drops trickled down my throat.

Merciful Heaven! the water was fresh!


CHAPTER LVI.
JANUARY 27th CONTINUED.--A change came over me as if by miracle.


No longer had I any wish to die, and already Curtis, who had heard my cries,
was throwing me a rope. I seized it eagerly, and was hauled up on to the raft,
"Fresh water!" were the first words I uttered.

"Fresh water?" cried Curtis, "why then, my friends, we are not far from
land!"

It was not too late; the blow had not been struck, and so the victim had not
yet fallen. Curtis and Andre (who had regained his liberty) had fought with the
cannibals, and it was just as they were yielding to overpowering numbers that
my voice had made itself heard.

The struggle came to an end. As soon as the words "Fresh water" had
escaped my lips, I leaned over the side of the raft and swallowed the life-giving
liquid in greedy draughts. Miss Herbey was the first to follow my example, but
soon Curtis, Falsten, and all the rest were on their knees and drinking eagerly,
The rough sailors seemed as if by a magic touch transformed back from
ravenous beasts to human beings, and I saw several of them raise their hands to
heaven in silent gratitude, Andre and his father were the last to drink.

"But where are we?" I asked at length.

"The land is there," said Curtis pointing towards the west.

We all stared at the captain as though he were mocking us; no land was in
sight, and the raft, just as ever, was the centre of a watery waste. Yet our senses
had not deceived us the water we had been drinking was perfectly fresh.

"Yes," repeated the captain, "land is certainly there, not more than twenty
miles to leeward."

"What land?" inquired the boatswain.

"South America," answered Curtis, "and near the Amazon; no other river has
a current strong enough to freshen the ocean twenty miles from shore!"


CHAPTER LVII.

JANUARY 27th CONTINUED.--Curtis, no doubt was right The discharge
from the mouth of the Amazon is enormously large, but we had probably drifted
into the only spot in the Atlantic where we could find fresh water so far from
land. Yet land, undoubtedly was there, and the breeze was carrying us onwards
slowly but surely to our deliverance.

Miss Herbey's voice was heard pouring out fervent praise to Heaven, and we
were all glad to unite our thanksgivings with hers. Then the whole of us (with
the exception of Andre and his father, who remained by themselves together at
the stern) clustered in a group, and kept our expectant gaze upon the horizon.

We had not long to wait. Before an hour had passed Curtis, leaped in ecstasy


and raised the joyous shout of "Land ahoy!"

My journal has come to a close.

I have only to relate, as briefly as possible, the circumstances that finally
brought us to our destination.

A few hours after we first sighted land the raft was off Cape Magoari, on the
Island of Marajo, and was observed by some fishermen who, with kind-hearted
alacrity picked us up, and tended us most carefully. They conveyed us to Para,
where we became the objects of unbounded sympathy.

The raft was brought to land in lat. Odeg. 12min. N., so that since we
abandoned the "Chancellor" we had drifted at least fifteen degrees to the south-
west. Except for the influence of the Gulf Stream we must have been carried far,
far to the south, and in that case we should never have reached the mouth of the
Amazon, and must inevitably have been lost.

Of the thirty-two souls--nine passengers, and twenty-three seamen--who left
Charleston on board the ship, only five passengers and six seamen remain.
Eleven of us alone survive.

An official account of our rescue was drawn up by the Brazilian authorities.
Those who signed were Miss Herbey, J. R. Kazallon, M. Letourneur, Andre
Letourneur, Mr. Falsten, the boatswain, Dowlas, Burke, Flaypole, Sandon, and
last, though not least,

"Robert Curtis, captain."

At Para we soon found facilities for continuing our homeward route. A
vessel took us to Cayenne, where we secured a passage on board one of the
steamers of the French Transatlantic Aspinwall line, the "Ville de St. Nazaire,"
which conveyed us to Europe.

After all the dangers and privations which we have undergone together, it is
scarcely necessary to say that there has arisen between the surviving passengers
of the "Chancellor" a bond of friendship too indissoluble, I believe, for either
time or circumstance to destroy; Curtis must ever remain the honoured and
valued friend of those whose welfare he consulted so faithfully in their
misfortunes; his conduct was beyond all praise.

When we were fairly on our homeward way, Miss Herbey by chance
intimated to us her intention of retiring from the world and devoting the
remainder of her life to the care of the sick and suffering.

"Then why not come and look after my son?" said M. Letourneur, adding,
"he is an invalid, and he requires, as he deserves, the best of nursing."

Miss Herbey, after some deliberation, consented to become a member of
their family, and finds in M. Letourneur a father, and in Andre a brother. A
brother, I say; but may we not hope that she may be united by a dearer and a


closer tie, and that the noble-hearted girl may experience the happiness that so
richly she deserves?


THE UNDERGROUND CITY


OR


THE BLACK INDIES
(Sometimes Called The Child of the Cavern)


CHAPTER I. CONTRADICTORY LETTERS

To Mr. F. R. Starr, Engineer, 30 Canongate, Edinburgh.

IF Mr. James Starr will come tomorrow to the Aberfoyle coal-mines,
Dochart pit, Yarrow shaft, a communication of an interesting nature will be made
to him.

"Mr. James Starr will be awaited for, the whole day, at the Callander station,
by Harry Ford, son of the old overman Simon Ford."

"He is requested to keep this invitation secret."

Such was the letter which James Starr received by the first post, on the 3rd
December, 18--, the letter bearing the Aberfoyle postmark, county of Stirling,
Scotland.

The engineer's curiosity was excited to the highest pitch. It never occurred to
him to doubt whether this letter might not be a hoax. For many years he had
known Simon Ford, one of the former foremen of the Aberfoyle mines, of which
he, James Starr, had for twenty years, been the manager, or, as he would be
termed in English coal-mines, the viewer. James Starr was a strongly-constituted
man, on whom his fifty-five years weighed no more heavily than if they had
been forty. He belonged to an old Edinburgh family, and was one of its most
distinguished members. His labors did credit to the body of engineers who are
gradually devouring the carboniferous subsoil of the United Kingdom, as much
at Cardiff and Newcastle, as in the southern counties of Scotland. However, it
was more particularly in the depths of the mysterious mines of Aberfoyle, which
border on the Alloa mines and occupy part of the county of Stirling, that the
name of Starr had acquired the greatest renown. There, the greater part of his
existence had been passed. Besides this, James Starr belonged to the Scottish
Antiquarian Society, of which he had been made president. He was also included
amongst the most active members of the Royal Institution; and the Edinburgh
Review frequently published clever articles signed by him. He was in fact one of
those practical men to whom is due the prosperity of England. He held a high
rank in the old capital of Scotland, which not only from a physical but also from
a moral point of view, well deserves the name of the Northern Athens.

We know that the English have given to their vast extent of coal-mines a
very significant name. They very justly call them the "Black Indies," and these


Indies have contributed perhaps even more than the Eastern Indies to swell the
surprising wealth of the United Kingdom.

At this period, the limit of time assigned by professional men for the
exhaustion of coal-mines was far distant and there was no dread of scarcity.
There were still extensive mines to be worked in the two Americas. The manu-
factories, appropriated to so many different uses, locomotives, steamers, gas
works, &c., were not likely to fail for want of the mineral fuel; but the
consumption had so increased during the last few years, that certain beds had
been exhausted even to their smallest veins. Now deserted, these mines
perforated the ground with their useless shafts and forsaken galleries. This was
exactly the case with the pits of Aberfoyle.

Ten years before, the last butty had raised the last ton of coal from this
colliery. The underground working stock, traction engines, trucks which run on
rails along the galleries, subterranean tramways, frames to support the shaft,
pipes--in short, all that constituted the machinery of a mine had been brought up
from its depths. The exhausted mine was like the body of a huge fantastically-
shaped mastodon, from which all the organs of life have been taken, and only the
skeleton remains.

Nothing was left but long wooden ladders, down the Yarrow shaft--the only
one which now gave access to the lower galleries of the Dochart pit. Above
ground, the sheds, formerly sheltering the outside works, still marked the spot
where the shaft of that pit had been sunk, it being now abandoned, as were the
other pits, of which the whole constituted the mines of Aberfoyle.

It was a sad day, when for the last time the workmen quitted the mine, in
which they had lived for so many years. The engineer, James Starr, had collected
the hundreds of workmen which composed the active and courageous population
of the mine. Overmen, brakemen, putters, wastemen, barrowmen, masons,
smiths, carpenters, outside and inside laborers, women, children, and old men,
all were collected in the great yard of the Dochart pit, formerly heaped with coal
from the mine.

Many of these families had existed for generations in the mine of old
Aberfoyle; they were now driven to seek the means of subsistence elsewhere,
and they waited sadly to bid farewell to the engineer.

James Starr stood upright, at the door of the vast shed in which he had for so
many years superintended the powerful machines of the shaft. Simon Ford, the
foreman of the Dochart pit, then fifty-five years of age, and other managers and
overseers, surrounded him. James Starr took off his hat. The miners, cap in hand,
kept a profound silence. This farewell scene was of a touching character, not
wanting in grandeur.


"My friends," said the engineer, "the time has come for us to separate. The
Aberfoyle mines, which for so many years have united us in a common work,
are now exhausted. All our researches have not led to the discovery of a new
vein, and the last block of coal has just been extracted from the Dochart pit."
And in confirmation of his words, James Starr pointed to a lump of coal which
had been kept at the bottom of a basket.

"This piece of coal, my friends," resumed James Starr, "is like the last drop
of blood which has flowed through the veins of the mine! We shall keep it, as the
first fragment of coal is kept, which was extracted a hundred and fifty years ago
from the bearings of Aberfoyle. Between these two pieces, how many
generations of workmen have succeeded each other in our pits! Now, it is over!
The last words which your engineer will address to you are a farewell. You have
lived in this mine, which your hands have emptied. The work has been hard, but
not without profit for you. Our great family must disperse, and it is not probable
that the future will ever again unite the scattered members. But do not forget that
we have lived together for a long time, and that it will be the duty of the miners
of Aberfoyle to help each other. Your old masters will not forget you either.
When men have worked together, they must never be stranger to each other
again. We shall keep our eye on you, and wherever you go, our
recommendations shall follow you. Farewell then, my friends, and may Heaven
be with you!"

So saying, James Starr wrung the horny hand of the oldest miner, whose eyes
were dim with tears. Then the overmen of the different pits came forward to
shake hands with him, whilst the miners waved their caps, shouting, "Farewell,
James Starr, our master and our friend!"

This farewell would leave a lasting remembrance in all these honest hearts.
Slowly and sadly the population quitted the yard. The black soil of the roads
leading to the Dochart pit resounded for the last time to the tread of miners' feet,
and silence succeeded to the bustling life which had till then filled the Aberfoyle
mines.

One man alone remained by James Starr. This was the overman, Simon Ford.
Near him stood a boy, about fifteen years of age, who for some years already had
been employed down below.

James Starr and Simon Ford knew and esteemed each other well. "Good-by,
Simon," said the engineer.

"Good-by, Mr. Starr," replied the overman, "let me add, till we meet again!"

"Yes, till we meet again. Ford!" answered James Starr. "You know that I shall
be always glad to see you, and talk over old times."

"T know that, Mr. Starr."


"My house in Edinburgh is always open to you."

"It's a long way off, is Edinburgh!" answered the man shaking his head. "Ay,
a long way from the Dochart pit."

"A long way, Simon? Where do you mean to live?"

"Even here, Mr. Starr! We're not going to leave the mine, our good old nurse,
just because her milk is dried up! My wife, my boy, and myself, we mean to
remain faithful to her!"

"Good-by then, Simon," replied the engineer, whose voice, in spite of
himself, betrayed some emotion.


"No, I tell you, it's TILL WE MEET AGAIN, Mr. Starr, and not Just 'good-
™ returned the foreman. "Mark my words, Aberfoyle will see you again!"

The engineer did not try to dispel the man's illusion. He patted Harry's head,
again wrung the father's hand, and left the mine.

All this had taken place ten years ago; but, notwithstanding the wish which
the overman had expressed to see him again, during that time Starr had heard
nothing of him. It was after ten years of separation that he got this letter from
Simon Ford, requesting him to take without delay the road to the old Aberfoyle
colliery.

A communication of an interesting nature, what could it be? Dochart pit.
Yarrow shaft! What recollections of the past these names brought back to him!
Yes, that was a fine time, that of work, of struggle,--the best part of the
engineer's life. Starr re-read his letter. He pondered over it in all its bearings. He
much regretted that just a line more had not been added by Ford. He wished he
had not been quite so laconic.

Was it possible that the old foreman had discovered some new vein? No!
Starr remembered with what minute care the mines had been explored before the
definite cessation of the works. He had himself proceeded to the lowest
soundings without finding the least trace in the soil, burrowed in every direction.
They had even attempted to find coal under strata which are usually below it,
such as the Devonian red sandstone, but without result. James Starr had therefore
abandoned the mine with the absolute conviction that it did not contain another
bit of coal.

"No," he repeated, "no! How is it possible that anything which could have
escaped my researches, should be revealed to those of Simon Ford. However, the
old overman must well know that such a discovery would be the one thing in the
world to interest me, and this invitation, which I must keep secret, to repair to
the Dochart pit!" James Starr always came back to that.

On the other hand, the engineer knew Ford to be a clever miner, peculiarly
endowed with the instinct of his trade. He had not seen him since the time when
the Aberfoyle colliery was abandoned, and did not know either what he was
doing or where he was living, with his wife and his son. All that he now knew
was, that a rendezvous had been appointed him at the Yarrow shaft, and that
Harry, Simon Ford's son, was to wait for him during the whole of the next day at
the Callander station.

"I shall go, I shall go!" said Starr, his excitement increasing as the time drew
near.

Our worthy engineer belonged to that class of men whose brain is always on
the boil, like a kettle on a hot fire. In some of these brain kettles the ideas bubble


by,


over, in others they just simmer quietly. Now on this day, James Starr's ideas
were boiling fast.

But suddenly an unexpected incident occurred. This was the drop of cold
water, which in a moment was to condense all the vapors of the brain. About six
in the evening, by the third post, Starr's servant brought him a second letter. This
letter was enclosed in a coarse envelope, and evidently directed by a hand
unaccustomed to the use of a pen. James Starr tore it open. It contained only a
scrap of paper, yellowed by time, and apparently torn out of an old copy book.

On this paper was written a single sentence, thus worded:

"It is useless for the engineer James Starr to trouble himself, Simon Ford's
letter being now without object."

No signature.


CHAPTER II. ON THE ROAD

THE course of James Starr's ideas was abruptly stopped, when he got this
second letter contradicting the first.

"What does this mean?" said he to himself. He took up the torn envelope,
and examined it. Like the other, it bore the Aberfoyle postmark. It had therefore
come from the same part of the county of Stirling. The old miner had evidently
not written it. But, no less evidently, the author of this second letter knew the
overman's secret, since it expressly contradicted the invitation to the engineer to
go to the Yarrow shaft.

Was it really true that the first communication was now without object? Did
someone wish to prevent James Starr from troubling himself either uselessly or
otherwise? Might there not be rather a malevolent intention to thwart Ford's
plans?

This was the conclusion at which James Starr arrived, after mature reflection.
The contradiction which existed between the two letters only wrought in him a
more keen desire to visit the Dochart pit. And besides, if after all it was a hoax, it
was well worth while to prove it. Starr also thought it wiser to give more
credence to the first letter than to the second; that is to say, to the request of such
aman as Simon Ford, rather than to the warning of his anonymous contradictor.

"Indeed," said he, "the fact of anyone endeavoring to influence my
resolution, shows that Ford's communication must be of great importance.
Tomorrow, at the appointed time, I shall be at the rendezvous."

In the evening, Starr made his preparations for departure. As it might happen
that his absence would be prolonged for some days, he wrote to Sir W.
Elphiston, President of the Royal Institution, that he should be unable to be


present at the next meeting of the Society. He also wrote to excuse himself from
two or three engagements which he had made for the week. Then, having
ordered his servant to pack a traveling bag, he went to bed, more excited than the
affair perhaps warranted.

The next day, at five o'clock, James Starr jumped out of bed, dressed himself
warmly, for a cold rain was falling, and left his house in the Canongate, to go to
Granton Pier to catch the steamer, which in three hours would take him up the
Forth as far as Stirling.

For the first time in his life, perhaps, in passing along the Canongate, he did
NOT TURN TO LOOK AT HOLYROOD, the palace of the former sovereigns of
Scotland. He did not notice the sentinels who stood before its gateways, dressed
in the uniform of their Highland regiment, tartan kilt, plaid and sporran
complete. His whole thought was to reach Callander where Harry Ford was
supposedly awaiting him.

The better to understand this narrative, it will be as well to hear a few words
on the origin of coal. During the geological epoch, when the terrestrial spheroid
was still in course of formation, a thick atmosphere surrounded it, saturated with
watery vapors, and copiously impregnated with carbonic acid. The vapors
gradually condensed in diluvial rains, which fell as if they had leapt from the
necks of thousands of millions of seltzer water bottles. This liquid, loaded with
carbonic acid, rushed in torrents over a deep soft soil, subject to sudden or slow
alterations of form, and maintained in its semi-fluid state as much by the heat of
the sun as by the fires of the interior mass. The internal heat had not as yet been
collected in the center of the globe. The terrestrial crust, thin and incompletely
hardened, allowed it to spread through its pores. This caused a peculiar form of
vegetation, such as is probably produced on the surface of the inferior planets,
Venus or Mercury, which revolve nearer than our earth around the radiant sun of
our system.

The soil of the continents was covered with immense forests. Carbonic acid,
so suitable for the development of the vegetable kingdom, abounded. The feet of
these trees were drowned in a sort of immense lagoon, kept continually full by
currents of fresh and salt waters. They eagerly assimilated to themselves the
carbon which they, little by little, extracted from the atmosphere, as yet unfit for
the function of life, and it may be said that they were destined to store it, in the
form of coal, in the very bowels of the earth.

It was the earthquake period, caused by internal convulsions, which suddenly
modified the unsettled features of the terrestrial surface. Here, an intumescence
which was to become a mountain, there, an abyss which was to be filled with an
ocean or a sea. There, whole forests sunk through the earth's crust, below the


unfixed strata, either until they found a resting-place, such as the primitive bed
of granitic rock, or, settling together in a heap, they formed a solid mass.

As the waters were contained in no bed, and were spread over every part of
the globe, they rushed where they liked, tearing from the scarcely-formed rocks
material with which to compose schists, sandstones, and limestones. This the
roving waves bore over the submerged and now peaty forests, and deposited
above them the elements of rocks which were to superpose the coal strata. In
course of time, periods of which include millions of years, these earths hardened
in layers, and enclosed under a thick carapace of pudding-stone, schist, compact
or friable sandstone, gravel and stones, the whole of the massive forests.

And what went on in this gigantic crucible, where all this vegetable matter
had accumulated, sunk to various depths? A regular chemical operation, a sort of
distillation. All the carbon contained in these vegetables had agglomerated, and
little by little coal was forming under the double influence of enormous pressure
and the high temperature maintained by the internal fires, at this time so close to
it.

Thus there was one kingdom substituted for another in this slow but
irresistible reaction. The vegetable was transformed into a mineral. Plants which
had lived the vegetative life in all the vigor of first creation became petrified.
Some of the substances enclosed in this vast herbal left their impression on the
other more rapidly mineralized products, which pressed them as an hydraulic
press of incalculable power would have done.

Thus also shells, zoophytes, star-fish, polypi, spirifores, even fish and lizards
brought by the water, left on the yet soft coal their exact likeness, "admirably
taken off."

Pressure seems to have played a considerable part in the formation of
carboniferous strata. In fact, it is to its degree of power that are due the different
sorts of coal, of which industry makes use. Thus in the lowest layers of the coal
ground appears the anthracite, which, being almost destitute of volatile matter,
contains the greatest quantity of carbon. In the higher beds are found, on the
contrary, lignite and fossil wood, substances in which the quantity of carbon is
infinitely less. Between these two beds, according to the degree of pressure to
which they have been subjected, are found veins of graphite and rich or poor
coal. It may be asserted that it is for want of sufficient pressure that beds of peaty
bog have not been completely changed into coal. So then, the origin of coal
mines, in whatever part of the globe they have been discovered, is this: the
absorption through the terrestrial crust of the great forests of the geological
period; then, the mineralization of the vegetables obtained in the course of time,
under the influence of pressure and heat, and under the action of carbonic acid.


Now, at the time when the events related in this story took place, some of the
most important mines of the Scottish coal beds had been exhausted by too rapid
working. In the region which extends between Edinburgh and Glasgow, for a
distance of ten or twelve miles, lay the Aberfoyle colliery, of which the engineer,
James Starr, had so long directed the works. For ten years these mines had been
abandoned. No new seams had been discovered, although the soundings had
been carried to a depth of fifteen hundred or even of two thousand feet, and
when James Starr had retired, it was with the full conviction that even the
smallest vein had been completely exhausted.

Under these circumstances, it was plain that the discovery of a new seam of
coal would be an important event. Could Simon Ford's communication relate to
a fact of this nature? This question James Starr could not cease asking himself.
Was he called to make conquest of another corner of these rich treasure fields?
Fain would he hope it was so.

The second letter had for an instant checked his speculations on this subject,
but now he thought of that letter no longer. Besides, the son of the old overman
was there, waiting at the appointed rendezvous. The anonymous letter was
therefore worth nothing.

The moment the engineer set foot on the platform at the end of his journey,
the young man advanced towards him.

"Are you Harry Ford?" asked the engineer quickly.

"Yes, Mr. Starr."

"IT should not have known you, my lad. Of course in ten years you have
become a man!"

"I knew you directly, sir," replied the young miner, cap in hand. "You have
not changed. You look just as you did when you bade us good-by in the Dochart
pit. I haven't forgotten that day."

"Put on your cap, Harry," said the engineer. "It's pouring, and politeness
needn't make you catch cold."

"Shall we take shelter anywhere, Mr. Starr?" asked young Ford.

"No, Harry. The weather is settled. It will rain all day, and I am in a hurry.
Let us go on."

"I am at your orders," replied Harry.

"Tell me, Harry, is your father well?"

"Very well, Mr. Starr."

"And your mother?"

"She is well, too."

"Was it your father who wrote telling me to come to the Yarrow shaft?"

"No, it was I."


"Then did Simon Ford send me a second letter to contradict the first?" asked
the engineer quickly.

"No, Mr. Starr," answered the young miner.

"Very well," said Starr, without speaking of the anonymous letter. Then,
continuing, "And can you tell me what you father wants with me?"

"Mr. Starr, my father wishes to tell you himself."

"But you know what it is?"

"T do, sir."

"Well, Harry, I will not ask you more. But let us get on, for I'm anxious to
see Simon Ford. By-the-bye, where does he live?"

"In the mine."

"What! In the Dochart pit?"

"Yes, Mr. Starr," replied Harry.

"Really! has your family never left the old mine since the cessation of the
works?"

"Not a day, Mr. Starr. You know my father. It is there he was born, it is there
he means to die!"

"I can understand that, Harry. I can understand that! His native mine! He did
not like to abandon it! And are you happy there?"

"Yes, Mr. Starr," replied the young miner, "for we love one another, and we
have but few wants."

"Well, Harry," said the engineer, "lead the way."

And walking rapidly through the streets of Callander, in a few minutes they
had left the town behind them.


CHAPTER II. THE DOCHART PIT

HARRY FORD was a fine, strapping fellow of five and twenty. His grave
looks, his habitually passive expression, had from childhood been noticed among
his comrades in the mine. His regular features, his deep blue eyes, his curly hair,
rather chestnut than fair, the natural grace of his person, altogether made him a
fine specimen of a lowlander. Accustomed from his earliest days to the work of
the mine, he was strong and hardy, as well as brave and good. Guided by his
father, and impelled by his own inclinations, he had early begun his education,
and at an age when most lads are little more than apprentices, he had managed to
make himself of some importance, a leader, in fact, among his fellows, and few
are very ignorant in a country which does all it can to remove ignorance.
Though, during the first years of his youth, the pick was never out of Harry's
hand, nevertheless the young miner was not long in acquiring sufficient


knowledge to raise him into the upper class of the miners, and he would
certainly have succeeded his father as overman of the Dochart pit, if the colliery
had not been abandoned.

James Starr was still a good walker, yet he could not easily have kept up with
his guide, if the latter had not slackened his pace. The young man, carrying the
engineer's bag, followed the left bank of the river for about a mile. Leaving its
winding course, they took a road under tall, dripping trees. Wide fields lay on
either side, around isolated farms. In one field a herd of hornless cows were
quietly grazing; in another sheep with silky wool, like those in a child's toy
sheep fold.

The Yarrow shaft was situated four miles from Callander. Whilst walking,
James Starr could not but be struck with the change in the country. He had not
seen it since the day when the last ton of Aberfoyle coal had been emptied into
railway trucks to be sent to Glasgow. Agricultural life had now taken the place of
the more stirring, active, industrial life. The contrast was all the greater because,
during winter, field work is at a standstill. But formerly, at whatever season, the
mining population, above and below ground, filled the scene with animation.
Great wagons of coal used to be passing night and day. The rails, with their
rotten sleepers, now disused, were then constantly ground by the weight of
wagons. Now stony roads took the place of the old mining tramways. James
Starr felt as if he was traversing a desert.

The engineer gazed about him with a saddened eye. He stopped now and
then to take breath. He listened. The air was no longer filled with distant
whistlings and the panting of engines. None of those black vapors which the
manufacturer loves to see, hung in the horizon, mingling with the clouds. No tall
cylindrical or prismatic chimney vomited out smoke, after being fed from the
mine itself; no blast-pipe was puffing out its white vapor. The ground, formerly
black with coal dust, had a bright look, to which James Starr's eyes were not
accustomed.

When the engineer stood still, Harry Ford stopped also. The young miner
waited in silence. He felt what was passing in his companion's mind, and he
shared his feelings; he, a child of the mine, whose whole life had been passed in
its depths.

"Yes, Harry, it is all changed," said Starr. "But at the rate we worked, of
course the treasures of coal would have been exhausted some day. Do you regret
that time?"

"I do regret it, Mr. Starr," answered Harry. "The work was hard, but it was
interesting, as are all struggles."

"No doubt, my lad. A continuous struggle against the dangers of landslips,


fires, inundations, explosions of firedamp, like claps of thunder. One had to
guard against all those perils! You say well! It was a struggle, and consequently
an exciting life."

"The miners of Alva have been more favored than the miners of Aberfoyle,
Mr. Starr!"

"Ay, Harry, so they have," replied the engineer.

"Indeed," cried the young man, "it's a pity that all the globe was not made of
coal; then there would have been enough to last millions of years!"

"No doubt there would, Harry; it must be acknowledged, however, that
nature has shown more forethought by forming our sphere principally of
sandstone, limestone, and granite, which fire cannot consume."

"Do you mean to say, Mr. Starr, that mankind would have ended by burning
their own globe?"

"Yes! The whole of it, my lad," answered the engineer. "The earth would
have passed to the last bit into the furnaces of engines, machines, steamers, gas
factories; certainly, that would have been the end of our world one fine day!"

"There is no fear of that now, Mr. Starr. But yet, the mines will be exhausted,
no doubt, and more rapidly than the statistics make out!"

"That will happen, Harry; and in my opinion England is very wrong in
exchanging her fuel for the gold of other nations! I know well," added the
engineer, "that neither hydraulics nor electricity has yet shown all they can do,
and that some day these two forces will be more completely utilized. But no
matter! Coal is of a very practical use, and lends itself easily to the various wants
of industry. Unfortunately man cannot produce it at will. Though our external
forests grow incessantly under the influence of heat and water, our subterranean
forests will not be reproduced, and if they were, the globe would never be in the
state necessary to make them into coal."

James Starr and his guide, whilst talking, had continued their walk at a rapid
pace. An hour after leaving Callander they reached the Dochart pit.

The most indifferent person would have been touched at the appearance this
deserted spot presented. It was like the skeleton of something that had formerly
lived. A few wretched trees bordered a plain where the ground was hidden under
the black dust of the mineral fuel, but no cinders nor even fragments of coal
were to be seen. All had been carried away and consumed long ago.

They walked into the shed which covered the opening of the Yarrow shaft,
whence ladders still gave access to the lower galleries of the pit. The engineer
bent over the opening. Formerly from this place could be heard the powerful
whistle of the air inhaled by the ventilators. It was now a silent abyss. It was like
being at the mouth of some extinct volcano.


When the mine was being worked, ingenious machines were used in certain
shafts of the Aberfoyle colliery, which in this respect was very well off; frames
furnished with automatic lifts, working in wooden slides, oscillating ladders,
called "man-engines," which, by a simple movement, permitted the miners to
descend without danger.

But all these appliances had been carried away, after the cessation of the
works. In the Yarrow shaft there remained only a long succession of ladders,
separated at every fifty feet by narrow landings. Thirty of these ladders placed
thus end to end led the visitor down into the lower gallery, a depth of fifteen
hundred feet. This was the only way of communication which existed between
the bottom of the Dochart pit and the open air. As to air, that came in by the
Yarrow shaft, from whence galleries communicated with another shaft whose
orifice opened at a higher level; the warm air naturally escaped by this species of
inverted siphon.

"I will follow you, my lad," said the engineer, signing to the young man to
precede him.

"As you please, Mr. Starr."

"Have you your lamp?"

"Yes, and I only wish it was still the safety lamp, which we formerly had to
use!"

"Sure enough," returned James Starr, "there is no fear of firedamp explosions
now!"

Harry was provided with a simple oil lamp, the wick of which he lighted. In
the mine, now empty of coal, escapes of light carburetted hydrogen could not
occur. As no explosion need be feared, there was no necessity for interposing
between the flame and the surrounding air that metallic screen which prevents
the gas from catching fire. The Davy lamp was of no use here. But if the danger
did not exist, it was because the cause of it had disappeared, and with this cause,
the combustible in which formerly consisted the riches of the Dochart pit.

Harry descended the first steps of the upper ladder. Starr followed. They
soon found themselves in a profound obscurity, which was only relieved by the
glimmer of the lamp. The young man held it above his head, the better to light
his companion. A dozen ladders were descended by the engineer and his guide,
with the measured step habitual to the miner. They were all still in good
condition.

James Starr examined, as well as the insufficient light would permit, the
sides of the dark shaft, which were covered by a partly rotten lining of wood.

Arrived at the fifteenth landing, that is to say, half way down, they halted for
a few minutes.


"Decidedly, I have not your legs, my lad," said the engineer, panting.

"You are very stout, Mr. Starr," replied Harry, "and it's something too, you
see, to live all one's life in the mine."

"Right, Harry. Formerly, when I was twenty, I could have gone down all at a
breath. Come, forward!"

But just as the two were about to leave the platform, a voice, as yet far
distant, was heard in the depths of the shaft. It came up like a sonorous billow,
swelling as it advanced, and becoming more and more distinct.

"Halloo! who comes here?" asked the engineer, stopping Harry.

"I cannot say," answered the young miner.

"Is it not your father?"

"My father, Mr. Starr? no."

"Some neighbor, then?"

"We have no neighbors in the bottom of the pit," replied Harry. "We are
alone, quite alone."

"Well, we must let this intruder pass," said James Starr. "Those who are
descending must yield the path to those who are ascending."

They waited. The voice broke out again with a magnificent burst, as if it had
been carried through a vast speaking trumpet; and soon a few words of a Scotch
song came clearly to the ears of the young miner.

"The Hundred Pipers!" cried Harry. "Well, I shall be much surprised if that
comes from the lungs of any man but Jack Ryan."

"And who is this Jack Ryan?" asked James Starr.

"An old mining comrade," replied Harry. Then leaning from the platform,
"Halloo! Jack!" he shouted.

"Is that you, Harry?" was the reply. "Wait a bit, I'm coming." And the song
broke forth again.

In a few minutes, a tall fellow of five and twenty, with a merry face, smiling
eyes, a laughing mouth, and sandy hair, appeared at the bottom of the luminous
cone which was thrown from his lantern, and set foot on the landing of the
fifteenth ladder. His first act was to vigorously wring the hand which Harry
extended to him.

"Delighted to meet you!" he exclaimed. "If I had only known you were to be
above ground to-day, I would have spared myself going down the Yarrow shaft!"

"This is Mr. James Starr," said Harry, turning his lamp towards the engineer,
who was in the shadow.

"Mr. Starr!" cried Jack Ryan. "Ah, sir, I could not see. Since I left the mine,
my eyes have not been accustomed to see in the dark, as they used to do."

"Ah, I remember a laddie who was always singing. That was ten years ago. It


was you, no doubt?"

"Ay, Mr. Starr, but in changing my trade, I haven't changed my disposition.
It's far better to laugh and sing than to cry and whine!"

"You're right there, Jack Ryan. And what do you do now, as you have left the
mine?"

"I am working on the Melrose farm, forty miles from here. Ah, it's not like
our Aberfoyle mines! The pick comes better to my hand than the spade or hoe.
And then, in the old pit, there were vaulted roofs, to merrily echo one's songs,
while up above ground!--But you are going to see old Simon, Mr. Starr?"

"Yes, Jack," answered the engineer.

"Don't let me keep you then."

"Tell me, Jack," said Harry, "what was taking you to our cottage to-day?"

"I wanted to see you, man," replied Jack, "and ask you to come to the Irvine
games. You know I am the piper of the place. There will be dancing and
singing."

"Thank you, Jack, but it's impossible."

"Impossible?"

"Yes; Mr. Starr's visit will last some time, and I must take him back to
Callander."

"Well, Harry, it won't be for a week yet. By that time Mr. Starr's visit will be
over, I should think, and there will be nothing to keep you at the cottage."

"Indeed, Harry," said James Starr, "you must profit by your friend Jack's
invitation."

"Well, I accept it, Jack," said Harry. "In a week we will meet at Irvine."

"In a week, that's settled," returned Ryan. "Good-by, Harry! Your servant,
Mr. Starr. I am very glad to have seen you again! I can give news of you to all
my friends. No one has forgotten you, sir."

"And I have forgotten no one," said Starr.

"Thanks for all, sir," replied Jack.

"Good-by, Jack," said Harry, shaking his hand. And Jack Ryan, singing as he
went, soon disappeared in the heights of the shaft, dimly lighted by his lamp.

A quarter of an hour afterwards James Starr and Harry descended the last
ladder, and set foot on the lowest floor of the pit.

From the bottom of the Yarrow shaft radiated numerous empty galleries.
They ran through the wall of schist and sandstone, some shored up with great,
roughly-hewn beams, others lined with a thick casing of wood. In every
direction embankments supplied the place of the excavated veins. Artificial
pillars were made of stone from neighboring quarries, and now they supported
the ground, that is to say, the double layer of tertiary and quaternary soil, which


formerly rested on the seam itself. Darkness now filled the galleries, formerly
lighted either by the miner's lamp or by the electric light, the use of which had
been introduced in the mines.

"Will you not rest a while, Mr. Starr?" asked the young man.

"No, my lad," replied the engineer, "for I am anxious to be at your father's
cottage."

"Follow me then, Mr. Starr. I will guide you, and yet I daresay you could find
your way perfectly well through this dark labyrinth."

"Yes, indeed! I have the whole plan of the old pit still in my head."

Harry, followed by the engineer, and holding his lamp high the better to light
their way, walked along a high gallery, like the nave of a cathedral. Their feet
still struck against the wooden sleepers which used to support the rails.

They had not gone more than fifty paces, when a huge stone fell at the feet of
James Starr. "Take care, Mr. Starr!" cried Harry, seizing the engineer by the arm.

"A stone, Harry! Ah! these old vaultings are no longer quite secure, of
course, and--"

"Mr. Starr," said Harry Ford, "it seems to me that stone was thrown, thrown
as by the hand of man!"

"Thrown!" exclaimed James Starr. "What do you mean, lad?"

"Nothing, nothing, Mr. Starr," replied Harry evasively, his anxious gaze
endeavoring to pierce the darkness. "Let us go on. Take my arm, sir, and don't be
afraid of making a false step."

"Here I am, Harry." And they both advanced, whilst Harry looked on every
side, throwing the light of his lamp into all the corners of the gallery.

"Shall we soon be there?" asked the engineer.

"In ten minutes at most."

"Good."

"But," muttered Harry, "that was a most singular thing. It is the first time
such an accident has happened to me.

"That stone falling just at the moment we were passing."

"Harry, it was a mere chance."

"Chance," replied the young man, shaking his head. "Yes, chance." He
stopped and listened.

"What is the matter, Harry?" asked the engineer.

"I thought I heard someone walking behind us," replied the young miner,
listening more attentively. Then he added, "No, I must have been mistaken. Lean
harder on my arm, Mr. Starr. Use me like a staff."

"A good solid staff, Harry," answered James Starr. "I could not wish for a
better than a fine fellow like you."


'


They continued in silence along the dark nave. Harry was evidently
preoccupied, and frequently turned, trying to catch, either some distant noise, or
remote glimmer of light.

But behind and before, all was silence and darkness.


CHAPTER IV. THE FORD FAMILY

TEN minutes afterwards, James Starr and Harry issued from the principal
gallery. They were now standing in a glade, if we may use this word to designate
a vast and dark excavation. The place, however, was not entirely deprived of
daylight. A few rays straggled in through the opening of a deserted shaft. It was
by means of this pipe that ventilation was established in the Dochart pit. Owing
to its lesser density, the warm air was drawn towards the Yarrow shaft. Both air
and light, therefore, penetrated in some measure into the glade.

Here Simon Ford had lived with his family ten years, in a subterranean
dwelling, hollowed out in the schistous mass, where formerly stood the powerful
engines which worked the mechanical traction of the Dochart pit.

Such was the habitation, "his cottage," as he called it, in which resided the
old overman. As he had some means saved during a long life of toil, Ford could
have afforded to live in the light of day, among trees, or in any town of the
kingdom he chose, but he and his wife and son preferred remaining in the mine,
where they were happy together, having the same opinions, ideas, and tastes.
Yes, they were quite fond of their cottage, buried fifteen hundred feet below
Scottish soil. Among other advantages, there was no fear that tax gatherers, or
rent collectors would ever come to trouble its inhabitants.

At this period, Simon Ford, the former overman of the Dochart pit, bore the
weight of sixty-five years well. Tall, robust, well-built, he would have been
regarded as one of the most conspicuous men in the district which supplies so
many fine fellows to the Highland regiments.

Simon Ford was descended from an old mining family, and his ancestors had
worked the very first carboniferous seams opened in Scotland. Without
discussing whether or not the Greeks and Romans made use of coal, whether the
Chinese worked coal mines before the Christian era, whether the French word
for coal (HOUILLE) is really derived from the farrier Houillos, who lived in
Belgium in the twelfth century, we may affirm that the beds in Great Britain
were the first ever regularly worked. So early as the eleventh century, William
the Conqueror divided the produce of the Newcastle bed among his companions-
in-arms. At the end of the thirteenth century, a license for the mining of "sea
coal" was granted by Henry III. Lastly, towards the end of the same century,


mention is made of the Scotch and Welsh beds.

It was about this time that Simon Ford's ancestors penetrated into the bowels
of Caledonian earth, and lived there ever after, from father to son. They were but
plain miners. They labored like convicts at the work of extracting the precious
combustible. It is even believed that the coal miners, like the salt-makers of that
period, were actual slaves.

However that might have been, Simon Ford was proud of belonging to this
ancient family of Scotch miners. He had worked diligently in the same place
where his ancestors had wielded the pick, the crowbar, and the mattock. At thirty
he was overman of the Dochart pit, the most important in the Aberfoyle colliery.
He was devoted to his trade. During long years he zealously performed his duty.
His only grief had been to perceive the bed becoming impoverished, and to see
the hour approaching when the seam would be exhausted.

It was then he devoted himself to the search for new veins in all the
Aberfoyle pits, which communicated underground one with another. He had had
the good luck to discover several during the last period of the working. His
miner's instinct assisted him marvelously, and the engineer, James Starr,
appreciated him highly. It might be said that he divined the course of seams in
the depths of the coal mine as a hydroscope reveals springs in the bowels of the
earth. He was par excellence the type of a miner whose whole existence is
indissolubly connected with that of his mine. He had lived there from his birth,
and now that the works were abandoned he wished to live there still. His son
Harry foraged for the subterranean housekeeping; as for himself, during those
ten years he had not been ten times above ground.

"Go up there! What is the good?" he would say, and refused to leave his
black domain. The place was remarkably healthy, subject to an equable
temperature; the old overman endured neither the heat of summer nor the cold of
winter. His family enjoyed good health; what more could he desire?

But at heart he felt depressed. He missed the former animation, movement,
and life in the well-worked pit. He was, however, supported by one fixed idea.
"No, no! the mine is not exhausted!" he repeated.

And that man would have given serious offense who could have ventured to
express before Simon Ford any doubt that old Aberfoyle would one day revive!
He had never given up the hope of discovering some new bed which would
restore the mine to its past splendor. Yes, he would willingly, had it been
necessary, have resumed the miner's pick, and with his still stout arms vigorously
attacked the rock. He went through the dark galleries, sometimes alone,
sometimes with his son, examining, searching for signs of coal, only to return
each day, wearied, but not in despair, to the cottage.


Madge, Simon's faithful companion, his "gude-wife," to use the Scotch term,
was a tall, strong, comely woman. Madge had no wish to leave the Dochart pit
any more than had her husband. She shared all his hopes and regrets. She
encouraged him, she urged him on, and talked to him in a way which cheered the
heart of the old overman. "Aberfoyle is only asleep," she would say. "You are
right about that, Simon. This is but a rest, it is not death!"

Madge, as well as the others, was perfectly satisfied to live independent of
the outer world, and was the center of the happiness enjoyed by the little family
in their dark cottage.

The engineer was eagerly expected. Simon Ford was standing at his door,
and as soon as Harry's lamp announced the arrival of his former viewer he
advanced to meet him.

"Welcome, Mr. Starr!" he exclaimed, his voice echoing under the roof of
schist. "Welcome to the old overman's cottage! Though it is buried fifteen
hundred feet under the earth, our house is not the less hospitable."

"And how are you, good Simon?" asked James Starr, grasping the hand
which his host held out to him.

"Very well, Mr. Starr. How could I be otherwise here, sheltered from the
inclemencies of the weather? Your ladies who go to Newhaven or Portobello in
the summer time would do much better to pass a few months in the coal mine of
Aberfoyle! They would run no risk here of catching a heavy cold, as they do in
the damp streets of the old capital."

"I'm not the man to contradict you, Simon," answered James Starr, glad to
find the old man just as he used to be. "Indeed, I wonder why I do not change
my home in the Canongate for a cottage near you."

"And why not, Mr. Starr? I know one of your old miners who would be truly
pleased to have only a partition wall between you and him."

"And how is Madge?" asked the engineer.

"The goodwife is in better health than I am, if that's possible," replied Ford,
"and it will be a pleasure to her to see you at her table. I think she will surpass
herself to do you honor."

"We shall see that, Simon, we shall see that!" said the engineer, to whom the
announcement of a good breakfast could not be indifferent, after his long walk.

"Are you hungry, Mr. Starr?"

"Ravenously hungry. My journey has given me an appetite. I came through
horrible weather."

"Ah, it is raining up there," responded Simon Ford.

"Yes, Simon, and the waters of the Forth are as rough as the sea."

"Well, Mr. Starr, here it never rains. But I needn't describe to you all the


advantages, which you know as well as myself. Here we are at the cottage. That
is the chief thing, and I again say you are welcome, sir."

Simon Ford, followed by Harry, ushered their guest into the dwelling. James
Starr found himself in a large room lighted by numerous lamps, one hanging
from the colored beams of the roof.

"The soup is ready, wife," said Ford, "and it mustn't be kept waiting any
more than Mr. Starr. He is as hungry as a miner, and he shall see that our boy
doesn't let us want for anything in the cottage! By-the-bye, Harry," added the old
overman, turning to his son, "Jack Ryan came here to see you."

"T know, father. We met him in the Yarrow shaft."

"He's an honest and a merry fellow," said Ford; "but he seems to be quite
happy above ground. He hasn't the true miner's blood in his veins. Sit down, Mr.
Starr, and have a good dinner, for we may not sup till late."

As the engineer and his hosts were taking their places:

"One moment, Simon," said James Starr. "Do you want me to eat with a
good appetite?”

"It will be doing us all possible honor, Mr. Starr," answered Ford.

"Well, in order to eat heartily, I must not be at all anxious. Now I have two
questions to put to you."

"Go on, sir."

"Your letter told me of a communication which was to be of an interesting
nature."

"It is very interesting indeed."

"To you?"

"To you and to me, Mr. Starr. But I do not want to tell it you until after
dinner, and on the very spot itself. Without that you would not believe me."

"Simon," resumed the engineer, "look me straight in the face. An interesting
communication? Yes. Good! I will not ask more," he added, as if he had read the
reply in the old overman's eyes.

"And the second question?" asked the latter.

"Do you know, Simon, who the person is who can have written this?"
answered the engineer, handing him the anonymous letter.

Ford took the letter and read it attentively. Then giving it to his son, "Do you
know the writing?" he asked.

"No, father," replied Harry.

"And had this letter the Aberfoyle postmark?" inquired Simon Ford.

"Yes, like yours," replied James Starr.

"What do you think of that, Harry?" said his father, his brow darkening.

"I think, father," returned Harry, "that someone has had some interest in


trying to prevent Mr. Starr from coming to the place where you invited him."

"But who," exclaimed the old miner, "who could have possibly guessed
enough of my secret?" And Simon fell into a reverie, from which he was aroused
by his wife.

"Let us begin, Mr. Starr," she said. "The soup is already getting cold. Don't
think any more of that letter just now."

On the old woman's invitation, each drew in his chair, James Starr opposite
to Madge--to do him honor--the father and son opposite to each other. It was a
good Scotch dinner. First they ate "hotchpotch," soup with the meat swimming
in capital broth. As old Simon said, his wife knew no rival in the art of preparing
hotchpotch. It was the same with the "cockyleeky," a cock stewed with leeks,
which merited high praise. The whole was washed down with excellent ale,
obtained from the best brewery in Edinburgh.

But the principal dish consisted of a "haggis," the national pudding, made of
meat and barley meal. This remarkable dish, which inspired the poet Burns with
one of his best odes, shared the fate of all the good things in this world--it passed
away like a dream.

Madge received the sincere compliments of her guest. The dinner ended with
cheese and oatcake, accompanied by a few small glasses of "usquebaugh,"”
capital whisky, five and twenty years old--just Harry's age. The repast lasted a
good hour. James Starr and Simon Ford had not only eaten much, but talked
much too, chiefly of their past life in the old Aberfoyle mine.

Harry had been rather silent. Twice he had left the table, and even the house.
He evidently felt uneasy since the incident of the stone, and wished to examine
the environs of the cottage. The anonymous letter had not contributed to reassure
him.

Whilst he was absent, the engineer observed to Ford and his wife, "That's a
fine lad you have there, my friends."

"Yes, Mr. Starr, he is a good and affectionate son," replied the old overman
earnestly.

"Is he happy with you in the cottage?"

"He would not wish to leave us."

"Don't you think of finding him a wife, some day?"

"A wife for Harry," exclaimed Ford. "And who would it be? A girl from up
yonder, who would love merry-makings and dancing, who would prefer her clan
to our mine! Harry wouldn't do it!"

"Simon," said Madge, "you would not forbid that Harry should take a wife."

"I would forbid nothing," returned the old miner, "but there's no hurry about
that. Who knows but we may find one for him--"


Harry re-entered at that moment, and Simon Ford was silent.

When Madge rose from the table, all followed her example, and seated
themselves at the door of the cottage. "Well, Simon," said the engineer, "I am
ready to hear you."

"Mr. Starr," responded Ford, "I do not need your ears, but your legs. Are you
quite rested?"

"Quite rested and quite refreshed, Simon. I am ready to go with you
wherever you like."

"Harry," said Simon Ford, turning to his son, "light our safety lamps."

"Are you going to take safety lamps!" exclaimed James Starr, in amazement,
knowing that there was no fear of explosions of firedamp in a pit quite empty of
coal.

"Yes, Mr. Starr, it will be prudent."

"My good Simon, won't you propose next to put me in a miner's dress?"

"Not just yet, sir, not just yet!" returned the old overman, his deep-set eyes
gleaming strangely.

Harry soon reappeared, carrying three safety lamps. He handed one of these
to the engineer, the other to his father, and kept the third hanging from his left
hand, whilst his right was armed with a long stick.

"Forward!" said Simon Ford, taking up a strong pick, which was leaning
against the wall of the cottage.

"Forward!" echoed the engineer. "Good-by, Madge."

"GOD speed you!" responded the good woman.

"A good supper, wife, do you hear?" exclaimed Ford. "We shall be hungry
when we come back, and will do it justice!"


CHAPTER V. SOME STRANGE PHENOMENA

MANY superstitious beliefs exist both in the Highlands and Lowlands of
Scotland. Of course the mining population must furnish its contingent of legends
and fables to this mythological repertory. If the fields are peopled with imaginary
beings, either good or bad, with much more reason must the dark mines be
haunted to their lowest depths. Who shakes the seam during tempestuous nights?
who puts the miners on the track of an as yet unworked vein? who lights the
firedamp, and presides over the terrible explosions? who but some spirit of the
mine? This, at least, was the opinion commonly spread among the superstitious
Scotch.

In the first rank of the believers in the supernatural in the Dochart pit figured
Jack Ryan, Harry's friend. He was the great partisan of all these superstitions. All


these wild stories were turned by him into songs, which earned him great
applause in the winter evenings.

But Jack Ryan was not alone in his belief. His comrades affirmed, no less
strongly, that the Aberfoyle pits were haunted, and that certain strange beings
were seen there frequently, just as in the Highlands. To hear them talk, it would
have been more extraordinary if nothing of the kind appeared. Could there
indeed be a better place than a dark and deep coal mine for the freaks of fairies,
elves, goblins, and other actors in the fantastical dramas? The scenery was all
ready, why should not the supematural personages come there to play their
parts?

So reasoned Jack Ryan and his comrades in the Aberfoyle mines. We have
said that the different pits communicated with each other by means of long
subterranean galleries. Thus there existed beneath the county of Stirling a vast
tract, full of burrows, tunnels, bored with caves, and perforated with shafts, a
subterranean labyrinth, which might be compared to an enormous ant-hill.

Miners, though belonging to different pits, often met, when going to or
returning from their work. Consequently there was a constant opportunity of
exchanging talk, and circulating the stories which had their origin in the mine,
from one pit to another. These accounts were transmitted with marvelous
rapidity, passing from mouth to mouth, and gaining in wonder as they went.

Two men, however, better educated and with more practical minds than the
rest, had always resisted this temptation. They in no degree believed in the
intervention of spirits, elves, or goblins. These two were Simon Ford and his
son. And they proved it by continuing to inhabit the dismal crypt, after the
desertion of the Dochart pit. Perhaps good Madge, like every Highland woman,
had some leaning towards the supernatural. But she had to repeat all these stories
to herself, and so she did, most conscientiously, so as not to let the old traditions
be lost.

Even had Simon and Harry Ford been as credulous as their companions, they
would not have abandoned the mine to the imps and fairies. For ten years,
without missing a single day, obstinate and immovable in their convictions, the
father and son took their picks, their sticks, and their lamps. They went about
searching, sounding the rock with a sharp blow, listening if it would return a
favor-able sound. So long as the soundings had not been pushed to the granite of
the primary formation, the Fords were agreed that the search, unsuccessful to-
day, might succeed to-morrow, and that it ought to be resumed. They spent their
whole life in endeavoring to bring Aberfoyle back to its former prosperity. If the
father died before the hour of success, the son was to go on with the task alone.

It was during these excursions that Harry was more particularly struck by


certain phenomena, which he vainly sought to explain. Several times, while
walking along some narrow cross-alley, he seemed to hear sounds similar to
those which would be produced by violent blows of a pickax against the wall.

Harry hastened to seek the cause of this mysterious work. The tunnel was
empty. The light from the young miner's lamp, thrown on the wall, revealed no
trace of any recent work with pick or crowbar. Harry would then ask himself if it
was not the effect of some acoustic illusion, or some strange and fantastic echo.
At other times, on suddenly throwing a bright light into a suspicious-looking
cleft in the rock, he thought he saw a shadow. He rushed forward. Nothing, and
there was no opening to permit a human being to evade his pursuit!

Twice in one month, Harry, whilst visiting the west end of the pit, distinctly
heard distant reports, as if some miner had exploded a charge of dynamite. The
second time, after many careful researches, he found that a pillar had just been
blown up.

By the light of his lamp, Harry carefully examined the place attacked by the
explosion. It had not been made in a simple embankment of stones, but in a mass
of schist, which had penetrated to this depth in the coal stratum. Had the object
of the explosion been to discover a new vein? Or had someone wished simply to
destroy this portion of the mine? Thus he questioned, and when he made known
this occurrence to his father, neither could the old overman nor he himself
answer the question in a satisfactory way.

"It is very queer,” Harry often repeated. "The presence of an unknown being
in the mine seems impossible, and yet there can be no doubt about it. Does
someone besides ourselves wish to find out if a seam yet exists? Or, rather, has
he attempted to destroy what remains of the Aberfoyle mines? But for what
reason? I will find that out, if it should cost me my life!"

A fortnight before the day on which Harry Ford guided the engineer through
the labyrinth of the Dochart pit, he had been on the point of attaining the object
of his search. He was going over the southwest end of the mine, with a large
lantern in his hand. All at once, it seemed to him that a light was suddenly
extinguished, some hundred feet before him, at the end of a narrow passage cut
obliquely through the rock. He darted forward.

His search was in vain. As Harry would not admit a supernatural explanation
for a physical occurrence, he concluded that certainly some strange being
prowled about in the pit. But whatever he could do, searching with the greatest
care, scrutinizing every crevice in the gallery, he found nothing for his trouble.

If Jack Ryan and the other superstitious fellows in the mine had seen these
lights, they would, without fail, have called them supernatural, but Harry did not
dream of doing so, nor did his father. And when they talked over these


phenomena, evidently due to a physical cause, "My lad," the old man would say,
"we must wait. It will all be explained some day."

However, it must be observed that, hitherto, neither Harry nor his father had
ever been exposed to any act of violence. If the stone which had fallen at the feet
of James Starr had been thrown by the hand of some ill-disposed person, it was
the first criminal act of that description.

James Starr was of opinion that the stone had become detached from the roof
of the gallery; but Harry would not admit of such a simple explanation.
According to him, the stone had not fallen, it had been thrown; for otherwise,
without rebounding, it could never have described a trajectory as it did.

Harry saw in it a direct attempt against himself and his father, or even against
the engineer.


CHAPTER VI. SIMON FORD'S EXPERIMENT

THE old clock in the cottage struck one as James Starr and his two
companions went out. A dim light penetrated through the ventilating shaft into
the glade. Harry's lamp was not necessary here, but it would very soon be of use,
for the old overman was about to conduct the engineer to the very end of the
Dochart pit.

After following the principal gallery for a distance of two miles, the three
explorers--for, as will be seen, this was a regular exploration--arrived at the
entrance of a narrow tunnel. It was like a nave, the roof of which rested on
woodwork, covered with white moss. It followed very nearly the line traced by
the course of the river Forth, fifteen hundred feet above.

"So we are going to the end of the last vein?" said James Starr.

"Ay! You know the mine well still."

"Well, Simon," returned the engineer, "it will be difficult to go further than
that, if I don't mistake."

"Yes, indeed, Mr. Starr. That was where our picks tore out the last bit of coal
in the seam. I remember it as if it were yesterday. I myself gave that last blow,
and it re-echoed in my heart more dismally than on the rock. Only sandstone and
schist were round us after that, and when the truck rolled towards the shaft, I
followed, with my heart as full as though it were a funeral. It seemed to me that
the soul of the mine was going with it."

The gravity with which the old man uttered these words impressed the
engineer, who was not far from sharing his sentiments. They were those of the
sailor who leaves his disabled vessel--of the proprietor who sees the house of his
ancestors pulled down. He pressed Ford's hand; but now the latter seized that of


the engineer, and, wringing it:

"That day we were all of us mistaken," he exclaimed. "No! The old mine was
not dead. It was not a corpse that the miners abandoned; and I dare to assert, Mr.
Starr, that its heart beats still."

"Speak, Ford! Have you discovered a new vein?" cried the engineer, unable
to contain himself. "I know you have! Your letter could mean nothing else."

"Mr. Starr," said Simon Ford, "I did not wish to tell any man but yourself."

"And you did quite right, Ford. But tell me how, by what signs, are you
sure?"

"Listen, sir!" resumed Simon. "It is not a seam that I have found."

"What is it, then?"

"Only positive proof that such a seam exists."

"And the proof?"

"Could firedamp issue from the bowels of the earth if coal was not there to
produce it?"

"No, certainly not!" replied the engineer. "No coal, no firedamp. No effects
without a cause.”

"Just as no smoke without fire."

"And have you recognized the presence of light carburetted hydrogen?"

"An old miner could not be deceived," answered Ford. "I have met with our
old enemy, the firedamp!"

"But suppose it was another gas," said Starr. "Firedamp is almost without
smell, and colorless. It only really betrays its presence by an explosion."

"Mr. Starr," said Simon Ford, "will you let me tell you what I have done?
Harry had once or twice observed something remarkable in his excursions to the
west end of the mine. Fire, which suddenly went out, sometimes appeared along
the face of the rock or on the embankment of the further galleries. How those
flames were lighted, I could not and cannot say. But they were evidently owing
to the presence of firedamp, and to me firedamp means a vein of coal."

"Did not these fires cause any explosion?" asked the engineer quickly.

"Yes, little partial explosions," replied Ford, "such as I used to cause myself
when I wished to ascertain the presence of firedamp. Do you remember how
formerly it was the custom to try to prevent explosions before our good genius,
Humphry Davy, invented his safety-lamp?"

"Yes," replied James Starr. "You mean what the 'monk,' as the men called
him, used to do. But I have never seen him in the exercise of his duty."

"Indeed, Mr. Starr, you are too young, in spite of your five-and-fifty years, to
have seen that. But I, ten years older, often saw the last 'monk' working in the
mine. He was called so because he wore a long robe like a monk. His proper


name was the ‘fireman.’ At that time there was no other means of destroying the
bad gas but by dispersing it in little explosions, before its buoyancy had
collected it in too great quantities in the heights of the galleries. The monk, as
we Called him, with his face masked, his head muffled up, all his body tightly
wrapped in a thick felt cloak, crawled along the ground. He could breathe down
there, when the air was pure; and with his right hand he waved above his head a
blazing torch. When the firedamp had accumulated in the air, so as to form a
detonating mixture, the explosion occurred without being fatal, and, by often
renewing this operation, catastrophes were prevented. Sometimes the 'monk' was
injured or killed in his work, then another took his place. This was done in all
mines until the Davy lamp was universally adopted. But I knew the plan, and by
its means I discovered the presence of firedamp and consequently that of a new
seam of coal in the Dochart pit."

All that the old overman had related of the so-called "monk" or "fireman"
was perfectly true. The air in the galleries of mines was formerly always purified
in the way described.

Firedamp, marsh-gas, or carburetted hydrogen, is colorless, almost scentless;
it burns with a blue flame, and makes respiration impossible. The miner could
not live in a place filled with this injurious gas, any more than one could live ina
gasometer full of common gas. Moreover, firedamp, as well as the latter, a
mixture of inflammable gases, forms a detonating mixture as soon as the air
unites with it in a proportion of eight, and perhaps even five to the hundred.
When this mixture is lighted by any cause, there is an explosion, almost always
followed by a frightful catastrophe.

As they walked on, Simon Ford told the engineer all that he had done to
attain his object; how he was sure that the escape of firedamp took place at the
very end of the farthest gallery in its western part, because he had provoked
small and partial explosions, or rather little flames, enough to show the nature of
the gas, which escaped in a small jet, but with a continuous flow.

An hour after leaving the cottage, James Starr and his two companions had
gone a distance of four miles. The engineer, urged by anxiety and hope, walked
on without noticing the length of the way. He pondered over all that the old
miner had told him, and mentally weighed all the arguments which the latter had
given in support of his belief. He agreed with him in thinking that the continued
emission of carburetted hydrogen certainly showed the existence of a new coal-
seam. If it had been merely a sort of pocket, full of gas, as it is sometimes found
amongst the rock, it would soon have been empty, and the phenomenon have
ceased. But far from that. According to Simon Ford, the firedamp escaped
incessantly, and from that fact the existence of an important vein might be


considered certain. Consequently, the riches of the Dochart pit were not entirely
exhausted. The chief question now was, whether this was merely a vein which
would yield comparatively little, or a bed occupying a large extent.

Harry, who preceded his father and the engineer, stopped.

"Here we are!" exclaimed the old miner. "At last, thank Heaven! you are
here, Mr. Starr, and we shall soon know." The old overman's voice trembled
slightly.

"Be calm, my man!" said the engineer. "I am as excited as you are, but we
must not lose time."

The gallery at this end of the pit widened into a sort of dark cave. No shaft
had been pierced in this part, and the gallery, bored into the bowels of the earth,
had no direct communication with the surface of the earth.

James Starr, with intense interest, examined the place in which they were
standing. On the walls of the cavern the marks of the pick could still be seen, and
even holes in which the rock had been blasted, near the termination of the
working. The schist was excessively hard, and it had not been necessary to bank
up the end of the tunnel where the works had come to an end. There the vein had
failed, between the schist and the tertiary sandstone. From this very place had
been extracted the last piece of coal from the Dochart pit.

"We must attack the dyke," said Ford, raising his pick; "for at the other side
of the break, at more or less depth, we shall assuredly find the vein, the existence
of which I assert."

"And was it on the surface of these rocks that you found out the firedamp?"
asked James Starr.

"Just there, sir," returned Ford, "and I was able to light it only by bringing
my lamp near to the cracks in the rock. Harry has done it as well as I."

"At what height?" asked Starr.

"Ten feet from the ground," replied Harry.

James Starr had seated himself on a rock. After critically inhaling the air of
the cavern, he gazed at the two miners, almost as if doubting their words,
decided as they were. In fact, carburetted hydrogen is not completely scentless,
and the engineer, whose sense of smell was very keen, was astonished that it had
not revealed the presence of the explosive gas. At any rate, if the gas had
mingled at all with the surrounding air, it could only be in a very small stream.
There was no danger of an explosion, and they might without fear open the
safety lamp to try the experiment, just as the old miner had done before.

What troubled James Starr was, not lest too much gas mingled with the air,
but lest there should be little or none.

"Could they have been mistaken?" he murmured. "No: these men know what


they are about. And yet--"

He waited, not without some anxiety, until Simon Ford's phenomenon should
have taken place. But just then it seemed that Harry, like himself, had remarked
the absence of the characteristic odor of firedamp; for he exclaimed in an altered
voice, "Father, I should say the gas was no longer escaping through the cracks!"

"No longer!" cried the old miner--and, pressing his lips tight together, he
snuffed the air several times.

Then, all at once, with a sudden movement, "Hand me your lamp, Harry," he
said.

Ford took the lamp with a trembling hand. He drew off the wire gauze case
which surrounded the wick, and the flame burned in the open air.

As they had expected, there was no explosion, but, what was more serious,
there was not even the slight crackling which indicates the presence of a small
quantity of firedamp. Simon took the stick which Harry was holding, fixed his
lamp to the end of it, and raised it high above his head, up to where the gas, by
reason of its buoyancy, would naturally accumulate. The flame of the lamp,
burning straight and clear, revealed no trace of the carburetted hydrogen.

"Close to the wall," said the engineer.

"Yes," responded Ford, carrying the lamp to that part of the wall at which he
and his son had, the evening before, proved the escape of gas.

The old miner's arm trembled whilst he tried to hoist the lamp up. "Take my
place, Harry," said he.

Harry took the stick, and successively presented the lamp to the different
fissures in the rock; but he shook his head, for of that slight crackling peculiar to
escaping firedamp he heard nothing. There was no flame. Evidently not a
particle of gas was escaping through the rock.

"Nothing!" cried Ford, clenching his fist with a gesture rather of anger than
disappointment.

A cry escaped Harry.

"What's the matter?" asked Starr quickly.

"Someone has stopped up the cracks in the schist!"

"Is that true?" exclaimed the old miner.

"Look, father!" Harry was not mistaken. The obstruction of the fissures was
clearly visible by the light of the lamp. It had been recently done with lime,
leaving on the rock a long whitish mark, badly concealed with coal dust.

"It's he!" exclaimed Harry. "It can only be he!"

"He?" repeated James Starr in amazement.

"Yes!" returned the young man, "that mysterious being who haunts our
domain, for whom I have watched a hundred times without being able to get at


him--the author, we may now be certain, of that letter which was intended to
hinder you from coming to see my father, Mr. Starr, and who finally threw that
stone at us in the gallery of the Yarrow shaft! Ah! there's no doubt about it; there
is a man's hand in all that!"

Harry spoke with such energy that conviction came instantly and fully to the
engineer's mind. As to the old overman, he was already convinced. Besides,
there they were in the presence of an undeniable fact--the stopping-up of cracks
through which gas had escaped freely the night before.

"Take your pick, Harry," cried Ford; "mount on my shoulders, my lad! I am
still strong enough to bear you!" The young man understood in an instant. His
father propped himself up against the rock. Harry got upon his shoulders, so that
with his pick he could reach the line of the fissure. Then with quick sharp blows
he attacked it. Almost directly afterwards a slight sound was heard, like
champagne escaping from a bottle--a sound commonly expressed by the word
"puff."

Harry again seized his lamp, and held it to the opening. There was a slight
report; and a little red flame, rather blue at its outline, flickered over the rock like
a Will-o'-the-Wisp.

Harry leaped to the ground, and the old overman, unable to contain his joy,
grasped the engineer's hands, exclaiming, "Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah! Mr. Starr.
The firedamp burns! the vein is there!"


CHAPTER VII. NEW ABERFOYLE

THE old overman's experiment had succeeded. Firedamp, it is well known, is
only generated in coal seams; therefore the existence of a vein of precious
combustible could no longer be doubted. As to its size and quality, that must be
determined later.

"Yes," thought James Starr, "behind that wall lies a carboniferous bed,
undiscovered by our soundings. It is vexatious that all the apparatus of the mine,
deserted for ten years, must be set up anew. Never mind. We have found the vein
which was thought to be exhausted, and this time it shall be worked to the end!"

"Well, Mr. Starr," asked Ford, "what do you think of our discovery? Was I
wrong to trouble you? Are you sorry to have paid this visit to the Dochart pit?"

"No, no, my old friend!" answered Starr. "We have not lost our time; but we
shall be losing it now, if we do not return immediately to the cottage. Tomorrow
we will come back here. We will blast this wall with dynamite. We will lay open
the new vein, and after a series of soundings, if the seam appears to be large, I
will form a new Aberfoyle Company, to the great satisfaction of the old


shareholders. Before three months have passed, the first corves full of coal will
have been taken from the new vein."

"Well said, sir!" cried Simon Ford. "The old mine will grow young again,
like a widow who remarries! The bustle of the old days will soon begin with the
blows of the pick, and mattock, blasts of powder, rumbling of wagons, neighing
of horses, creaking of machines! I shall see it all again! I hope, Mr. Starr, that
you will not think me too old to resume my duties of overman?"

"No, Simon, no indeed! You wear better than I do, my old friend!"

"And, sir, you shall be our viewer again. May the new working last for many
years, and pray Heaven I shall have the consolation of dying without seeing the
end of it!"

The old miner was overflowing with joy. James Starr fully entered into it; but
he let Ford rave for them both. Harry alone remained thoughtful. To his memory
recurred the succession of singular, inexplicable circumstances attending the
discovery of the new bed. It made him uneasy about the future.

An hour afterwards, James Starr and his two companions were back in the
cottage. The engineer supped with good appetite, listening with satisfaction to all
the plans unfolded by the old overman; and had it not been for his excitement
about the next day's work, he would never have slept better than in the perfect
stillness of the cottage.

The following day, after a substantial breakfast, James Starr, Simon Ford,
Harry, and even Madge herself, took the road already traversed the day before.
All looked like regular miners. They carried different tools, and some dynamite
with which to blast the rock. Harry, besides a large lantern, took a safety lamp,
which would burn for twelve hours. It was more than was necessary for the
journey there and back, including the time for the working--supposing a working
was possible.

"To work! to work!" shouted Ford, when the party reached the further end of
the passage; and he grasped a heavy crowbar and brandished it.

"Stop one instant," said Starr. "Let us see if any change has taken place, and
if the firedamp still escapes through the crevices."

"You are right, Mr. Starr," said Harry. "Whoever stopped it up yesterday may
have done it again to-day!"

Madge, seated on a rock, carefully observed the excavation, and the wall
which was to be blasted.

It was found that everything was just as they left it. The crevices had
undergone no alteration; the carburetted hydrogen still filtered through, though
in a small stream, which was no doubt because it had had a free passage since
the day before. As the quantity was so small, it could not have formed an


explosive mixture with the air inside. James Starr and his companions could
therefore proceed in security. Besides, the air grew purer by rising to the heights
of the Dochart pit; and the firedamp, spreading through the atmosphere, would
not be strong enough to make any explosion.

"To work, then!" repeated Ford; and soon the rock flew in splinters under his
skillful blows. The break was chiefly composed of pudding-stone, interspersed
with sandstone and schist, such as is most often met with between the coal veins.
James Starr picked up some of the pieces, and examined them carefully, hoping
to discover some trace of coal.

Starr having chosen the place where the holes were to be drilled, they were
rapidly bored by Harry. Some cartridges of dynamite were put into them. As
soon as the long, tarred safety match was laid, it was lighted on a level with the
ground. James Starr and his companions then went off to some distance.

"Oh! Mr. Starr," said Simon Ford, a prey to agitation, which he did not
attempt to conceal, "never, no, never has my old heart beaten so quick before! I
am longing to get at the vein!"

"Patience, Simon!" responded the engineer. "You don't mean to say that you
think you are going to find a passage all ready open behind that dyke?"

"Excuse me, sir," answered the old overman; "but of course I think so! If
there was good luck in the way Harry and I discovered this place, why shouldn't
the good luck go on?"

As he spoke, came the explosion. A sound as of thunder rolled through the
labyrinth of subterranean galleries. Starr, Madge, Harry, and Simon Ford
hastened towards the spot.

"Mr. Starr! Mr. Starr!" shouted the overman. "Look! the door is broken
open!"

Ford's comparison was justified by the appearance of an excavation, the
depth of which could not be calculated. Harry was about to spring through the
opening; but the engineer, though excessively surprised to find this cavity, held
him back. "Allow time for the air in there to get pure,” said he.

"Yes! beware of the foul air!" said Simon.

A quarter of an hour was passed in anxious waiting. The lantern was then
fastened to the end of a stick, and introduced into the cave, where it continued to
bum with unaltered brilliancy. "Now then, Harry, go," said Starr, "and we will
follow you."

The opening made by the dynamite was sufficiently large to allow a man to
pass through. Harry, lamp in hand, entered unhesitatingly, and disappeared in the
darkness. His father, mother, and James Starr waited in silence. A minute--which
seemed to them much longer--passed. Harry did not reappear, did not call.


Gazing into the opening, James Starr could not even see the light of his lamp,
which ought to have illuminated the dark cavern.

Had the ground suddenly given way under Harry's feet? Had the young
miner fallen into some crevice? Could his voice no longer reach _ his
companions?

The old overman, dead to their remonstrances, was about to enter the
opening, when a light appeared, dim at first, but gradually growing brighter, and
Harry's voice was heard shouting, "Come, Mr. Starr! come, father! The road to
New Aberfoyle is open!"

If, by some superhuman power, engineers could have raised in a block, a
thousand feet thick, all that portion of the terrestrial crust which supports the
lakes, rivers, gulfs, and territories of the counties of Stirling, Dumbarton, and
Renfrew, they would have found, under that enormous lid, an immense
excavation, to which but one other in the world can be compared--the celebrated
Mammoth caves of Kentucky. This excavation was composed of several hundred
divisions of all sizes and shapes. It might be called a hive with numberless
ranges of cells, capriciously arranged, but a hive on a vast scale, and which,
instead of bees, might have lodged all the ichthyosauri, megatheriums, and
pterodactyles of the geological epoch.

A labyrinth of galleries, some higher than the most lofty cathedrals, others
like cloisters, narrow and winding--these following a horizontal line, those on an
incline or running obliquely in all directions--connected the caverns and allowed
free communication between them.

The pillars sustaining the vaulted roofs, whose curves allowed of every style,
the massive walls between the passages, the naves themselves in this layer of
secondary formation, were composed of sandstone and schistous rocks. But
tightly packed between these useless strata ran valuable veins of coal, as if the
black blood of this strange mine had circulated through their tangled network.
These fields extended forty miles north and south, and stretched even under the
Caledonian Canal. The importance of this bed could not be calculated until after
soundings, but it would certainly surpass those of Cardiff and Newcastle.

We may add that the working of this mine would be singularly facilitated by
the fantastic dispositions of the secondary earths; for by an unaccountable retreat
of the mineral matter at the geological epoch, when the mass was solidifying,
nature had already multiplied the galleries and tunnels of New Aberfoyle.

Yes, nature alone! It might at first have been supposed that some works
abandoned for centuries had been discovered afresh. Nothing of the sort. No one
would have deserted such riches. Human termites had never gnawed away this
part of the Scottish subsoil; nature herself had done it all. But, we repeat, it could


be compared to nothing but the celebrated Mammoth caves, which, in an extent
of more than twenty miles, contain two hundred and twenty-six avenues, eleven
lakes, seven rivers, eight cataracts, thirty-two unfathomable wells, and fifty-
seven domes, some of which are more than four hundred and fifty feet in height.
Like these caves, New Aberfoyle was not the work of men, but the work of the
Creator.

Such was this new domain, of matchless wealth, the discovery of which
belonged entirely to the old overman. Ten years’ sojourn in the deserted mine, an
uncommon pertinacity in research, perfect faith, sustained by a marvelous
mining instinct--all these qualities together led him to succeed where so many
others had failed. Why had the soundings made under the direction of James
Starr during the last years of the working stopped just at that limit, on the very
frontier of the new mine? That was all chance, which takes great part in
researches of this kind.

However that might be, there was, under the Scottish subsoil, what might be
called a subterranean county, which, to be habitable, needed only the rays of the
sun, or, for want of that, the light of a special planet.

Water had collected in various hollows, forming vast ponds, or rather lakes
larger than Loch Katrine, lying just above them. Of course the waters of these
lakes had no movement of currents or tides; no old castle was reflected there; no
birch or oak trees waved on their banks. And yet these deep lakes, whose mirror-
like surface was never ruffled by a breeze, would not be without charm by the
light of some electric star, and, connected by a string of canals, would well
complete the geography of this strange domain.

Although unfit for any vegetable production, the place could be inhabited by
a whole population. And who knows but that in this steady temperature, in the
depths of the mines of Aberfoyle, as well as in those of Newcastle, Alloa, or
Cardiff--when their contents shall have been exhausted--who knows but that the
poorer classes of Great Britain will some day find a refuge?


CHAPTER VIII. EXPLORING

AT Harry's call, James Starr, Madge, and Simon Ford entered through the
narrow orifice which put the Dochart pit in communication with the new mine.
They found themselves at the beginning of a tolerably wide gallery. One might
well believe that it had been pierced by the hand of man, that the pick and
mattock had emptied it in the working of a new vein. The explorers question
whether, by a strange chance, they had not been transported into some ancient
mine, of the existence of which even the oldest miners in the county had ever


known.

No! It was merely that the geological layers had left this passage when the
secondary earths were in course of formation. Perhaps some torrent had formerly
dashed through it; but now it was as dry as if it had been cut some thousand feet
lower, through granite rocks. At the same time, the air circulated freely, which
showed that certain natural vents placed it in communication with the exterior
atmosphere.

This observation, made by the engineer, was correct, and it was evident that
the ventilation of the new mine would be easily managed. As to the firedamp
which had lately filtered through the schist, it seemed to have been contained in
a pocket now empty, and it was certain that the atmosphere of the gallery was
quite free from it. However, Harry prudently carried only the safety lamp, which
would insure light for twelve hours.

James Starr and his companions now felt perfectly happy. All their wishes
were satisfied. There was nothing but coal around them. A sort of emotion kept
them silent; even Simon Ford restrained himself. His joy overflowed, not in long
phrases, but in short ejaculations.

It was perhaps imprudent to venture so far into the crypt. Pooh! they never
thought of how they were to get back.

The gallery was practicable, not very winding. They met with no noxious
exhalations, nor did any chasm bar the path. There was no reason for stopping
for a whole hour; James Starr, Madge, Harry, and Simon Ford walked on, though
there was nothing to show them what was the exact direction of this unknown
tunnel.

And they would no doubt have gone farther still, if they had not suddenly
come to the end of the wide road which they had followed since their entrance
into the mine.

The gallery ended in an enormous cavern, neither the height nor depth of
which could be calculated. At what altitude arched the roof of this excavation--at
what distance was its opposite wall--the darkness totally concealed; but by the
light of the lamp the explorers could discover that its dome covered a vast extent
of still water--pond or lake--whose picturesque rocky banks were lost in
obscurity.

"Halt!" exclaimed Ford, stopping suddenly. "Another step, and perhaps we
shall fall into some fathomless pit."

"Let us rest awhile, then, my friends," returned the engineer. "Besides, we
ought to be thinking of returning to the cottage."

"Our lamp will give light for another ten hours, sir," said Harry.

"Well, let us make a halt," replied Starr; "I confess my legs have need of a


rest. And you, Madge, don't you feel tired after so long a walk?"

"Not over much, Mr. Starr," replied the sturdy Scotchwoman; "we have been
accustomed to explore the old Aberfoyle mine for whole days together."

"Tired? nonsense!" interrupted Simon Ford; "Madge could go ten times as
far, if necessary. But once more, Mr. Starr, wasn't my communication worth your
trouble in coming to hear it? Just dare to say no, Mr. Starr, dare to say no!"

"Well, my old friend, I haven't felt so happy for a long while!" replied the
engineer; "the small part of this marvelous mine that we have explored seems to
show that its extent is very considerable, at least in length."

"In width and in depth, too, Mr. Starr!" returned Simon Ford.

"That we shall know later."

"And I can answer for it! Trust to the instinct of an old miner! It has never
deceived me!"

"I wish to believe you, Simon," replied the engineer, smiling. "As far as I can
judge from this short exploration, we possess the elements of a working which
will last for centuries!"

"Centuries!" exclaimed Simon Ford; "I believe you, sir! A thousand years
and more will pass before the last bit of coal is taken out of our new mine!"

"Heaven grant it!" returned Starr. "As to the quality of the coal which crops
out of these walls?"

"Superb! Mr. Starr, superb!" answered Ford; "just look at it yourself!"

And so saying, with his pick he struck off a fragment of the black rock.

"Look! look!" he repeated, holding it close to his lamp; "the surface of this
piece of coal is shining! We have here fat coal, rich in bituminous matter; and
see how it comes in pieces, almost without dust! Ah, Mr. Starr! twenty years ago
this seam would have entered into a strong competition with Swansea and
Cardiff! Well, stokers will quarrel for it still, and if it costs little to extract it from
the mine, it will not sell at a less price outside."

"Indeed," said Madge, who had taken the fragment of coal and was
examining it with the air of a connoisseur; "that's good quality of coal. Carry it
home, Simon, carry it back to the cottage! I want this first piece of coal to burn
under our kettle."

"Well said, wife!" answered the old overman, "and you shall see that I am
not mistaken."

"Mr. Starr," asked Harry, "have you any idea of the probable direction of this
long passage which we have been following since our entrance into the new
mine?"

"No, my lad," replied the engineer; "with a compass I could perhaps find out
its general bearing; but without a compass I am here like a sailor in open sea, in


the midst of fogs, when there is no sun by which to calculate his position."

"No doubt, Mr. Starr," replied Ford; "but pray don't compare our position
with that of the sailor, who has everywhere and always an abyss under his feet!
We are on firm ground here, and need never be afraid of foundering."

"I won't tease you, then, old Simon," answered James Starr. "Far be it from
me even in jest to depreciate the New Aberfoyle mine by an unjust comparison!
I only meant to say one thing, and that is that we don't know where we are.”

"We are in the subsoil of the county of Stirling, Mr. Starr," replied Simon
Ford; "and that I assert as if--"

"Listen!" said Harry, interrupting the old man. All listened, as the young
miner was doing. His ears, which were very sharp, had caught a dull sound, like
a distant murmur. His companions were not long in hearing it themselves. It was
above their heads, a sort of rolling sound, in which though it was so feeble, the
successive CRESCENDO and DIMINUENDO could be distinctly heard.

All four stood for some minutes, their ears on the stretch, without uttering a
word. All at once Simon Ford exclaimed, "Well, I declare! Are trucks already
running on the rails of New Aberfoyle?"

"Father," replied Harry, "it sounds to me just like the noise made by waves
rolling on the sea shore."

"We can't be under the sea though!" cried the old overman.

"No," said the engineer, "but it is not impossible that we should be under
Loch Katrine."

"The roof cannot have much thickness just here, if the noise of the water is
perceptible."

"Very little indeed," answered James Starr, "and that is the reason this cavern
is so huge."

"You must be right, Mr. Starr," said Harry.

"Besides, the weather is so bad outside," resumed Starr, "that the waters of
the loch must be as rough as those of the Firth of Forth."

"Well! what does it matter after all?" returned Simon Ford; "the seam won't
be any the worse because it is under a loch. It would not be the first time that
coal has been looked for under the very bed of the ocean! When we have to work
under the bottom of the Caledonian Canal, where will be the harm?"

"Well said, Simon," cried the engineer, who could not restrain a smile at the
overman's enthusiasm; "let us cut our trenches under the waters of the sea! Let
us bore the bed of the Atlantic like a strainer; let us with our picks join our
brethren of the United States through the subsoil of the ocean! let us dig into the
center of the globe if necessary, to tear out the last scrap of coal."

"Are you joking, Mr. Starr?" asked Ford, with a pleased but slightly


suspicious look.

"I joking, old man? no! but you are so enthusiastic that you carry me away
into the regions of impossibility! Come, let us return to the reality, which is
sufficiently beautiful; leave our picks here, where we may find them another day,
and let's take the road back to the cottage."

Nothing more could be done for the time. Later, the engineer, accompanied
by a brigade of miners, supplied with lamps and all necessary tools, would
resume the exploration of New Aberfoyle. It was now time to return to the
Dochart pit. The road was easy, the gallery running nearly straight through the
rock up to the orifice opened by the dynamite, so there was no fear of their
losing themselves.

But as James Starr was proceeding towards the gallery Simon Ford stopped
him.

"Mr. Starr," said he, "you see this immense cavern, this subterranean lake,
whose waters bathe this strand at our feet? Well! it is to this place I mean to
change my dwelling, here I will build a new cottage, and if some brave fellows
will follow my example, before a year is over there will be one town more inside
old England."

James Starr, smiling approval of Ford's plans, pressed his hand, and all three,
preceding Madge, re-entered the gallery, on their way back to the Dochart pit.
For the first mile no incident occurred. Harry walked first, holding his lamp
above his head. He carefully followed the principal gallery, without ever turning
aside into the narrow tunnels which radiated to the right and left. It seemed as if
the returning was to be accomplished as easily as the going, when an unexpected
accident occurred which rendered the situation of the explorers very serious.

Just at a moment when Harry was raising his lamp there came a rush of air,
as if caused by the flapping of invisible wings. The lamp escaped from his
hands, fell on the rocky ground, and was broken to pieces.

James Starr and his companions were suddenly plunged in absolute darkness.
All the oil of the lamp was spilt, and it was of no further use. "Well, Harry,"
cried his father, "do you want us all to break our necks on the way back to the
cottage?"

Harry did not answer. He wondered if he ought to suspect the hand of a
mysterious being in this last accident? Could there possibly exist in these depths
an enemy whose unaccountable antagonism would one day create serious
difficulties? Had someone an interest in defending the new coal field against any
attempt at working it? In truth that seemed absurd, yet the facts spoke for
themselves, and they accumulated in such a way as to change simple
presumptions into certainties.


In the meantime the explorers’ situation was bad enough. They had now, in
the midst of black darkness, to follow the passage leading to the Dochart pit for
nearly five miles. There they would still have an hour's walk before reaching the
cottage.

"Come along," said Simon Ford. "We have no time to lose. We must grope
our way along, like blind men. There's no fear of losing our way. The tunnels
which open off our road are only just like those in a molehill, and by following
the chief gallery we shall of course reach the opening we got in at. After that, it
is the old mine. We know that, and it won't be the first time that Harry and I have
found ourselves there in the dark. Besides, there we shall find the lamps that we
left. Forward then! Harry, go first. Mr. Starr, follow him. Madge, you go next,
and I will bring up the rear. Above everything, don't let us get separated."

All complied with the old overman's instructions. As he said, by groping
carefully, they could not mistake the way. It was only necessary to make the
hands take the place of the eyes, and to trust to their instinct, which had with
Simon Ford and his son become a second nature.

James Starr and his companions walked on in the order agreed. They did not
speak, but it was not for want of thinking. It became evident that they had an
adversary. But what was he, and how were they to defend themselves against
these mysteriously-prepared attacks? These disquieting ideas crowded into their
brains. However, this was not the moment to get discouraged.

Harry, his arms extended, advanced with a firm step, touching first one and
then the other side of the passage.

If a cleft or side opening presented itself, he felt with his hand that it was not
the main way; either the cleft was too shallow, or the opening too narrow, and he
thus kept in the right road.

In darkness through which the eye could not in the slightest degree pierce,
this difficult return lasted two hours. By reckoning the time since they started,
taking into consideration that the walking had not been rapid, Starr calculated
that he and his companions were near the opening. In fact, almost immediately,
Harry stopped.

"Have we got to the end of the gallery?” asked Simon Ford.

"Yes," answered the young miner.

"Well! have you not found the hole which connects New Aberfoyle with the
Dochart pit?"

"No," replied Harry, whose impatient hands met with nothing but a solid
wall.

The old overman stepped forward, and himself felt the schistous rock. A cry
escaped him.


Either the explorers had strayed from the right path on their return, or the
narrow orifice, broken in the rock by the dynamite, had been recently stopped
up. James Starr and his companions were prisoners in New Aberfoyle.


CHAPTER IX. THE FIRE-MAIDENS

A WEEK after the events just related had taken place, James Starr's friends
had become very anxious. The engineer had disappeared, and no reason could be
brought forward to explain his absence. They learnt, by questioning his servant,
that he had embarked at Granton Pier. But from that time there were no traces of
James Starr. Simon Ford's letter had requested secrecy, and he had said nothing
of his departure for the Aberfoyle mines.

Therefore in Edinburgh nothing was talked of but the unaccountable absence
of the engineer. Sir W. Elphiston, the President of the Royal Institution,
communicated to his colleagues a letter which James Starr had sent him,
excusing himself from being present at the next meeting of the society. Two or
three others produced similar letters. But though these documents proved that
Starr had left Edinburgh--which was known before--they threw no light on what
had become of him. Now, on the part of such a man, this prolonged absence, so
contrary to his usual habits, naturally first caused surprise, and then anxiety.

A notice was inserted in the principal newspapers of the United Kingdom
relative to the engineer James Starr, giving a description of him and the date on
which he left Edinburgh; nothing more could be done but to wait. The time
passed in great anxiety. The scientific world of England was inclined to believe
that one of its most distinguished members had positively disappeared. At the
same time, when so many people were thinking about James Starr, Harry Ford
was the subject of no less anxiety. Only, instead of occupying public attention,
the son of the old overman was the cause of trouble alone to the generally
cheerful mind of Jack Ryan.

It may be remembered that, in their encounter in the Yarrow shaft, Jack Ryan
had invited Harry to come a week afterwards to the festivities at Irvine. Harry
had accepted and promised expressly to be there. Jack Ryan knew, having had it
proved by many circumstances, that his friend was a man of his word. With him,
a thing promised was a thing done. Now, at the Irvine merry-making, nothing
was wanting; neither song, nor dance, nor fun of any sort--nothing but Harry
Ford.

The notice relative to James Starr, published in the papers, had not yet been
seen by Ryan. The honest fellow was therefore only worried by Harry's absence,
telling himself that something serious could alone have prevented him from


keeping his promise. So, the day after the Irvine games, Jack Ryan intended to
take the railway from Glasgow and go to the Dochart pit; and this he would have
done had he not been detained by an accident which nearly cost him his life.
Something which occurred on the night of the 12th of December was of a nature
to support the opinions of all partisans of the supernatural, and there were many
at Melrose Farm.

Irvine, a little seaport of Renfrew, containing nearly seven thousand
inhabitants, lies in a sharp bend made by the Scottish coast, near the mouth of
the Firth of Clyde. The most ancient and the most famed ruins on this part of the
coast were those of this castle of Robert Stuart, which bore the name of
Dundonald Castle.

At this period Dundonald Castle, a refuge for all the stray goblins of the
country, was completely deserted. It stood on the top of a high rock, two miles
from the town, and was seldom visited. Sometimes a few strangers took it into
their heads to explore these old historical remains, but then they always went
alone. The inhabitants of Irvine would not have taken them there at any price.
Indeed, several legends were based on the story of certain "fire-maidens," who
haunted the old castle.

The most superstitious declared they had seen these fantastic creatures with
their own eyes. Jack Ryan was naturally one of them. It was a fact that from time
to time long flames appeared, sometimes on a broken piece of wall, sometimes
on the summit of the tower which was the highest point of Dundonald Castle.

Did these flames really assume a human shape, as was asserted? Did they
merit the name of fire-maidens, given them by the people of the coast? It was
evidently just an optical delusion, aided by a good deal of credulity, and science
could easily have explained the phenomenon.

However that might be, these fire-maidens had the reputation of frequenting
the ruins of the old castle and there performing wild strathspeys, especially on
dark nights. Jack Ryan, bold fellow though he was, would never have dared to
accompany those dances with the music of his bagpipes.

"Old Nick is enough for them!" said he. "He doesn't need me to complete his
infernal orchestra."

We may well believe that these strange apparitions frequently furnished a
text for the evening stories. Jack Ryan was ending the evening with one of these.
His auditors, transported into the phantom world, were worked up into a state of
mind which would believe anything.

All at once shouts were heard outside. Jack Ryan stopped short in the middle
of his story, and all rushed out of the barn. The night was pitchy dark. Squalls of
wind and rain swept along the beach. Two or three fishermen, their backs against


a rock, the better to resist the wind, were shouting at the top of their voices.

Jack Ryan and his companions ran up to them. The shouts were, however,
not for the inhabitants of the farm, but to warn men who, without being aware of
it, were going to destruction. A dark, confused mass appeared some way out at
sea. It was a vessel whose position could be seen by her lights, for she carried a
white one on her foremast, a green on the starboard side, and a red on the
outside. She was evidently running straight on the rocks.

"A ship in distress?" said Ryan.

"Ay," answered one of the fishermen, "and now they want to tack, but it's too
late!"

"Do they want to run ashore?" said another.

"It seems so," responded one of the fishermen, "unless he has been misled by
some--"

The man was interrupted by a yell from Jack. Could the crew have heard it?
At any rate, it was too late for them to beat back from the line of breakers which
gleamed white in the darkness.

But it was not, as might be supposed, a last effort of Ryan's to warn the
doomed ship. He now had his back to the sea. His companions turned also, and
gazed at a spot situated about half a mile inland. It was Dundonald Castle. A
long flame twisted and bent under the gale, on the summit of the old tower.

"The Fire-Maiden!" cried the superstitious men in terror.

Clearly, it needed a good strong imagination to find any human likeness in
that flame. Waving in the wind like a luminous flag, it seemed sometimes to fly
round the tower, as if it was just going out, and a moment after it was seen again
dancing on its blue point.

"The Fire-Maiden! the Fire-Maiden!" cried the terrified fishermen and
peasants.

All was then explained. The ship, having lost her reckoning in the fog, had
taken this flame on the top of Dundonald Castle for the Irvine light. She thought
herself at the entrance of the Firth, ten miles to the north, when she was really
running on a shore which offered no refuge.

What could be done to save her, if there was still time? It was too late. A
frightful crash was heard above the tumult of the elements. The vessel had
struck. The white line of surf was broken for an instant; she heeled over on her
side and lay among the rocks.

At the same time, by a strange coincidence, the long flame disappeared, as if
it had been swept away by a violent gust. Earth, sea, and sky were plunged in
complete darkness.

"The Fire-Maiden!" shouted Ryan, for the last time, as the apparition, which


he and his companions believed supernatural, disappeared. But then the courage
of these superstitious Scotchmen, which had failed before a fancied danger,
returned in face of a real one, which they were ready to brave in order to save
their fellow-creatures. The tempest did not deter them. As heroic as they had
before been credulous, fastening ropes round their waists, they rushed into the
waves to the aid of those on the wreck.

Happily, they succeeded in their endeavors, although some--and bold Jack
Ryan was among the number--were severely wounded on the rocks. But the
captain of the vessel and the eight sailors who composed his crew were hauled
up, safe and sound, on the beach.

The ship was the Norwegian brig MOTALA, laden with timber, and bound
for Glasgow. Of the MOTALA herself nothing remained but a few spars, washed
up by the waves, and dashed among the rocks on the beach.

Jack Ryan and three of his companions, wounded like himself, were carried
into a room of Melrose Farm, where every care was lavished on them. Ryan was
the most hurt, for when with the rope round his waist he had rushed into the sea,
the waves had almost immediately dashed him back against the rocks. He was
brought, indeed, very nearly lifeless on to the beach.

The brave fellow was therefore confined to bed for several days, to his great
disgust. However, as soon as he was given permission to sing as much as he
liked, he bore his trouble patiently, and the farm echoed all day with his jovial
voice. But from this adventure he imbibed a more lively sentiment of fear with
regard to brownies and other goblins who amuse themselves by plaguing
mankind, and he made them responsible for the catastrophe of the Motala. It
would have been vain to try and convince him that the Fire-Maidens did not
exist, and that the flame, so suddenly appearing among the ruins, was but a
natural phenomenon. No reasoning could make him believe it. His companions
were, if possible, more obstinate than he in their credulity. According to them,
one of the Fire-Maidens had maliciously attracted the MOTALA to the coast. As
to wishing to punish her, as well try to bring the tempest to justice! The
magistrates might order what arrests they pleased, but a flame cannot be
imprisoned, an impalpable being can't be handcuffed. It must be acknowledged
that the researches which were ultimately made gave ground, at least in
appearance, to this superstitious way of explaining the facts.

The inquiry was made with great care. Officials came to Dundonald Castle,
and they proceeded to conduct a most vigorous search. The magistrate wished
first to ascertain if the ground bore any footprints, which could be attributed to
other than goblins' feet. It was impossible to find the least trace, whether old or
new. Moreover, the earth, still damp from the rain of the day before, would have


preserved the least vestige.

The result of all this was, that the magistrates only got for their trouble a new
legend added to so many others--a legend which would be perpetuated by the
remembrance of the catastrophe of the MOTALA, and indisputably confirm the
truth of the apparition of the Fire-Maidens.

A hearty fellow like Jack Ryan, with so strong a constitution, could not be
long confined to his bed. A few sprains and bruises were not quite enough to
keep him on his back longer than he liked. He had not time to be ill.

Jack, therefore, soon got well. As soon as he was on his legs again, before
resuming his work on the farm, he wished to go and visit his friend Harry, and
learn why he had not come to the Irvine merry-making. He could not understand
his absence, for Harry was not a man who would willingly promise and not
perform. It was unlikely, too, that the son of the old overman had not heard of
the wreck of the MOTALA, as it was in all the papers. He must know the part
Jack had taken in it, and what had happened to him, and it was unlike Harry not
to hasten to the farm and see how his old chum was going on.

As Harry had not come, there must have been something to prevent him.
Jack Ryan would as soon deny the existence of the Fire-Maidens as believe in
Harry's indifference.

Two days after the catastrophe Jack left the farm merily, feeling nothing of
his wounds. Singing in the fullness of his heart, he awoke the echoes of the cliff,
as he walked to the station of the railway, which VIA Glasgow would take him
to Stirling and Callander.

As he was waiting for his train, his attention was attracted by a bill posted up
on the walls, containing the following notice:

"On the 4th of December, the engineer, James Starr, of Edinburgh, embarked
from Granton Pier, on board the Prince of Wales. He disembarked the same day
at Stirling. From that time nothing further has been heard of him.

"Any information concerning him is requested to be sent to the President of
the Royal Institution, Edinburgh."

Jack Ryan, stopping before one of these advertisements, read it twice over,
with extreme surprise.

"Mr. Starr!" he exclaimed. "Why, on the 4th of December I met him with
Harry on the ladder of the Dochart pit! That was ten days ago! And he has not
been seen from that time! That explains why my chum didn't come to Irvine."

And without taking time to inform the President of the Royal Institution by
letter, what he knew relative to James Starr, Jack jumped into the train,
determining to go first of all to the Yarrow shaft. There he would descend to the
depths of the pit, if necessary, to find Harry, and with him was sure to be the


engineer James Starr.

"They haven't turned up again," said he to himself. "Why? Has anything
prevented them? Could any work of importance keep them still at the bottom of
the mine? I must find out!" and Ryan, hastening his steps, arrived in less than an
hour at the Yarrow shaft.

Externally nothing was changed. The same silence around. Not a living
creature was moving in that desert region. Jack entered the ruined shed which
covered the opening of the shaft. He gazed down into the dark abyss--nothing
was to be seen. He listened--nothing was to be heard.

"And my lamp!" he exclaimed; "suppose it isn't in its place!" The lamp
which Ryan used when he visited the pit was usually deposited in a comer, near
the landing of the topmost ladder. It had disappeared.

"Here is a nuisance!" said Jack, beginning to feel rather uneasy. Then,
without hesitating, superstitious though he was, "I will go," said he, "though it's
as dark down there as in the lowest depths of the infernal regions!"

And he began to descend the long flight of ladders, which led down the
gloomy shaft. Jack Ryan had not forgotten his old mining habits, and he was
well acquainted with the Dochart pit, or he would scarcely have dared to venture
thus. He went very carefully, however. His foot tried each round, as some of
them were worm-eaten. A false step would entail a deadly fall, through this
space of fifteen hundred feet. He counted each landing as he passed it, knowing
that he could not reach the bottom of the shaft until he had left the thirtieth. Once
there, he would have no trouble, so he thought, in finding the cottage, built, as
we have said, at the extremity of the principal passage.

Jack Ryan went on thus until he got to the twenty-sixth landing, and
consequently had two hundred feet between him and the bottom.

Here he put down his leg to feel for the first rung of the twenty-seventh
ladder. But his foot swinging in space found nothing to rest on. He knelt down
and felt about with his hand for the top of the ladder. It was in vain.

"Old Nick himself must have been down this way!" said Jack, not without a
slight feeling of terror.

He stood considering for some time, with folded arms, and longing to be able
to pierce the impenetrable darkness. Then it occurred to him that if he could not
get down, neither could the inhabitants of the mine get up. There was now no
communication between the depths of the pit and the upper regions. If the
removal of the lower ladders of the Yarrow shaft had been effected since his last
visit to the cottage, what had become of Simon Ford, his wife, his son, and the
engineer?

The prolonged absence of James Starr proved that he had not left the pit


since the day Ryan met with him in the shaft. How had the cottage been
provisioned since then? The food of these unfortunate people, imprisoned fifteen
hundred feet below the surface of the ground, must have been exhausted by this
time.

All this passed through Jack's mind, as he saw that by himself he could do
nothing to get to the cottage. He had no doubt but that communication had been
interrupted with a malevolent intention. At any rate, the authorities must be
informed, and that as soon as possible. Jack Ryan bent forward from the landing.

"Harry! Harry!" he shouted with his powerful voice.

Harry's name echoed and re-echoed among the rocks, and finally died away
in the depths of the shaft.

Ryan rapidly ascended the upper ladders and returned to the light of day.
Without losing a moment he reached the Callander station, just caught the
express to Edinburgh, and by three o'clock was before the Lord Provost.

There his declaration was received. His account was given so clearly that it
could not be doubted. Sir William Elphiston, President of the Royal Institution,
and not only colleague, but a personal friend of Starr's, was also informed, and
asked to direct the search which was to be made without delay in the mine.
Several men were placed at his disposal, supplied with lamps, picks, long rope
ladders, not forgetting provisions and cordials. Then guided by Jack Ryan, the
party set out for the Aberfoyle mines.

The same evening the expedition arrived at the opening of the Yarrow shaft,
and descended to the twenty-seventh landing, at which Jack Ryan had been
stopped a few hours previously. The lamps, fastened to long ropes, were lowered
down the shaft, and it was thus ascertained that the four last ladders were
wanting.

As soon as the lamps had been brought up, the men fixed to the landing a
rope ladder, which unrolled itself down the shaft, and all descended one after the
other. Jack Ryan's descent was the most difficult, for he went first down the
swinging ladders, and fastened them for the others.

The space at the bottom of the shaft was completely deserted; but Sir
William was much surprised at hearing Jack Ryan exclaim, "Here are bits of the
ladders, and some of them half burnt!"

"Burnt?" repeated Sir William. "Indeed, here sure enough are cinders which
have evidently been cold a long time!"

"Do you think, sir," asked Ryan, "that Mr. Starr could have had any reason
for burning the ladders, and thus breaking of communication with the world?"

"Certainly not," answered Sir William Elphiston, who had become very
thoughtful. "Come, my lad, lead us to the cottage. There we shall ascertain the


truth."

Jack Ryan shook his head, as if not at all convinced. Then, taking a lamp
from the hands of one of the men, he proceeded with a rapid step along the
principal passage of the Dochart pit. The others all followed him.

In a quarter of an hour the party arrived at the excavation in which stood
Simon Ford's cottage. There was no light in the window. Ryan darted to the door,
and threw it open. The house was empty.

They examined all the rooms in the somber habitation. No trace of violence
was to be found. All was in order, as if old Madge had been still there. There was
even an ample supply of provisions, enough to last the Ford family for several
days.

The absence of the tenants of the cottage was quite unaccountable. But was it
not possible to find out the exact time they had quitted it? Yes, for in this region,
where there was no difference of day or night, Madge was accustomed to mark
with a cross each day in her almanac.

The almanac was pinned up on the wall, and there the last cross had been
made at the 6th of December; that is to say, a day after the arrival of James Starr,
to which Ryan could positively swear. It was clear that on the 6th of December,
ten days ago, Simon Ford, his wife, son, and guest, had quitted the cottage.
Could a fresh exploration of the mine, undertaken by the engineer, account for
such a long absence? Certainly not.

It was intensely dark all round. The lamps held by the men gave light only
just where they were standing. Suddenly Jack Ryan uttered a cry. "Look there,
there!"

His finger was pointing to a tolerably bright light, which was moving about
in the distance. "After that light, my men!" exclaimed Sir William.

"It's a goblin light!" said Ryan. "So what's the use? We shall never catch it."

The president and his men, little given to superstition, darted off in the
direction of the moving light. Jack Ryan, bravely following their example,
quickly overtook the head-most of the party.

It was a long and fatiguing chase. The lantern seemed to be carried by a
being of small size, but singular agility.

Every now and then it disappeared behind some pillar, then was seen again at
the end of a cross gallery. A sharp turn would place it out of sight, and it seemed
to have completely disappeared, when all at once there would be the light as
bright as ever. However, they gained very little on it, and Ryan's belief that they
could never catch it seemed far from groundless.

After an hour of this vain pursuit Sir William Elphiston and his companions
had gone a long way in the southwest direction of the pit, and began to think


they really had to do with an impalpable being. Just then it seemed as if the
distance between the goblin and those who were pursuing it was becoming less.
Could it be fatigued, or did this invisible being wish to entice Sir William and his
companions to the place where the inhabitants of the cottage had perhaps
themselves been enticed. It was hard to say.

The men, seeing that the distance lessened, redoubled their efforts. The light
which had before burnt at a distance of more than two hundred feet before them
was now Seen at less than fifty. The space continued to diminish. The bearer of
the lamp became partially visible. Sometimes, when it tured its head, the
indistinct profile of a human face could be made out, and unless a sprite could
assume bodily shape, Jack Ryan was obliged to confess that here was no
supernatural being. Then, springing forward,--

"Courage, comrades!" he exclaimed; "it is getting tired! We shall soon catch
it up now, and if it can talk as well as it can run we shall hear a fine story."

But the pursuit had suddenly become more difficult. They were in unknown
regions of the mine; narrow passages crossed each other like the windings of a
labyrinth. The bearer of the lamp might escape them as easily as possible, by just
extinguishing the light and retreating into some dark refuge.

"And indeed," thought Sir William, "if it wishes to avoid us, why does it not
do so?"

Hitherto there had evidently been no intention to avoid them, but just as the
thought crossed Sir William's mind the light suddenly disappeared, and the party,
continuing the pursuit, found themselves before an extremely narrow natural
opening in the schistous rocks.

To trim their lamps, spring forward, and dart through the opening, was for
Sir William and his party but the work of an instant. But before they had gone a
hundred paces along this new gallery, much wider and loftier than the former,
they all stopped short. There, near the wall, lay four bodies, stretched on the
ground--four corpses, perhaps!

"James Starr!" exclaimed Sir William Elphiston.

"Harry! Harry!" cried Ryan, throwing himself down beside his friend.

It was indeed the engineer, Madge, Simon, and Harry Ford who were lying
there motionless. But one of the bodies moved slightly, and Madge's voice was
heard faintly murmuring, "See to the others! help them first!"

Sir William, Jack, and their companions endeavored to reanimate the
engineer and his friends by getting them to swallow a few drops of brandy. They
very soon succeeded. The unfortunate people, shut up in that dark cavern for ten
days, were dying of starvation. They must have perished had they not on three
occasions found a loaf of bread and a jug of water set near them. No doubt the


charitable being to whom they owed their lives was unable to do more for them.

Sir William wondered whether this might not have been the work of the
strange sprite who had allured them to the very spot where James Starr and his
companions lay.

However that might be, the engineer, Madge, Simon, and Harry Ford were
saved. They were assisted to the cottage, passing through the narrow opening
which the bearer of the strange light had apparently wished to point out to Sir
William. This was a natural opening. The passage which James Starr and his
companions had made for themselves with dynamite had been completely
blocked up with rocks laid one upon another.

So, then, whilst they had been exploring the vast cavern, the way back had
been purposely closed against them by a hostile hand.


CHAPTER X. COAL TOWN

THREE years after the events which have just been related, the guide-books
recommended as a "great attraction," to the numerous tourists who roam over the
county of Stirling, a visit of a few hours to the mines of New Aberfoyle.

No mine in any country, either in the Old or New World, could present a
more curious aspect.

To begin with, the visitor was transported without danger or fatigue to a level
with the workings, at fifteen hundred feet below the surface of the ground. Seven
miles to the southwest of Callander opened a slanting tunnel, adorned with a
castellated entrance, turrets and battlements. This lofty tunnel gently sloped
straight to the stupendous crypt, hollowed out so strangely in the bowels of the
earth.

A double line of railway, the wagons being moved by hydraulic power, plied
from hour to hour to and from the village thus buried in the subsoil of the
county, and which bore the rather ambitious title of Coal Town.

Arrived in Coal Town, the visitor found himself in a place where electricity
played a principal part as an agent of heat and light. Although the ventilation
shafts were numerous, they were not sufficient to admit much daylight into New
Aberfoyle, yet it had abundance of light. This was shed from numbers of electric
discs; some suspended from the vaulted roofs, others hanging on the natural
pillars--all, whether suns or stars in size, were fed by continuous currents
produced from electro-magnetic machines. When the hour of rest arrived, an
artificial night was easily produced all over the mine by disconnecting the wires.

Below the dome lay a lake of an extent to be compared to the Dead Sea of
the Mammoth caves--a deep lake whose transparent waters swarmed with


eyeless fish, and to which the engineer gave the name of Loch Malcolm.

There, in this immense natural excavation, Simon Ford built his new cottage,
which he would not have exchanged for the finest house in Prince's Street,
Edinburgh. This dwelling was situated on the shores of the loch, and its five
windows looked out on the dark waters, which extended further than the eye
could see. Two months later a second habitation was erected in the neighborhood
of Simon Ford's cottage: this was for James Starr. The engineer had given
himself body and soul to New Aberfoyle, and nothing but the most imperative
necessity ever caused him to leave the pit. There, then, he lived in the midst of
his mining world.

On the discovery of the new field, all the old colliers had hastened to leave
the plow and harrow, and resume the pick and mattock. Attracted by the
certainty that work would never fail, allured by the high wages which the
prosperity of the mine enabled the company to offer for labor, they deserted the
open air for an underground life, and took up their abode in the mines.

The miners' houses, built of brick, soon grew up in a picturesque fashion;
some on the banks of Loch Malcolm, others under the arches which seemed
made to resist the weight that pressed upon them, like the piers of a bridge. So
was founded Coal Town, situated under the eastern point of Loch Katrine, to the
north of the county of Stirling. It was a regular settlement on the banks of Loch
Malcolm. A chapel, dedicated to St. Giles, overlooked it from the top of a huge
rock, whose foot was laved by the waters of the subterranean sea.

When this underground town was lighted up by the bright rays thrown from
the discs, hung from the pillars and arches, its aspect was so strange, so fantastic,
that it justified the praise of the guide-books, and visitors flocked to see it.

It is needless to say that the inhabitants of Coal Town were proud of their
place. They rarely left their laboring village--in that imitating Simon Ford, who
never wished to go out again. The old overman maintained that it always rained
"up there," and, considering the climate of the United Kingdom, it must be
acknowledged that he was not far wrong. All the families in New Aberfoyle
prospered well, having in three years obtained a certain competency which they
could never have hoped to attain on the surface of the county. Dozens of babies,
who were born at the time when the works were resumed, had never yet breathed
the outer air.

This made Jack Ryan remark, "It's eighteen months since they were weaned,
and they have not yet seen daylight!"

It may be mentioned here, that one of the first to run at the engineer's call
was Jack Ryan. The merry fellow had thought it his duty to return to his old
trade. But though Melrose farm had lost singer and piper it must not be thought


that Jack Ryan sung no more. On the contrary, the sonorous echoes of New
Aberfoyle exerted their strong lungs to answer him.

Jack Ryan took up his abode in Simon Ford's new cottage. They offered him
a room, which he accepted without ceremony, in his frank and hearty way. Old
Madge loved him for his fine character and good nature. She in some degree
shared his ideas on the subject of the fantastic beings who were supposed to
haunt the mine, and the two, when alone, told each other stories wild enough to
make one shudder--stories well worthy of enriching the hyperborean mythology.

Jack thus became the life of the cottage. He was, besides being a jovial
companion, a good workman. Six months after the works had begun, he was
made head of a gang of hewers.

"That was a good work done, Mr. Ford," said he, a few days after his
appointment. "You discovered a new field, and though you narrowly escaped
paying for the discovery with your life--well, it was not too dearly bought."

"No, Jack, it was a good bargain we made that time!" answered the old
overman. "But neither Mr. Starr nor I have forgotten that to you we owe our
lives."

"Not at all," returned Jack. "You owe them to your son Harry, when he had
the good sense to accept my invitation to Irvine."

"And not to go, isn't that it?" interrupted Harry, grasping his comrade's hand.
"No, Jack, it is to you, scarcely healed of your wounds--to you, who did not
delay a day, no, nor an hour, that we owe our being found still alive in the mine!"

"Rubbish, no!" broke in the obstinate fellow. "I won't have that said, when
it's no such thing. I hurried to find out what had become of you, Harry, that's all.
But to give everyone his due, I will add that without that unapproachable goblin-

"Ah, there we are!" cried Ford. "A goblin!"

"A goblin, a brownie, a fairy's child," repeated Jack Ryan, "a cousin of the
Fire-Maidens, an Urisk, whatever you like! It's not the less certain that without it
we should never have found our way into the gallery, from which you could not
get out.”

"No doubt, Jack," answered Harry. "It remains to be seen whether this being
was as supernatural as you choose to believe."

"Supernatural!" exclaimed Ryan. "But it was as supernatural as a Will-o'-the-
Wisp, who may be seen skipping along with his lantern in his hand; you may try
to catch him, but he escapes like a fairy, and vanishes like a shadow! Don't be
uneasy, Harry, we shall see it again some day or other!"

"Well, Jack," said Simon Ford, "Will-o'-the-Wisp or not, we shall try to find
it, and you must help us."


"You'll get into a scrap if you don't take care, Mr. Ford!" responded Jack
Ryan.

"We'll see about that, Jack!"

We may easily imagine how soon this domain of New Aberfoyle became
familiar to all the members of the Ford family, but more particularly to Harry. He
learnt to know all its most secret ins and outs. He could even say what point of
the surface corresponded with what point of the mine. He knew that above this
seam lay the Firth of Clyde, that there extended Loch Lomond and Loch Katrine.
Those columns supported a spur of the Grampian mountains. This vault served
as a basement to Dumbarton. Above this large pond passed the Balloch railway.
Here ended the Scottish coast. There began the sea, the tumult of which could be
distinctly heard during the equinoctial gales. Harry would have been a first-rate
guide to these natural catacombs, and all that Alpine guides do on their snowy
peaks in daylight he could have done in the dark mine by the wonderful power
of instinct.

He loved New Aberfoyle. Many times, with his lamp stuck in his hat, did he
penetrate its furthest depths. He explored its ponds in a skillfully-managed
canoe. He even went shooting, for numerous birds had been introduced into the
crypt--pintails, snipes, ducks, who fed on the fish which swarmed in the deep
waters. Harry's eyes seemed made for the dark, just as a sailor's are made for
distances. But all this while Harry felt irresistibly animated by the hope of
finding the mysterious being whose intervention, strictly speaking, had saved
himself and his friends. Would he succeed? He certainly would, if presentiments
were to be trusted; but certainly not, if he judged by the success which had as yet
attended his researches.

The attacks directed against the family of the old overman, before the
discovery of New Aberfoyle, had not been renewed.


CHAPTER XI. HANGING BY A THREAD

ALTHOUGH in this way the Ford family led a happy and contented life, yet
it was easy to see that Harry, naturally of a grave disposition, became more and
more quiet and reserved. Even Jack Ryan, with all his good humor and usually
infectious merriment, failed to rouse him to gayety of manner.

One Sunday--it was in the month of June--the two friends were walking
together on the shores of Loch Malcolm. Coal Town rested from labor. In the
world above, stormy weather prevailed. Violent rains fell, and dull sultry vapors
brooded over the earth; the atmosphere was most oppressive.

Down in Coal Town there was perfect calm; no wind, no rain. A soft and


pleasant temperature existed instead of the strife of the elements which raged
without. What wonder then, that excursionists from Stirling came in
considerable numbers to enjoy the calm fresh air in the recesses of the mine?

The electric discs shed a brilliancy of light which the British sun, oftener
obscured by fogs than it ought to be, might well envy. Jack Ryan kept talking of
these visitors, who passed them in noisy crowds, but Harry paid very little
attention to what he said.

"I say, do look, Harry!" cried Jack. "See what numbers of people come to
visit us! Cheer up, old fellow! Do the honors of the place a little better. If you
look so glum, you'll make all these outside folks think you envy their life above-
ground."

"Never mind me, Jack," answered Harry. "You are jolly enough for two, I'm
sure; that's enough."

"T'll be hanged if I don't feel your melancholy creeping over me though!"
exclaimed Jack. "I declare my eyes are getting quite dull, my lips are drawn
together, my laugh sticks in my throat; I'm forgetting all my songs. Come, man,
what's the matter with you?"

"You know well enough, Jack."

"What? the old story?"

"Yes, the same thoughts haunt me."

"Ah, poor fellow!" said Jack, shrugging his shoulders. "If you would only do
like me, and set all the queer things down to the account of the goblins of the
mine, you would be easier in your mind."

"But, Jack, you know very well that these goblins exist only in your
imagination, and that, since the works here have been reopened, not a single one
has been seen."

"That's true, Harry; but if no spirits have been seen, neither has anyone else
to whom you could attribute the extraordinary doings we want to account for."

"T shall discover them."

"Ah, Harry! Harry! it's not so easy to catch the spirits of New Aberfoyle!"

"I shall find out the spirits as you call them," said Harry, in a tone of firm
conviction.

"Do you expect to be able to punish them?"

"Both punish and reward. Remember, if one hand shut us up in that passage,
another hand delivered us! I shall not soon forget that."

"But, Harry, how can we be sure that these two hands do not belong to the
same body?"

"What can put such a notion in your head, Jack?" asked Harry.

"Well, I don't know. Creatures that live in these holes, Harry, don't you see?


they can't be made like us, eh?"

"But they ARE just like us, Jack."

"Oh, no! don't say that, Harry! Perhaps some madman managed to get in for
a time."

"A madman! No madman would have formed such connected plans, or done
such continued mischief as befell us after the breaking of the ladders."

"Well, but anyhow he has done no harm for the last three years, either to you,
Harry, or any of your people."

"No matter, Jack," replied Harry; "I am persuaded that this malignant being,
whoever he is, has by no means given up his evil intentions. I can hardly say on
what I found my convictions. But at any rate, for the sake of the new works, I
must and will know who he is and whence he comes."

"For the sake of the new works did you say?" asked Jack, considerably
surprised.

"I said so, Jack," returned Harry. "I may be mistaken, but, to me, all that has
happened proves the existence of an interest in this mine in strong opposition to
ours. Many a time have I considered the matter; I feel almost sure of it. Just
consider the whole series of inexplicable circumstances, so singularly linked
together. To begin with, the anonymous letter, contradictory to that of my father,
at once proves that some man had become aware of our projects, and wished to
prevent their accomplishment. Mr. Starr comes to see us at the Dochart pit. No
sooner does he enter it with me than an immense stone is cast upon us, and
communication is interrupted by the breaking of the ladders in the Yarrow shaft.
We commence exploring. An experiment, by which the existence of a new vein
would be proved, is rendered impossible by stoppage of fissures.
Notwithstanding this, the examination is carried out, the vein discovered. We
return aS we came, a prodigious gust of air meets us, our lamp is broken, utter
darkness surrounds us. Nevertheless, we make our way along the gloomy
passage until, on reaching the entrance, we find it blocked up. There we were--
imprisoned. Now, Jack, don't you see in all these things a malicious intention?
Ah, yes, believe me, some being hitherto invisible, but not supernatural, as you
will persist in thinking, was concealed in the mine. For some reason, known only
to himself, he strove to keep us out of it. WAS there, did I say? I feel an inward
conviction that he IS there still, and probably prepares some terrible disaster for
us. Even at the risk of my life, Jack, I am resolved to discover him."

Harry spoke with an earnestness which strongly impressed his companion.
"Well, Harry," said he, "if I am forced to agree with you in certain points, won't
you admit that some kind fairy or brownie, by bringing bread and water to you,
was the means of--"


"Jack, my friend," interrupted Harry, "it is my belief that the friendly person,
whom you will persist in calling a spirit, exists in the mine as certainly as the
criminal we speak of, and I mean to seek them both in the most distant recesses
of the mine."

"But," inquired Jack, "have you any possible clew to guide your search?"

"Perhaps I have. Listen to me! Five miles west of New Aberfoyle, under the
solid rock which supports Ben Lomond, there exists a natural shaft which
descends perpendicularly into the vein beneath. A week ago I went to ascertain
the depth of this shaft. While sounding it, and bending over the opening as my
plumb-line went down, it seemed to me that the air within was agitated, as
though beaten by huge wings."

"Some bird must have got lost among the lower galleries," replied Jack.

"But that is not all, Jack. This very morning I went back to the place, and,
listening attentively, I thought I could detect a sound like a sort of groaning."

"Groaning!" cried Jack, "that must be nonsense; it was a current of air--
unless indeed some ghost--"

"T shall know to-morrow what it was," said Harry.

"Tomorrow?" answered Jack, looking at his friend.

"Yes; to-morrow I am going down into that abyss."

"Harry! that will be a tempting of Providence."

"No, Jack, Providence will aid me in the attempt. Tomorrow, you and some
of our comrades will go with me to that shaft. I will fasten myself to a long rope,
by which you can let me down, and draw me up at a given signal. I may depend
upon you, Jack?"

"Well, Harry," said Jack, shaking his head, "I will do as you wish me; but I
tell you all the same, you are very wrong."

"Nothing venture nothing win," said Harry, in a tone of decision. "Tomorrow
morning, then, at six o'clock. Be silent, and farewell!"

It must be admitted that Jack Ryan's fears were far from groundless. Harry
would expose himself to very great danger, supposing the enemy he sought for
lay concealed at the bottom of the pit into which he was going to descend. It did
not seem likely that such was the case, however.

"Why in the world," repeated Jack Ryan, "should he take all this trouble to
account for a set of facts so very easily and simply explained by the supernatural
intervention of the spirits of the mine?"

But, notwithstanding his objections to the scheme, Jack Ryan and three
miners of his gang arrived next morning with Harry at the mouth of the opening
of the suspicious shaft. Harry had not mentioned his intentions either to James
Starr or to the old overman. Jack had been discreet enough to say nothing.


Harry had provided himself with a rope about 200 feet long. It was not
particularly thick, but very strong--sufficiently so to sustain his weight. His
friends were to let him down into the gulf, and his pulling the cord was to be the
signal to withdraw him.

The opening into this shaft or well was twelve feet wide. A beam was thrown
across like a bridge, so that the cord passing over it should hang down the center
of the opening, and save Harry from striking against the sides in his descent.

He was ready.

"Are you still determined to explore this abyss?" whispered Jack Ryan.

"Yes, I am, Jack."

The cord was fastened round Harry's thighs and under his arms, to keep him
from rocking. Thus supported, he was free to use both his hands. A safety-lamp
hung at his belt, also a large, strong knife in a leather sheath.

Harry advanced to the middle of the beam, around which the cord was
passed. Then his friends began to let him down, and he slowly sank into the pit.
As the rope caused him to swing gently round and round, the light of his lamp
fell in turns on all points of the side walls, so that he was able to examine them
carefully. These walls consisted of pit coal, and so smooth that it would be
impossible to ascend them.

Harry calculated that he was going down at the rate of about a foot per
second, so that he had time to look about him, and be ready for any event.

During two minutes--that is to say, to the depth of about 120 feet, the descent
continued without any incident.

No lateral gallery opened from the side walls of the pit, which was gradually
narrowing into the shape of a funnel. But Harry began to feel a fresher air rising
from beneath, whence he concluded that the bottom of the pit communicated
with a gallery of some description in the lowest part of the mine.

The cord continued to unwind. Darkness and silence were complete. If any
living being whatever had sought refuge in the deep and mysterious abyss, he
had either left it, or, if there, by no movement did he in the slightest way betray
his presence.

Harry, becoming more suspicious the lower he got, now drew his knife and
held it in his right hand. At a depth of 180 feet, his feet touched the lower point
and the cord slackened and unwound no further.

Harry breathed more freely for a moment. One of the fears he entertained
had been that, during his descent, the cord might be cut above him, but he had
seen no projection from the walls behind which anyone could have been
concealed.

The bottom of the abyss was quite dry. Harry, taking the lamp from his belt,


walked round the place, and perceived he had been right in his conjectures.

An extremely narrow passage led aside out of the pit. He had to stoop to look
into it, and only by creeping could it be followed; but as he wanted to see in
which direction it led, and whether another abyss opened from it, he lay down on
the ground and began to enter it on hands and knees.

An obstacle speedily arrested his progress. He fancied he could perceive by
touching it, that a human body lay across the passage. A sudden thrill of horror
and surprise made him hastily draw back, but he again advanced and felt more
carefully.

His senses had not deceived him; a body did indeed lie there; and he soon
ascertained that, although icy cold at the extremities, there was some vital heat
remaining. In less time than it takes to tell it, Harry had drawn the body from the
recess to the bottom of the shaft, and, seizing his lamp, he cast its lights on what
he had found, exclaiming immediately, "Why, it is a child!"

The child still breathed, but so very feebly that Harry expected it to cease
every instant. Not a moment was to be lost; he must carry this poor little creature
out of the pit, and take it home to his mother as quickly as he could. He eagerly
fastened the cord round his waist, stuck on his lamp, clasped the child to his
breast with his left arm, and, keeping his right hand free to hold the knife, he
gave the signal agreed on, to have the rope pulled up.

It tightened at once; he began the ascent. Harry looked around him with
redoubled care, for more than his own life was now in danger.

For a few minutes all went well, no accident seemed to threaten him, when
suddenly he heard the sound of a great rush of air from beneath; and, looking
down, he could dimly perceive through the gloom a broad mass arising until it
passed him, striking him as it went by.

It was an enormous bird--of what sort he could not see; it flew upwards on
mighty wings, then paused, hovered, and dashed fiercely down upon Harry, who
could only wield his knife in one hand. He defended himself and the child as
well as he could, but the ferocious bird seemed to aim all its blows at him alone.
Afraid of cutting the cord, he could not strike it as he wished, and the struggle
was prolonged, while Harry shouted with all his might in hopes of making his
comrades hear.

He soon knew they did, for they pulled the rope up faster; a distance of about
eighty feet remained to be got over. The bird ceased its direct attack, but
increased the horror and danger of his situation by rushing at the cord, clinging
to it just out of his reach, and endeavoring, by pecking furiously, to cut it.

Harry felt overcome with terrible dread. One strand of the rope gave way,
and it made them sink a little.


A shriek of despair escaped his lips.

A second strand was divided, and the double burden now hung suspended by
only half the cord.

Harry dropped his knife, and by a superhuman effort succeeded, at the
moment the rope was giving way, in catching hold of it with his right hand above
the cut made by the beak of the bird. But, powerfully as he held it in his iron
grasp, he could feel it gradually slipping through his fingers.

He might have caught it, and held on with both hands by sacrificing the life
of the child he supported in his left arm. The idea crossed him, but was banished
in an instant, although he believed himself quite unable to hold out until drawn
to the surface. For a second he closed his eyes, believing they were about to
plunge back into the abyss.

He looked up once more; the huge bird had disappeared; his hand was at the
very extremity of the broken rope--when, just as his convulsive grasp was
failing, he was seized by the men, and with the child was placed on the level
ground.

The fearful strain of anxiety removed, a reaction took place, and Harry fell
fainting into the arms of his friends.


CHAPTER XII. NELL ADOPTED

A COUPLE of hours later, Harry still unconscious, and the child in a very
feeble state, were brought to the cottage by Jack Ryan and his companions. The
old overman listened to the account of their adventures, while Madge attended
with the utmost care to the wants of her son, and of the poor creature whom he
had rescued from the pit.

Harry imagined her a mere child, but she was a maiden of the age of fifteen
or sixteen years.

She gazed at them with vague and wondering eyes; and the thin face, drawn
by suffering, the pallid complexion, which light could never have tinged, and the
fragile, slender figure, gave her an appearance at once singular and attractive.
Jack Ryan declared that she seemed to him to be an uncommonly interesting
kind of ghost.

It must have been due to the strange and peculiar circumstances under which
her life hitherto had been led, that she scarcely seemed to belong to the human
race. Her countenance was of a very uncommon cast, and her eyes, hardly able
to bear the lamp-light in the cottage, glanced around in a confused and puzzled
way, as if all were new to them.

As this singular being reclined on Madge's bed and awoke to consciousness,


as from a long sleep, the old Scotchwoman began to question her a little.

"What do they call you, my dear?" said she.

"Nell," replied the girl.

"Do you feel anything the matter with you, Nell?"

"IT am hungry. I have eaten nothing since--since--"

Nell uttered these few words like one unused to speak much. They were in
the Gaelic language, which was often spoken by Simon and his family. Madge
immediately brought her some food; she was evidently famished. It was
impossible to say how long she might have been in that pit.

"How many days had you been down there, dearie?" inquired Madge.

Nell made no answer; she seemed not to understand the question.

"How many days, do you think?"

"Days?" repeated Nell, as though the word had no meaning for her, and she
shook her head to signify entire want of comprehension.

Madge took her hand, and stroked it caressingly. "How old are you, my
lassie?" she asked, smiling kindly at her.

Nell shook her head again.

"Yes, yes," continued Madge, "how many years old?"

"Years?" replied Nell. She seemed to understand that word no better than
days! Simon, Harry, Jack, and the rest, looked on with an air of mingled
compassion, wonder, and sympathy. The state of this poor thing, clothed in a
miserable garment of coarse woolen stuff, seemed to impress them painfully.

Harry, more than all the rest, seemed attracted by the very peculiarity of this
poor stranger. He drew near, took Nell's hand from his mother, and looked
directly at her, while something like a smile curved her lip. "Nell," he said,
"Nell, away down there--in the mine--were you all alone?"

"Alone! alone!" cried the girl, raising herself hastily. Her features expressed
terror; her eyes, which had appeared to soften as Harry looked at her, became
quite wild again. "Alone!" repeated she, "alone!"--and she fell back on the bed,
as though deprived of all strength.

"The poor bairn is too weak to speak to us," said Madge, when she had
adjusted the pillows. "After a good rest, and a little more food, she will be
stronger. Come away, Simon and Harry, and all the rest of you, and let her go to
sleep." So Nell was left alone, and in a very few minutes slept profoundly.

This event caused a great sensation, not only in the coal mines, but in
Stirlingshire, and ultimately throughout the kingdom. The strangeness of the
story was exaggerated; the affair could not have made more commotion had they
found the girl enclosed in the solid rock, like one of those antediluvian creatures
who have occasionally been released by a stroke of the pickax from their stony


prison. Nell became a fashionable wonder without knowing it. Superstitious
folks made her story a new subject for legendary marvels, and were inclined to
think, as Jack Ryan told Harry, that Nell was the spirit of the mines.

"Be it so, Jack," said the young man; "but at any rate she is the good spirit. It
can have been none but she who brought us bread and water when we were shut
up down there; and as to the bad spirit, who must still be in the mine, we'll catch
him some day."

Of course James Starr had been at once informed of all this, and came, as
soon as the young girl had sufficiently recovered her strength, to see her, and
endeavor to question her carefully.

She appeared ignorant of nearly everything relating to life, and, although
evidently intelligent, was wanting in many elementary ideas, such as time, for
instance. She had never been used to its division, and the words signifying hours,
days, months, and years were unknown to her.

Her eyes, accustomed to the night, were pained by the glare of the electric
discs; but in the dark her sight was wonderfully keen, the pupil dilated in a
remarkable manner, and she could see where to others there appeared profound
obscurity. It was certain that her brain had never received any impression of the
outer world, that her eyes had never looked beyond the mine, and that these
somber depths had been all the world to her.

The poor girl probably knew not that there were a sun and stars, towns and
counties, a mighty universe composed of myriads of worlds. But until she
comprehended the significance of words at present conveying no precise
meaning to her, it was impossible to ascertain what she knew.

As to whether or not Nell had lived alone in the recesses of New Aberfoyle,
James Starr was obliged to remain uncertain; indeed, any allusion to the subject
excited evident alarm in the mind of this strange girl. Either Nell could not or
would not reply to questions, but that some secret existed in connection with the
place, which she could have explained, was manifest.

"Should you like to stay with us? Should you like to go back to where we
found you?" asked James Starr.

"Oh, yes!" exclaimed the maiden, in answer to his first question; but a cry of
terror was all she seemed able to say to the second.

James Starr, as well as Simon and Harry Ford, could not help feeling a
certain amount of uneasiness with regard to this persistent silence. They found it
impossible to forget all that had appeared so inexplicable at the time they made
the discovery of the coal mine; and although that was three years ago, and
nothing new had happened, they always expected some fresh attack on the part
of the invisible enemy.


They resolved to explore the mysterious well, and did so, well armed and in
considerable numbers. But nothing suspicious was to be seen; the shaft
communicated with lower stages of the crypt, hollowed out in the carboniferous
bed.

Many a time did James Starr, Simon, and Harry talk over these things. If one
or more malevolent beings were concealed in the coal-pit, and there concocted
mischief, Nell surely could have warned them of it, yet she said nothing. The
slightest allusion to her past life brought on such fits of violent emotion, that it
was judged best to avoid the subject for the present. Her secret would certainly
escape her by-and-by.

By the time Nell had been a fortnight in the cottage, she had become a most
intelligent and zealous assistant to old Madge. It was clear that she instinctively
felt she should remain in the dwelling where she had been so charitably received,
and perhaps never dreamt of quitting it. This family was all in all to her, and to
the good folks themselves Nell had seemed an adopted child from the moment
when she first came beneath their roof. Nell was in truth a charming creature;
her new mode of existence added to her beauty, for these were no doubt the first
happy days of her life, and her heart was full of gratitude towards those to whom
she owed them. Madge felt towards her as a mother would; the old woman doted
upon her; in short, she was beloved by everybody. Jack Ryan only regretted one
thing, which was that he had not saved her himself. Friend Jack often came to
the cottage. He sang, and Nell, who had never heard singing before, admired it
greatly; but anyone might see that she preferred to Jack's songs the graver
conversation of Harry, from whom by degrees she learnt truths concerning the
outer world, of which hitherto she had known nothing.

It must be said that, since Nell had appeared in her own person, Jack Ryan
had been obliged to admit that his belief in hobgoblins was in a measure
weakened. A couple of months later his credulity experienced a further shock.
About that time Harry unexpectedly made a discovery which, in part at least,
accounted for the apparition of the fire-maidens among the ruins of Dundonald
Castle at Irvine.

During several days he had been engaged in exploring the remote galleries of
the prodigious excavation towards the south. At last he scrambled with difficulty
up a narrow passage which branched off through the upper rock. To his great
astonishment, he suddenly found himself in the open air. The passage, after
ascending obliquely to the surface of the ground, led out directly among the
ruins of Dundonald Castle.

There was, therefore, a communication between New Aberfoyle and the hills
crowned by this ancient castle. The upper entrance to this gallery, being


completely concealed by stones and brushwood, was invisible from without; at
the time of their search, therefore, the magistrates had been able to discover
nothing.

A few days afterwards, James Starr, guided by Harry, came himself to
inspect this curious natural opening into the coal mine. "Well," said he, "here is
enough to convince the most superstitious among us. Farewell to all their
brownies, goblins, and fire-maidens now!"

"T hardly think, Mr. Starr, we ought to congratulate ourselves," replied Harry.
"Whatever it is we have instead of these things, it can't be better, and may be
worse than they are."

"That's true, Harry," said the engineer; "but what's to be done? It is plain that,
whatever the beings are who hide in the mine, they reach the surface of the earth
by this passage. No doubt it was the light of torches waved by them during that
dark and stormy night which attracted the MOTALA towards the rocky coast,
and like the wreckers of former days, they would have plundered the unfortunate
vessel, had it not been for Jack Ryan and his friends. Anyhow, so far it is
evident, and here is the mouth of the den. As to its occupants, the question is--
Are they here still?"

"I say yes; because Nell trembles when we mention them--yes, because Nell
will not, or dare not, speak about them,” answered Harry in a tone of decision.

Harry was surely in the right. Had these mysterious denizens of the pit
abandoned it, or ceased to visit the spot, what reason could the girl have had for
keeping silence?

James Starr could not rest till he had penetrated this mystery. He foresaw that
the whole future of the new excavations must depend upon it. Renewed and
strict precautions were therefore taken. The authorities were informed of the
discovery of the entrance. Watchers were placed among the ruins of the castle.
Harry himself lay hid for several nights in the thickets of brushwood which
clothed the hill-side.

Nothing was discovered--no human being emerged from the opening. So
most people came to the conclusion that the villains had been finally dislodged
from the mine, and that, as to Nell, they must suppose her to be dead at the
bottom of the shaft where they had left her.

While it remained unworked, the mine had been a safe enough place of
refuge, secure from all search or pursuit. But now, circumstances being altered, it
became difficult to conceal this lurking-place, and it might reasonably be hoped
they were gone, and that nothing for the future was to be dreaded from them.

James Starr, however, could not feel sure about it; neither could Harry be
satisfied on the subject, often repeating, "Nell has clearly been mixed up with all


this secret business. If she had nothing more to fear, why should she keep
silence? It cannot be doubted that she is happy with us. She likes us all--she
adores my mother. Her absolute silence as to her former life, when by speaking
out she might benefit us, proves to me that some awful secret, which she dares
not reveal, weighs on her mind. It may also be that she believes it better for us,
as well as for herself, that she should remain mute in a way otherwise so
unaccountable."

In consequence of these opinions, it was agreed by common consent to avoid
all allusion to the maiden's former mode of life. One day, however, Harry was
led to make known to Nell what James Starr, his father, mother, and himself
believed they owed to her interference.

It was a fete-day. The miners made holiday on the surface of the county of
Stirling as well as in its subterraneous domains. Parties of holiday-makers were
moving about in all directions. Songs resounded in many places beneath the
sonorous vaults of New Aberfoyle. Harry and Nell left the cottage, and slowly
walked along the left bank of Loch Malcolm.

Then the electric brilliance darted less vividly, and the rays were interrupted
with fantastic effect by the sharp angles of the picturesque rocks which
supported the dome. This imperfect light suited Nell, to whose eyes a glare was
very unpleasant.

"Nell," said Harry, "your eyes are not fit for daylight yet, and could not bear
the brightness of the sun."

"Indeed they could not," replied the girl; "if the sun is such as you describe it
to me, Harry."

"I cannot by any words, Nell, give you an idea either of his splendor or of the
beauty of that universe which your eyes have never beheld. But tell me, is it
really possible that, since the day when you were born in the depths of the coal
mine, you never once have been up to the surface of the earth?"

"Never once, Harry," said she; "I do not believe that, even as an infant, my
father or mother ever carried me thither. I am sure I should have retained some
impression of the open air if they had."

"I believe you would," answered Harry. "Long ago, Nell, many children used
to live altogether in the mine; communication was then difficult, and I have met
with more than one young person, quite as ignorant as you are of things above-
ground. But now the railway through our great tunnel takes us in a few minutes
to the upper regions of our country. I long, Nell, to hear you say, 'Come, Harry,
my eyes can bear daylight, and I want to see the sun! I want to look upon the
works of the Almighty.""

"T shall soon say so, Harry, I hope," replied the girl; "I shall soon go with you


to the world above; and yet--"

"What are you going to say, Nell?" hastily cried Harry; "can you possibly
regret having quitted that gloomy abyss in which you spent your early years, and
whence we drew you half dead?"

"No, Harry," answered Nell; "I was only thinking that darkness is beautiful
as well as light. If you but knew what eyes accustomed to its depth can see!
Shades flit by, which one longs to follow; circles mingle and intertwine, and one
could gaze on them forever; black hollows, full of indefinite gleams of radiance,
lie deep at the bottom of the mine. And then the voice-like sounds! Ah, Harry!
one must have lived down there to understand what I feel, what I can never
express."

"And were you not afraid, Nell, all alone there?"

"It was just when I was alone that I was not afraid."

Nell's voice altered slightly as she said these words; however, Harry thought
he might press the subject a little further, so he said, "But one might be easily
lost in these great galleries, Nell. Were you not afraid of losing your way?"

"Oh, no, Harry; for a long time I had known every turn of the new mine."

"Did you never leave it?"

"Yes, now and then," answered the girl with a little hesitation; "sometimes I
have been as far as the old mine of Aberfoyle."

"So you knew our old cottage?"

"The cottage! oh, yes; but the people who lived there I only saw at a great
distance."

"They were my father and mother," said Harry; "and I was there too; we have
always lived there--we never would give up the old dwelling."

"Perhaps it would have been better for you if you had," murmured the
maiden.

"Why so, Nell? Was it not just because we were obstinately resolved to
remain that we ended by discovering the new vein of coal? And did not that
discovery lead to the happy result of providing work for a large population, and
restoring them to ease and comfort? and did it not enable us to find you, Nell, to
save your life, and give you the love of all our hearts?"

"Ah, yes, for me indeed it is well, whatever may happen," replied Nell
earnestly; "for others--who can tell?"

"What do you mean?"

"Oh, nothing--nothing. But it used to be very dangerous at that time to go
into the new cutting--yes, very dangerous indeed, Harry! Once some rash people
made their way into these chasms. They got a long, long way; they were lost!"

"They were lost?" said Harry, looking at her.


"Yes, lost!" repeated Nell in a trembling voice. "They could not find their
way out.”

"And there," cried Harry, "they were imprisoned during eight long days!
They were at the point of death, Nell; and, but for a kind and charitable being--
an angel perhaps--sent by God to help them, who secretly brought them a little
food; but for a mysterious guide, who afterwards led to them their deliverers,
they never would have escaped from that living tomb!"

"And how do you know about that?" demanded the girl.

"Because those men were James Starr, my father, and myself, Nell!"

Nell looked up hastily, seized the young man's hand, and gazed so fixedly
into his eyes that his feelings were stirred to their depths. "You were there?" at
last she uttered.

"I was indeed," said Harry, after a pause, "and she to whom we owe our lives
can have been none other than yourself, Nell!"

Nell hid her face in her hands without speaking. Harry had never seen her so
much affected.

"Those who saved your life, Nell," added he in a voice tremulous with
emotion, "already owed theirs to you; do you think they will ever forget it?"


CHAPTER XIII. ON THE REVOLVING LADDER

THE mining operations at New Aberfoyle continued to be carried on very
successfully. As a matter of course, the engineer, James Starr, as well as Simon
Ford, the discoverers of this rich carboniferous region, shared largely in the
profits.

In time Harry became a partner. But he never thought of quitting the cottage.
He took his father's place as overman, and diligently superintended the works of
this colony of miners. Jack Ryan was proud and delighted at the good fortune
which had befallen his comrade. He himself was getting on very well also.

They frequently met, either at the cottage or at the works in the pit. Jack did
not fail to remark the sentiments entertained by Harry towards Nell. Harry would
not confess to them; but Jack only laughed at him when he shook his head and
tried to deny any special interest in her.

It must be noted that Jack Ryan had the greatest possible wish to be of the
party when Nell should pay her first visit to the upper surface of the county of
Stirling. He wished to see her wonder and admiration on first beholding the yet
unknown face of Nature. He very much hoped that Harry would take him with
them when the excursion was made. As yet, however, the latter had made no
proposal of the kind to him, which caused him to feel a little uneasy as to his


intentions.

One morning Jack Ryan was descending through a shaft which led from the
surface to the lower regions of the pit. He did so by means of one of those
ladders which, continually revolving by machinery, enabled persons to ascend
and descend without fatigue. This apparatus had lowered him about a hundred
and fifty feet, when at a narrow landing-place he perceived Harry, who was
coming up to his labors for the day.

"Well met, my friend!" cried Jack, recognizing his comrade by the light of
the electric lamps.

"Ah, Jack!" replied Harry, "I am glad to see you. I've got something to
propose."

"IT can listen to nothing till you tell me how Nell is," interrupted Jack Ryan.

"Nell is all right, Jack--so much so, in fact, that I hope in a month or six
weeks--"

"To marry her, Harry?"

"Jack, you don't know what you are talking about!"

"Ah, that's very likely; but I know quite well what I shall do."

"What will you do?"

"Marry her myself, if you don't; so look sharp," laughed Jack. "By Saint
Mungo! I think an immense deal of bonny Nell! A fine young creature like that,
who has been brought up in the mine, is just the very wife for a miner. She is an
orphan--so am I; and if you don't care much for her, and if she will have me--"

Harry looked gravely at Jack, and let him talk on without trying to stop him.
"Don't you begin to feel jealous, Harry?" asked Jack in a more serious tone.

"Not at all," answered Harry quietly.

"But if you don't marry Nell yourself, you surely can't expect her to remain a
spinster?"

"I expect nothing," said Harry.

A movement of the ladder machinery now gave the two friends the
opportunity--one to go up, the other down the shaft. However, they remained
where they were.

"Harry," quoth Jack, "do you think I spoke in earnest just now about Nell?"

"No, that I don't, Jack."

"Well, but now I will!"

"You? speak in earnest?"

"My good fellow, I can tell you I am quite capable of giving a friend a bit of
advice."

"Let's hear, then, Jack!"

"Well, look here! You love Nell as heartily as she deserves. Old Simon, your


father, and old Madge, your mother, both love her as if she were their daughter.
Why don't you make her so in reality? Why don't you marry her?"

"Come, Jack," said Harry, "you are running on as if you knew how Nell felt
on the subject."

"Everybody knows that," replied Jack, "and therefore it is impossible to
make you jealous of any of us. But here goes the ladder again--I'm off!"

"Stop a minute, Jack!" cried Harry, detaining his companion, who was
stepping onto the moving staircase.

"I say! you seem to mean me to take up my quarters here altogether!"

"Do be serious and listen, Jack! I want to speak in earnest myself now."

"Well, I'll listen till the ladder moves again, not a minute longer."

"Jack," resumed Harry, "I need not pretend that I do not love Nell; I wish
above all things to make her my wife."

"That's all right!"

"But for the present I have scruples of conscience as to asking her to make
me a promise which would be irrevocable."

"What can you mean, Harry?"

"I mean just this--that, it being certain Nell has never been outside this coal
mine in the very depths of which she was born, it stands to reason that she
knows nothing, and can comprehend nothing of what exists beyond it. Her eyes--
yes, and perhaps also her heart--have everything yet to learn. Who can tell what
her thoughts will be, when perfectly new impressions shall be made upon her
mind? As yet she knows nothing of the world, and to me it would seem like
deceiving her, if I led her to decide in ignorance, upon choosing to remain all her
life in the coal mine. Do you understand me, Jack?"

"Hem!--yes--pretty well. What I understand best is that you are going to
make me miss another turn of the ladder."

"Jack," replied Harry gravely, "if this machinery were to stop altogether, if
this landing-place were to fall beneath our feet, you must and shall hear what I
have to say."

"Well done, Harry! that's how I like to be spoken to! Let's settle, then, that,
before you marry Nell, she shall go to school in Auld Reekie."

"No indeed, Jack; I am perfectly able myself to educate the person who is to
be my wife."

"Sure that will be a great deal better, Harry!"

"But, first of all," resumed Harry, "I wish that Nell should gain a real
knowledge of the upper world. To illustrate my meaning, Jack, suppose you were
in love with a blind girl, and someone said to you, 'In a month's time her sight
will be restored,’ would you not wait till after she was cured, to marry her?"


"Faith, to be sure I would!" exclaimed Jack.

"Well, Jack, Nell is at present blind; and before she marries me, I wish her to
see what I am, and what the life really is to which she would bind herself. In
short, she must have daylight let in upon the subject!"

"Well said, Harry! Very well said indeed!" cried Jack. "Now I see what you
are driving at. And when may we expect the operation to come off?"

"In a month, Jack," replied Harry. "Nell is getting used to the light of our
reflectors. That is some preparation. In a month she will, I hope, have seen the
earth and its wonders--the sky and its splendors. She will perceive that the limits
of the universe are boundless."

But while Harry was thus giving the rein to his imagination, Jack Ryan,
quitting the platform, had leaped on the step of the moving machinery.

"Hullo, Jack! Where are you?"

"Far beneath you,” laughed the merry fellow. "While you soar to the heights,
I plunge into the depths."

"Fare ye well. Jack!" returned Harry, himself laying hold of the rising ladder;
"mind you say nothing about what I have been telling you."

"Not a word," shouted Jack, "but I make one condition."

"What is that?"

"That I may be one of the party when Nell's first excursion to the face of the
earth comes off!"

"So you shall, Jack, I promise you!"

A fresh throb of the machinery placed a yet more considerable distance
between the friends. Their voices sounded faintly to each other. Harry, however,
could still hear Jack shouting:

"I say! do you know what Nell will like better than either sun, moon, or stars,
after she's seen the whole of them?"

"No, Jack!"

"Why, you yourself, old fellow! still you! always you!" And Jack's voice
died away in a prolonged "Hurrah!"

Harry, after this, applied himself diligently, during all his spare time, to the
work of Nell's education. He taught her to read and to write, and such rapid
progress did she make, it might have been said that she learnt by instinct. Never
did keen intelligence more quickly triumph over utter ignorance. It was the
wonder of all beholders.

Simon and Madge became every day more and more attached to their
adopted child, whose former history continued to puzzle them a good deal. They
plainly saw the nature of Harry's feelings towards her, and were far from
displeased thereat. They recollected that Simon had said to the engineer on his


first visit to the old cottage, "How can our son ever think of marrying? Where
could a wife possibly be found suitable for a lad whose whole life must be
passed in the depths of a coal mine?"

Well! now it seemed as if the most desirable companion in the world had
been led to him by Providence. Was not this like a blessing direct from Heaven?
So the old man made up his mind that, if the wedding did take place, the miners
of New Aberfoyle should have a merry-making at Coal Town, which they would
never during their lives forget. Simon Ford little knew what he was saying!

It must be remarked that another person wished for this union of Harry and
Nell as much as Simon did--and that was James Starr, the engineer. Of course he
was really interested in the happiness of the two young people. But another
motive, connected with wider interests, influenced him to desire it.

It has been said that James Starr continued to entertain a certain amount of
apprehension, although for the present nothing appeared to justify it. Yet that
which had been might again be. This mystery about the new cutting--Nell was
evidently the only person acquainted with it. Now, if fresh dangers were in store
for the miners of Aberfoyle, how were they possibly to be guarded against,
without so much as knowing the cause of them?

"Nell has persisted in keeping silence," said James Starr very often, "but
what she has concealed from others, she will not long hide from her husband.
Any danger would be danger to Harry as well as to the rest of us. Therefore, a
marriage which brings happiness to the lovers, and safety to their friends, will be
a good marriage, if ever there is such a thing here below."

Thus, not illogically, reasoned James Starr. He communicated his ideas to old
Simon, who decidedly appreciated them. Nothing, then, appeared to stand in the
way of the match. What, in fact, was there to prevent it? They loved each other;
the parents desired nothing better for their son. Harry's comrades envied his
good fortune, but freely acknowledged that he deserved it. The maiden depended
on no one else, and had but to give the consent of her own heart.

Why, then, if there were none to place obstacles in the way of this union--
why, as night came on, and, the labors of the day being over, the electric lights in
the mine were extinguished, and all the inhabitants of Coal Town at rest within
their dwellings--why did a mysterious form always emerge from the gloomier
recesses of New Aberfoyle, and silently glide through the darkness?

What instinct guided this phantom with ease through passages so narrow as
to appear to be impracticable?

Why should the strange being, with eyes flashing through the deepest
darkness, come cautiously creeping along the shores of Lake Malcolm? Why so
directly make his way towards Simon's cottage, yet so carefully as hitherto to


avoid notice? Why, bending towards the windows, did he strive to catch, by
listening, some fragment of the conversation within the closed shutters?

And, on catching a few words, why did he shake his fist with a menacing
gesture towards the calm abode, while from between his set teeth issued these
words in muttered fury, "She and he? Never! never!"


CHAPTER XIV. A SUNRISE

A MONTH after this, on the evening of the 20th of August, Simon Ford and
Madge took leave, with all manner of good wishes, of four tourists, who were
setting forth from the cottage.

James Starr, Harry, and Jack Ryan were about to lead Nell's steps over yet
untrodden paths, and to show her the glories of nature by a light to which she
was as yet a stranger. The excursion was to last for two days. James Starr, as
well as Harry, considered that during these eight and forty hours spent above
ground, the maiden would be able to see everything of which she must have
remained ignorant in the gloomy pit; all the varied aspects of the globe, towns,
plains, mountains, rivers, lakes, gulfs, and seas would pass, panorama-like,
before her eyes.

In that part of Scotland lying between Edinburgh and Glasgow, nature would
seem to have collected and set forth specimens of every one of these terrestrial
beauties. As to the heavens, they would be spread abroad as over the whole
earth, with their changeful clouds, serene or veiled moon, their radiant sun, and
clustering stars. The expedition had been planned so as to combine a view of all
these things.

Simon and Madge would have been glad to go with Nell; but they never left
their cottage willingly, and could not make up their minds to quit their
subterranean home for a single day.

James Starr went as an observer and philosopher, curious to note, from a
psychological point of view, the novel impressions made upon Nell; perhaps also
with some hope of detecting a clue to the mysterious events connected with her
childhood. Harry, with a little trepidation, asked himself whether it was not
possible that this rapid initiation into the things of the exterior world would
change the maiden he had known and loved hitherto into quite a different girl.
As for Jack Ryan, he was as joyous as a lark rising in the first beams of the sun.
He only trusted that his gayety would prove contagious, and enliven his traveling
companions, thus rewarding them for letting him join them. Nell was pensive
and silent.

James Starr had decided, very sensibly, to set off in the evening. It would be


very much better for the girl to pass gradually from the darkness of night to the
full light of day; and that would in this way be managed, since between midnight
and noon she would experience the successive phases of shade and sunshine, to
which her sight had to get accustomed.

Just as they left the cottage, Nell took Harry's hand saying, "Harry, is it really
necessary for me to leave the mine at all, even for these few days?"

"Yes, it is, Nell," replied the young man. "It is needful for both of us."

"But, Harry," resumed Nell, "ever since you found me, I have been as happy
as I can possibly be. You have been teaching me. Why is that not enough? What
am I going up there for?"

Harry looked at her in silence. Nell was giving utterance to nearly his own
thoughts.

"My child," said James Starr, "I can well understand the hesitation you feel;
but it will be good for you to go with us. Those who love you are taking you, and
they will bring you back again. Afterwards you will be free, if you wish it, to
continue your life in the coal mine, like old Simon, and Madge, and Harry. But at
least you ought to be able to compare what you give up with what you choose,
then decide freely. Come!"

"Come, dear Nell!" cried Harry.

"Harry, I am willing to follow you," replied the maiden. At nine o'clock the
last train through the tunnel started to convey Nell and her companions to the
surface of the earth. Twenty minutes later they alighted on the platform where
the branch line to New Aberfoyle joins the railway from Dumbarton to Stirling.

The night was already dark. From the horizon to the zenith, light vapory
clouds hurried through the upper air, driven by a refreshing northwesterly
breeze. The day had been lovely; the night promised to be so likewise.

On reaching Stirling, Nell and her friends, quitting the train, left the station
immediately. Just before them, between high trees, they could see a road which
led to the banks of the river Forth.

The first physical impression on the girl was the purity of the air inhaled
eagerly by her lungs.

"Breathe it freely, Nell," said James Starr; "it is fragrant with all the scents of
the open country."

"What is all that smoke passing over our heads?" inquired Nell.

"Those are clouds," answered Harry, "blown along by the westerly wind."

"Ah!" said Nell, "how I should like to feel myself carried along in that silent
whirl! And what are those shining sparks which glance here and there between
rents in the clouds?"

"Those are the stars I have told you about, Nell. So many suns they are, so


many centers of worlds like our own, most likely."

The constellations became more clearly visible as the wind cleared the
clouds from the deep blue of the firmament. Nell gazed upon the myriad stars
which sparkled overhead. "But how is it," she said at length, "that if these are
suns, my eyes can endure their brightness?"

"My child," replied James Starr, "they are indeed suns, but suns at an
enormous distance. The nearest of these millions of stars, whose rays can reach
us, is Vega, that star in Lyra which you observe near the zenith, and that is fifty
thousand millions of leagues distant. Its brightness, therefore, cannot affect your
vision. But our own sun, which will rise to-morrow, is only distant thirty-eight
millions of leagues, and no human eye can gaze fixedly upon that, for it is
brighter than the blaze of any furnace. But come, Nell, come!"

They pursued their way, James Starr leading the maiden, Harry walking by
her side, while Jack Ryan roamed about like a young dog, impatient of the slow
pace of his masters. The road was lonely. Nell kept looking at the great trees,
whose branches, waving in the wind, made them seem to her like giants
gesticulating wildly. The sound of the breeze in the tree-tops, the deep silence
during a lull, the distant line of the horizon, which could be discerned when the
road passed over open levels--all these things filled her with new sensations, and
left lasting impressions on her mind.

After some time she ceased to ask questions, and her companions respected
her silence, not wishing to influence by any words of theirs the girl's highly
sensitive imagination, but preferring to allow ideas to arise spontaneously in her
soul.

At about half past eleven o'clock, they gained the banks of the river Forth.
There a boat, chartered by James Starr, awaited them. In a few hours it would
convey them all to Granton. Nell looked at the clear water which flowed up to
her feet, as the waves broke gently on the beach, reflecting the starlight. "Is this a
lake?" said she.

"No," replied Harry, "it is a great river flowing towards the sea, and soon
opening so widely as to resemble a gulf. Taste a little of the water in the hollow
of your hand, Nell, and you will perceive that it is not sweet like the waters of
Lake Malcolm."

The maiden bent towards the stream, and, raising a little water to her lips,
"This is quite salt," said she.

"Yes, the tide is full; the sea water flows up the river as far as this," answered
Harry.

"Oh, Harry! Harry!" exclaimed the maiden, "what can that red glow on the
horizon be? Is it a forest on fire?"


"No, it is the rising moon, Nell."

"To be sure, that's the moon," cried Jack Ryan, "a fine big silver plate, which
the spirits of air hand round and round the sky to collect the stars in, like
money."

"Why, Jack," said the engineer, laughing, "I had no idea you could strike out
such bold comparisons!"

"Well, but, Mr. Starr, it is a just comparison. Don't you see the stars disappear
as the moon passes on? so I suppose they drop into it."

"What you mean to say, Jack, is that the superior brilliancy of the moon
eclipses that of stars of the sixth magnitude, therefore they vanish as she
approaches."

"How beautiful all this is!" repeated Nell again and again, with her whole
soul in her eyes. "But I thought the moon was round?"

"So she is, when ‘full,"" said James Starr; "that means when she is just
opposite to the sun. But to-night the moon is in the last quarter, shorn of her just
proportions, and friend Jack's grand silver plate looks more like a barber's
basin."

"Oh, Mr. Starr, what a base comparison!" he exclaimed, "I was just going to
begin a sonnet to the moon, but your barber's basin has destroyed all chance of
an inspiration."

Gradually the moon ascended the heavens. Before her light the lingering
clouds fled away, while stars still sparkled in the west, beyond the influence of
her radiance. Nell gazed in silence on the glorious spectacle. The soft silvery
light was pleasant to her eyes, and her little trembling hand expressed to Harry,
who clasped it, how deeply she was affected by the scene.

"Let us embark now," said James Starr. "We have to get to the top of Arthur's
Seat before sunrise."

The boat was moored to a post on the bank. A boatman awaited them. Nell
and her friends took their seats; the sail was spread; it quickly filled before the
northwesterly breeze, and they sped on their way.

What a new sensation was this for the maiden! She had been rowed on the
waters of Lake Malcolm; but the oar, handled ever so lightly by Harry, always
betrayed effort on the part of the oarsman. Now, for the first time, Nell felt
herself borne along with a gliding movement, like that of a balloon through the
air. The water was smooth as a lake, and Nell reclined in the stern of the boat,
enjoying its gentle rocking. Occasionally the effect of the moonlight on the
waters was as though the boat sailed across a glittering silver field. Little
wavelets rippled along the banks. It was enchanting.

At length Nell was overcome with drowsiness, her eyelids drooped, her head


sank on Harry's shoulder--she slept. Harry, sorry that she should miss any of the
beauties of this magnificent night, would have aroused her.

"Let her sleep!" said the engineer. "She will better enjoy the novelties of the
day after a couple of hours' rest."

At two o'clock in the morning the boat reached Granton pier. Nell awoke.
"Have I been asleep?" inquired she.

"No, my child," said James Starr. "You have been dreaming that you slept,
that's all."

The night continued clear. The moon, riding in mid-heaven, diffused her rays
on all sides. In the little port of Granton lay two or three fishing boats; they
rocked gently on the waters of the Firth. The wind fell as the dawn approached.
The atmosphere, clear of mists, promised one of those fine autumn days so
delicious on the sea coast.

A soft, transparent film of vapor lay along the horizon; the first sunbeam
would dissipate it; to the maiden it exhibited that aspect of the sea which seems
to blend it with the sky. Her view was now enlarged, without producing the
impression of the boundless infinity of ocean.

Harry taking Nell's hand, they followed James Starr and Jack Ryan as they
traversed the deserted streets. To Nell, this suburb of the capital appeared only a
collection of gloomy dark houses, just like Coal Town, only that the roof was
higher, and gleamed with small lights.

She stepped lightly forward, and easily kept pace with Harry. "Are you not
tired, Nell?" asked he, after half an hour's walking.

"No! my feet seem scarcely to touch the earth," returned she. "This sky
above us seems so high up, I feel as if I could take wing and fly!"

"I say! keep hold of her!" cried Jack Ryan. "Our little Nell is too good to
lose. I feel just as you describe though, myself, when I have not left the pit for a
long time."

"It is when we no longer experience the oppressive effect of the vaulted
rocky roof above Coal Town," said James Starr, "that the spacious firmament
appears to us like a profound abyss into which we have, as it were, a desire to
plunge. Is that what you feel, Nell?"

"Yes, Mr. Starr, it is exactly like that," said Nell. "It makes me feel giddy."

"Ah! you will soon get over that, Nell," said Harry. "You will get used to the
outer world, and most likely forget all about our dark coal pit."

"No, Harry, never!" said Nell, and she put her hand over her eyes, as though
she would recall the remembrance of everything she had lately quitted.

Between the silent dwellings of the city, the party passed along Leith Walk,
and went round the Calton Hill, where stood, in the light of the gray dawn, the


buildings of the Observatory and Nelson's Monument. By Regent's Bridge and
the North Bridge they at last reached the lower extremity of the Canongate. The
town still lay wrapt in slumber.

Nell pointed to a large building in the center of an open space, asking, "What
great confused mass is that?"

"That confused mass, Nell, is the palace of the ancient kings of Scotland; that
is Holyrood, where many a sad scene has been enacted! The historian can here
invoke many a royal shade; from those of the early Scottish kings to that of the
unhappy Mary Stuart, and the French king, Charles X. When day breaks,
however, Nell, this palace will not look so very gloomy. Holyrood, with its four
embattled towers, is not unlike some handsome country house. But let us pursue
our way. There, just above the ancient Abbey of Holyrood, are the superb cliffs
called Salisbury Crags. Arthur's Seat rises above them, and that is where we are
going. From the summit of Arthur's Seat, Nell, your eyes shall behold the sun
appear above the horizon seaward."

They entered the King's Park, then, gradually ascending they passed across
the Queen's Drive, a splendid carriageway encircling the hill, which we owe to a
few lines in one of Sir Walter Scott's romances.

Arthur's Seat is in truth only a hill, seven hundred and fifty feet high, which
stands alone amid surrounding heights. In less than half an hour, by an easy
winding path, James Starr and his party reached the crest of the crouching lion,
which, seen from the west, Arthur's Seat so much resembles. There, all four
seated themselves; and James Starr, ever ready with quotations from the great
Scottish novelist, simply said, "Listen to what is written by Sir Walter Scott in
the eighth chapter of the Heart of Mid-Lothian. 'If I were to choose a spot from
which the rising or setting sun could be seen to the greatest possible advantage,
it would be from this neighborhood.’ Now watch, Nell! the sun will soon appear,
and for the first time you will contemplate its splendor."

The maiden turned her eyes eastward. Harry, keeping close beside her,
observed her with anxious interest. Would the first beams of day overpower her
feelings? All remained quiet, even Jack Ryan. A faint streak of pale rose tinted
the light vapors of the horizon. It was the first ray of light attacking the laggards
of the night. Beneath the hill lay the silent city, massed confusedly in the twilight
of dawn. Here and there lights twinkled among the houses of the old town.
Westward rose many hill-tops, soon to be illuminated by tips of fire.

Now the distant horizon of the sea became more plainly visible. The scale of
colors fell into the order of the solar. Every instant they increased in intensity,
rose color became red, red became fiery, daylight dawned. Nell now glanced
towards the city, of which the outlines became more distinct. Lofty monuments,


slender steeples emerged from the gloom; a kind of ashy light was spread
abroad. At length one solitary ray struck on the maiden's sight. It was that ray of
green which, moming or evening, is reflected upwards from the sea when the
horizon is clear.

An instant afterwards, Nell tured, and pointing towards a bright prominent
point in the New Town, "Fire!" cried she.

"No, Nell, that is no fire," said Harry. "The sun has touched with gold the top
of Sir Walter Scott's monument"--and, indeed, the extreme point of the
monument blazed like the light of a pharos.

It was day--the sun arose--his disc seemed to glitter as though he indeed
emerged from the waters of the sea. Appearing at first very large from the effects
of refraction, he contracted as he rose and assumed the perfectly circular form.
Soon no eye could endure the dazzling splendor; it was as though the mouth of a
furnace was opened through the sky.

Nell closed her eyes, but her eyelids could not exclude the glare, and she
pressed her fingers over them. Harry advised her to turn in the opposite
direction. "Oh, no," said she, "my eyes must get used to look at what yours can
bear to see!"

Even through her hands Nell perceived a rosy light, which became more
white as the sun rose above the horizon. As her sight became accustomed to it,
her eyelids were raised, and at length her eyes drank in the light of day.

The good child knelt down, exclaiming, "Oh Lord God! how beautiful is Thy
creation!" Then she rose and looked around. At her feet extended the panorama
of Edinburgh--the clear, distinct lines of streets in the New Town, and the
irregular mass of houses, with their confused network of streets and lanes, which
constitutes Auld Reekie, properly so called. Two heights commanded the entire
city; Edinburgh Castle, crowning its huge basaltic rock, and the Calton Hill,
bearing on its rounded summit, among other monuments, ruins built to represent
those of the Parthenon at Athens.

Fine roadways led in all directions from the capital. To the north, the coast of
the noble Firth of Forth was indented by a deep bay, in which could be seen the
seaport town of Leith, between which and this Modern Athens of the north ran a
Street, straight as that leading to the Piraeus.

Beyond the wide Firth could be seen the soft outlines of the county of Fife,
while beneath the spectator stretched the yellow sands of Portobello and
Newhaven.

Nell could not speak. Her lips murmured a word or two indistinctly; she
trembled, became giddy, her strength failed her; overcome by the purity of the
air and the sublimity of the scene, she sank fainting into Harry's arms, who,


watching her closely, was ready to support her.

The youthful maiden, hitherto entombed in the massive depths of the earth,
had now obtained an idea of the universe--of the works both of God and of man.
She had looked upon town and country, and beyond these, into the immensity of
the sea, the infinity of the heavens.


CHAPTER XV. LOCH LOMOND AND LOCH KATRINE

HARRY bore Nell carefully down the steeps of Arthur's Seat, and,
accompanied by James Starr and Jack Ryan, they reached Lambert's Hotel.
There a good breakfast restored their strength, and they began to make further
plans for an excursion to the Highland lakes.

Nell was now refreshed, and able to look boldly forth into the sunshine,
while her lungs with ease inhaled the free and healthful air. Her eyes learned
gladly to know the harmonious varieties of color as they rested on the green
trees, the azure skies, and all the endless shades of lovely flowers and plants.

The railway train, which they entered at the Waverley Station, conveyed Nell
and her friends to Glasgow. There, from the new bridge across the Clyde, they
watched the curious sea-like movement of the river. After a night's rest at
Comrie's Royal Hotel, they betook themselves to the terminus of the Edinburgh
and Glasgow Railway, from whence a train would rapidly carry them, by way of
Dumbarton and Balloch, to the southern extremity of Loch Lomond.

"Now for the land of Rob Roy and Fergus Maclvor!--the scenery
immortalized by the poetical descriptions of Walter Scott," exclaimed James
Starr. "You don't know this country, Jack?"

"Only by its songs, Mr. Starr," replied Jack; "and judging by those, it must be
grand.”

"So it is, so it is!" cried the engineer, "and our dear Nell shall see it to the
best advantage."

A steamboat, the SINCLAIR by name, awaited tourists about to make the
excursion to the lakes. Nell and her companions went on board. The day had
begun in brilliant sunshine, free from the British fogs which so often veil the
skies.

The passengers were determined to lose none of the beauties of nature to be
displayed during the thirty miles' voyage. Nell, seated between James Starr and
Harry, drank in with every faculty the magnificent poetry with which lovely
Scottish scenery is fraught. Numerous small isles and islets soon appeared, as
though thickly sown on the bosom of the lake. The SINCLAIR steamed her way
among them, while between them glimpses could be had of quiet valleys, or wild


rocky gorges on the mainland.

"Nell," said James Starr, "every island here has its legend, perhaps its song,
as well as the mountains which overshadow the lake. One may, without much
exaggeration, say that the history of this country is written in gigantic characters
of mountains and islands."

Nell listened, but these fighting stories made her sad. Why all that bloodshed
on plains which to her seemed enormous, and where surely there must have been
room for everybody?

The shores of the lake form a little harbor at Luss. Nell could for a moment
catch sight of the old tower of its ancient castle. Then, the SINCLAIR turning
northward, the tourists gazed upon Ben Lomond, towering nearly 3,000 feet
above the level of the lake.

"Oh, what a noble mountain!" cried Nell; "what a view there must be from
the top!"

"Yes, Nell," answered James Starr; "see how haughtily its peak rises from
amidst the thicket of oaks, birches, and heather, which clothe the lower portion
of the mountain! From thence one may see two-thirds of old Caledonia. This
eastern side of the lake was the special abode of the clan McGregor. At no great
distance, the struggles of the Jacobites and Hanoverians repeatedly dyed with
blood these lonely glens. Over these scenes shines the pale moon, called in old
ballads 'Macfarlane's lantern.’ Among these rocks still echo the immortal names
of Rob Roy and McGregor Campbell."

As the SINCLAIR advanced along the base of the mountain, the country
became more and more abrupt in character. Trees were only scattered here and
there; among them were the willows, slender wands of which were formerly
used for hanging persons of low degree.

"To economize hemp," remarked James Starr.

The lake narrowed very much as it stretched northwards.

The steamer passed a few more islets, Inveruglas, Eilad-whow, where stand
some ruins of a stronghold of the clan MacFarlane. At length the head of the
loch was reached, and the SINCLAIR stopped at Inversnaid.

Leaving Loch Arklet on the left, a steep ascent led to the Inn of
Stronachlacar, on the banks of Loch Katrine.

There, at the end of a light pier, floated a small steamboat, named, as a
matter of course, the Rob Roy. The travelers immediately went on board; it was
about to start. Loch Katrine is only ten miles in length; its width never exceeds
two miles. The hills nearest it are full of a character peculiar to themselves.

"Here we are on this famous lake," said James Starr. "It has been compared
to an eel on account of its length and windings: and justly so. They say that it


never freezes. I know nothing about that, but what we want to think of is, that
here are the scenes of the adventures in the Lady of the Lake. I believe, if friend
Jack looked about him carefully, he might see, still gliding over the surface of
the water, the shade of the slender form of sweet Ellen Douglas."

"To be sure, Mr. Starr," replied Jack; "why should I not? I may just as well
see that pretty girl on the waters of Loch Katrine, as those ugly ghosts on Loch
Malcolm in the coal pit."

It was by this time three o'clock in the afternoon. The less hilly shores of
Loch Katrine westward extended like a picture framed between Ben An and Ben
Venue. At the distance of half a mile was the entrance to the narrow bay, where
was the landing-place for our tourists, who meant to retum to Stirling by
Callander.

Nell appeared completely worn out by the continued excitement of the day. A
faint ejaculation was all she was able to utter in token of admiration as new
objects of wonder or beauty met her gaze. She required some hours of rest, were
it but to impress lastingly the recollection of all she had seen.

Her hand rested in Harry's, and, looking earnestly at her, he said, "Nell, dear
Nell, we shall soon be home again in the gloomy region of the coal mine. Shall
you not pine for what you have seen during these few hours spent in the glorious
light of day?"

"No, Harry," replied the girl; "I shall like to think about it, but I am glad to
go back with you to our dear old home."

"Nell!" said Harry, vainly attempting to steady his voice, "are you willing to
be bound to me by the most sacred tie? Could you marry me, Nell?"

"Yes, Harry, I could, if you are sure that I am able to make you happy,"
answered the maiden, raising her innocent eyes to his.

Scarcely had she pronounced these words when an unaccountable
phenomenon took place. The Rob Roy, still half a mile from land, experienced a
violent shock. She suddenly grounded. No efforts of the engine could move her.

The cause of this accident was simply that Loch Katrine was all at once
emptied, as though an enormous fissure had opened in its bed. In a few seconds
it had the appearance of a sea beach at low water. Nearly the whole of its
contents had vanished into the bosom of the earth.

"My friends!" exclaimed James Starr, as the cause of this marvel became
suddenly clear to him, "God help New Aberfoyle!"


CHAPTER XVI. A FINAL THREAT
ON that day, in the colliery of New Aberfoyle, work was going on in the


usual regular way. In the distance could be heard the crash of great charges of
dynamite, by which the carboniferous rocks were blasted. Here masses of coal
were loosened by pick-ax and crowbar; there the perforating machines, with
their harsh grating, bored through the masses of sandstone and schist.

Hollow, cavernous noises resounded on all sides. Draughts of air rushed
along the ventilating galleries, and the wooden swing-doors slammed beneath
their violent gusts. In the lower tunnels, trains of trucks kept passing along at the
rate of fifteen miles an hour, while at their approach electric bells warned the
workmen to cower down in the refuge places. Lifts went incessantly up and
down, worked by powerful engines on the surface of the soil. Coal Town was
throughout brilliantly lighted by the electric lamps at full power.

Mining operations were being carried on with the greatest activity; coal was
being piled incessantly into the trucks, which went in hundreds to empty
themselves into the corves at the bottom of the shaft. While parties of miners
who had labored during the night were taking needful rest, the others worked
without wasting an hour.

Old Simon Ford and Madge, having finished their dinner, were resting at the
door of their cottage. Simon smoked a good pipe of tobacco, and from time to
time the old couple spoke of Nell, of their boy, of Mr. Starr, and wondered how
they liked their trip to the surface of the earth. Where would they be now? What
would they be doing? How could they stay so long away from the mine without
feeling homesick?

Just then a terrific roaring noise was heard. It was like the sound of a mighty
cataract rushing down into the mine. The old people rose hastily. They perceived
at once that the waters of Loch Malcolm were rising. A great wave, unfurling
like a billow, swept up the bank and broke against the walls of the cottage.
Simon caught his wife in his arms, and carried her to the upper part of their
dwelling.

At the same moment, cries arose from all parts of Coal Town, which was
threatened by a sudden inundation. The inhabitants fled for safety to the top of
the schist rocks bordering the lake; terror spread in all directions; whole families
in frantic haste rushed towards the tunnel in order to reach the upper regions of
the pit.

It was feared that the sea had burst into the colliery, for its galleries and
passages penetrated as far as the Caledonian Canal. In that case the entire
excavation, vast as it was, would be completely flooded. Not a single inhabitant
of New Aberfoyle would escape death.

But when the foremost fugitives reached the entrance to the tunnel, they
encountered Simon Ford, who had quitted his cottage. "Stop, my friends, stop!"


shouted the old man; "if our town is to be overwhelmed, the floods will rush
faster than you can; no one can possibly escape. But see! the waters are rising no
further! it appears to me the danger is over."

"And our comrades at the far end of the works--what about them?" cried
some of the miners.

"There is nothing to fear for them," replied Simon; "they are working on a
higher level than the bed of the loch."

It was soon evident that the old man was in the right. The sudden influx of
water had rushed to the very lowest bed of the vast mine, and its only ultimate
effect was to raise the level of Loch Malcolm a few feet. Coal Town was
uninjured, and it was reasonable to hope that no one had perished in the flood of
water which had descended to the depths of the mine never yet penetrated by the
workmen.

Simon and his men could not decide whether this inundation was owing to
the overflow of a subterranean sheet of water penetrating fissures in the solid
rock, or to some underground torrent breaking through its worn bed, and
precipitating itself to the lowest level of the mine. But that very same evening
they knew what to think about it, for the local papers published an account of the
marvelous phenomenon which Loch Katrine had exhibited.

The surprising news was soon after confirmed by the four travelers, who,
returning with all possible speed to the cottage, learned with extreme satisfaction
that no serious damage was done in New Aberfoyle.

The bed of Loch Katrine had fairly given way. The waters had suddenly
broken through by an enormous fissure into the mine beneath. Of Sir Walter
Scott's favorite loch there was not left enough to wet the pretty foot of the Lady
of the Lake; all that remained was a pond of a few acres at the further extremity.

This singular event made a profound sensation in the country. It was a thing
unheard of that a lake should in the space of a few minutes empty itself, and
disappear into the bowels of the earth. There was nothing for it but to erase Loch
Katrine from the map of Scotland until (by public subscription) it could be
refilled, care being of course taken, in the first place, to stop the rent up tight.
This catastrophe would have been the death of Sir Walter Scott, had he still been
in the world.

The accident was explicable when it was ascertained that, between the bed of
the lake and the vast cavity beneath, the geological strata had become reduced to
a thin layer, incapable of longer sustaining the weight of water.

Now, although to most people this event seemed plainly due to natural
causes, yet to James Starr and his friends, Simon and Harry Ford, the question
constantly recurred, was it not rather to be attributed to malevolence? Uneasy


suspicions continually harassed their minds. Was their evil genius about to renew
his persecution of those who ventured to work this rich mine?

At the cottage, some days later, James Starr thus discussed the matter with
the old man and his son: "Well, Simon," said he, "to my thinking we must class
this circumstance with the others for which we still seek elucidation, although it
is no doubt possible to explain it by natural causes."

"IT am quite of your mind, Mr. James," replied Simon, "but take my advice,
and say nothing about it; let us make all researches ourselves."

"Oh, I know the result of such research beforehand!" cried the engineer.

"And what will it be, then?"

"We shall find proofs of malevolence, but not the malefactor."

"But he exists! he is there! Where can he lie concealed? Is it possible to
conceive that the most depraved human being could, single-handed, carry out an
idea so infernal as that of bursting through the bed of a lake? I believe I shall end
by thinking, like Jack Ryan, that the evil demon of the mine revenges himself on
us for having invaded his domain."

Nell was allowed to hear as little as possible of these discussions. Indeed, she
showed no desire to enter into them, although it was very evident that she shared
in the anxieties of her adopted parents. The melancholy in her countenance bore
witness to much mental agitation.

It was at length resolved that James Starr, together with Simon and Harry,
should return to the scene of the disaster, and endeavor to satisfy themselves as
to the cause of it. They mentioned their project to no one. To those unacquainted
with the group of facts on which it was based, the opinion of Starr and his
friends could not fail to appear wholly inadmissible.

A few days later, the three friends proceeded in a small boat to examine the
natural pillars on which had rested the solid earth forming the basin of Loch
Katrine. They discovered that they had been right in suspecting that the massive
columns had been undermined by blasting. The blackened traces of explosion
were to be seen, the waters having subsided below the level of these mysterious
operations Thus the fall of a portion of the vast vaulted dome was proved to have
been premeditated by man, and by man's hand had it been effected.

"It is impossible to doubt it," said James Starr; "and who can say what might
not have happened had the sea, instead of a little loch, been let in upon us?"

"You may well say that," cried the old overman, with a feeling of pride in his
beloved mine; "for nothing less than a sea would have drowned our Aberfoyle.
But, once more, what possible interest could any human being have in the
destruction of our works?"

"It is quite incomprehensible," replied James Starr. "This case is something


perfectly unlike that of a band of common criminals, who, concealing
themselves in dens and caves, go forth to rob and pillage the surrounding
country. The evil deeds of such men would certainly, in the course of three years
have betrayed their existence and lurking-places. Neither can it be, as I
sometimes used to think, that smugglers or coiners carried on their illegal
practices in some distant and unknown corner of these prodigious caverns, and
were consequently anxious to drive us out of them. But no one coins false
money or obtains contraband goods only to conceal them!

"Yet it is clear that an implacable enemy has sworn the ruin of New
Aberfoyle, and that some interest urges him to seek in every possible way to
wreak his hatred upon us. He appears to be too weak to act openly, and lays his
schemes in secret; but displays such intelligence as to render him a most
formidable foe.

"My friends, he must understand better than we do the secrets of our domain,
since he has all this time eluded our vigilance. He must be a man experienced in
mining, skilled beyond the most skillful--that's certain, Simon! We have proof
enough of that.

"Let me see! Have you never had a personal enemy, to whom your
suspicions might point? Think well! There is such a thing as hatred which time
never softens. Go back to recollections of your earliest days. What befalls us
appears the work of a stern and patient will, and to explain it demands every
effort of thought and memory."

Simon did not answer immediately--his mind evidently engaged in a close
and candid survey of his past life. Presently, raising his head, "No," said he; "no!
Heaven be my witness, neither Madge nor I have ever injured anybody. We
cannot believe that we have a single enemy in the world."

"Ah! if Nell would only speak!" cried the engineer.

"Mr. Starr--and you, father," said Harry, "I do beg of you to keep silence on
this matter, and not to question my poor Nell. I know she is very anxious and
uneasy; and I feel positive that some great secret painfully oppresses her heart.
Either she knows nothing it would be of any use for us to hear, or she considers
it her duty to be silent. It is impossible to doubt her affection for us--for all of us.
If at a future time she informs me of what she has hitherto concealed from us,
you shall know about it immediately."

"So be it, then, Harry," answered the engineer; "and yet I must say Nell's
silence, if she knows anything, is to me perfectly inexplicable."

Harry would have continued her defense; but the engineer stopped him,
saying, "All right, Harry; we promise to say no more about it to your future
wife."


"With my father's consent she shall be my wife without further delay."

"My boy," said old Simon, "your marriage shall take place this very day
month. Mr. Starr, will you undertake the part of Nell's father?"

"You may reckon upon me for that, Simon," answered the engineer.

They then returned to the cottage, but said not a word of the result of their
examinations in the mine, so that to the rest of its inhabitants, the bursting in of
the vaulted roof of the caverns continued to be regarded as a mere accident.
There was but a loch the less in Scotland.

Nell gradually resumed her customary duties, and Harry made good use of
her little visit to the upper air, in the instructions he gave her. She enjoyed the
recollections of life above ground, yet without regretting it. The somber region
she had loved as a child, and in which her wedded life would be spent, was as
dear to her as ever.

The approaching marriage created great excitement in New Aberfoyle. Good
wishes poured in on all sides, and foremost among them were Jack Ryan's. He
was detected busily practicing his best songs in preparation for the great day,
which was to be celebrated by the whole population of Coal Town.

During the month preceding the wedding-day, there were more accidents
occurring in New Aberfoyle than had ever been known in the place. One would
have thought the approaching union of Harry and Nell actually provoked one
catastrophe after another. These misfortunes happened chiefly at the further and
lowest extremity of the works, and the cause of them was always in some way
mysterious.

Thus, for instance, the woodwork of a distant gallery was discovered to be in
flames, which were extinguished by Harry and his companions at the risk of
their lives, by employing engines filled with water and carbonic acid, always
kept ready in case of necessity. The lamp used by the incendiary was found; but
no clew whatever as to who he could be.

Another time an inundation took place in consequence of the stanchions of a
water-tank giving way; and Mr. Starr ascertained beyond a doubt that these
supports had first of all been partially sawn through. Harry, who had been
overseeing the works near the place at the time, was buried in the falling rubbish,
and narrowly escaped death.

A few days afterwards, on the steam tramway, a train of trucks, which Harry
was passing along, met with an obstacle on the rails, and was overturned. It was
then discovered that a beam had been laid across the line. In short, events of this
description became so numerous that the miners were seized with a kind of
panic, and it required all the influence of their chiefs to keep them on the works.

"You would think that there was a whole band of these ruffians," Simon kept


saying, "and we can't lay hands on a single one of them."

Search was made in all directions. The county police were on the alert night
and day, yet discovered nothing. The evil intentions seeming specially designed
to injure Harry. Starr forbade him to venture alone beyond the ordinary limits of
the works.

They were equally careful of Nell, although, at Harry's entreaty, these
malicious attempts to do harm were concealed from her, because they might
remind her painfully of former times. Simon and Madge watched over her by
day and by night with a sort of stern solicitude. The poor child yielded to their
wishes, without a remark or a complaint. Did she perceive that they acted with a
view to her interest? Probably she did. And on her part, she seemed to watch
over others, and was never easy unless all whom she loved were together in the
cottage.

When Harry came home in the evening, she could not restrain expressions of
child-like joy, very unlike her usual manner, which was rather reserved than
demonstrative. As soon as day broke, she was astir before anyone else, and her
constant uneasiness lasted all day until the hour of return home from work.

Harry became very anxious that their marriage should take place. He thought
that, when the irrevocable step was taken, malevolence would be disarmed, and
that Nell would never feel safe until she was his wife. James Starr, Simon, and
Madge, were all of the same opinion, and everyone counted the intervening
days, for everyone suffered from the most uncomfortable forebodings.

It was perfectly evident that nothing relating to Nell was indifferent to this
hidden foe, whom it was impossible to meet or to avoid. Therefore it seemed
quite possible that the solemn act of her marriage with Harry might be the
occasion of some new and dreadful outbreak of his hatred.

One morning, a week before the day appointed for the ceremony, Nell, rising
early, went out of the cottage before anyone else. No sooner had she crossed the
threshold than a cry of indescribable anguish escaped her lips.

Her voice was heard throughout the dwelling; in a moment, Madge, Harry,
and Simon were at her side. Nell was pale as death, her countenance agitated,
her features expressing the utmost horror. Unable to speak, her eyes were riveted
on the door of the cottage, which she had just opened.

With rigid fingers she pointed to the following words traced upon it during
the night: "Simon Ford, you have robbed me of the last vein in our old pit. Harry,
your son, has robbed me of Nell. Woe betide you! Woe betide you all! Woe
betide New Aberfoyle!--SILFAX."

"Silfax!" exclaimed Simon and Madge together.

"Who is this man?" demanded Harry, looking alternately at his father and at


the maiden.

"Silfax!" repeated Nell in tones of despair, "Silfax!"--and, murmuring this
name, her whole frame shuddering with fear and agitation, she was borne away
to her chamber by old Madge.

James Starr, hastening to the spot, read the threatening sentences again and
again.

"The hand which traced these lines," said he at length, "is the same which
wrote me the letter contradicting yours, Simon. The man calls himself Silfax. I
see by your troubled manner that you know him. Who is this Silfax?"


CHAPTER XVII. THE "MONK"


THIS name revealed everything to the old overman. It was that of the last
"monk" of the Dochart pit.

In former days, before the invention of the safety-lamp, Simon had known
this fierce man, whose business it was to go daily, at the risk of his life, to
produce partial explosions of fire-damp in the passages. He used to see this
strange solitary being, prowling about the mine, always accompanied by a
monstrous owl, which he called Harfang, who assisted him in his perilous
occupation, by soaring with a lighted match to places Silfax was unable to reach.

One day this old man disappeared, and at the same time also, a little orphan
girl born in the mine, who had no relation but himself, her great-grandfather. It
was perfectly evident now that this child was Nell. During the fifteen years, up
to the time when she was saved by Harry, they must have lived in some secret
abyss of the mine.

The old overman, full of mingled compassion and anger, made known to the
engineer and Harry all that the name of Silfax had revealed to him. It explained
the whole mystery. Silfax was the mysterious being so long vainly sought for in
the depths of New Aberfoyle.

"So you knew him, Simon?" demanded Mr. Starr.

"Yes, that I did," replied the overman. "The Harfang man, we used to call
him. Why, he was old then! He must be fifteen or twenty years older than I am.
A wild, savage sort of fellow, who held aloof from everyone and was known to
fear nothing--neither fire nor water. It was his own fancy to follow the trade of
‘monk,’ which few would have liked. The constant danger of the business had
unsettled his brain. He was prodigiously strong, and he knew the mine as no one
else--at any rate, as well as I did. He lived on a small allowance. In faith, I
believed him dead years ago."

"But," resumed James Starr, "what does he mean by those words, 'You have
robbed me of the last vein of our old mine"?"

"Ah! there it is," replied Simon; "for a long time it had been a fancy of his--I
told you his mind was deranged--that he had a right to the mine of Aberfoyle; so
he became more and more savage in temper the deeper the Dochart pit--his pit!--
was worked out. It just seemed as if it was his own body that suffered from every
blow of the pickax. You must remember that, Madge?"

"Ay, that I do, Simon," replied she.

"T can recollect all this," resumed Simon, "since I have seen the name of
Silfax on the door. But I tell you, I thought the man was dead, and never
imagined that the spiteful being we have so long sought for could be the old
fireman of the Dochart pit."

"Well, now, then,” said Starr, "it is all quite plain. Chance made known to


Silfax the new vein of coal. With the egotism of madness, he believed himself
the owner of a treasure he must conceal and defend. Living in the mine, and
wandering about day and night, he perceived that you had discovered the secret,
and had written in all haste to beg me to come. Hence the letter contradicting
yours; hence, after my arrival, all the accidents that occurred, such as the block
of stone thrown at Harry, the broken ladder at the Yarrow shaft, the obstruction
of the openings into the wall of the new cutting; hence, in short, our
imprisonment, and then our deliverance, brought about by the kind assistance of
Nell, who acted of course without the knowledge of this man Silfax, and
contrary to his intentions."

"You describe everything exactly as it must have happened, Mr. Starr,"
returned old Simon. "The old 'Monk' is mad enough now, at any rate!"

"All the better," quoth Madge.

"I don't know that," said Starr, shaking his head; "it is a terrible sort of
madness this."

"Ah! now I understand that the very thought of him must have terrified poor
little Nell, and also I see that she could not bear to denounce her grandfather.
What a miserable time she must have had of it with the old man!"

"Miserable with a vengeance," replied Simon, "between that savage and his
owl, as savage as himself. Depend upon it, that bird isn't dead. That was what
put our lamp out, and also so nearly cut the rope by which Harry and Nell were
suspended."

"And then, you see," said Madge, "this news of the marriage of our son with
his granddaughter added to his rancor and ill-will."

"To be sure," said Simon. "To think that his Nell should marry one of the
robbers of his own coal mine would just drive him wild altogether."

"He will have to make up his mind to it, however," cried Harry. "Mad as he
is, we shall manage to convince him that Nell is better off with us here than ever
she was in the caverns of the pit. I am sure, Mr. Starr, if we could only catch
him, we should be able to make him listen to reason."

"My poor Harry! there is no reasoning with a madman," replied the engineer.
"Of course it is better to know your enemy than not; but you must not fancy all is
right because we have found out who he is. We must be on our guard, my
friends; and to begin with, Harry, you positively must question Nell. She will
perceive that her silence is no longer reasonable. Even for her grandfather's own
interest, she ought to speak now. For his own sake, as well as for ours, these
insane plots must be put a stop to."

"I feel sure, Mr. Starr," answered Harry, "that Nell will of herself propose to
tell you what she knows. You see it was from a sense of duty that she has been


silent hitherto. My mother was very right to take her to her room just now. She
much needed time to recover her spirits; but now I will go for her."

"You need not do so, Harry," said the maiden in a clear and firm voice, as she
entered at that moment the room in which they were. Nell was very pale; traces
of tears were in her eyes; but her whole manner showed that she had nerved
herself to act as her loyal heart dictated as her duty.

"Nell!" cried Harry, springing towards her.

The girl arrested her lover by a gesture, and continued, "Your father and
mother, and you, Harry, must now know all. And you too, Mr. Starr, must remain
ignorant of nothing that concerns the child you have received, and whom Harry--
unfortunately for him, alas!--drew from the abyss."

"Oh, Nell! what are you saying?" cried Harry.

"Allow her to speak," said James Starr in a decided tone.

"I am the granddaughter of old Silfax," resumed Nell. "I never knew a
mother till the day I came here," added she, looking at Madge.

"Blessed be that day, my daughter!" said the old woman.

"IT knew no father till I saw Simon Ford," continued Nell; "nor friend till the
day when Harry's hand touched mine. Alone with my grandfather I have lived
during fifteen years in the remote and most solitary depths of the mine. I say
WITH my grandfather, but I can scarcely use the expression, for I seldom saw
him. When he disappeared from Old Aberfoyle, he concealed himself in caverns
known only to himself. In his way he was kind to me, dreadful as he was; he fed
me with whatever he could procure from outside the mine; but I can dimly
recollect that in my earliest years I was the nursling of a goat, the death of which
was a bitter grief to me. My grandfather, seeing my distress, brought me another
animal--a dog he said it was. But, unluckily, this dog was lively, and barked.
Grandfather did not like anything cheerful. He had a horror of noise, and had
taught me to be silent; the dog he could not teach to be quiet, so the poor animal
very soon disappeared. My grandfather's companion was a ferocious bird,
Harfang, of which, at first, I had a perfect horror; but this creature, in spite of my
dislike to it, took such a strong affection for me, that I could not help returning it.
It even obeyed me better than its master, which used to make me quite uneasy,
for my grandfather was jealous. Harfang and I did not dare to let him see us
much together; we both knew it would be dangerous. But I am talking too much
about myself: the great thing is about you."

"No, my child," said James Starr, "tell us everything that comes to your
mind."

"My grandfather," continued Nell, "always regarded your abode in the mine
with a very evil eye--not that there was any lack of space. His chosen refuge was


far--very far from you. But he could not bear to feel that you were there. If I
asked any questions about the people up above us, his face grew dark, he gave
no answer, and continued quite silent for a long time afterwards. But when he
perceived that, not content with the old domain, you seemed to think of
encroaching upon his, then indeed his anger burst forth. He swore that, were you
to succeed in reaching the new mine, you should assuredly perish.
Notwithstanding his great age, his strength is astonishing, and his threats used to
make me tremble."

"Go on, Nell, my child," said Simon to the girl, who paused as though to
collect her thoughts.

"On the occasion of your first attempt," resumed Nell, "as soon as my
grandfather saw that you were fairly inside the gallery leading to New
Aberfoyle, he stopped up the opening, and turned it into a prison for you. I only
knew you as shadows dimly seen in the gloom of the pit, but I could not endure
the idea that you would die of hunger in these horrid places; and so, at the risk of
being detected, I succeeded in obtaining bread and water for you during some
days. I should have liked to help you to escape, but it was so difficult to avoid
the vigilance of my grandfather. You were about to die. Then arrived Jack Ryan
and the others. By the providence of God I met with them, and instantly guided
them to where you were. When my grandfather discovered what I had done, his
rage against me was terrible. I expected death at his hands. After that my life
became insupportable to me. My grandfather completely lost his senses. He
proclaimed himself King of Darkness and Flame; and when he heard your tools
at work on coal-beds which he considered entirely his own, he became furious
and beat me cruelly. I would have fled from him, but it was impossible, so
narrowly did he watch me. At last, in a fit of ungovernable fury, he threw me
down into the abyss where you found me, and disappeared, vainly calling on
Harfang, which faithfully stayed by me, to follow him. I know not how long I
remained there, but I felt I was at the point of death when you, my Harry, came
and saved me. But now you all see that the grandchild of old Silfax can never be
the wife of Harry Ford, because it would be certain death to you all!"

"Nell!" cried Harry.

"No," continued the maiden, "my resolution is taken. By one means only can
your ruin be averted; I must return to my grandfather. He threatens to destroy the
whole of New Aberfoyle. His is a soul incapable of mercy or forgiveness, and no
mortal can say to what horrid deed the spirit of revenge will lead him. My duty
is clear; I should be the most despicable creature on earth did I hesitate to
perform it. Farewell! I thank you all heartily. You only have taught me what
happiness is. Whatever may befall, believe that my whole heart remains with


W


you.

At these words, Simon, Madge, and Harry started up in an agony of grief,
exclaiming in tones of despair, "What, Nell! is it possible you would leave us?"

James Starr put them all aside with an air of authority, and, going straight up
to Nell, he took both her hands in his, saying quietly, "Very right, my child; you
have said exactly what you ought to say; and now listen to what we have to say
in reply. We shall not let you go away; if necessary, we shall keep you by force.
Do you think we could be so base as to accept of your generous proposal? These
threats of Silfax are formidable--no doubt about it! But, after all, a man is but a
man, and we can take precautions. You will tell us, will you not, even for his
own sake, all you can about his habits and his lurking-places? All we want to do
is to put it out of his power to do harm, and perhaps bring him to reason."

"You want to do what is quite impossible," said Nell. "My grandfather is
everywhere and nowhere. I have never seen his retreats. I have never seen him
sleep. If he meant to conceal himself, he used to leave me alone, and vanish.
When I took my resolution, Mr. Starr, I was aware of everything you could say
against it. Believe me, there is but one way to render Silfax powerless, and that
will be by my return to him. Invisible himself, he sees everything that goes on.
Just think whether it is likely he could discover your very thoughts and
intentions, from that time when the letter was written to Mr. Starr, up to now that
my marriage with Harry has been arranged, if he did not possess the
extraordinary faculty of knowing everything. As far as I am able to judge, my
grandfather, in his very insanity, is a man of most powerful mind. He formerly
used to talk to me on very lofty subjects. He taught me the existence of God, and
never deceived me but on one point, which was--that he made me believe that all
men were base and perfidious, because he wished to inspire me with his own
hatred of all the human race. When Harry brought me to the cottage, you thought
I was simply ignorant of mankind, but, far beyond that, I was in mortal fear of
you all. Ah, forgive me! I assure you, for many days I believed myself in the
power of wicked wretches, and I longed to escape. You, Madge, first led me to
perceive the truth, not by anything you said, but by the sight of your daily life,
for I saw that your husband and son loved and respected you! Then all these
good and happy workmen, who so revere and trust Mr. Starr, I used to think they
were slaves; and when, for the first time, I saw the whole population of
Aberfoyle come to church and kneel down to pray to God, and praise Him for
His infinite goodness, I said to myself, 'My grandfather has deceived me.’ But
now, enlightened by all you have taught me, I am inclined to think he himself is
deceived. I mean to return to the secret passages I formerly frequented with him.
He is certain to be on the watch. I will call to him; he will hear me, and who


knows but that, by returning to him, I may be able to bring him to the knowledge
of the truth?"

The maiden spoke without interruption, for all felt that it was good for her to
open her whole heart to her friends.

But when, exhausted by emotion, and with eyes full of tears, she ceased
speaking, Harry turned to old Madge and said, "Mother, what should you think
of the man who could forsake the noble girl whose words you have been
listening to?"

"I should think he was a base coward," said Madge, "and, were he my son, I
should renounce and curse him."

"Nell, do you hear what our mother says?" resumed Harry. "Wherever you
go I will follow you. If you persist in leaving us, we will go away together."

"Harry! Harry!" cried Nell.

Overcome by her feelings, the girl's lips blanched, and she sank into the arms
of Madge, who begged she might be left alone with her.


CHAPTER XVIII. NELL'S WEDDING

IT was agreed that the inhabitants of the cottage must keep more on their
guard than ever. The threats of old Silfax were too serious to be disregarded. It
was only too possible that he possessed some terrible means by which the whole
of Aberfoyle might be annihilated.

Armed sentinels were posted at the various entrances to the mine, with
orders to keep strict watch day and night. Any stranger entering the mine was
brought before James Starr, that he might give an account of himself. There
being no fear of treason among the inhabitants of Coal Town, the threatened
danger to the subterranean colony was made known to them. Nell was informed
of all the precautions taken, and became more tranquil, although she was not free
from uneasiness. Harry's determination to follow her wherever she went
compelled her to promise not to escape from her friends.

During the week preceding the wedding, no accident whatever occurred in
Aberfoyle. The system of watching was carefully maintained, but the miners
began to recover from the panic, which had seriously interrupted the work of
excavation. James Starr continued to look out for Silfax. The old man having
vindictively declared that Nell should never marry Simon's son, it was natural to
suppose that he would not hesitate to commit any violent deed which would
hinder their union.

The examination of the mine was carried on minutely. Every passage and
gallery was searched, up to those higher ranges which opened out among the


ruins of Dundonald Castle. It was rightly supposed that through this old building
Silfax passed out to obtain what was needful for the support of his miserable
existence (which he must have done, either by purchasing or thieving).

As to the "fire-maidens," James Starr began to think that appearance must
have been produced by some jet of fire-damp gas which, issuing from that part
of the pit, could be lighted by Silfax. He was not far wrong; but all search for
proof of this was fruitless, and the continued strain of anxiety in this perpetual
effort to detect a malignant and invisible being rendered the engineer--outwardly
calm--an unhappy man.

389

As the wedding-day approached, his dread of some catastrophe increased,
and he could not but speak of it to the old overman, whose uneasiness soon more
than equaled his own. At length the day came. Silfax had given no token of
existence.

By daybreak the entire population of Coal Town was astir. Work was
suspended; overseers and workmen alike desired to do honor to Simon Ford and
his son. They all felt they owed a large debt of gratitude to these bold and
persevering men, by whose means the mine had been restored to its former
prosperity. The ceremony was to take place at eleven o'clock, in St. Giles's
chapel, which stood on the shores of Loch Malcolm.

At the appointed time, Harry left the cottage, supporting his mother on his
arm, while Simon led the bride. Following them came Starr, the engineer,
composed in manner, but in reality nerved to expect the worst, and Jack Ryan,
stepping superb in full Highland piper's costume. Then came the other mining
engineers, the principal people of Coal Town, the friends and comrades of the
old overman--every member of this great family of miners forming the
population of New Aberfoyle.

In the outer world, the day was one of the hottest of the month of August,
peculiarly oppressive in northern countries. The sultry air penetrated the depths
of the coal mine, and elevated the temperature. The air which entered through
the ventilating shafts, and the great tunnel of Loch Malcolm, was charged with
electricity, and the barometer, it was afterwards remarked, had fallen in a
remarkable manner. There was, indeed, every indication that a storm might burst
forth beneath the rocky vault which formed the roof of the enormous crypt of the
very mine itself.

But the inhabitants were not at that moment troubling themselves about the
chances of atmospheric disturbance above ground. Everybody, as a matter of
course, had put on his best clothes for the occasion. Madge was dressed in the
fashion of days gone by, wearing the "toy" and the "rokelay," or Tartan plaid, of


matrons of the olden time, old Simon wore a coat of which Bailie Nicol Jarvie
himself would have approved.

Nell had resolved to show nothing of her mental agitation; she forbade her
heart to beat, or her inward terrors to betray themselves, and the brave girl
appeared before all with a calm and collected aspect. She had declined every
omament of dress, and the very simplicity of her attire added to the charming
elegance of her appearance. Her hair was bound with the "snood," the usual
head-dress of Scottish maidens.

All proceeded towards St. Giles's chapel, which had been handsomely
decorated for the occasion.

The electric discs of light which illuminated Coal Town blazed like so many
suns. A luminous atmosphere pervaded New Aberfoyle. In the chapel, electric
lamps shed a glow over the stained-glass windows, which shone like fiery
kaleidoscopes. At the porch of the chapel the minister awaited the arrival of the
wedding party.

It approached, after having passed in stately procession along the shore of
Loch Malcolm. Then the tones of the organ were heard, and, preceded by the
minister, the group advanced into the chapel. The Divine blessing was first
invoked on all present. Then Harry and Nell remained alone before the minister,
who, holding the sacred book in his hand, proceeded to say, "Harry, will you take
Nell to be your wife, and will you promise to love her always?"

"I promise," answered the young man in a firm and steady voice.

"And you, Nell," continued the minister, "will you take Harry to be your
husband, and--"

Before he could finish the sentence, a prodigious noise resounded from
without. One of the enormous rocks, on which was formed the terrace
overhanging the banks of Loch Malcolm, had suddenly given way and opened
without explosion, disclosing a profound abyss, into which the waters were now
wildly plunging.

In another instant, among the shattered rocks and rushing waves appeared a
canoe, which a vigorous arm propelled along the surface of the lake. In the canoe
was seen the figure of an old man standing upright. He was clothed in a dark
mantle, his hair was dishevelled, a long white beard fell over his breast, and in
his hand he bore a lighted Davy safety lamp, the flame being protected by the
metallic gauze of the apparatus.

In a loud voice this old man shouted, "The fire-damp is upon you! Woe--woe
betide ye all!"

At the same moment the slight smell peculiar to carburetted hydrogen was
perceptibly diffused through the atmosphere. And, in truth, the fall of the rock


had made a passage of escape for an enormous quantity of explosive gas,
accumulated in vast cavities, the openings to which had hitherto been blocked
up.

Jets and streams of the fire-damp now rose upward in the vaulted dome; and
well did that fierce old man know that the consequence of what he had done
would be to render explosive the whole atmosphere of the mine.

James Starr and several others, having hastily quitted the chapel, and
perceived the imminence of the danger, now rushed back, crying out in accents
of the utmost alarm, "Fly from the mine! Fly instantly from the mine!"

"Now for the fire-damp! Here comes the fire-damp!" yelled the old man,
urging his canoe further along the lake.

Harry with his bride, his father and his mother, left the chapel in haste and in
terror.

"Fly! fly for your lives!" repeated James Starr. Alas! it was too late to fly!
Old Silfax stood there, prepared to fulfill his last dreadful threat--prepared to
stop the marriage of Nell and Harry by overwhelming the entire population of
the place beneath the ruins of the coal mine.

As he stood ready to accomplish this act of vengeance, his enormous owl,
whose white plumage was marked with black spots, was seen hovering directly
above his head.

At that moment a man flung himself into the waters of the lake, and swam
vigorously towards the canoe.

It was Jack Ryan, fully determined to reach the madman before he could do
the dreadful deed of destruction.

Silfax saw him coming. Instantly he smashed the glass of his lamp, and,
snatching out the burning wick, waved it in the air.

Silence like death fell upon the astounded multitude. James Starr, in the
calmness of despair, marvelled that the inevitable explosion was even for a
moment delayed.

Silfax, gazing upwards with wild and contracted features, appeared to
become aware that the gas, lighter than the lower atmosphere, was accumulating
far up under the dome; and at a sign from him the owl, seizing in its claw the
lighted match, soared upwards to the vaulted roof, towards which the madman
pointed with outstretched arm.

Another second and New Aberfoyle would be no more.

Suddenly Nell sprang from Harry's arms, and, with a bright look of
inspiration, she ran to the very brink of the waters of the lake. "Harfang!
Harfang!" cried she in a clear voice; "here! come to me!"

The faithful bird, surprised, appeared to hesitate in its flight. Presently,


recognizing Nell's voice, it dropped the burning match into the water, and,
describing a wide circle, flew downwards, alighting at the maiden's feet.

Then a terrible cry echoed through the vaulted roofs. It was the last sound
uttered by old Silfax.

Just as Jack Ryan laid his hand on the edge of the canoe, the old man, foiled
in his purpose of revenge, cast himself headlong into the waters of the lake.

"Save him! oh, save him!" shrieked Nell in a voice of agony. Immediately
Harry plunged into the water, and, swimming towards Jack Ryan, he dived
repeatedly.

But his efforts were useless. The waters of Loch Malcolm yielded not their
prey: they closed forever over Silfax.


CHAPTER XIX. THE LEGEND OF OLD SILFAX

Six months after these events, the marriage, so strangely interrupted, was
finally celebrated in St. Giles's chapel, and the young couple, who still wore
mourning garments, returned to the cottage. James Starr and Simon Ford,
henceforth free from the anxieties which had so long distressed them, joyously
presided over the entertainment which followed the ceremony, and prolonged it
to the following day.

On this memorable occasion, Jack Ryan, in his favorite character of piper,
and in all the glory of full dress, blew up his chanter, and astonished the
company by the unheard of achievement of playing, singing, and dancing all at
once.

It is needless to say that Harry and Nell were happy. These loving hearts,
after the trials they had gone through found in their union the happiness they
deserved.

As to Simon Ford, the ex-overman of New Aberfoyle, he began to talk of
celebrating his golden wedding, after fifty years of marriage with good old
Madge, who liked the idea immensely herself.

"And after that, why not golden wedding number two?"

"You would like a couple of fifties, would you, Mr. Simon?" said Jack Ryan.

"All right, my boy," replied the overman quietly, "I see nothing against it in
this fine climate of ours, and living far from the luxury and intemperance of the
outer world."

Will the dwellers in Coal Town ever be called to witness this second
ceremony? Time will show. Certainly the strange bird of old Silfax seemed
destined to attain a wonderful longevity. The Harfang continued to haunt the
gloomy recesses of the cave. After the old man's death, Nell had attempted to


keep the owl, but in a very few days he flew away. He evidently disliked human
society as much as his master had done, and, besides that, he appeared to have a
particular spite against Harry. The jealous bird seemed to remember and hate
him for having carried off Nell from the deep abyss, notwithstanding all he could
do to prevent him. Still, at long intervals, Nell would see the creature hovering
above Loch Malcolm.

Could he possibly be watching for his friend of yore? Did he strive to pierce,
with keen eye, the depths which had engulfed his master?

The history of the Harfang became legendary, and furnished Jack Ryan with
many a tale and song. Thanks to him, the story of old Silfax and his bird will
long be preserved, and handed down to future generations of the Scottish
peasantry.


THE WAIF OF THE "CYNTHIA."


By
Jules Verne and André Laurie


CHAPTER I.

MR. MALARIUS' FRIEND.

There is probably neither in Europe nor anywhere else a scholar whose face
is more universally known than that of Dr. Schwaryencrona, of Stockholm. His
portrait appears on the millions of bottles with green seals, which are sent to the
confines of the globe.

Truth compels us to state that these bottles only contain cod liver oil, a good
and useful medicine; which is sold to the inhabitants of Norway for a
"couronnes," which is worth one franc and thirty-nine centimes.

Formerly this oil was made by the fishermen, but now the process is a more
scientific one, and the prince of this special industry is the celebrated Dr.
Schwaryencrona.

There is no one who has not seen his pointed beard, his spectacles, his
hooked nose, and his cap of otter skin. The engraving, perhaps, is not very fine,
but it is certainly a striking likeness. A proof of this is what happened one day in
a primary school in Noroe, on the western coast of Norway, a few leagues from
Bergen.

Two o'clock had struck. The pupils were in their classes in the large, sanded
hall--the girls on the left and the boys on the right--occupied in following the
demonstration which their teacher, Mr. Malarius, was making on the black-
board. Suddenly the door opened, and a fur coat, fur boots, fur gloves, and a cap
of otter, made their appearance on the threshold.

The pupils immediately rose respectfully, as is usual when a stranger visits
the class-room. None of them had ever seen the new arrival before, but they all
whispered when they saw him, "Doctor Schwaryencrona," so much did the
picture engraved on the bottles resemble the doctor.

We must say that the pupils of Mr. Malarius had the bottles continually
before their eyes, for one of the principal manufactories of the doctor was at
Noroe. But for many years the learned man had not visited that place, and none
of the children consequently could have beheld him in the flesh. In imagination
it was another matter, for they often spoke of him in Noroe, and his ears must
have often tingled, if the popular belief has any foundation. Be this as it may, his
recognition was unanimous, and a triumph for the unknown artist who had
drawn his portrait--a triumph of which this modest artist might justly be proud,


and of which more than one photographer in the world might well be jealous.

But what astonished and disappointed the pupils a little was to discover that
the doctor was a man below the ordinary height, and not the giant which they
had imagined him to be. How could such an illustrious man be satisfied with a
height of only five feet three inches? His gray head hardly reached the shoulder
of Mr. Malarius, and he was already stooping with age. He was also much
thinner than the doctor, which made him appear twice as tall. His large brown
overcoat, to which long use had given a greenish tint, hung loosely around him;
he wore short breeches and shoes with buckles, and from beneath his black silk
cap a few gray locks had made their escape. His rosy cheeks and smiling
countenance gave an expression of great sweetness to his face. He also wore
spectacles, through which he did not cast piercing glances like the doctor, but
through them his blue eyes shone with inexhaustible benevolence.

In the memory of his pupils Mr. Malarius had never punished a scholar. But,
nevertheless, they all respected him, and loved him. He had a brave soul, and all
the world knew it very well. They were not ignorant of the fact that in his youth
he had passed brilliant examinations, and that he had been offered a
professorship in a great university, where he might have attained to honor and
wealth. But he had a sister, poor Kristina, who was always ill and suffering. She
would not have left her native village for the world, for she felt sure that she
would die if they removed to the city. So Mr. Malarius had submitted gently to
her wishes, and sacrificed his own prospects. He had accepted the humble duty
of the village school-master, and when twenty years afterward Kristina had died,
blessing him, he had become accustomed to his obscure and retired life, and did
not care to change it. He was absorbed in his work, and forgot the world. He
found a supreme pleasure in becoming a model instructor, and in having the
best-conducted school in his country. Above all, he liked to instruct his best
pupils in the higher branches, to initiate them into scientific studies, and in
ancient and modern literature, and give them the information which is usually
the portion of the higher classes, and not bestowed upon the children of
fishermen and peasants.

"What is good for one class, is good for the other," he argued. "If the poor
have not as many comforts, that is no reason why they should be denied an
acquaintance with Homer and Shakespeare; the names of the stars which guide
them across the ocean, or of the plants which grow on the earth. They will soon
see them laid low by their ploughs, but in their infancy at least they will have
drunk from pure sources, and participated in the common patrimony of
mankind." In more than one country this system would have been thought
imprudent, and calculated to disgust the lowly with their humble lot in life, and


lead them to wander away in search of adventures. But in Norway nobody thinks
of these things. The patriarchal sweetness of their dispositions, the distance
between the villages, and the laborious habits of the people, seem to remove all
danger of this kind. This higher instruction is more frequent than a stranger
would believe to be possible. Nowhere is education more generally diffused, and
nowhere is it carried so high; as well in the poorest rural schools, as in the
colleges.

Therefore the Scandinavian Peninsula may flatter herself, that she has
produced more learned and distinguished men in proportion to her population,
than any other region of Europe. The traveler is constantly astonished by the
contrast between the wild and savage aspect of nature, and the manufactures, and
works of art, which represent the most refined civilization.

But perhaps it is time for us to return to Noroe, and Dr. Schwaryencrona,
whom we have left on the threshold of the school. If the pupils had been quick to
recognize him, although they had never seen him before, it had been different
with the instructor, whose acquaintance with him dated further back.

"Ah! good-day, my dear Malarius!" said the visitor cordially, advancing with
outstretched hands toward the school-master.

"Sir! you are very welcome,” answered the latter, a little surprised, and
somewhat timidly, as is customary with all men who have lived secluded lives;
and are interrupted in the midst of their duties. "But excuse me if I ask whom I
have the honor of--"

"What! Have I changed so much since we ran together over the snow, and
smoked our long pipes at Christiania; have you forgotten our Krauss boarding-
house, and must I name your comrade and friend?"

"Schwaryencrona!" cried Mr. Malarius. "Is it possible.--Is it really you.--Is it
the doctor?"

"Oh! I beg of you, omit all ceremony. I am your old friend Roff, and you are
my brave Olaf, the best, the dearest friend of my youth. Yes, I know you well.
We have both changed a little in thirty years; but our hearts are still young, and
we have always kept a little corner in them for those whom we learmed to love,
when we were students, and eat our dry bread side by side."

The doctor laughed, and squeezed the hands of Mr. Malarius, whose eyes
were moist.

"My dear friend, my good excellent doctor, you must not stay here," said he;
"I will give all these youngsters a holiday, for which they will not be sorry, I
assure you, and then you must go home with me."

"Not at all!" declared the doctor, turning toward the pupils who were
watching this scene with lively interest. "I must neither interfere with your work,


nor the studies of these youths. If you wish to give me great pleasure, you will
permit me to sit here near you, while you resume your teaching."

"I would willingly do so," answered Mr. Malarius, "but to tell you the truth, I
have no longer any heart for geometry; besides, having mentioned a holiday, I do
not like to disappoint the children. There is one way of arranging the matter
however. If Doctor Schwaryencrona would deign to do my pupils the honor of
questioning them about their studies, and then I will dismiss them for the rest of
the day."

"An excellent idea. I shall be only too happy to do so. I will become their
examiner."

Then taking the master's seat, he addressed the school:

"Tell me," asked the doctor, "who is the best pupil?"

"Erik Hersebom!" answered fifty youthful voices unhesitatingly.

"Ah! Erik Hersebom. Well, Erik, will you come here?"

A young boy, about twelve years of age, who was seated on the front row of
benches, approached his chair. He was a grave, serious-looking child, whose
pensive cast of countenance, and large deep set eyes, would have attracted
attention anywhere, and he was the more remarkable, because of the blonde
heads by which he was surrounded. While all his companions of both sexes had
hair the color of flax, rosy complexions, and blue eyes, his hair was of deep
chestnut color, like his eyes, and his skin was brown. He had not the prominent
cheek bones, the short nose, and the stout frame of these Scandinavian children.
In a word, by his physical characteristics so plainly marked, it was evident that
he did not belong to the race by whom he was surrounded.

He was clothed like them in the coarse cloth of the country, made in the style
common among the peasantry of Bergen; but the delicacy of his limbs, the
smallness of his head, the easy elegance of his poise, and the natural
gracefulness of his movements and attitudes, all seemed to denote a foreign
origin.

No physiologist could have helped being struck at once by these
peculiarities, and such was the case with Dr. Schwaryencrona.

However, he had no motive for calling attention to these facts, and he simply
proceeded to fulfill the duty which he had undertaken.

"Where shall we begin--with grammar?" he asked the young lad.

"I am at the command of the doctor," answered Erik, modestly.

The doctor then gave him two or three simple questions, but was astonished
to hear him answer them, not only in the Swedish language, but also in French
and English. It was the usual custom of Mr. Malarius, who contended that it was
as easy to learn three languages at once as it was to learn only one.


"You teach them French and English then?" said the doctor, turning toward
his friend.

"Why not? also the elements of Greek and Latin. I do not see what harm it
can do them."

"Nor I," said the doctor, laughing, and Erik Hersebom translated several
sentences very correctly.

In one of the sentences, reference was made to the hemlock drunk by
Socrates, and Mr. Malarius asked the doctor to question him as to the family
which this plant belonged to.

Erik answered without hesitation "that it was one of the family of
umbelliferous plants," and described them in detail.

From botany they passed to geometry, and Erik demonstrated clearly a
theorem relative to the sum of the angles of a triangle.

The doctor became every moment more and more surprised.

"Let us have a little talk about geography," he said. "What sea is it which
bounds Scandinavia, Russia and Siberia on the north?"

"Tt is the Arctic Ocean."

"And what waters does this ocean communicate with?"

"The Atlantic on the west, and the Pacific on the east."

"Can you name two or three of the most important seaports on the Pacific?"

"I can mention Yokohama, in Japan; Melbourne, in Australia; San Francisco,
in the State of California."

"Well, since the Arctic Ocean communicates on one side with the Atlantic,
and on the other with the Pacific, do you not think that the shortest route to
Yokohama or San Francisco would be through this Arctic Ocean?"

"Assuredly," answered Erik, "it would be the shortest way, if it were
practicable, but all navigators who have attempted to follow it have been
prevented by ice, and been compelled to renounce the enterprise, when they have
escaped death."

"Have they often attempted to discover the north-east passage?"

"At least fifty times during the last three centuries, but without success."

"Could you mention a few of the expeditions?"

"The first was organized in 1523, under the direction of Franois Sebastian
Cabot. It consisted of three vessels under the command of the unfortunate Sir
Hugh Willoughby, who perished in Lapland, with all his crew. One of his
lieutenants, Chancellor, was at first successful, and opened a direct route through
the Polar Sea. But he also, while making a second attempt, was shipwrecked,
and perished. A captain, Stephen Borough, who was sent in search of him,
succeeded in making his way through the strait which separates Nova Zembla


from the Island of Waigate and in penetrating into the Sea of Kara. But the fog
and ice prevented him from going any further.

"Two expeditions which were sent out in 1580 were equally unsuccessful.
The project was nevertheless revived by the Hollanders about fifteen years later,
and they fitted out, successively, three expeditions, under the command of
Barentz.

"In 1596, Barentz also perished, in the ice of Nova Zembla.

"Ten years later Henry Hudson was sent out, but also failed.

"The Danes were not more successful in 1653.

"In 1676, Captain John Wood was also shipwrecked. Since that period the
north-east passage has been considered impracticable, and abandoned by the
Maritime powers."

"Has it never been attempted since that epoch?"

"It has been by Russia, to whom it would be of immense advantage, as well
as to all the northern nations, to find a direct route between her shores and
Siberia. She has sent out during a century no less than eighteen expeditions to
explore the coasts of Nova Zembla, the Sea of Kara, and the eastern and western
coasts of Siberia. But, although these expeditions have made these places better
known, they have also demonstrated the impossibility of forcing a passage
through the Arctic Ocean. The academician Van Baer, who made the last attempt
in 1837, after Admiral Lutke and Pachtusow, declared emphatically that this
ocean is simply a glacier, as impracticable for vessels as it would be if it were a
continent."

"Must we, then, renounce all hopes of discovering a north-east passage?"

"That seems to be the conclusion which we must arrive at, from the failure of
these numerous attempts. It is said, however, that a great navigator, named
Nordenskiold, wishes to make another attempt, after he has prepared himself by
first exploring portions of this polar sea. If he then considers it practicable, he
may get up another expedition."

Dr. Schwaryencrona was a warm admirer of Nordenskiold, and this is why
he had asked these questions about the north-east passage. He was charmed with
the clearness of these answers.

He fixed his eyes on Erik Hersebom, with an expression of the deepest
interest.

"Where did you learn all this, my dear child?" he demanded, after a short
silence.

"Here, sir," answered Erik, surprised at the question.

"You have never studied in any other school?"

"Certainly not."


"Mr. Malarius may be proud of you, then," said the doctor, tuming toward
the master.

"I am very well satisfied with Erik," said the latter.

"He has been my pupil for eight years. When I first took him he was very
young, and he has always been at the head of his section."

The doctor became silent. His piercing eyes were fixed upon Erik, with a
singular intensity. He seemed to be considering some problem, which it would
not be wise to mention.

"He could not have answered my question better and I think it useless to
continue the examination," he said at last. "I will no longer delay your holiday,
my children, and since Mr. Malarius desires it, we will stop for to-day."

At these words, the master clapped his hands. All the pupils rose at once,
collected their books, and arranged themselves in four lines, in the empty spaces
between the benches.

Mr. Malarias clapped his hands a second time. The column started, and
marched out, keeping step with military precision.

At a third signal they broke their ranks, and took to flight with joyous cries.

In a few seconds they were scattered around the blue waters of the fiord,
where might be seen also the turf roofs of the village of Noroe.


CHAPTER II.

THE HOME OF A FISHERMAN IN NOROE.

The house of Mr. Hersebom was, like all others in Noroe, covered by a turf
roof, and built of enormous timbers of fir-trees, in the Scandinavian fashion. The
two large rooms were separated by a hall in the center, which led to the boat-
house where the canoes were kept. Here were also to be seen the fishing-tackle
and the codfish, which they dry and sell. These two rooms were used both as
living-rooms and bedrooms. They had a sort of wooden drawer let into the wall,
with its mattress and skins, which serve for beds, and are only to be seen at
night. This arrangement for sleeping, with the bright panels, and the large open
fire-place, where a blazing fire of wood was always kept burning, gave to the
interior of the most humble homes an appearance of neatness and domestic
luxury unknown to the peasantry of Southern Europe.

This evening all the family were gathered round the fire-place, where a huge
kettle was boiling, containing "sillsallat," or smoked herring, salmon and
potatoes.

Mr. Hersebom, seated in a high wooden chair, was making a net, which was
his usual occupation when he was not on the sea, or drying his fish. He was a


hardy fisherman, whose skin had been bronzed by exposure to the arctic breezes,
and his hair was gray, although he was still in the prime of life. His son Otto, a
great boy, fourteen years old, who bore a strong resemblance to him, and who
was destined to also become famous as a fisherman, sat near him. At present he
was occupied in solving the mysteries of the rule of three, covering a little slate
with figures, although his large hands looked as if they would be much more at
home handling the oars.

Erik, seated before the dining-table, was absorbed in a Volume of history that
Mr. Malarius had lent him. Katrina, Hersebom, the goodwife, was occupied
peacefully with her spinning-wheel, while little Vanda, a blonde of ten years,
was Seated on a stool, knitting a large stocking with red wool.

At their feet a large dog of a yellowish-white color, with wool as thick as that
of a sheep, lay curled up sound asleep.

For more than one hour the silence had been unbroken, and the copper lamp
suspended over their heads, and filled with fish oil, lighted softly this tranquil
interior.

To tell the truth, the silence became oppressive to Dame Katrina, who for
some moments had betrayed the desire of unloosing her tongue.

At last she could keep quiet no longer.

"You have worked long enough for to-night," she said, "it is time to lay the
cloth for supper."

Without a word of expostulation. Erik lifted his large book, and seated
himself nearer the fire-place, whilst Vanda laid aside her knitting, and going to
the buffet brought out the plates and spoons.

"Did you say, Otto," asked the little girl, "that our Erik answered the doctor
very well?"

"Very well, indeed," said Otto enthusiastically, "he talked like a book in fact.
I do not know where he learned it all. The more questions the doctor asked the
more he had to answer. The words came and came. Mr. Malarius was well
satisfied with him."

"I am also," said Vanda, gravely.

"Oh, we were all well pleased. If you could have seen, mother, how the
children all listened, with their mouths open. We were only afraid that our turn
would come. But Erik was not afraid, and answered the doctor as he would have
answered the master."

"Stop. Mr. Malarius is as good as the doctor, and quite as learned," cried
Erik, whom their praises seemed to annoy.

The old fisherman gave him an approving smile.

"You are right, little boy," he said; "Mr. Malarius, if he chose, could be the


superior of all the doctors in the town, and besides he does not make use of his
scientific knowledge to ruin poor people."

"Has Doctor Schwaryencrona ruined any one?" asked Erik with curiosity.

"Well--if he has not done so, it has not been his fault. Do you think that I
have taken any pleasure in the erection of his factory, which is sending forth its
smoke on the borders of our fiord? Your mother can tell you that formerly we
manufactured our own oil, and that we sold it easily in Bergen for a hundred and
fifty to two hundred kroners a year. But that is all ended now--nobody will buy
the brown oil, or, if they do, they pay so little for it, that it is not worth while to
take the journey. We must be satisfied with selling the livers to the factory, and
God only knows how this tiresome doctor has managed to get them for such a
low price. I hardly realize forty-five kroners now, and I have to take twice as
much trouble as formerly. Ah, well. I say it is not just, and the doctor would do
better to look after his patients in Stockholm, instead of coming here to take
away our trade by which we earn our bread."

After these bitter words they were all silent. They heard nothing for some
minutes except the clicking of the plates, as Vanda arranged them, whilst her
mother emptied the contents of the pot into a large dish.

Erik reflected deeply upon what Mr. Hersebom had said. Numerous
objections presented themselves to his mind, and as he was candor itself--he
could not help speaking.

"Tt seems to me that you have a right to regret your former profits, father," he
said, "but is it just to accuse Doctor Schwaryencrona of having diminished
them? Is not his oil worth more than the home-made article?"

"Ah! it is clearer, that is all. It does not taste as strong as ours, they say; and
that is the reason why all the fine ladies in the town prefer it, no doubt; but it
does not do any more good to the lungs of sick people than our oil."

"But for some reason or other they buy it in preference; and since it is a very
useful medicine it is essential that the public should experience as little disgust
as possible in taking it. Therefore, if a doctor finds out a method of making it
more palatable, is it not his duty to make use of his discovery?"

Master Hersebom scratched his ear.

"Doubtless," he said, reluctantly, "it is his duty as a doctor, but that is no
reason why he should prevent poor fishermen from getting their living."

"I believe the doctor's factory gives employment to three hundred, whilst
there were only twenty in Noroe at the time of which you speak," objected Erik,
timidly.

"You are right, and that is why the business is no longer worth anything,"
said Hersebom.


"Come, supper is ready. Seat yourselves at the table," said Dame Katrina,
who saw that the discussion was in danger of becoming unpleasantly warm.

Erik understood that further opposition on his part would be out of place, and
he did not answer the last argument of his father, but took his habitual seat
beside Vanda.

"Were the doctor and Mr. Malarius friends in childhood?" he asked, in order
to give a turn to the conversation.

"Yes," answered the fisherman, as he seated himself at the table. "They were
both born in Noroe, and I can remember when they played around the school-
house, although they are both ten years older than I am. Mr. Malarius was the
son of the physician, and Doctor Schwaryencrona only the son of a simple
fisherman. But he has risen in the world, and they say that he is now worth
millions, and that his residence in Stockholm is a perfect palace. Oh, learning is
a fine thing.”

After uttering this aphorism the brave man took a spoon to help the smoking
fish and potatoes, when a knock at the door made him pause.

"May I come in, Master Hersebom?" said a deep-toned voice. And without
waiting for permission the person who had spoken entered, bringing with him a
great blast of icy air.

"Doctor Schwaryencrona!" cried the three children, while the father and
mother rose quickly.

"My dear Hersebom," said the doctor, taking the fisherman's hand, "we have
not seen each other for many years, but I have not forgotten your excellent
father, and thought I might call and see a friend of my childhood!"

The worthy man felt a little ashamed of the accusations which he had so
recently made against his visitor, and he did not know what to say. He contented
himself, therefore, with returning the doctor's shake of the hand cordially, and
smiling a welcome, whilst his good wife was more demonstrative.

"Quick, Otto, Erik, help the doctor to take off his overcoat, and you, Vanda,
prepare another place at the table," she said, for, like all Norwegian
housekeepers, she was very hospitable.

"Will you do us the honor, doctor, of eating a morsel with us?"

"Indeed I would not refuse, you may be sure, if I had the least appetite; for I
see you have a very tempting dish before you. But it is not an hour since I took
supper with Mr. Malarius, and I certainly would not have called so early if I had
thought you would be at the table. It would give me great pleasure if you would
resume your seats and eat your supper."

"Oh, doctor!" implored the good wife, "at least you will not refuse some
'snorgas' and a cup of tea?"


"I will gladly take a cup of tea, but on condition that, you eat your supper
first," answered the doctor, seating himself in the large armchair.

Vanda immediately placed the tea-kettle on the fire, and disappeared in the
neighboring room. The rest of the family understanding with native courtesy that
it would annoy their guest if they did not do as he wished, began to eat their
supper.

In two minutes the doctor was quite at his ease. He stirred the fire, and
warmed his legs in the blaze of the dry wood that Katrina had thrown on before
going to supper. He talked about old times, and old friends; those who had
disappeared, and those who remained, about the changes that had taken place
even in Bergen.

He made himself quite at home, and, what was more remarkable, he
succeeded in making Mr. Hersebom eat his supper.

Vanda now entered carrying a large wooden dish, upon which was a saucer,
which she offered so graciously to the doctor that he could not refuse it. It was
the famous "snorgas" of Norway, slices of smoked reindeer, and shreds of
herring, and red pepper, minced up and laid between slices of black bread, spiced
cheese, and other condiments; which they eat at any hour to produce an appetite.

It succeeded so well in the doctor's case, that although he only took it out of
politeness, he was soon able to do honor to some preserved mulberries which
were Dame Katrina's special pride, and so thirsty that he drank seven or eight
cups of tea.

Mr. Hersebom brought out a bottle of "schiedam," which he had bought of a
Hollander.

Then supper being ended, the doctor accepted an enormous pipe which his
host offered him, and smoked away to their general satisfaction.

By this time all feeling of constraint had passed away, and it seemed as if the
doctor had always been a member of the family. They joked and laughed, and
were the best of friends in the world, until the old clock of varnished wood
struck ten.

"My good friends, it is growing late," said the doctor.

"If you will send the children to bed, we will talk about more serious
matters."

Upon a sign from Dame Katrina, Otto, Erik, and Vanda bade them good-
night and left the room.

"You wonder why I have come," said the doctor, after a moments’ silence,
fixing his penetrating glance upon the fisherman.

"My guests are always welcome," answered the fisherman, sententiously.

"Yes! I know that Noroe is famous for hospitality. But you must certainly


have asked yourself what motive could have induced me to leave the society of
my old friend Malarius and come to you. I am sure that Dame Hersebom has
some suspicion of my motive."

"We shall know when you tell us," replied the good woman, diplomatically.

"Well," said the doctor, with a sigh, "since you will not help me, I must face
it alone. Your son, Erik, Master Hersebom, is a most remarkable child."

"I do not complain of him," answered the fisherman.

"He is singularly intelligent, and well informed for his age," continued the
doctor. "I questioned him to-day, in school, and I was very much surprised by the
extraordinary ability which his answers displayed. I was also astonished, when I
learned his name, to see that he bore no resemblance to you, nor indeed to any of
the natives of this country."

The fisherman and his wife remained silent and motionless.

"To be brief," continued the doctor, with visible impatience, "this child not
only interests me--he puzzles me. I have talked with Malarius, who told me that
he was not your son, but that he had been cast on your shore by a shipwreck, and
that you took him in and adopted him, bringing him up as your own, and
bestowing your name upon him. This is true, is it not?"

"Yes, doctor," answered Hersebom, gravely.

"If he is not our son by birth, he is in love and affection," said Katrina, with
moist eyes and trembling hands. "Between him, and Otto, and Vanda, we have
made no difference--we have never thought of him only as our own child."

"These sentiments do you both honor," said the doctor, moved by the
emotion of the brave woman. "But I beg of you, my friends, relate to me the
history of this child. I have come to hear it, and I assure you that I wish him
well.”

The fisherman appeared to hesitate a moment. Then seeing that the doctor
was waiting impatiently for him to speak, he concluded to gratify him.

"You have been told the truth,” he said, regretfully; "the child is not our son.
Twelve years ago I was fishing near the island at the entrance of the fiord, near
the open sea. You know it is surrounded by a sand bank, and that codfish are
plentiful there. After a good day's work, I drew in my lines, and was going to
hoist my sail, when something white moving upon the water, about a mile off,
attracted my attention. The sea was calm, and there was nothing pressing to
hurry me home, so I had the curiosity to go and see what this white object was.
In ten minutes I had reached it. It was a little wicker cradle, enveloped in a
woolen cloth, and strongly tied to a buoy. I drew it toward me; an emotion which
I could not understand seized me; I beheld a sleeping infant, about seven or eight
months old, whose little fists were tightly clinched. He looked a little pale and


cold, but did not appear to have suffered much from his adventurous voyage, if
one might judge by his lusty screams when he awoke, as he did immediately,
when he no longer felt himself rocked by the waves. Our little Otto was over two
years old, and I knew how to manage such little rogues. I rolled up a bit of rag,
dipped it in some eau de vie and water that I had with me, and gave it to him to
suck. This quieted him at once, and he seemed to enjoy the cordial. But I knew
that he would not be quiet long, therefore I made all haste to return to Noroe. I
had untied the cradle and placed it in the boat at my feet; and while I attended to
my sail, I watched the poor little one, and asked myself where it could possibly
have come from. Doubtless from some shipwrecked vessel. A fierce tempest had
been raging during the night, and there had been many disasters. But by what
means had this infant escaped the fate of those who had had the charge of him?
How had they thought of tying him to the buoy? How many hours had he been
floating on the waves? Where were his father and mother, those who loved him?
But all these questions had to remain unanswered, the poor baby was unable to
give us any information. In half an hour I was at home, and gave my new
possession to Katrina. We had a cow then, and she was immediately pressed into
service as a nurse for the infant. He was so pretty, so smiling, so rosy, when he
had been fed and warmed before the fire, that we fell in love with him at once;
just the same as if he had been our own. And then, you see, we took care of him;
we brought him up, and we have never made any difference between him and
our own two children. Is it not true, wife?" added Mr. Hersebom, turning toward
Katrina.

"Very true, the poor little one," answered the good dame, drying her eyes,
which this recital had filled with tears. "And he is our child now, for we have
adopted him. I do not know why Mr. Malarius should say anything to the
contrary."

"It is true," said Hersebom, and I do not see that it concerns any one but
ourselves.”

"That is so," said the doctor, in a conciliatory tone, "but you must not accuse
Mr. Malarius of being indiscreet. I was struck with the physiognomy of the child,
and I begged my friend confidentially to relate his history. He told me that Erik
believed himself to be your son, and that every one in Noroe had forgotten how
he had become yours. Therefore, you see, I took care not to speak until the
children had been sent to bed. You say that he was about seven or eight months
old when you found him?"

"About that; he had already four teeth, the little brigand, and I assure you that
it was not long before he began to use them," said Hersebom, laughing.

"Oh, he was a superb child," said Katrinn, eagerly. "He was so white, and


strong, and plump; and such arms and legs. You should have seen them!"

"How was he dressed?" asked Dr. Schwaryencrona.

Hersebom did not answer, but his wife was less discreet.

"Like a little prince," she answered. "Imagine a robe of pique, trimmed all
over with lace, a pelisse of quilted satin, a cloak of white velvet, and a little cap;
the son of a king could not have more. Everything he had was beautiful. But you
can see for yourself, for I have kept them all just as they were. You may be sure
that we did not dress the baby in them. Oh, no; I put Otto's little garments on
him, which I had laid away, and which also served, later on, for Vanda. But his
outfit is here, and I will show it to you."

While she was speaking, the worthy woman knelt down before a large oaken
chest, with an antique lock, and after lifting the lid, began searching the
compartments.

She drew out, one by one, all the garments of which she had spoken, and
displayed them with pride before the eyes of the doctor. She also showed the
linen, which was exquisitely fine, a little quilt of silk, and a pair of white merino
boots. All the articles were marked with the initials "E.D.," elegantly
embroidered, as the doctor saw at a glance.

E.D.;' is that why you named the child Erik?" he asked.

"Precisely," answered Katrina, who it was evident enjoyed this exhibition,
while her husband's face grew more gloomy. "See," she said, "this is the most
beautiful of all. He wore it around his neck."

And she drew from its box a rattle of coral and gold, suspended from a little
chain.

The initials "E.D." were here surrounded by a Latin motto, "Semper idem."

"We thought at first it was the baby's name, but Mr. Malarius told us it meant
‘always the same," she continued, seeing that the doctor was trying to decipher
the motto.

"Mr. Malarius told you the truth," said the doctor. "It is evident the child
belonged to a rich and distinguished family," he added, while Katrina replaced
the babe's outfit in the oaken chest.

"Have you any idea what country he came from?"

"How could we know anything about it, since I found him on the sea?"
replied Hersebom.

"Yes, but the cradle was attached to a buoy, you said, and it is customary on
all vessels to write on the buoy the name of the ship to which it belongs,"
answered the doctor, fixing his penetrating eyes upon those of the fisherman.

"Doubtless," said the latter, hanging his head.

"Well, this buoy, what name did it bear?"


"Doctor, I am not a savant. I can read my own language a little, but as for
foreign tongues--and then it was so long ago."

"However, you ought to be able to remember something about it--and
doubtless you showed it to Mr. Malarius, with the rest of the articles--make a
little effort, Mr. Hersebom. Was not this name inscribed on the buoy, 'Cynthia'?"

"I believe it was something like that," answered the fisherman vaguely.

"It is a strange name. To what country does it belong in your judgment, Mr.
Hersebom?"

"How should I know? Have I ever been beyond the shores of Noroe and
Bergen, except once or twice to fish off the coast of Greenland and Iceland?"
answered the good man, in a tone which grew more and more morose.

"T think it is either an English or a German name," said the doctor, taking no
notice of his crossness. "It would be easy to decide on account of the shape of
the letters, if I could see the buoy. Have you preserved it?"

"By my faith no. It was burnt up ages ago,” answered Hersebom,
triumphantly.

"As near as Mr. Malarius could remember, the letters were Roman," said the
doctor, as if he were talking to himself--"and the letters on the linen certainly
are. It is therefore probable that the 'Cynthia' was not a German vessel. I think it
was an English one. Is not this your opinion, Mr. Hersebom?"

"Well, I have thought little about it," replied the fisherman. "Whether it was
English, German, or Russian, makes no difference to me. For many years
according to all appearances, they have lain beneath the sea, which alone could
tell the secret."

"But you have doubtless made some effort to discover the family to whom
the child belonged?" said the doctor, whose glasses seemed to shine with irony.
"You doubtless wrote to the Governor of Bergen, and had him insert an
advertisement in the journals?"

"I!" cried the fisherman, "I did nothing of the kind. God knows where the
baby came from; why should I trouble myself about it? Can I afford to spend
money to find his people, who perhaps care little for him? Put yourself in my
place, doctor. I am not a millionaire, and you may be sure if we had spent all we
had, we should have discovered nothing. I have done the best I could; we have
raised the little one as our own son, we have loved him and taken care of him."

"Even more than the two others, if it were possible," interrupted Katrina,
drying her eyes on the corner of her apron. "If we have anything to reproach
ourselves for, it is for bestowing upon him too large a share of our tenderness."

"Dame Hersebom, you must not do me the injustice to suppose that your
kindness to the little shipwrecked child inspires me with any other feeling than


the greatest admiration," said the doctor.

"No, you must not think such a thing. But if you wish me to speak frankly--I
must say that this tenderness has blinded you to your duty. You should have
endeavored to discover the family of the infant, as far as your means permitted."

There was perfect silence for a few minutes.

"It is possible that we have done wrong," said Mr. Hersebom, who had hung
his head under this reproach. "But what is done can not be altered. Erik belongs
to us now, and I do not wish any one to speak to him about these old
reminiscences."

"You need have no fear, I will not betray your confidence," answered the
doctor, rising.

"I must leave you, my good friends, and I wish you good-night--a night free
from remorse," he added, gravely.

Then he put on his fur cloak, and shook hands cordially with his hosts, and
being conducted to the door by Hersebom, he took the road toward his factory.

The fisherman stood for a moment on the threshold, watching his retreating
figure in the moonlight.

"What a devil of a man!" he murmured, as at last he closed his door.


CHAPTER III.

MR. HERSEBOM'S REFLECTIONS.

The next morming Dr. Schwaryencrona had just finished breakfast with his
overseer, after having made a thorough inspection of his factory when he saw a
person enter whom he did not at first recognize as Mr. Hersebom.

He was clothed in his holiday suit: his embroidered waistcoat, his furred
riding coat, and his high hat, and the fisherman looked very different to what he
did in his working clothes. But what made the change more apparent, was the
deep sadness and humility portrayed in his countenance. His eyes were red, and
looked as if he had had no sleep all the night.

This was in fact the case. Mr. Hersebom who up to this time had never felt
his conscience trouble him, had passed hours of sad remorse, on his mattress of
skins.

Toward morning he had exchanged confidences with Dame Katrina, who had
also been unable to close her eyes.

"Wife, I have been thinking of what the doctor said to us," he said, after
several hours of wakefulness.

"I have been thinking of it also, ever since he left us," answered his worthy
helpmate.


"It is my opinion that there is some truth in what he said, and that we have
perhaps acted more egotistically than we should have done. Who knows but that
the child may have a right to some great fortune, of which he is deprived by our
negligence? Who knows if his family have not mourned for him these twelve
years, and they could justly accuse us of having made no attempt to restore him
to them?"

"This is precisely what I have been saying to myself," answered Katrina,
sighing. "If his mother is living what frightful anguish the poor woman must
have endured, in believing that her infant was drowned. I put myself in her
place, and imagine that we had lost Otto in this manner. We would never have
been consoled."

"It is not thoughts of his mother that trouble me, for according to all
appearances, she is dead," said Hersebom, after a silence broken only by their
sighs.

"How can we suppose that an infant of that age would travel without her, or
that it would have been tied to a buoy and left to take its chances on the ocean, if
she had been living?"

"That is true; but what do we know about it, after all. Perhaps she also has
had a miraculous escape."

"Perhaps some one has taken her infant from her--this idea has often
occurred to me," answered Hersebom. "Some one might be interested in his
disappearance. To expose so young a child to such a hazardous proceeding is so
extraordinary that such conjectures are possible, and in this case we have
become accomplices of a crime--we have contributed to its success. Is it not
horrible to think of?"

"And we thought we were doing such a good and charitable work in adopting
the poor little one."

"Oh, it is evident that we had no malicious intentions. We nourished it, and
brought it up as well as we were able, but that does not prevent me from seeing
that we have acted rashly, and the little one will have a right to reproach us some
of these days."

"We need not be afraid of that, I am sure. But it is too bad that we should feel
at this late day that we have done anything for which we must reproach
ourselves.”

"How strange it is that the same action regarded from a different point of
view, can be judged so differently. I never would have thought of such a thing.
And yet a few words from the doctor seems to have turned my brain."

Thus these good people talked during the night.

The result of their nocturnal conversation was that Mr. Hersebom resolved to


call upon the doctor, and ask him what they could do to make amends for the
error of which they had been guilty.

Dr. Schwaryencrona did not revert to the conversation which had taken place
the previous evening. He appeared to regard the visit of the fisherman as simply
an act of politeness, and received him cordially, and began talking about the
weather and the price of fish.

Mr. Hersebom tried to lead the conversation toward the subject which
occupied his mind. He spoke of Mr. Malarius' school, and at last said plainly:
"Doctor, my wife and I have been thinking all night about what you said to us
last evening about the boy. We never thought that we were doing him a wrong in
educating him as our son. But you have changed our opinion, and we want to
know what you would advise us to do, in order to repair our fault. Do you think
that we still ought to seek to find Erik's family?"

"It is never too late to do our duty," said the doctor, "although the task is
certainly much more difficult now than it would have been at first."

"Will you interest yourself in the matter?"

"T will, with pleasure," answered the doctor; "and I promise you to use every
exertion to fulfill it, upon one condition: that is, that you let me take the boy to
Stockholm."

If Mr. Hersebom had been struck on the head with a club, he would not have
been more astonished than he was by this proposal.

"Intrust Erik to you! Send him to Stockholm! Why should I do this, doctor?"
he asked, in an altered voice.

"T will tell you. My attention was drawn to the child, not only on account of
his physical appearance, which was so different to that of his companions, but by
his great intelligence and his evident taste for study. Before knowing the
circumstances which had brought him to Noroe, I said to myself that it was a
shame to leave a boy so gifted in a village school--even under such a master as
Malarius; for here there is nothing to assist in the development of his
exceptionally great faculties. There are no museums, nor scientific collections,
nor libraries, nor competitors who are worthy of him. I felt a strong desire to
give him the advantages of a complete education. You can understand that, after
the confidence which you have bestowed upon me, I am more anxious to do so
than before. You can see, Mr. Hersebom, that your adopted son belongs to some
rich and distinguished family. If I succeed in finding them, would you wish to
restore to them a child educated in a village, and deprived of this education,
without which he will feel out of place among his kindred? It is not reasonable;
and you are too sensible not to understand it."

Mr. Hersebom hung his head: without his being aware of it, two large tears


rolled down his cheeks.

"But then," he said, "this would be an entire separation. Before we ever know
whether the child will find his relations, he must be taken from his home. It is
asking too much, doctor--asking too much of my wife. The child is happy with
us. Why can he not be left alone, at least until he is sure of a better one?"

"Happy. How do you know that he will be so when he grows older? How can
you tell whether he may not regret having been saved? Intelligent and superior
as he will be, perhaps he would be stifled with the life which you would offer
him in Noroe."

"But, doctor, this life which you disdain, is good enough for us. Why is it not
good enough for him?"

"I do not disdain it," said the doctor. "Nobody admires and honors those who
work more than I do. Do you believe, Mr. Hersebom, that I forget my birth? My
father and grandfather were fishermen like yourself, and it is just because they
were so far-seeing as to educate me, that I appreciate the value of it, and I would
assure it to a child who merits it. It is his interest alone which guides me, I beg of
you to believe."

"Ah--what do I know about it? Erik will be almost grown up when you have
made a gentleman of him, and he will not know how to use his arms. Then if you
do not find his family, which is more than possible, since twelve years have
passed since I found him, what a beautiful future we are preparing for him! Do
you not see, doctor, that a fisherman's life is a brave one--better than any other:
with a good boat under his feet and four or five dozen of codfish at the end of his
lines, a Norwegian fisherman need have no fear, nor be indebted to any one. You
say that Erik would not be happy leading such a life. Permit me to believe the
contrary. I know the child well, he loves his books, but, above all, he loves the
sea. It also almost seems as if he felt that he had been rocked upon it, and all the
museums in the world would not console him for the loss of it."

"But we have the sea around us also at Stockholm," said the doctor, smiling--
touched in spite of himself by this affectionate resistance.

"Well," said the fisherman, crossing his arms, "what do you wish to do? what
do you propose, doctor?"

"There, you see, after all, the necessity of doing something. Well this is my
proposition--Erik is twelve years old, nearly thirteen, and he appears to be highly
gifted. We will say nothing about his origin--he is worthy of being supplied with
the means of developing and utilizing his faculties; that is all we need trouble
ourselves about at present. I am rich, and I have no children. I will undertake to
furnish the means, and give him the best masters, and all possible facilities for
profiting by their instructions. I will do this for two years. During this time I will


make inquiries, insert advertisements in the newspapers; make every possible
exertion, move heaven and earth to discover his parents. If I do not find them in
two years, we shall never do it. If his relatives are found, they will naturally
decide his future career in life. If we do not find them, I will send Erik back to
you. He will then be fifteen years old--he will have seen something of the world.
The hour will have arrived to tell him the truth about his birth. Then aided by our
advice, and the opinions of his teachers, he can choose what path he would
prefer to follow. If he wishes to become a fisherman, I will not oppose it. If he
wishes to continue his studies, I engage to furnish the means for him to follow
any profession that he may choose. Does this seem a reasonable proposition to
you?"

"More than reasonable. It is wisdom itself issuing from your lips, doctor,"
said Mr. Hersebom, overcome in spite of himself. "See what it is to have an
education!" he continued, shaking his head. "The difficulty will be to repeat all
you have said to my wife. When will you take the child away?"

"To-morrow. I can not delay my return to Stockholm any longer."

Mr. Hersebom heaved a deep sigh, which was almost a sob.

"To-morrow! So soon!" he said. "Well, what must be, must be. I will go and
talk to my wife about it."

"Yes, do so, and consult Mr. Malarius also; you will find that he is of my
opinion."

"T do not doubt it," answered the fisherman, with a sad smile.

He shook the hand which Dr. Schwaryencrona held out to him, and went
away looking very thoughtful.

That evening before dinner the doctor again directed his steps toward the
dwelling of Mr. Hersebom. He found the family assembled round the hearth, as
they were the evening before, but not wearing the same appearance of peaceful
happiness. The father was seated the furthest from the fire, silent, and with idle
hands. Katrina, with tears in her eyes, held Erik's hands between her own, whose
cheeks were reddened by the hope of the new destiny which seemed opening
before him, but who looked sad at leaving all whom he loved, and who did not
know what feeling he ought to yield to.

Little Vanda's face was hidden in her father's knees, and nothing could be
seen except her long braids of golden hair. Otto, also greatly troubled at this
proposed separation, sat motionless beside his brother.

"How sad and disconsolate you look!" said the doctor, stopping on the
threshold. "If Erik were about to set out on a distant and most perilous
expedition you could not show more grief. He is not going to do anything of the
kind, I assure you, my good friends. Stockholm is not at the antipodes, and the


child is not going away forever. He can write to you, and I do not doubt that he
will do so often. He is only going away to school, like so many other boys. In
two years he will return tall, and well-informed, and accomplished, I hope. Is
this anything to feel sad about? Seriously, it is not reasonable."

Katrina arose with the natural dignity of the peasant of the North.

"Doctor," she said, "God is my witness that I am profoundly grateful to you
for what you propose to do for Erik--but we can not help feeling sad because of
his departure. Mr. Hersebom has explained to me that it is necessary, and I
submit. Do not think that I shall feel no regret."

"Mother," said Erik, "I will not go, if it causes you such pain."

"No, child," answered the worthy woman, taking him in her arms.
"Education is a benefit which we have no right to refuse you. Go, my son, and
thank the doctor who has provided it for you, and prove to him by constant
application to your studies that you appreciate his kindness."

"There, there," said the doctor, whose glasses were dimmed by a singular
cloudiness, "let us rather speak of practical matters, that will be better. You
know, do you not, that we must set out to-morrow very early, and that you must
have everything ready. We will go by sleigh to Bergen, and thence by railroad.
Erik only needs a change of linen, I will procure everything else that is necessary
at Stockholm."

"Everything shall be ready," answered Dame Hersebom.

"Vanda," she added, with Norwegian hospitality, "the doctor is still
standing."

The little girl hurriedly pushed a large armchair toward him.

"I can not stay," said the doctor. "I promised my friend Malarius to dine with
him, and he is waiting for me. Little girl," he said, laying his hand gently upon
Vanda's blonde head, "I hope you do not wish me any harm because I am taking
your brother away from you?"

"No, doctor," she answered gravely. "Erik will be happier with you--he was
not intended to live in a village."

"And you, little one, will you be very unhappy without him?"

"The shore will seem deserted," she answered; "the seagulls will look for
him without finding him, the little waves will be astonished because they no
longer see him, and the house will seem empty, but Erik will be contented,
because he will have plenty of books, and he will become a learned man."

"And his little sister will rejoice in his happiness--is it not so, my child?" said
the doctor, kissing the forehead of the little girl. "And she will be proud of him
when he returns--see we have arranged the whole matter--but I must hurry away.
Good-bye until to-morrow."


"Doctor," murmured Vanda, timidly, "I wish to ask a favor of you!"

"Speak, child."

"You are going in a sleigh, you said. I wish with my papa's and mamma's
permission to drive you to the first relay."

"Ah, ah! but I have already arranged that. Reguild, the daughter of my
overseer, should do this."

"Yes, I know it, but she is willing that I should take her place, if you will
authorize me to do so."

"Well, in that case you have only to obtain the permission of your father and
mother."

"T have done so."

"Then you have mine also, dear child," said the doctor, and he took his
departure.

The next morning when the sleigh stopped before the door of Mr. Hersebom
little Vanda held the reins according to her desire, seated upon the front seat.

She was going to drive them to the next village, where the doctor would
procure another horse and sleigh, and thus procure relays until he reached
Bergen. This new kind of coachman always astonishes a stranger, but it is the
custom in Norway and Sweden. The men would think it a loss of time to pursue
such a calling, and it is not rare to see children of ten or twelve years of age
managing heavy equipages with perfect ease.

The doctor was already installed in the back of the sleigh, nearly hidden by
his furs. Erik took his seat beside Vanda, after having tenderly embraced his
father and brother, who contented themselves by showing by their mute sadness
the sorrow which his departure caused them; but the good Katrina was more
open in the expression of her feelings.

"Adieu, my son!" she said, in the midst of her tears. "Never forget what you
have learned from your poor parents--be honest, and brave, and never tell a lie.
Work as hard as you can--always protect those who are weaker than yourself--
and if you do not find the happiness you merit come back and seek it with us."

Vanda touched the horse which set out at a trot, and made the bells ring. The
air was cold, and the road as hard as glass. Just above the horizon a pale sun
began to throw his golden beams upon the snowy landscape. In a few minutes
Noroe was out of sight behind them.


CHAPTER IV.
AT STOCKHOLM.
Doctor Schwaryencrona lived in a magnificent house in Stockholm. It was in


the oldest and most aristocratic quarter of the charming capital, which is one of
the most pleasant and agreeable in Europe. Strangers would visit it much more
frequently if it were better known and more fashionable. But tourists,
unfortunately for themselves, plan their journeys much upon the same principle
as they purchase their hats. Situated between Lake Melar and the Baltic, it is
built upon eight small islands, connected by innumerable bridges, and bordered
by splendid quays, enlivened by numerous steamboats, which fulfill the duties of
omnibuses. The population are hardworking, gay, and contented. They are the
most hospitable, the most polite, and the best educated of any nation in Europe.
Stockholm, with its libraries, its museums, its scientific establishments, is in fact
the Athens of the North, as well as a very important commercial center.

Erik, however, had not recovered from the sadness incident upon parting
from Vanda, who had left them at the first relay. Their parting had been more
sorrowful than would have been expected at their age, but they had not been able
to conceal their emotion.

When the carriage stopped before a large brick house, whose double
windows shone resplendently with gaslight, Erik was fairly dazzled. The copper
knocker of the door appeared to him to be of fine gold. The vestibule, paved
with marble and ornamented with statues, bronze torches, and large Chinese-
vases, completed his amazement.

A footman in livery removed his master's furs, and inquired after his health
with the affectionate cordiality which is habitual with Swedish servants. Erik
looked around him with amazement.

The sound of voices attracted his attention toward the broad oaken staircase,
covered with heavy carpet. He turned, and saw two persons whose costumes
appeared to him the height of elegance.

One was a lady with gray hair, and of medium height, who wore a dress of
black cloth, short enough to show her red stockings with yellow clock-work, and
her buckled shoes. An enormous bunch of keys attached to a steel chain hung at
her side. She carried her head high, and looked about her with piercing eyes.
This was "Fru," or Madame Greta--Maria, the lady in charge of the doctor's
house, and who was the undisputed autocrat of the mansion in everything that
pertained to the culinary or domestic affairs. Behind her came a little girl, eleven
or twelve years old, who appeared to Erik like a fairy princess. Instead of the
national costume, the only one which he had ever seen worn by a child of that
age, she had on a dress of deep blue velvet, over which her yellow hair was
allowed to fall loosely. She wore black stockings and satin shoes; a knot of
cherry-colored ribbon was poised in her hair like a butterfly, and gave a little
color to her pale cheeks, while her large eyes shone with a phosphorescent light.


"How delightful, uncle, to have you back again! Have you had a pleasant
journey?" she cried, clasping the doctor around the neck. She hardly deigned to
cast a glance at Erik, who stood modestly aside.

The doctor returned her caresses, and shook hands with his housekeeper,
then he made a sign for Erik to advance.

"Kajsa, and Dame Greta, I ask your friendship for Erik Hersebom, whom I
have brought from Norway with me!" he said, "and you, my boy, do not be
afraid," he said kindly. "Dame Greta is not as severe as she looks, and you and
my niece Kajsa, will soon be the best of friends, is it not so, little girl?" he
added, pinching gently the cheek of the little fairy.

Kajsa only responded by making a disdainful face.

As for the housekeeper, she did not appear very enthusiastic over the new
recruit thus presented to her notice.

"If you please, doctor," she said, with a severe air, as they ascended the
staircase, "may I ask who this child is?"

"Certainly, Dame Greta; I will tell you all about it before long. Do not be
afraid; but now, if you please, give us something to eat."

In the "matsal," or dining-room, the table was beautifully laid with damask
and crystal, and the "snorgas" was ready.

Poor Erik had never seen a table covered with a white cloth, for they are
unknown to the peasants of Norway, who hardly use plates, as they have only
recently been introduced, and many of them still eat their fish on rounds of black
bread, and find it very good. Therefore the doctor had to repeat his invitation
several times before the boy took his seat at the table, and the awkwardness of
his movements caused "Froken," or Miss Kajsa, to cast upon him more than one
ironical glance during the repast. However, his journey had sharpened his
appetite, and this was of great assistance to him.

The "snorgas" was followed by a dinner that would have frightened a
Frenchman by its massive solidity, and would have sufficed to appease the
appetites of a battalion of infantry after a long march. Soup, fish, home-made
bread, goose stuffed with chestnuts, boiled beef, flanked with a mountain of
vegetables, a pyramid of potatoes, hard-boiled eggs by the dozen, and a raisin
pudding; all these were gallantly attacked and dismantled.

This plentiful repast being ended, almost without a word having been
spoken, they passed into the parlor, a large wainscoted room, with six windows
draped with heavy curtains, large enough to have sufficed a Parisian artist with
hangings for the whole apartment. The doctor seated himself in a corner by the
fire, in a large leather armchair, Kajsa took her place at his feet upon a footstool,
whilst Erik, intimidated and ill at ease, approached one of the windows, and


would have gladly hidden himself in its deep embrasure.

But the doctor did not leave him alone long.

"Come and warm yourself, my boy!" he said, in his sonorous voice; "and tell
us what you think of Stockholm."

"The streets are very black and very narrow, and the houses are very high,"
said Erik.

"Yes, a little higher than they are in Norway," answered the doctor, laughing.

"They prevent one from seeing the stars!" said the young boy.

"Because we are in the quarter where the nobility live," said Kajsa, piqued by
his criticisms. "When you pass the bridges the streets are broader."

"I saw that as we rode along; but the best of them are not as wide as that
which borders the fiord of Noroe," answered Erik.

"Ah, ah!" said the doctor, "are you home-sick already?"

"No," answered Erik, resolutely. "I am too much obliged to you, dear doctor,
for having brought me. But you asked me what I thought of Stockholm, and I
had to answer."

"Noroe must be a frightful little hole," said Kajsa.

"A frightful little hole!" repeated Erik, indignantly. "Those who say that must
be without eyes. If you could only see our rocks of granite, our mountains, our
glaciers, and our forests of pine, looking so black against the pale sky! And
besides all this, the great sea; sometimes tumultuous and terrible, and sometimes
so calm as scarcely to rock one; and then the flight of the seagulls, which are lost
in infinitude, and then return, to fan you with their wings. Oh, it is beautiful!
Yes, far more beautiful than a town."

"I was not speaking of the country but of the houses," said Kajsa, "they are
only peasants’ cabins--are they not, uncle?"

"In these peasants’ cabins, your father and grandfather as well as myself were
born, my child," answered the doctor, gravely.

Kajsa blushed and remained silent.

"They are only wooden houses, but they answer as well as any," said Erik.

"Often in the evening while my father mends his nets, and my mother is busy
with her spinning-wheel, we three sit on a little bench, Otto, Vanda, and I, and
we repeat together the old sagas, while we watch the shadows that play upon the
ceiling; and when the wind blows outside, and all the fishermen are safe at
home, it does one good to gather around the blazing fire. We are just as happy as
if we were in a beautiful room like this."

"This is not the best room," said Kajsa proudly. "I must show you the grand
drawing-room, it is worth seeing!"

"But there are so many books in this one," said Erik, "are there as many in


the drawing-room?"

"Books--who cares for them? There are velvet armchairs, and sofas, lace
curtains, a splendid French clock, and carpets from Turkey!"

Erik did not appear to be fascinated by this description, but cast envious
glances toward the large oaken bookcase, which filled one side of the parlor!

"You can go and examine the books, and take any you like," said the doctor.
Erik did not wait for him to repeat this permission. He chose a volume at once,
and seating himself in a corner where there was a good light, he was soon
completely absorbed in his reading. He hardly noticed the successive entrance of
two old gentlemen, who were intimate friends of Dr. Schwaryencrona, and who
came almost every evening to play a game of whist with him.

The first who arrived was Professor Hochstedt, a large man with cold and
stately manners, who expressed in polished terms the pleasure which he felt at
the doctor's safe return. He was scarcely seated in the armchair which had long
borne the name of the "professor's seat," when a sharp ring was heard.

"It is Bredejord," exclaimed the two friends simultaneously.

The door soon opened to admit a thin sprightly little man, who entered like a
gust of wind, seized both the doctor's hands, kissed Kajsa on the forehead
affectionately, greeted the professor, and cast a glance as keen as that of a mouse
around the room.

It was the Advocate Bredejord, one of the most illustrious lawyers of
Stockholm.

"Ha! Who is this?" said he, suddenly, as he beheld Erik.

The doctor tried to explain in as few words as possible.

"What--a young fisherman, or rather a boy from Bergen--and who reads
Gibbon in English?" he asked. For he saw at a glance what the book was which
so absorbed the little peasant.

"Does that interest you, my boy?" he asked.

"Yes, sir, it is a work that I have wanted to read for a long time, the first
volume of the 'Fall of the Roman Empire," answered Erik, simply.

"Upon my word," exclaimed the lawyer, "it appears that the peasants of
Bergen are fond of serious reading. But are you from Bergen?" he asked.

"IT am from Noroe, which is not far from there," answered Erik.

"Ah, have they usually eyes and hair as brown as yours at Noroe?"

"No, sir; my brother and sister, and all the others, are blondes like Miss
Kajsa. But they are not dressed like her," he added, laughing; "therefore they do
not look much like her."

"No; I have no doubt of it," said Mr. Bredejord. "Miss Kajsa is a product of
civilization. And what are you going to do at Stockholm, my boy, if I am not too


curious?"

"The doctor has been kind enough to offer to send me to school," said Erik.

"Ah, ah!" said Mr. Bredejord, tapping his snuff-box with the ends of his
fingers.

His glance seemed to question the doctor about this living problem; but the
latter made a sign to him, which was almost imperceptible, not to pursue his
investigations, and he changed the conversation. They then talked about court
affairs, the city news, and all that had taken place since the departure of the
doctor. Then Dame Greta came, and opened the card-table, and laid out the
cards. Soon silence reigned, while the three friends were absorbed in the
mysteries of whist.

The doctor made pretension to being a great player, and had no mercy for the
mistakes of his partners. He exulted loudly when their errors caused him to win,
and scolded when they made him lose. After every rubber he took pleasure in
showing the delinquent where he had erred; what card he should have led, and
which he should have held back. It is generally the habit of whist-players, but it
is not always conducive to amiability, particularly when the victims are the same
every evening.

Happily for him, the doctor's two friends never lost their temper. The
professor was habitually cool, and the lawyer severely skeptical.

"You are right," the first would say gravely, in answer to the most severe
reproaches.

"My dear Schwaryencrona, you know very well you are only losing your
time lecturing me," Mr. Bredejord would say, laughing. "All my life I have made
the greatest blunders whenever I play whist, and the worst of it is, I do not
improve.” What could any one do with two such hardened sinners?

The doctor was compelled to discontinue his criticisms, but it was only to
renew them a quarter of an hour later, for he was incorrigible.

It happened, however, that this evening he lost every game, and his
consequent ill-humor made his criticisms very severe upon his two companions,
and even upon the "dummy."

But the professor coolly acknowledged his faults, and the lawyer answered
his most bitter reproaches by jokes.

"Why should I alter my play, when I win by playing badly, and you lose by
following your correct rules?" he said to the doctor.

They played until ten o'clock. Then Kajsa made the tea in a magnificent
"samovar," and served it with pretty gracefulness; then she discreetly
disappeared. Soon Dame Greta appeared, and, calling Erik, she conducted him to
the apartment which had been prepared for him. It was a pretty little room, clean


and well furnished, on the second floor.

The three friends were now left alone.

"Now, at last, you can tell us who this young fisherman from Noroe is, who
reads Gibbon in the original text?" said Mr. Bredejord, as he put some sugar into
his second cup of tea. "Or is it a forbidden subject, which it is indiscreet for me
to mention?"

"There is nothing mysterious about the matter, and I will willingly tell you
Erik's history, for I know that I can rely upon your discretion," answered Dr.
Schwaryencrona.

"Ah! I knew that he had a history," said the lawyer, seating himself
comfortably in his armchair. "We will listen, dear doctor. I assure you that your
confidence will not be misplaced. I confess this youth arouses my curiosity like a
problem."

"He is, indeed, a living problem," answered the doctor, flattered by the
curiosity of his friend. "A problem which I hope to be able to solve. But I must
tell you all about it, and see if you think as I do."

The doctor settled himself comfortably, and began by telling them that he
had been struck by Erik's appearance in the school at Noroe, and by his unusual
intelligence. He had made inquiries about him, and he related all that Mr.
Malarius and Mr. Hersebom had told. He omitted none of the details. He spoke
of the buoy, of the name of "Cynthia," of the little garments which Dame Katrina
had shown him, of the coral ornament, of the device upon it, and of the character
of the letters.

"You are now in possession of all the facts as far as I have been able to learn
them," he said. "And you must bear in mind that the extraordinary ability of the
child is only a secondary phenomenon, and largely due to the interest with which
Mr. Malarius has always regarded him, and of which he has made the best use. It
was his unusual acquirements which first drew my attention to him and led me to
make inquiries about him. But in reality this has litthke connection with the
questions which now occupy me, which are: where did this child come from, and
what course would it be best for me to take in order to discover his family? We
have only two facts to guide us in this search. First: The physical indications of
the race to which the child belongs. Second: The name ‘Cynthia,’ which was
engraved on the buoy.

"As to the first fact, there can be no doubt; the child belongs to the Celtic
race. He presents the type of a Celt in all its beauty and purity.

"Let us pass to the second fact:

Cynthia’ is certainly the name of the vessel to which the buoy belonged.
This name might have belonged to a German vessel, as well as to an English


one; but it was written in the Roman characters. Therefore, the vessel was an
English one--or we will say Anglo-Saxon to be more precise. Besides,
everything confirms the hypothesis, for more than one English vessel going and
coming from Inverness, or the Orkneys, have been driven on the coast of
Norway by a tempest; and you must not forget that the little living waif could not
have been floating for a long while, since he had resisted hunger, and all the
dangers of his perilous journey. Well, now you know all, and what is your
conclusion my dear friends?"

Neither the professor nor the lawyer thought it prudent to utter a word.

"You have not been able to arrive at any conclusion," said the doctor, in a
tone which betrayed a secret triumph. "Perhaps you even think there is a
contradiction between the two facts--a child of the Celtic race--an English
Vessel. But this is simply because you have failed to bear in mind the existence
on the coast of Great Britain of a people of the Celtic race, on her sister island,
Ireland. I did not think of it at first myself, and it prevented me from solving the
problem. But when it occurred to me, I said to myself: the child is Irish. Is this
your opinion, Hochstedt?"

If there was anything in the world the professor disliked, it was to give a
positive opinion upon any subject. It must also be confessed that to give such an
opinion in this case would have been premature. He therefore contented himself
with nodding his head, and saying:

"It is an incontestable fact that the Irish belong to the Celtic branch of the
Arian race."

This was a sufficiently safe aphorism, but Doctor Schwaryencrona asked
nothing more, and only saw in it the entire confirmation of his theory.

"You think so, yourself," he said eagerly. "The Irish were Celts, and the child
has all the characteristics of the race. The 'Cynthia' having been an English
vessel, it appears to me that we are in possession of the necessary links, in order
to find the family of the poor child. It is in Great Britain that we must look for
them. Some advertisements in the "Times' will probably be sufficient to put us on
their tracks."

The doctor continued to enlarge upon his plan of proceeding, when he
remarked the obstinate silence of the lawyer and the slightly ironical expression
with which he listened to his conclusions.

"If you are not of my opinion, Bredejord, I wish you would say so. You
know that I do not fear to discuss the matter," he said, stopping short.

"I have nothing to say," answered Mr. Bredejord. "Hochstedt can bear
witness that I have said nothing."

"No. But I see very well that you do not share my opinion; and I am curious


to know why," said the doctor.

"Is Cynthia an English name?" he asked, with vehemence. "Yes! it was
written in Roman characters--it could not have been German. You have heard
our eminent friend, Hochstedt, affirm that the Irish are Celts. Has the child all
the characteristics of the Celtic race? You can judge for yourself. You were
struck by his appearance before I opened my mouth about the subject. I
conclude, therefore, that it is a want of friendship for you to refuse to agree with
me, and recognize the fact that the boy belongs to an Irish family."

"Want of friendship is a strong charge," answered Mr. Bredejord, "if you
apply it to me. I can only say that I have not, as yet, expressed the slightest
opinion."

"No; but I see that you do not spare mine."

"Have I not a right?"

"But give some facts to support your theory."

"T have not said that I have formed any."

"Then it is a systematic opposition, just for the sake of contradicting me, as
you do in whist."

"Nothing is further from my thoughts, I assure you. Your reasoning appeared
to me to be too peremptory, that is all."

"In what way, if you please, I am curious to know?"

"It would take too long to tell you. Eleven o'clock is striking. I will content
myself with offering you a bet. Your copy of Pliny against my Quintilian, that
you have not judged rightly, and that the child is not Irish."

"You know that I do not like to bet," said the doctor, softened by his
unconquerable good humor. "But I shall take so much pleasure in your
discomfiture that I accept your offer."

"Well, then it is a settled affair. How much time do you expect to take for
your researches?"

"A few months will suffice, I hope, but I have said two years to Hersebom, in
order to be sure that no efforts were wanting."

"Ah! well--I give you two years. Hochstedt shall be our witness; and there is
no ill-feeling, I hope?"

"Assuredly not, but I see your Quintilian in great danger of coming to keep
company with my Pliny," answered the doctor.

Then, after shaking hands with his two friends, he accompanied them to the
door.


CHAPTER V.


THE THIRTEEN DAYS OF CHRISTMAS.

The next day Erik began his new life at school.

Dr. Schwaryencrona first took him to his tailors, and fitted him out with
some new suits of clothes; then he introduced him to the principal of one of the
best schools in town. It was called in Swedish "Hogre elementar larovek."

In this school were taught the ancient and modern languages, the elementary
sciences, and all that it was necessary to learn before entering college. As in
Germany and Italy, the students did not board in the college. They lived with
their families in the town, with the professors, or wherever they could obtain
comfortable accommodations. The charges are very moderate; in fact, they have
been reduced almost to nothing. Large gymnasiums are attached to each of the
higher classes, and physical culture is as carefully attended to as the intellectual.

Erik at once gained the head of his division. He learned everything with such
extreme facility that he had a great deal of time to himself. The doctor therefore
thought that it would be better for him to utilize his evenings by taking a course
at the "Slodjskolan," the great industrial school of Stockholm. It was an
establishment especially devoted to the practice of the sciences, particularly to
making experiments in physics and chemistry, and to geometrical constructions
which are only taught theoretically in the schools.

Doctor Schwaryencrona judged rightly that the teachings of this school,
which was one of the wonders of Stockholm, would give a new impetus to the
rapid progress which Erik was making, and he hoped for great results from this
double training.

His young protégé, proved worthy of the advantages which he procured for
him. He penetrated the depths of the fundamental sciences, and instead of vague
and superficial ideas, the ordinary lot of so many pupils, he stored up a provision
of just, precise, and definite facts. The future development of these excellent
principles could only be a question of time.

Hereafter he would be able to learn without difficulty the more elevated
branches of these studies which would be required in college; in fact it would be
only play to him.

The same service which Mr. Malarius had rendered him, in teaching him
languages, history, and botany, the "Slodjskolan" now did for him by inculcating
the A, B, C, of the industrial arts; without which the best teaching so often
remains a dead letter.

Far from fatiguing Erik's brain, the multiplicity and variety of his studies
strengthened it much more than a special course of instruction could have done.

Besides, the gymnasium was always open to him to recruit his body when his
studies were over; and here as well as in the school Erik stood first. On holidays


he never failed to pay a visit to the sea which he loved with filial tenderness. He
talked with the sailors and fishermen, and often brought home a fine fish, which
was well received by Dame Greta.

This good woman had conceived a great affection for this new member of
the household. Erik was so gentle, and naturally so courteous and obliging, so
studious and so brave, that it was impossible to know him and not to like him. In
eight days he had become a favorite with Mr. Bredejord and Mr. Hochstedt, as
he was already with Doctor Schwaryencrona.

The only person who treated him with coldness was Kajsa. Whether the little
fairy thought that her hitherto undisputed sovereignty in the house was in danger,
or whether she bore Erik a grudge, because of the sarcasms which her
aristocratic air toward him inspired in the doctor, nobody knew. However, she
persisted in treating him with a disdainful coldness, which no courtesy or
politeness on his part could overcome. Her opportunities of displaying her
disdain were fortunately rare, for Erik was always either out-of-doors, or else
busy in his own little room.

Time passed in the most peaceful manner, and without any notable incidents.

We will pass with our reader without further comment over the two years
which Erik spent at school and return to Noroe.

Christmas had returned for the second time since Erik's departure. It is in all
Central and Northern Europe the great annual festival; because it is coincident
with the dull season in nearly all industries. In Norway especially, they prolong
the festival for thirteen days.--"Tretten yule dage" (the thirteen days of
Christmas), and they make it a season of great rejoicings. It is a time for family
reunions, for dinners, and even for weddings.

Provisions are abundant, even in the poorest dwellings. Everywhere the
greatest hospitality is the order of the day.

The "Yule ol," or Christmas beer, is drunk freely. Every visitor is offered a
bumper in a wooden cup, mounted in gold, silver, or copper, which the poorest
families possess, and which cups have been transmitted to them from time
immemorial. The visitor must empty this cup, and exchange with his hosts the
joyful wishes of the season, and for a happy New Year.

It is also at Christmas that the servants receive their new clothes; which are
often the best part of their wages--that the cows, and sheep, and even the birds of
the air, receive a double ration, which is exceptionally large. They say in Norway
of a "poor man," that he is so poor that he can not even give the sparrows their
dinner at Christmas.

Of these thirteen traditional days, Christmas-eve is the gayest. It is the
custom for the young girls and boys to go around in bands on their "schnee-


schuhe," or snow-shoes, and stop before the houses, and sing in chorus the old
national melodies. The clear voices suddenly sounding through the fresh night
air, in the lonely valleys, with their wintery surroundings, have an odd and
charming effect. The doors are immediately opened, the singers are invited to
enter, and they offer them cake, dried apples, and ale; and often make them
dance. After this frugal supper the joyous band depart, like a flock of gulls, to
perform the same ceremony further away. Distances are regarded as nothing, for
on their "schnee-schuhe," which are attached to their feet by leather straps, they
glide over several miles with marvelous rapidity. The peasants of Norway also
use, with these show-shoes, a strong stick, to balance themselves, and help them
along. This year the festival would be a joyous one for the Herseboms. They
were expecting Erik.

A letter from Stockholm had announced that he would arrive that evening.
Therefore Otto and Vanda could not sit still. Every moment they ran to the door,
to see if he was coming. Dame Katrina, although she reproved them for their
impatience, felt in the same way herself. Mr. Hersebom smoked his pipe silently,
and was divided in his mind between a longing to see his adopted son, and the
fear that he would not be able to keep him with them very long.

For the fiftieth time, perhaps, Otto had gone to the door, when he gave a
shout and cried out:

"Mother! Vanda! I believe it is he!"

They all rushed to the door. In the distance, on the road which led from
Bergen, they saw a black object. It grew larger rapidly, and soon took the shape
of a young man, clothed in gray cloth, wearing a fur cap, and carrying merrily
over his shoulders a knapsack of green leather. He had on snow-shoes, and
would soon be near enough to recognize.

The traveler perceived those who were watching before the door, and taking
off his cap, he waved it around his head.

Two minutes later Erick was in the arms of Katrina, Otto, Vanda, and even
Mr. Hersebom, who had left his armchair and advanced to the door.

They hugged him, and almost stifled him with caresses. They went into
ecstasies over his improved appearance. Dame Katrina among them all could not
get accustomed to it.

"What--is this the dear babe that I nursed on my knees?" she cried. "This
great boy, with such a frank and resolute air, with these strong shoulders, this
elegant form, and on whose lip I can already see signs of a mustache. Is it
possible?"

The brave woman was conscious of feeling a sort of respect for her former
nursling. She was proud of him, above all for the tears of joy which she saw in


his eyes. For he also was deeply affected.

"Mother, is it really you," he exclaimed. "I can hardly believe that I am with
you all again. The two years have seemed so long to me. I have missed you all,
as I know you have missed me."

"Yes," said Mr. Hersebom, gravely. "Not a day has passed without our having
spoken of you. Morning and evening, and at meal times, it was your name that
was constantly on our lips. But you, my boy, you have not forgotten us in the
grand city? You are contented to return and see the old country and the old
house?"

"I am sure that you do not doubt it," said Erik, as he embraced them all. "You
were always in my thoughts. But above all when the wind blew a gale. I thought
of you, father. I said to myself, Where is he? Has he returned home in safety?
And in the evening I used to read the meteorological bulletin in the doctor's
newspaper, to see what kind of weather you had had on the coast of Norway; if it
was the same as on the coast of Sweden?--and I found that you have severe
storms more often than we have in Stockholm, which come from America, and
beat on our mountains. Ah! how often I have wished that I could be with you in
your little boat to help you with the sail, and overcome all difficulties. And on
the other hand when the weather was fine it seemed to me as if I was in prison in
that great city, between the tall three-story houses. Yes! I would have given all
the world to be on the sea for one hour, and to feel as formerly free, and joyfully
exhilarated by the fresh air!"

A smile brightened the weather-beaten face of the fisherman.

"His books have not spoiled him," he said. "A joyful season and a happy
New-Year to you, my child!" he added. "Come, let us go to the table. Dinner is
only waiting for you."

When he was once more seated in his old place on the right hand of Katrina,
Erik was able to look around him, and mark the changes that two years had made
in the family. Otto was now a large, robust boy of sixteen years of age, and who
looked twenty. As for Vanda, two years had added wonderfully to her size and
beauty. Her countenance had become more refined. Her magnificent blonde hair,
which lay in heavy braids upon her shoulders, formed around her forehead a
light silvery cloud. Modest and sweet as usual, she busied herself, almost
unconsciously, with seeing that no one wanted for anything.

"Vanda has grown to be a great girl!" said her mother, proudly. "And if you
knew, Erik, how learned she has become, how hard she has worked and studied
since you left us! She is the best scholar in the school now, and Mr. Malarius
says she is his only consolation for no longer having you among his pupils."

"Dear Mr. Malarius! how glad I shall be to see him again," said Erik. "So our


Vanda has become so learned, has she?" he replied with interest, while the young
girl blushed up to the roots of her hair at these maternal praises.

"She has learned to play the organ also, and Mr. Malarius says that she has
the sweetest voice of all the choir?"

"Oh, decidedly, it is a very accomplished young person whom I find on my
return," Erik said, laughing, to relieve the embarrassment of his sister. "We must
make her display all her talents to-morrow."

And without affectation he began to talk about all the good people of Noroe,
asking questions about each one; inquiring for his old school-mates, and about
all that had happened since he went away. He asked about their fishing
adventures, and all the details of their daily life. Then on his part, he satisfied the
curiosity of his family, by giving an account of his mode of life in Stockholm; he
told them about Dame Greta, about Kajsa, and the doctor.

"That reminds me that I have a letter for you, father," he said, drawing it out
of the inside pocket of his vest. "I do not know what it contains, but the doctor
told me to take good care of it, for it was about me."

Mr. Hersebom took the letter, and laid it on the table by his side.

"Well!" said Erik, "are you not going to read it?"

"No," answered the fisherman, laconically.

"But, since it concerns me?" persisted the young man.

"It is addressed to me," said Mr. Hersebom, holding the letter before his eyes.
"Yes, I will read it at my leisure." Filial obedience is the basis of family
government in Norway.

Erik bowed his head in acquiescence.

When they rose from the table, the three children seated themselves on their
little bench in the chimney-corner, as they had so often done before, and began
one of those confidential conversations, where each one relates what the other is
curious to know, and where they tell the same things a hundred times.

Katrina busied herself about the room, putting everything in order; insisting
that Vanda should for once "play the lady," as she said, and not trouble herself
about household matters.

As for Mr. Hersebom, he had seated himself in his favorite armchair, and was
smoking his pipe in silence. It was only after he had finished this important
operation that he decided to open the doctor's letter.

He read it through without saying a single word; then he folded it up, put it
in his pocket, and smoked a second pipe, like the first, without uttering a sound.
He seemed to be absorbed in his own reflections.

Although he was never a talkative man, his silence appeared singular to
Dame Katrina. After she had finished her work, she went and seated herself


beside him, and made two or three attempts to draw him into conversation, but
she only received the most brief replies. Being thus repulsed, she became
melancholy, and the children themselves, after talking breathlessly for some
time, began to be affected by the evident sadness of their parents.

Twenty youthful voices singing in chorus before the door suddenly greeted
their ears, and made a happy diversion. It was a merry band of Erik's old
classmates, who had conceived the pleasant idea of coming to give him a cordial
welcome home.

They hastened to invite them into the house, and offered them the customary
feast, whilst they eagerly pressed around their old friend to express the great
pleasure which they felt in seeing him again. Erik was touched by the
unexpected visit of the friends of his childhood, and was anxious to go with
them on their Christmas journey, and Vanda and Otto also were, naturally, eager
to be of the party. Dame Katrina charged them not to go too far, but to bring their
brother back early, as he needed rest after his journey.

The door was hardly closed upon them, when she resumed her seat beside
her husband.

"Well, has the doctor discovered anything?" she asked, anxiously.

Instead of answering, Mr. Hersebom took the letter from his pocket, and read
it aloud, but not without hesitating over some words which were strange to him:

"MY DEAR HERSEBOM," wrote the doctor, "it is now two years since you
intrusted your dear child to my care, and every day I have had renewed pleasure
in watching his progress in all the studies that he has undertaken. His
intelligence is as remarkable as his heart is generous. Erik is truly one of nature's
nobleman, and the parents who have lost such a son, if they knew the extent of
their misfortune, would be objects of pity. But it is very doubtful whether his
parents are still living. As we agreed, I have spared no efforts to discover them. I
have written to several persons in England who have an agency for making
special researches. I have had advertisements inserted in twenty different
newspapers, English, Irish, and Scotch. Not the least ray of light has been
thrown upon this mystery, and I have to confess that all the information which I
have succeeded in procuring has rather tended to deepen the mystery.

"The name 'Cynthia,' I find in very common use in the English navy. From
Lloyd's office, they inform me, that there are seventeen ships, of different
tonnage, bearing this name. Some of these ships belong to English ports, and
some to Scotland and Ireland. My supposition concerning the nationality of the
child is therefore confirmed, and it becomes more and more evident to me that
Erik is of Irish parentage. I do not know whether you agree with me on this
point, but I have already mentioned it to two of my most intimate friends in


Stockholm, and everything seems to confirm it.

"Whether this Irish family are all dead, or whether they have some interest in
remaining unknown, I have not been able to discover any trace of them.

"Another singular circumstance, and which I also think looks still more
suspicious, is the fact that no shipwreck registered at Lloyd's, or at any of the
marine insurance companies, corresponds with the date of the infant's arrival on
your coast. Two vessels named ‘Cynthia’ have been lost, it is true, during this
century; but one was in the Indian Ocean, thirty-two years ago, and the other was
in sight of Portsmouth eighteen years ago.

"We are therefore obliged to conclude that the infant was not the victim of a
shipwreck.

"Doubtless he was intentionally exposed to the mercy of the waves. This
would explain why all my inquiries have been fruitless.

"Be this as it may, after having questioned successively all the proprietors of
the vessels bearing the name of 'Cynthia,' without obtaining any information, and
after exhausting all known means of pursuing my investigations, I have been
compelled to conclude that there is no hope of discovering Erik's family.

"The question that arises for us to decide, my dear Hersebom, and
particularly for you, is what we ought to say to the boy, and what we ought to do
for him.

"If I were in your place, I should now tell him all the facts about himself
which affect him so nearly, and leave him free to choose his own path in life.
You know we agreed to adopt this course if my efforts should prove
unsuccessful. The time has come for you to keep your word. I have wished to
leave it to you to relate all this to Erik. He is returning to Noroe still ignorant that
he is not your son, and he does not know whether he is to return to Stockholm or
remain with you. It is for you to tell him.

"Remember, if you refuse to fulfill this duty, Erik would have the right some
day, perhaps, to be astonished at you. Recall to mind also that he is a boy of too
remarkable abilities to be condemned to an obscure and illiterate life. Such a
sentence would have been unmerited two years ago, and now, after his brilliant
career at Stockholm, it would be positively unjustifiable.

"I therefore renew my offer: let him return to me and finish his studies, and
take at Upsal the degree of Doctor of Medicine. I will continue to provide for
him as if he were my own son, and he has only to go on and win honors and a
fortune.

"I know that, in addressing you and the excellent adopted mother of Erik, I
leave his future in good hands. No personal consideration, I am sure, will
prevent you from accepting my offer. Take Mr. Malarius' advice in this matter.


"While awaiting your reply, Mr. Hersebom, I greet you affectionately, and I
beg you to remember me most kindly to your worthy wife and children.

"R.W. SCHWARYENCRONA, M.D."

When the fisherman had finished reading this letter, Dame Katrina, who had
been silently weeping while she listened to it, asked him what he intended to do.

"My duty is very clear," he said. "I shall tell the boy everything."

"That is my opinion also; it must be done, or we should never have another
peaceful moment," she murmured, as she dried her eyes.

Then they both relapsed into silence.

It was past midnight when the three children returned from their expedition.
Their cheeks were rosy, and their eyes shone with pleasure from their walk in the
fresh air. They seated themselves around the fire to finish gayly their Christmas-
eve by eating a last cake before the enormous log which looked like a burning
cavern.


CHAPTER VI.

ERIK'S DECISION.

The next day the fisherman called Erik to him, and in the presence of
Katrina, Otto, and Vanda, spoke to him as follows:

"Erik, the letter of Doctor Schwaryencrona was about you. He writes that
you have given entire satisfaction to your teachers, and the doctor offers to pay
all the expenses of your education, if you wish to continue your studies. But this
letter also requires you to decide for yourself, whether you will accept this offer,
or remain with us at Noroe, which we would like so much to have you do, as you
no doubt know. But before you make up your mind, I must tell you a great
secret, a secret that my wife and I would have preferred to keep to ourselves."

At this moment Dame Katrina could not restrain her tears, and, sobbing, she
took the hand of Erik and pressed it to her heart, as if protesting against the
information which the young man was now to hear.

"This secret," continued Mr. Hersebom, in a strangely altered voice, "is that
you are our son only by adoption. I found you on the sea, my child, and brought
you home when you were only eight or nine months old. God is my witness that
we never intended to tell you this, and neither my wife nor myself have ever
made the least difference between you, and Otto, and Vanda. But Doctor
Schwaryencrona requires us to do so. Therefore, I wish you to read what he has
written to me."

Erik had suddenly become deadly pale. Otto and Vanda, surprised at what
they had heard, both uttered a cry of astonishment. Then they put their arms


around Erik, and clung closely to him, one on the right, and the other on the left.

Then Erik took the doctor's letter, and without trying to conceal his emotion,
he read what he had written to Mr. Hersebom.

The fisherman then told him all the facts about himself. He explained how
Dr. Schwaryencrona had undertaken to try and discover the family to which he
belonged; and, also, that he had been unsuccessful. How, that but for his advice
and suggestions, they would never have thought of doing so. Then Dame Katrina
arose, and going to the oaken chest, brought out the garments that the baby had
worn, and showed him also the coral which had been fastened around his neck.
The story was naturally so full of dramatic interest to the children, that they
forgot for a time, at least, how sad it was. They looked with wonder at the lace,
and velvet, the golden setting of the coral, and the inscription. It almost seemed
to them as if they were taking part in some fairy tale. The impossibility of
obtaining any information, as reported by the doctor, only made them regard
these articles as almost sacred.

Erik looked at them as if he were in a dream, and his thoughts flew to the
unknown mother, who, without doubt, had herself dressed him in these little
garments, and more than once shook the coral before the eyes of the baby to
make him smile. It seemed to him when he touched them as if he held direct
communion with her through time and space.

But where was this mother? Was she still living, or had she perished? Was
she weeping for her lost son, or must the son, on the contrary, think of her as
forever lost to him?

He remained for some minutes absorbed in these reflections, with his head
bent, but a word from Dame Katrina recalled him to himself.

"Erik, you are always our child," she cried, disturbed by his silence.

The eyes of the young man as he looked around him fell on all their loving
countenances--the maternal look of the loving wife, the honest face of Mr.
Hersebom, that of Otto even more affectionate than usual, and that of Vanda,
serious and troubled. As he read the tenderness and disquietude displayed on all
their faces, Erik felt as if his heart was melting within him. In a moment he
realized his situation, and saw vividly the scene which his father had described.
The cradle abandoned to the mercy of the waves, rescued by the hardy
fisherman, and carried to his wife; and these people, humble and poor as they
were, had not hesitated to take care of the little stranger, to adopt and cherish
him as their own son. They had not spoken of the matter for fourteen years, and
now they were hanging on his words as if they were a matter of life and death to
them.

All this touched him so deeply that suddenly his tears came. An irresistible


feeling of love and gratitude overwhelmed him. He felt eager on his part to repay
by some devotion the tenderness which they had shown to him. He resolved to
stay with them at Noroe forever, and content himself with their humble lot, while
he endeavored to do everything in his power to repay them.

"Mother," said he, throwing himself into Katrina's arms, "do you think that I
can hesitate, now that I know all? We will write to the doctor, and thank him for
his kind offer, and tell him that I have chosen to remain with you. I will be a
fisherman, like you, father, and like Otto. Since you have given me a place at
your fireside, I would prefer to retain it. Since you have nourished me by the
labor of your hands, I ask to be allowed to repay you in your old age for your
generosity toward me when I was a helpless infant."

"God be praised!" cried Dame Katrina, pressing Erik to her heart in a
transport of joy and tenderness.

"I knew that the child would prefer the sea to all their books," said Mr.
Hersebom, not understanding the sacrifice that Erik's decision would be to him.

"Come, the matter is settled. We will not talk about it any more, but only try
to enjoy this good festival of Christmas!"

They all embraced each other, with eyes humid with happiness, and vowed
they would never be separated.

When Erik was alone he could not help a stifled sigh, as he thought about all
his former dreams of work, and of the career which he had renounced. But still
he experienced at the same time a joy which he believed would repay him for the
sacrifice.

"Since it is the wish of my adopted parents," he said to himself, "the rest
does not signify. I ought to be willing to work for them in the sphere and
condition where their devotion has placed me. If I have sometimes felt ambitious
to take a higher position in the world, was it not that I might be able to assist
them? Since it makes them happy to have me with them, and as they desire
nothing better than their present life, I must try to be contented, and endeavor by
good conduct and hard work to give them satisfaction. Adieu, then, to my
books."

Thus he mused, and soon his thoughts returned to the time when the
fisherman had found him floating in his little cradle on the waves. What country
did he belong to? Who were his parents? Were they still alive? Had he in some
foreign country brothers and sisters whom he would never know?

Christmas had also been in Dr. Schwaryencrona's house in Stockholm a
season of great festivity. It was at this time, as the reader doubtless remembers,
that they had agreed to decide the bet between him and Mr. Bredejord, and that
Professor Hochstedt was to be the umpire.


For two years not a word had been said by either of them about this bet. The
doctor had been patiently pursuing his researches in England, writing to the
maritime agencies, and multiplying his advertisements in the newspapers; but he
had taken care not to confess that his efforts had been fruitless.

As for Mr. Bredejord, he had had the good taste to avoid all allusion to the
subject, and contented himself with occasionally admiring the beautiful binding
of the Pliny which was displayed in the doctor's bookcase.

But when he struck his snuff-box sharply with the ends of his fingers, while
he looked at the book, the doctor correctly interpreted the pantomime, which was
a shock to his nerves, and said to himself:

"Oh, yes; he is thinking how well the Pliny will look beside his elegant
editions of Quintilian and Horace."

On these evenings he was more merciless than ever, if his unfortunate
partner made any mistakes at whist.

But time had taken its flight, and he was now obliged to submit the question
to the impartial arbitration of Professor Hochstedt.

Dr. Schwaryencrona approached the subject frankly. Kajsa had hardly left
him alone with his two friends when he confessed to them, as he had confessed
in his letter to Mr. Hersebom, that his investigations had been without result.
Nothing had occurred to throw any light on the mystery which surrounded Erik's
origin, and the doctor in all sincerity declared that the problem was thought by
him to be insolvable.

"But," he continued, "I should be doing myself an injustice if I did not
declare with equal sincerity that I do not believe that I have lost my bet. I have
not discovered Erik's family, it is true, but all the information that I have been
able to obtain corroborates the conclusion which I had arrived at. The 'Cynthia'
was, no doubt, an English vessel, for there are at least seventeen ships bearing
this name registered at Lloyd's. As for ethnographical characteristics, they are
clearly Celtic. My hypothesis, therefore, as to the nationality of Erik is
victoriously confirmed. I am more than ever certain that he is of Irish extraction
as I at first surmised. But I can not compel his family to come forward and
acknowledge him, if they have any reasons of their own for wishing him to
continue lost to them. This is all I have to say, my dear Hochstedt; and now you
must be the judge as to whether the Quintilian of our friend Bredejord should not
legitimately be transferred to my bookcase!"

At these words, which seemed to occasion a strong inclination to laugh, the
lawyer fell back in his armchair, raised his hands as if in protestation, then he
fixed his brilliant eyes upon Professor Hochstedt to see how he would regard the
matter. The professor did not betray the embarrassment which might have been


expected. He would have certainly felt miserable if the doctor had urged any
incontrovertible argument, which would have compelled him to decide in favor
of one or the other. His prudent character led him to speak in indefinite terms.
He excelled in presenting, one after the other, both sides of a question, and he
reveled in his vagaries, like a fish in water. Therefore, this evening he felt quite
equal to the situation.

"The fact is incontestable," he said, shaking his head, "that there are
seventeen English vessels bearing the name of 'Cynthia,' and this seems to favor
the conclusion arrived at by our eminent friend. The characteristic traits also
have assuredly great weight, and I do not hesitate to say that they appear to me
to be quite conclusive. I do not hesitate to confess that if I were called upon to
give an opinion as to Erik's nationality, I should say that he was Irish. But to
decide the bet in question we require something more than probabilities; we
must have facts to guide us. The chances so far greatly favor the opinion of Dr.
Schwaryencrona, but Bredejord can allege that nothing has actually been proved.
I see, therefore, no sufficient reason for declaring that the Quintilian has been
won by the doctor; neither can I say that the professor has lost his Pliny. In my
opinion, as the question remains undecided, it ought to be annulled, which is the
best thing to do in such a case."

The doctor's face clearly betrayed his dissatisfaction. As for Mr. Bredejord
he leaped to his feet, saying:

"Your argument is a beautiful one, my dear Hochstedt, but I think you are
hasty in your conclusions. Schwaryencrona, you say, has not verified his
opinions sufficiently for you to say positively that he has won the bet, although
you think that all the probabilities are in his favor. What will you say then, if I
prove to you immediately that the ‘Cynthia’ was not an English vessel at all?"

"What would I say?" said the professor, somewhat troubled by this sudden
attack. "Upon my word I do not know. I would have to consider the question in a
different aspect."

"Examine it then at your leisure," answered the advocate, thrusting his hand
into the inner pocket of his coat, and taking out a case from which he selected a
letter inclosed in one of those yellow envelopes, which betray at the first glance
their American origin.

"This is a document which you can not controvert," he added, placing the
letter before the doctor's eyes, who read aloud:

"To Mr. Bredejord, Stockholm.

"NEW YORK, October 27th.

"SIR,--In reply to your letter of the 5th instant, I hasten to write you the
following facts:--


"1st.--A vessel named ‘Cynthia,’ commanded by Captain Barton, and the
property of the Canadian General Transportation Company, was lost, with her
cargo and all on board, just fourteen years ago, in the neighborhood of the Faroe
Islands.

"2d.--This vessel was insured in the General Steam Navigation Company of
New York for the sum of eight hundred thousand dollars.

"3d.--The disappearance of the 'Cynthia' having remained unexplained, and
the causes of the sad accident never having been clearly proved to the
satisfaction of the insurance company, a lawsuit ensued, which was lost by the
proprietors of the said vessel.

"Ath.--The loss of this lawsuit occasioned the dissolution of the Canadian
General Transportation Company, which has ceased to exist for the last eleven
years, having gone into liquidation. While waiting to hear from you again, I beg
of you, sir, to accept our sincere salutations.

"JEREMIAH SMITH, WALKER & CO., "Maritime Agents."

"Well, what do you say to that?" asked Mr. Bredejord, when the doctor had
finished reading the letter. "It is a document of some value, I think. Do you agree
with me?"

"TI quite agree with you,” answered the doctor. "How did you procure it?"

"In the simplest way in the world. That evening when you spoke to me about
the 'Cynthia' being necessarily an English vessel, I thought that you were taking
too limited a field for your researches, and that the vessel might be an American
one. When time passed, and you received no intelligence, for you would have
told us if you had, the idea occurred to me of writing to New York. The third
letter brought the result which you have before you. The affair is no longer a
complicated one. Do you not think that it assures to me beyond contest the
possession of your Pliny?"

"It appears to me to be rather a forced conclusion," replied the doctor, taking
the letter and reading it over again, to see if he could find any new arguments to
support his theory.

"How forced?" cried the advocate.

"I have proved to you that the vessel was an American one, and that she was
lost off the Faroe Islands, that is to say, near the coast of Norway, precisely at the
time which corresponds to the arrival of the infant, and still you are not
convinced of your error."

"Not in the least, my dear friend. I do not dispute the value or your
document. You have discovered what I have found it impossible to do--the true
‘Cynthia,’ which was lost at a little distance from our coast, and at a specified
epoch; but permit me to say, that this only confirms precisely my theory, for the


vessel was a Canadian one, or in other words, English, and the Irish element is
very strong in some parts of Canada, and I have therefore more reason than ever
for being sure that the child is of Irish origin."

"Ah, is that what you find in my letter?" said Mr. Bredejord, more vexed than
he was willing to appear to be. "Then without doubt you persist in believing that
you have not lost your Pliny?"

"Assuredly!"

"Perhaps you think you have a right to my Quintilian?"

"I hope in any case to be able to prove my right, thanks to your discovery, if
you will only give me time by renewing the bet."

"I am willing. I ask nothing better. How much time do you want?"

"Let us take two more years, and wait until the second Christmas after this
one."

"It is agreed," answered Mr. Bredejord. "But be assured, doctor, that you will
finally see me in possession of your Pliny!"

"By my faith no. It will make a fine appearance in my bookcase beside your
Quintilian."


CHAPTER VII.

VANDA'S OPINION.

In the beginning, Erik burning with zeal at the sacrifice which he had made,
devoted all his energies to a fisherman's life, and tried to forget that he had ever
known any other. He was always the first to rise and prepare the boat for his
adopted father, who found every morning all the arrangements completed, and
he had only to step on board. If the wind failed, then Erik took the heavy oars,
and rowed with all his strength, seeming to choose the hardest and most
fatiguing duties. Nothing discouraged him, neither the long waiting for the fish
to seize the bait, nor the various preparations to which the captive was subjected-
-first, the removal of the tongue, which is a most delicate morsel; then the head,
then the bones, before placing them in the reservoir, where they receive their
first salting. Whatever their work was, Erik did his part not only conscientiously,
but eagerly. He astonished the placid Otto by his extreme application to the
smallest details of their business.

"How you must have suffered, when you were shut up in the town," said the
lad to him, naively. "You only seem to be in your element when you are on the
borders of the fiord or on the open sea."

When their conversation took this turn, Erik always remained silent.
Sometimes, however, he would revert to the subject himself, and try to prove to


Otto, or rather to himself, that there was no better state of existence than their
own.

"Tt is what I have always heard," the other would answer with his calm smile.

And poor Erik would turn away and stifle a sigh.

The truth is that he suffered cruelly after renouncing his studies and seeing
himself condemned to a life of manual labor. When these thoughts came to him
he fought against them with all his might. He did not wish any one to suspect
that he felt in this way, and in hiding them within his own breast he suffered all
the more.

A catastrophe which occurred at the beginning of the spring, only served to
increase his discouragement.

One day, as there was a great deal of work to do at home in piling together
the salted fish, Mr. Hersebom had intrusted it to Erik and to Otto, and had gone
out to fish alone. The weather was stormy, and the sky very cloudy for the time
of the year. The two young men, although they worked actively, could not help
noticing that it was exceptionally dull, and they felt the atmosphere very heavy.

"It is singular!" said Erik, "but I feel a roaring in my ears as if I were some
distance above the earth in a balloon."

Almost immediately his nose began to bleed. Otto had a similar sensation,
although not quite so severe.

"I think the barometer must be very low," said Erik. "If I had time I would
run to Mr. Malarius' and see."

"You have plenty of time," said Otto. "Our work is nearly done, and even if
you were delayed I could easily finish it alone."

"Then I will go," replied Erik. "I do not know why the state of the
atmosphere should trouble me so much. I wish father was home."

As he walked toward the school, he met Mr. Malarius on the road.

"Is it you, Erik?" said the teacher. "I am glad to see you, and make sure that
you are not on the sea. I was just going to inquire. The barometer has fallen with
such rapidity during the last half hour. I have never seen anything like it. We are
surely going to have a change of weather."

Mr. Malarius had hardly finished speaking, when a distant grumbling,
followed by a lugubrious roaring, fell upon their ears. The sky became covered
with a cloud as black as ink, which spread rapidly in all directions, and obscured
every object with great swiftness. Then suddenly, after an interval of complete
silence, the leaves of the trees, the bits of straw, the sand, and even the stones,
were swept away by a sudden gust of wind.

The hurricane had begun.

It raged with unheard-of violence. The chimneys, the window shutters, and


in some places even the roofs of the houses were blown down; and the boat-
houses without exception were carried away and destroyed by the wind. In the
fiord, which was usually as calm as a well in a court-yard, the most terrible
tempest raged; the waves were enormous and came and went, breaking against
the shore with a deafening noise.

The cyclone raged for an hour, then arrested in its course by the heights of
Norway, it moved toward the south, and swept over continental Europe. It is
noted in meteorological annals as one of the most extraordinary and disastrous
that ever was known upon the Atlantic coast. These great changes of the
atmosphere are now generally announced beforehand by the telegraph. Most of
the European seaports forewarned of the danger have time to warn vessels and
seamen of the threatened tempest, and they seek a safe anchorage. By this means
many disasters are averted.

But on the distant and less frequented coasts, in the fishing-hamlets, the
number of shipwrecks was beyond computation.

In one office, that of "Veritas" in France, there were registered not less than
730.

The first thought of all the members of the Hersebom family, as well as of all
the other families of fishermen, was naturally for those who were on the sea on
this disastrous day. Mr. Hersebom went most often to the western coast of a large
island which was about two miles distant, beyond the entrance to the fiord. It
was the spot where he had first seen Erik. They hoped that during the tempest he
had been able to find shelter by running his boat upon the low and sandy shore.
But Erik and Otto felt so anxious that they could not wait until evening to see if
this hope was well founded.

The fiord had hardly resumed its ordinary placidity, after the passage of the
hurricane, when they borrowed a boat of one of their neighbors, in order to go in
search of him. Mr. Malarius insisted upon accompanying the young men upon
their expedition, and they all three set out, anxiously watched by Katrina and her
daughter.

On the fiord the wind had nearly gone down, but it blew from the west, and
to reach the entrance to the harbor they were obliged to use their oars. This took
them more than an hour.

When they reached the entrance an unexpected obstacle presented itself. The
tempest was still raging on the ocean, and the waves dashed against the island
which, formed the entrance to the fiord of Noroe, forming two currents, which
came and went with such violence in the narrow pass that it was impossible to
gain the open sea. A steamboat could not have ventured through it, and a weak
boat could not have resisted it for a moment.


The only thing they could do, therefore, was to return to Noroe, and wait as
patiently as they could.

The hour when he habitually came home passed without bringing Mr.
Hersebom, but none of the other fishermen returned; so they hoped that they
were all detained by the impassable state of the entrance to the fiord, and would
not believe that he had personally met with any disaster. That evening was a very
sad one at all the firesides where a member was missing. As the night passed
without any of the absent men making their appearance, the anxieties of their
families increased. In Mr. Hersebom's house nobody went to bed. They passed
the long hours of waiting seated in a circle around the fire, silent and anxious.

Dawn is late in these high latitudes in March, but when at last it grew light it
was bright and clear. The wind was calm, and they hoped they would be able to
get through the pass. A regular fleet of boats, composed of every one who could
get away from Noroe, was ready to go in search of the absent men. Just at this
moment several vessels hove in sight, and soon reached the village. They were
the fishermen who had gone out the day before, not expecting such a cyclone;
but Mr. Hersebom was not among them.

Nobody could give any account of him, and the fact of his not returning with
the others increased their anxiety as all the men had been in great peril. Some
had been surprised by the cyclone and dashed upon the shore, others had time to
shelter themselves in a secure place of anchorage. A few had reached the land
just in time to save themselves.

It was decided that the flotilla should go in search of those who were
missing. Mr. Malarius who still wished to take part in the expedition
accompanied Erik and Otto. A large yellow dog begged so earnestly to go with
them, that at length they yielded. It was Kaas, the Greenland dog that Mr.
Hersebom had brought back with him, after a voyage to Cape Farewell.

After issuing from the pass the boats separated, some going to the right, and
others to the left, to explore the shores of the innumerable islands which lie
scattered near the entrance to the fiord of Noroe, as well as all along the coast of
Norway.

When they met at midday at a given point, which had been agreed upon
before separating, no trace of Mr. Hersebom had been discovered. As the search
had apparently been well conducted, everyone was of the opinion that they had
nothing more to do but to go home.

But Erik was not willing to own himself defeated, and give up all hope so
easily. He declared that having visited all the islands which lay toward the south,
he now wished to explore those which were in the north. Mr. Malarius and Otto
supported him; and seeing this they granted his desire.


This persistence deserved some recompense. Toward two o'clock as they
approached a large island, Kaas began suddenly to bark furiously; then before
they could prevent him he threw himself into the water, and swam to the shore.

Erik and Otto rowed with all their strength in the same direction. Soon they
saw the dog reach the island, and bound, while he uttered loud howls, toward
what appeared to be a human form lying extended upon the sand. They made all
possible haste, and soon saw beyond a doubt that it was a man who was lying
there, and this man was Mr. Hersebom; bloody, pale, cold, inanimate--dead,
perhaps. Kaas was licking his hands, and uttering mournful cries.

Erik's first action was to drop on his knees beside the cold body, and apply
his ear to his heart.

"He is alive, I feel it beat," he cried.

Mr. Malarias had taken one of Mr. Hersebom's hand's, and was feeling his
pulse and he shook his head, sadly and doubtfully; but he would not neglect any
of the means which are usually tried in such cases. After taking off a large
woolen girdle which he wore around his waist, he tore it in three pieces, and
giving one to each of the young men, they rubbed vigorously the body, the arms,
and the legs of the fisherman.

It was soon manifest that this simple treatment had produced the effect of
restoring the circulation. The beating of the heart grew stronger, the chest rose,
and a feeble respiration escaped through the lips. In a little while Mr. Hersebom
was partially restored to consciousness, for he distinctly moaned.

Mr. Malarias, and the two young men lifted him from the ground, and carried
him to the boat, where they hastily arranged a bed for him of sails. As they laid
him in the bottom of the boat he opened his eyes.

"A drink!" he said in a weak voice.

Erik held a flask of brandy to his lips. He swallowed a mouthful and
appeared to be conscious of their arrival, for he tried to give them an affectionate
and grateful smile. But fatigue overcame him almost immediately, and he fell
into a heavy sleep which resembled a complete lethargy. Thinking justly that the
best thing they could do was to get him home as speedily as possible, they took
their oars and rowed vigorously; and in a very short time they reached Noroe.

Mr. Hersebom was carried to his bed, and his wounds were dressed with
arnica. He was fed with broth, and given a glass of beer, and in a short time he
recovered consciousness. His injuries were not of a very grave nature. One of his
arms was fractured, and his body was covered with wound and bruises. But Mr.
Malarius insisted that he should remain quiet and rest, and not fatigue himself by
attempting to talk. He was soon sleeping peacefully.

It was not until the next day that they permitted him to speak and explain in a


few words what had happened to him.

He had been overtaken by the cyclone just as he had hoisted his sail to return
to Noroe. He had been dashed against the rocks of the island and his boat had
been broken into a thousand pieces and carried away by the waves. He had
thrown himself into the sea to escape the frightful shock, when she struck, but in
spite of all his efforts, he had been dashed by the waves upon the rocks and
terribly wounded; he had only been able to drag himself beyond the reach of the
waves.

Exhausted by fatigue, one arm broken, and his whole body covered with
wounds, he had lain in an unconscious state, unable to move. He could give no
account of the manner in which he had passed the twenty hours; doubtless he
had either been delirious or unconscious.

Now that he was saved, he began to lament for the loss of his boat, and
because of his broken arm, which was now in splints. What would become of
him, even admitting that he might be able to use his arm again after eight or ten
weeks? The boat was the only capital possessed by the family, and the boat had
been broken to pieces by the wind.

It would be very hard for a man of his age to be compelled to work for
others. Besides, could he find work? It was very doubtful, for nobody in Noroe
employed any assistant, and the factory even had lately reduced its hands.

Such were the bitter reflections of Mr. Hersebom, while he lay upon his bed
of pain; and he felt still worse when he was able to get up, and occupy his
accustomed seat in his armchair.

While waiting for his complete recovery, the family lived upon such
provisions as they had in the house, and by the sale of the salt codfish which still
remained. But the future looked very dark, and nobody could see how it was to
be lightened.

This imminent distress had given a new tur to Erik's thoughts. For two or
three days he reflected that it was by his good fortune that Mr. Hersebom had
been discovered. How could he help feeling proud, when he saw Dame Katrina
and Vanda look at him with intense gratitude, as they said: "Dear Erik, our father
saved you from the waves, and now, in your turn, you have snatched him from
death."

Certainly it was the highest recompense that he could desire for the self-
abnegation of which he had given such a noble proof, in condemning himself to
a fisherman's life. To feel that he had been able to render his adopted family such
an inestimable benefit was to him a thought full of sweetness and strength. This
family, who had so generously shared with him all that they possessed, were
now in trouble, and in want of food. But, could he remain to be a burden to


them? Was it not rather his duty to try and do something to assist them?

Erik did not doubt his obligation to do this. He only hesitated as to the best
way for him to do it. Should he go to Bergen and become a sailor? or was there
some better occupation open to him, where he could be immediately useful to
them. He resolved to consult Mr. Malarius, who listened to his reasons, and
approved of them, but did not think well of his project of becoming a sailor.

"I understood, but I deplored your decision when you were resigned to
remain here and share the life of your adopted parents; but I can not understand
why you should condemn yourself to the life of a sailor, which would take you
far away from them, when Doctor Schwaryencrona offers you every advantage
to pursue a more congenial career," said Mr. Malarius. "Reflect, my dear child,
before you make such a decision."

Mr. Malarius did not tell him that he had already written to Stockholm to
inform the doctor of the sad state of their affairs, and the change which the
cyclone of the 3d of March had made in the circumstances of Erik's family. He
was not surprised, when three days after his conversation with Erik, he received
the following letter, which he lost no time in carrying to the house of Mr.
Hersebom.

The letter read as follows:

"STOCKHOLM, March 17th.

"MY DEAR MR. MALARIUS,--I thank you cordially for informing me of
the disastrous consequences of the cyclone of the 3d of March to the worthy Mr.
Hersebom. I am proud and happy to learn that Erik acted in these circumstances,
as always before, like a brave boy and a devoted son. You will find a check in
this letter for 500 kroners; and I beg you to give them to him from me. Tell him
if it is not enough to buy at Bergen a first-class boat, he must let me know
without delay. He must name this boat ‘Cynthia,’ and then present it to Mr.
Hersebom as a souvenir of filial love. That done, if Erik wishes to please me he
will return to Stockholm and resume his studies. His place is always ready for
him at my fireside, and if he needs a motive to assist in this decision, I add that I
have at length obtained some information, and hope yet to be able to solve the
mystery enshrouding his birth.

"Believe me, my dear Malarius, your sincere and devoted friend,

"R.W. SCHWARYENCRONA, M.D."

You may imagine with what joy this letter was received. The doctor, by
sending this gift to Erik, showed that he understood the character of the old
fisherman. If he had offered it directly to him, it is hardly probable that Mr.
Hersebom would have accepted it. But he could not refuse the boat from Erik's
hand, and bearing the name of "Cynthia," which recalled how Erik had become a


member of the family. Their only grief now, which already began to sadden all
their countenances, was the thought that he must soon leave them again. Nobody
dared to speak about it, although it was constantly in their thoughts. Erik
himself, with his head bowed, was divided between the desire of satisfying the
doctor, and realizing the secret wishes of his own heart, and the no less natural
wish of giving no offense to his adopted parents.

It was Vanda who first broke the reserve, and spoke upon the subject.

"Erik," she said, in her sweet grave voice, "you can not say 'No' to the doctor
after receiving such a letter. You can not do it, because it would be treating him
most ungratefully, and sinning against yourself. Your place is among scholars,
and not among fishermen. I have thought so for a long time. Nobody has dared
to tell you, therefore I tell you."

"Vanda is right," said Mr. Malarius, with a smile.

"Vanda is right," repeated Dame Katrina, drying her eyes.

And in this manner, for the second time, Erik's departure was decided.


CHAPTER VIII.

PATRICK O'DONOGHAN.

The information which Dr. Schwaryencrona had received was not very
important, but it sufficed to start his inquiries in a new direction.

He had learned the name of the ex-director of the Canadian Transportation
Company, it was Mr. Joshua Churchill. But they did not know what had become
of this gentleman since the dissolution of the company. If they could succeed in
finding him, he might be able to give them some information about the old
records of the company; perhaps there might have been a list of the passengers
by the "Cynthia," and the baby might have been registered with his family or
with the persons who had charge of him. But their investigations proved very
unsatisfactory. The solicitor who had formerly had the books in his possession as
the receiver of the company about ten years before; did not know what had
become of Mr. Churchill. For a moment Dr. Schwaryencrona consoled himself
with a false hope. He remembered that the American newspapers usually
published a list of the passengers embarking for Europe, and he sent for a
number of old gazettes to see if he could find the "Cynthia's" list; but he was
soon convinced that this was a fruitless effort. He discovered that the practice of
publishing the names of passengers on European steamships was of
comparatively recent date. But the old gazettes were of one use to him, they gave
the exact date of sailing of the "Cynthia," which had left on the 3d of November,
not from a Canadian port as they had at first supposed, but from New York, to go


to Hamburg.

It was therefore in New York that the doctor must first make his
investigations, and, if unsuccessful, then in other parts of the United States.

At Hamburg all his inquiries proved to be useless. The consignee of the
Canadian Transportation Company knew nothing about the passengers of the
"Cynthia," and could only give them information about the freight, which they
had already obtained.

Erik had been in Stockholm six months when they learned that the ex-
director, Mr. Joshua Churchill, had died several years before, in an hospital,
without leaving any known heirs, or probably any money. As for the registers of
the company, they had probably been sold long before as waste paper.

These long researches led to nothing, except to provoke the sarcasms of Mr.
Bredejord, which were wounding, to the doctor's self-love, who, however, did
not as yet give way to despair.

Erik's history was now well known in the doctor's household. They no longer
forbore to speak openly about it, and the results of their researches were talked
of both in the dining-room and the parlor.

Perhaps the doctor had acted more discreetly during the first two years of
Erik's sojourn with him, when he had kept his affairs a secret. Now they
furnished food for the gossiping of Kajsa and Dame Greta, and even occupied
the thoughts of Erik himself; and his reflections were often very melancholy.

Not to know whether his parents were still living, to reflect that he might
never be able to discover the secret of his birth, was in itself a sad thought to
him; but it was still more sad to be ignorant of the land of his birth.

"The poorest child in the streets, the most miserable peasant, knew at least
what his country was, and to what branch of the great human family he
belonged," he would sometimes say to himself, as he thought of those things.
"But I am ignorant of all this. I am cast on the globe like a waif, like a grain of
dust tossed by the winds, and nobody knows where I came from. I have no
tradition--no past. The spot where my mother was born, and where her ashes
now rest, is perhaps profaned and trodden under foot, and I am powerless to
defend and protect it."

These thoughts saddened Erik. Sometimes he would tell himself that he had
a mother in Dame Katrina, and a home at Mr. Hersebom's, and that Noroe was
his country. He vowed that he would repay their kindness to him fourfold, and
would always be a devoted son to Norway, but still he felt himself in an
exceptional position.

Sometimes when he caught a glimpse of himself in a mirror, he could
observe the physical difference between himself and those surrounding him. The


color of his eyes and his skin often occasioned him gloomy reflections.
Sometimes he would ask himself which country he would prefer to be a native of
if he had a choice, and he studied history and geography that he might become
better acquainted with the civilization of different countries, and with the habits
of their inhabitants. It was a sort of consolation to him to believe that he
belonged to the Celtic race, and he sought in books a confirmation of the theory
of the doctor.

But when the learned man repeated that in his opinion he was certainly Irish,
Erik felt depressed. Why among all the Celtic race should he belong to the
people who were the most oppressed? If he had felt absolutely sure of this, he
would have loved this unfortunate country. But all proof being wanting, why
might he not rather believe that he was French? There were certainly Celts in
France, and it was a country that he would have been proud to claim as his own,
with her glorious traditions, her dramatic history, and her fruitful principles,
which she had disseminated all over the world. Oh! he could have passionately
loved, and served with devotion, such a country. He would have felt a filial
interest in studying her glorious annals, in reading the works of her great
authors, and in studying her poets. But alas! all these delicate emotions were
denied him, and he felt that the problem of his origin would never be solved,
since after so many years spent in making inquiries they had learned nothing.

However, it seemed to Erik that if he could pursue these inquiries himself,
and follow up the information already obtained, that he might discover
something which might lead to some result, and his activity and zeal might
succeed where money had failed. Would he not work with an ardor which must
overcome all difficulties?

This idea took possession of his mind, and insensibly had a marked effect in
his studies, giving them a special direction; although he was not aware of this
fact himself. As he had made up his mind to travel, he commenced to study
cosmography and nautical matters; in fact, everything that was taught in the
school for marines.

"Some day," he said to himself, "I will pass my examination as a captain, and
then I shall go to New York in my own vessel, and pursue my inquiries with
regard to the 'Cynthia.""

As a natural consequence, this project of personally investigating the matter
of his birth soon became known, for he was candor itself.

Dr. Schwaryencrona, Mr. Bredejord and Professor Hochstedt ended by
becoming interested, and finally adopted his views as their own. The question of
Erik's birth, which had at first only been an interesting problem in their eyes,
engrossed them more and more. They saw how much Erik took it to heart, and as


they were sincerely attached to him, they realized how important it was to him,
and they were disposed to do everything in their power to cast some light upon
the mystery.

One fine evening, just as the vacation was approaching, it occurred to them
that it would be a good idea to make an excursion to New York together, and see
if they could, obtain any further news about the matter.

Who first conceived this idea was a disputed point among them, and gave
rise to many discussions between the doctor and Mr. Bredejord, each claiming a
priority. Doubtless it occurred to them both simultaneously; but be this as it may,
the proposal was adopted unanimously, and in the month of September the three
friends, accompanied by Erik, embarked at Christiana for New York. Ten days
later they had reached that city, and opened communication with the house of
Jeremiah Smith, Walker & Company, from whom they had received the first
intelligence.

And now a new agent appeared on the scene, whose assistance they had had
little suspicion of, and this was Erik himself. In New York he only saw what
would assist him in his search. He was up at daybreak visiting the wharves,
accosting the sailors, whom he might chance to meet, working with indefatigable
activity to collect the most minute intelligence.

"Do you know anything about the Canadian Transportation Company? Could
you tell me of any officer, or passenger, or sailor, who had sailed on the
‘Cynthia'?" he asked everywhere.

Thanks to his perfect knowledge of the English language, his sweet and
serious countenance, and his familiarity with everything pertaining to the sea, he
was well received everywhere. They mentioned to him successively several old
officers, sailors, and employs, of the Canadian Transportation Company.
Sometimes he was able to find them. Sometimes all traces of them were lost. But
none of them could give him any useful information about the last voyage of the
"Cynthia." It took fifteen days of walking, and searching incessantly, to obtain
one little bit of information which might prove valuable, among all the confused
and contradictory accounts which were poured into poor Erik's willing ears.

This one little truth however seemed to be worth its weight in gold.

They assured him that a sailor named Patrick O'Donoghan, had survived the
shipwreck of the "Cynthia," and had even returned to New York several times
since that eventful voyage. This Patrick O'Donoghan had been on the "Cynthia,"
on her last voyage, and had been a special attendant of the captain. In all
probability he would know the first-class passengers, who always eat at the
captain's table. They judged by the fineness of the infant's clothing that he
belonged to this class. It was now a matter of the greatest importance to find this


Sailor.

This was the conclusion of Dr. Schwaryencrona and Mr. Bredejord, when
Erik informed them of his discovery, when he returned to the Fifth Avenue Hotel
to dinner.

As usual it led to a discussion, since the doctor tried to draw from this
discovery a confirmation of his favorite theory.

"If ever there was an Irish name," he cried, "Patrick O'Donoghan is one. Did
I not always say that I was sure that Erik was of Irish birth?"

"Does this discovery prove it?" asked Mr. Bredejord laughing. "An Irish
cabin-boy does not prove much. It would be difficult, I fancy, to find an
American vessel without one or two natives of Erin among her crew."

They discussed the matter for two or three hours, neither of them willing to
give way to the other.

From that day Erik devoted all his energies to the task of finding Patrick
O'Donoghan.

He was not successful it is true, but by force of seeking, and questioning, he
discovered a sailor who had known this man, and who was able to give him
some information. Patrick O'Donoghan was a native of the County Cork. He was
between thirty-three and thirty-four years old, of medium height, with red hair,
black eyes, and a nose which had been broken by some accident.

"A boy one would remember among a thousand," said the sailor. "I recollect
him very well, although I have not seen him for seven or eight years."

"Is it in New York you usually meet him?" asked Erik.

"Yes, in New York, and in other places; but the last time was in New York."

"Do you know any one who could give me any information about him, so
that I could find out what has become of him?"

"No, unless it is the proprietor of the hotel called the Red Anchor, in
Brooklyn. Patrick O'Donoghan lodges there when he is in New York. The name
of the hotel-keeper is Mr. Bowles, and he is an old sailor. If he does not know, I
do not know of any one else who can tell you anything about him."

Erik hurried on board one of the ferry-boats that cross the East River, and ten
minutes later he was in Brooklyn.

At the door-way of the Red Anchor he saw an old woman, who was neatly
dressed, and busily occupied in peeling potatoes.

"Is Mr. Bowles at home?" he said, saluting her politely, after the custom of
his adopted country.

"He is at home, but he is taking a nap," answered the good woman, looking
with curiosity at her questioner. "If you have any message for him, you can give
it to me. I am Mrs. Bowles."


"Oh, madam, you can no doubt give me the information I desire as well as
Mr. Bowles," answered Erik. "I wish to know whether you are acquainted with a
sailor named Patrick O'Donoghan, and whether he is now with you, or if you can
tell me where I can find him?"

"Patrick O'Donoghan: yes, I know him, but it is five or six years since he has
been here, and I am unable to say where he is now."

Erik's countenance displayed such great disappointment that the old woman
was touched.

"Are you so anxious to find Patrick O'Donoghan that you are disappointed in
not finding him here?" she asked.

"Yes, indeed," he answered. "He alone can solve a mystery that I shall seek
all my life to make clear."

During the three weeks that Erik had been running everywhere in search of
information, he gained a certain amount of experience in human nature. He saw
that the curiosity of Mrs. Bowles was aroused by his questions, he therefore
entered the hotel and asked for a glass of soda-water.

The low room in which he found himself was furnished with green tables,
and wooden chairs, but it was empty. This circumstance emboldened Erik to
enter into conversation with Mrs. Bowles, when she handed him the bottle of
soda-water which he had ordered.

"You are doubtless wondering, madam, what I can want with Patrick
O'Donoghan, and I will tell you," said he, with a smile.

"An American vessel called the 'Cynthia' was lost about seventeen years ago
on the coast of Norway; Patrick O'Donoghan was employed on board. I was
picked up by a Norwegian fisherman when I was about nine months old. I was
floating in a cradle attached to a buoy of the 'Cynthia.' I am seeking O'Donoghan
to see if he can give me any information about my family, or at least about my
country."

Mrs. Bowles uttered a cry that put a stop to Erik's explanation.

"To a buoy, do you say? You were tied to a buoy?"

But without waiting for any reply she ran to the stairway. "Bowles! Bowles!
come down quickly," she cried, in a piercing voice.

"On a buoy! you are the child who was tied to the buoy! Who ever would
have expected such a thing to happen?" she said, as she returned to Erik, who
had turned pale from surprise.

Was he going to learn the secret which he was so anxious to make out.

A heavy footstep was heard on the stairs, and soon an old man, fat and rosy,
clothed in a complete suit of blue cloth, and with gold rings in his ears, appeared
on the threshold.


"What is the matter?" he asked, rubbing his eyes.

"Here is somebody who wants you," said Mrs. Bowles; "sit down and listen
to the gentleman, who will repeat what he has told me."

Mr. Bowles obeyed without any protestation; Erik did the same. He repeated
in as few words as he could what he had told the old woman.

As he listened, the countenance of Mr. Bowles dilated like a full moon, his
lips parted in a broad smile, and he looked at his wife, and rubbed his hands. She
on her side appeared equally well pleased.

"Must I suppose that you are already acquainted with my story?" asked Erik,
with a beating heart.

Mr. Bowles made an affirmative sign, and scratching his ear, made up his
mind to speak:

"T know it without your telling me," he said, at length, "and my wife knows it
as well as I do. We have often talked about it without understanding it."

Erik, pale and with tightly compressed lips, hung upon his words, expecting
some revelation, but this he had to wait for. Mr. Bowles had not the gift of either
eloquence or clearness, and perhaps his ideas were still clouded with sleep, and
in order to recover his faculties he took two or three glasses of a liquor called
"pick me up," which greatly resembled gin.

After his wife had placed the bottle and two glasses before him, and he had
sufficiently fortified himself, he began to speak.

His story was so confused, and mingled with so many useless details, that it
was impossible to draw any conclusions from it, but Erik listened attentively to
all he said, and by questioning and insisting, and aided by Mrs. Bowles, he
ended by gathering some facts about himself.


CHAPTER IX.

IN WHICH A REWARD OF FIVE HUNDRED POUNDS STERLING IS
OFFERED.

Patrick O'Donoghan, as far as Erik could make out through Mr. Bowles'
rambling account of him, was not a model of virtue. The proprietor of the Red
Anchor had known him as a cabin-boy and sailor, both before and after the loss
of the "Cynthia." Up to that time Patrick O'Donoghan had been poor, as all
sailors are. After the shipwreck he had returned from Europe with a large bundle
of bank-notes, pretending to have inherited some money in Ireland, which
seemed likely enough.

Mr. Bowles, however, had never believed in this inheritance. He thought that
this sudden accession of wealth was connected in some way with the loss of the


"Cynthia," and that Patrick O'Donoghan was afraid to say so; for it was evident
that contrary to the usual habit of seamen in such cases, he carefully avoided
speaking about the sad occurrence. He would always turn the conversation if any
one alluded to it before him, and he was very anxious to start on a long voyage
before the lawsuit brought by the company to recover the insurance due on the
"Cynthia" should take place. He did not wish to be summoned as a witness. This
conduct appeared very suspicious, as he was the sole known survivor from the
shipwreck. Mr. Bowles and his wife had always suspected him, but they had kept
their own counsel.

What looked still more suspicious was the fact that when Patrick
O'Donoghan was in New York he was never short of money. He brought back
very little with him after a voyage, but a few days after his return he always had
gold and bank-notes; and when he was tipsy, which frequently happened, he
would boast of being in possession of a secret which was worth a fortune to him.
The words which most frequently escaped from his lips were, "the baby tied to
the buoy!"

"The baby tied to the buoy," he would say, striking the table with his fist,
"The baby tied to the buoy is worth its weight in gold."

Then he would laugh, as if well satisfied with himself. But they could never
draw out of him any explanation of these words, and for many years the Bowles
household were lost in conjectures as to what they could possibly mean.

This accounted for Mrs. Bowles' excitement, when Erik suddenly announced
to her that he was the famous baby who had been tied to a buoy.

Patrick O'Donoghan, who had been in the habit of lodging at the Red
Anchor, whenever he was in New York, for more than fifteen years, had not been
seen there now for more than four years. There had also been something
mysterious about his last departure. He had received a visit from a man who had
been closeted with him for more than an hour. After this visit Patrick
O'Donoghan, who had seemed worried and troubled, had paid his board bill,
taken his carpet bag, and left in a hurry.

They had never seen him since that day.

Mr. and Mrs. Bowles were naturally ignorant of the cause of his sudden
departure, but they had always thought that it had some connection with the loss
of the "Cynthia." In their opinion the visitor had come to warn Patrick
O'Donoghan of some danger which threatened him, and the Irishman had
thought it prudent to leave New York immediately. Mrs. Bowles did not think he
had ever returned. If he had done so, they would have been sure to hear of him
through other seamen who frequented their house, and who would have been
astonished if Patrick O'Donoghan had boarded anywhere else, and would have


been sure to ask questions as to the reasons for his doing so.

This was the substance of the story related to Erik, and he hastened to
communicate it to his friends.

His report was naturally received with all the interest which it merited. For
the first time, after so many years, they were on the track of a man who had
made reiterated allusions to the baby tied to a buoy. It was true they did not
know where this man was, but they hoped to find him some day. It was the most
important piece of news which they had as yet obtained. They resolved to
telegraph to Mrs. Bowles, and beg her to prepare a dinner for six persons. Mr.
Bredejord had suggested this idea, as a good means of drawing the worthy
couple out; for while they talked during the dinner, they might be able to glean
some new facts.

Erik had little hopes of obtaining any further information. He thought that he
already knew Mr. and Mrs. Bowles well enough to be convinced that they had
told him all that they knew. But he did not take into account Mr. Bredejord's skill
in questioning witnesses, and in drawing from them information which they
themselves were scarcely aware of.

Mrs. Bowles had surpassed herself in preparing the dinner. She had laid the
table in the best room on the first floor. She felt very much flattered at being
invited to partake of it, in the society of such distinguished guests, and answered
willingly all of Mr. Bredejord's questions.

They gathered from this conversation a certain number of facts which were
not unimportant.

One was that Patrick O'Donoghan had said at the time, of the lawsuit against
the insurance company, that he was going away to avoid being summoned as a
witness. This was evident proof that he did not wish to explain the circumstances
under which the shipwreck had occurred, and his subsequent conduct confirmed
this theory. It was also evident that in New York or its environs he received the
suspicious revenue which seemed to be connected with his secret. For when he
arrived he was always without money, but after he had been about for a short
time he always returned with his pockets full of gold. They could not doubt that
his secret was connected with the infant tied to the buoy, for he had frequently
affirmed that such was the case.

The evening before his sudden departure Patrick O'Donoghan had said that
he was tired of a sea-faring life, and that he thought he should give up making
voyages, and settle in New York for the remainder of his life.

Lastly, the individual who had called to see Patrick O'Donoghan was
interested in his departure, for he had called the next day and asked for the
Irishman who was boarding at the Red Anchor, and had seemed pleased to hear


that he was no longer there. Mr. Bowles felt sure that he would recognize this
man if he saw him again. By his conversation and actions he had believed him to
be a detective, or some agent of the police.

Mr. Bredejord concluded from these facts that Patrick O'Donoghan had been
systematically frightened by the person from whom he drew the money, and that
this man had been sent to make him fear that criminal proceedings were about to
be taken against him. This would explain his precipitate flight, and why he had
never returned to New York.

It was important to find this detective, as well as Patrick O'Donoghan.

Mr. and Mrs. Bowles, by referring to their books, were able to give the exact
date of the Irishman's departure, which was four years, lacking three months;
although they had previously believed that it was four or five years ago.

Dr. Schwaryencrona was immediately struck by the fact that the date of his
departure, and consequently of the visit of the detective, corresponded precisely
with the date of the first advertisements which he had caused to be made in
Great Britain for the survivors of the "Cynthia." This coincidence was so striking
that it was impossible not to believe that there was some connection between
them.

They began to understand the mystery a little better. The abandonment of
Erik on the buoy had been the result of some crime--a crime of which the cabin-
boy O'Donoghan had been a witness or an accomplice. He knew the authors of
this crime, who lived in New York or its environs, and he had for a long time
enjoyed the reward of his secrecy. Then a day had come when the excessive
demands of the Irishman had become burdensome, and the announcement in the
newspapers by advertisement had been made use of to frighten Patrick, and
cause his hurried departure.

In any case, even if these deductions were not correct in every point, they
had obtained sufficient information to entitle them to demand a judicial
investigation.

Erik and his friends therefore left the Red Anchor full of hope that they
would soon obtain some favorable intelligence.

The next day Mr. Bredejord was introduced by the Swedish consul to the
chief of police of New York, and he made him acquainted with the facts which
had become known to him. At the same time he entered into conversation with
the officers of the insurance company who had refused to pay the claims due on
the "Cynthia," and read the old documents relative to this matter, which had lain
undisturbed so many years. But the examination of these papers did not afford
him any important intelligence. The matter had been decided upon technical
points, relating to an excess of insurance far above the value of the vessel and


cargo. Neither side had been able to produce any person who had been a witness
of the shipwreck. The owners of the "Cynthia" had not been able to prove their
good faith, or to explain how the shipwreck had taken place, and the Court had
decided in favor of their adversaries. Their defense had been weak, and their
opponents had triumphed.

The insurance company, however, had been compelled to pay several claims
on the lives of the passengers to their heirs. But, in all these law proceedings,
there was no trace of any infant nine months old.

These examinations had occupied several days. Finally, the chief of police
informed Mr. Bredejord that he had been unable to obtain any intelligence about
the matter. Nobody in New York knew any detective who answered to Mr.
Bowles' description. Nobody could tell who the individual was who was
interested in the departure of Patrick O'Donoghan. As for this sailor, he did not
appear to have set his foot in the United States for at least four years. All they
could do was to keep the address of the place where he was born, which might
prove useful some time. But the chief of police told Mr. Bredejord, without any
dissimulation, that the affair had happened so long ago--now nearly twenty
years--that even if Patrick O'Donoghan ever returned to New York, it was at
least doubtful if the authorities would be willing to investigate the matter.

At the moment when Erik believed that he was about to obtain a solution of
the mystery which clouded his life, all their investigations came to a sudden end,
and without producing the slightest result. The only thing that remained to be
done was to pass through Ireland as they returned to Sweden, to see if perchance
Patrick O'Donoghan had returned there to pass the remainder of his days
planting cabbages.

Dr. Schwaryencrona and his friends, after taking leave of Mr. and Mrs.
Bowles, resolved to pursue this route. The steamers between New York and
Liverpool touch at Cork, and this was only a few miles from Innishannon, the
place where Patrick was born. There they learned that Patrick O'Donoghan had
never returned to his native place since he left it at the age of twelve years, and
that they had never heard from him.

"Where shall we look for him now?" asked Dr. Schwaryencrona, as they
embarked for England, on the way to Stockholm.

"At the seaport towns evidently, and clearly at those which are not
American," answered Mr. Bredejord. "For note this point, a sailor, a sea-faring
man, does not renounce his profession at the age of thirty-five. It is the only one
he knows. Patrick is doubtless still on the sea. And all vessels have some port or
other for their destination, and it is only there that we can hope to find this man.
What do you think, Hochstedt?"


"Your reasoning seems to be just, although not altogether indisputable,"
answered the professor, with his customary prudence.

"Admit that it is right," continued Mr. Bredejord. "We know that Patrick
O'Donoghan was frightened away and would be in dread of pursuit, perhaps of
being extradited. In that case, he would avoid his old companions, and seek in
preference ports where he was not likely to meet any of them. I know that my
ideas can be contradicted, but let us suppose they are well founded. The number
of ports which are not frequented by American vessels is not very large. I think
we might begin by seeking in these places news of Patrick O'Donoghan."

"Why not have recourse to advertisements?" asked Dr. Schwaryencrona.

"Because Patrick O'Donoghan would not answer them if he is trying to hide
himself; even supposing that a sailor would be likely to see your advertisement."

"But you could word your advertisement so as to assure him that you
intended to do him no injury, but rather that it would be greatly to his advantage
to communicate with you."

"You are right, but still I am afraid that an ordinary seaman would not be
likely to see such an advertisement."

"Well, you might try offering a reward to Patrick O'Donoghan, or to any one
who would give you information as to where he might be found. What do you
think about it, Erik?"

"Tt seems to me that such an advertisement to produce any result would have
to be continued for a long time, and in a great many different papers. That would
cost a great deal, and might only frighten Patrick O'Donoghan, no matter how
well worded the advertisement might be, provided it is to his interest to remain
concealed. Would it not be better to employ some one to visit personally those
seaports which this man would be likely to frequent?"

"But where could we find a trusty man who would be willing to undertake
such a task?"

"I can furnish one, if you wish it," answered Erik. "I would go myself."

"You, my dear child--and what would become of your studies?"

"My studies need not suffer. There is nothing to prevent me from pursuing
them, even during my travels. And another thing, doctor, I must confess to you,
that I have already secured the means of doing so without costing me anything."

"How is that possible," asked Dr. Schwaryencrona, Mr. Bredejord, and
Professor Hochstedt, simultaneously.

"I have simply been preparing myself for a sea-faring life. I can pass the
examination to-day if necessary. Once in possession of my diploma, it would be
easy for me to obtain a position as a lieutenant in any seaport.

"And you have done all this without saying a word to me?" said the doctor,


half grieved, while the lawyer and the professor both laughed heartily.

"Well," said Erik, "I do not think that I have committed any great crime. I
have only made inquiries as to the requisite amount of knowledge, and I have
mastered it. I should not have made any use of it without asking your
permission, and I now solicit it."

"And I shall grant it, wicked boy," said the doctor, "But to let you set out all
alone now is another matter--we will wait until you have attained your majority."

Erik submitted to this decision willingly and gratefully.

However, the doctor was not willing to give up his own ideas. To search the
seaports personally he regarded as a last expedient. An advertisement on the
other hand would go everywhere. If Patrick O'Donoghan was not hiding away,
they might possibly find him by this means. If he was hiding, some one might
see it and betray him. He therefore had this advertisement written in seven or
eight different languages, and dispatched to the four quarters of the globe in a
hundred of the most widely circulated newspapers.

"Patrick O'Donoghan, a sailor, has been absent from New York for four
years. A reward of one hundred pounds sterling will be paid to any one who can
give me news of him. Five hundred pounds sterling will be given to the said
Patrick O'Donoghan if he will communicate with the advertiser. He need fear
nothing, as no advantage will be taken of him.

"DOCTOR SCHWARYENCRONA.

"Stockholm."

By the 20th of October, the doctor and his companions had returned to their
homes.

The next day the advertisement was sent to the advertising agency in
Stockholm, and three days afterward it had made its appearance in several
newspapers. Erik could not repress a sigh and a presentiment that it would be
unsuccessful as he read it.

As for Mr. Bredejord, he declared openly that it was the greatest folly in the
world, and that for the future he considered the affair a failure.

But Erik and Mr. Bredejord were deceived, as events afterward proved.


CHAPTER X.

TUDOR BROWN, ESQUIRE.

One morning in May the doctor was in his office, when his servant brought
him a visitor's card. This card, which was small as is usual in America, had the
name of "Mr. Tudor Brown, on board the 'Albatross" printed upon it.

"Mr. Tudor Brown," said the doctor, trying to remember whom he had ever


known who bore this name.

"This gentleman asked to see the doctor," said the servant.

"Can he not come at my office-hour?" asked the doctor.

"He said his business was about a personal matter."

"Show him in, then," said the doctor, with a sigh.

He lifted his head as the door opened again, and was surprised when he
beheld the singular person who answered to the feudal name of Tudor, and the
plebeian name of Brown.

He was a man about fifty years of age, his forehead was covered with a
profusion of little ringlets, of a carroty color, while the most superficial
examination betrayed that they were made of curled silk; his nose was hooked,
and surmounted with an enormous pair of gold spectacles; his teeth were as long
as those of a horse, his cheeks were smooth, but under his chin he wore a little
red beard. This odd head, covered by a high hat which he did not pretend to
remove, surmounted a thin angular body, clothed from head to foot in a woolen
suit. In his cravat he wore a pin, containing a diamond as large as a walnut; also
a large gold chain, and his vest buttons were amethysts. He had a dozen rings on
his fingers, which were as knotty as those of a chimpanzee. Altogether he was
the most pretentious and grotesque-looking man that it was possible to behold.
This person entered the doctor's office as if he had been entering a railway
station, without even bowing. He stopped to say, in a voice that resembled that of
Punch, its tone was so nasal and guttural:

"Are you Doctor Schwaryencrona?"

"I am," answered the doctor, very much astonished at his manners.

He was debating in his mind whether he should ring for his servant to
conduct this offensive person to the door, when a word put a stop to his
intention.

"I saw your advertisement about Patrick O'Donoghan," said the stranger,
"and I thought you would like to know that I can tell you something about him."

"Take a Seat, sir," answered the doctor.

But he perceived that the stranger had not waited to be asked.

After selecting the most comfortable armchair, he drew it toward the doctor,
then he seated himself with his hands in his pockets, lifted his feet and placed his
heels on the window-sill, and looked at the doctor with the most self-satisfied air
in the world.

"I thought," he said, "that you would listen to these details with pleasure,
since you offer five hundred pounds for them. That is why I have called upon
you."

The doctor bowed without saying a word.


"Doubtless," continued the other, in his nasal voice, "you are wondering who
I am. I am going to tell you. My card has informed you as to my name, and I am
a British subject."

"Irish perhaps?" asked the doctor with interest.

The Granger, evidently surprised, hesitated a moment, and then said:

"No, Scotch. Oh, I know I do not look like a Scotchman, they take me very
often for a Yankee--but that is nothing--I am Scotch."

As he gave this piece of information, he looked at Dr. Schwaryencrona as
much as to say:

"You can believe what you please, it is a matter of indifference to me."

"From Inverness, perhaps?" suggested the doctor, still clinging to his favorite
theory.

The stranger again hesitated for a moment.

"No, from Edinburgh," he answered. "But that is of no importance after all,
and has nothing to do with the matter in hand. I have an independent fortune and
owe nothing to anybody. If I tell you who I am, it is because it gives me pleasure
to do so, for I am not obliged to do it."

"Permit me to observe that I did not ask you," said the doctor, smiling.

"No, but do not interrupt me, or we shall never reach the end of this matter.
You published an advertisement to find out what became of Patrick O'Donoghan,
did you not?--you therefore have some interest in knowing. I know what has
become of him."

"You know?" asked the doctor, drawing his seat closer to that of the stranger.

"I know, but before I tell you, I want to ask you what interest you have in
finding him?"

"That is only just," answered the doctor.

In as few words as possible, he related Erik's history, to which his visitor
listened with profound attention.

"And this boy is still living?" asked Tudor Brown.

"Assuredly he is living. He is in good health, and in October next he will
begin his studies in the Medical University at Upsal."

"Ah! ah!" answered the stranger, who seemed lost in reflection. "Tell me," he
said at length, "have you no other means of solving this mystery of his birth
except by finding Patrick O'Donoghan?"

"I know of no other," replied the doctor. "After years of searching I only
found out that this O'Donoghan was in possession of the secret, that he alone
could reveal it to me, and that is why I have advertised for him in the papers. I
must confess that I had no great hopes of finding him by this means."

"How is that?"


"Because I had reasons for believing that this O'Donoghan has grave motives
for remaining unknown, consequently it was not likely that he would respond to
my advertisement. I had the intention of resorting to other means. I have a
description of him. I know what ports he would be likely to frequent, and I
propose to employ special agents to be on the lookout for him."

Dr. Schwaryencrona did not say this lightly. He spoke with the intention of
seeing what effect these words would produce on the man before him. And as he
watched him intently, he saw that in spite of the affected coolness of the stranger
his eyelids fell and the muscles of his month contracted. But almost immediately
Tudor Brown recovered his self-possession, and said:

"Well, doctor, if you have no other means of solving this mystery, except by
discovering Patrick O'Donoghan, I am afraid that you will never find it out.
Patrick O'Donoghan is dead."

The doctor was too much taken aback by this disappointing announcement to
say a word, and only looked at his visitor, who continued:

"Dead and buried, three hundred fathoms beneath the sea. This man, whose
past life always appeared to me to have been mysterious, was employed three
years on board my yacht, the 'Albatross.' I must tell you that my yacht is a stanch
vessel, in which I often cruise for seven or eight months at a time. Nearly three
years ago we were passing through the Straits of Madeira, when Patrick
O'Donoghan fell overboard. I had the vessel stopped, and some boats lowered,
and after a diligent search we recovered him; but though we spared no pains to
restore him to life, our efforts were in vain. Patrick O'Donoghan was dead. We
were compelled to return to the sea the prey which we had snatched from it. The
accident was put down on the ship's log, and recorded in the notary's office at the
nearest place we reached. Thinking that this act might be useful to you, I have
brought you a certified copy of it."

As he said this, Mr. Tudor Brown took out his pocket-book and presented the
doctor with a paper stamped with a notarial seal.

The latter read it quickly. It was a record of the death of Patrick O'Donoghan,
while passing through the Straits of Madeira, duly signed and sworn to, before
two witnesses, as being an exact copy of the original--it was also registered in
London, at Somerset House, by the commissioners of her Britannic Majesty.

This instrument was evidently authentic. But the manner in which he had
received it was so strange that the doctor could not conceal his astonishment. He
took it, however, with his habitual courtesy.

"Permit me to ask one question, sir," he said to his visitor.

"Speak, doctor."

"How is it that you have this document in your pocket duly prepared and


certified? And why have you brought it to me?"

"If I can count, you have asked two questions," said Tudor Brown. "I will
answer them, however--I had this paper in my pocket, because I read your
advertisement two months ago, and wishing to furnish you with the information
which you asked for, I thought it better to give it to you, in the most complete
and definite form that lay in my power. I have brought it to you personally,
because I happened to be cruising in these waters; and I wished at the same time
to gratify your curiosity and my own."

There was nothing to answer to this reasoning--this was the only conclusion
the doctor could draw.

"Yon are here, then, with the 'Albatross'?" he asked, eagerly.

"Without doubt."

"And you have still on board some sailors who have known Patrick
O'Donoghan?"

"Yes, several."

"Would you permit me to see them?"

"As many as you please. Will you accompany me on board now?"

"If you have no objection."

"T have none," said the stranger, as he arose.

Dr. Schwaryencrona touched his bell, and they brought him his fur pelisse,
his hat, and his cane, and he departed with Mr. Tudor Brown.

Fifteen minutes later they were on board the "Albatross."

They were received by an old gray-headed seaman, with a rubicund face,
whose open countenance betrayed only truth and loyalty.

"Mr. Ward, this gentleman wishes to make some inquiries about the fate of
Patrick O'Donoghan," said Mr. Tudor Brown.

"Patrick O'Donoghan," answered the old sailor, "God rest his soul. He gave
us trouble enough to pick him up the day he was drowned in the Straits of
Madeira. What is the use of inquiries now that he has gone to feed the fishes?"

"Had you known him for a long time?" asked the doctor.

"The rascal--no--for a year or two perhaps. I believe that it was at Zanzibar
that we took him on board--am I right, Tommy Duff?"

"Is any one hailing me?" asked a young sailor, who was busily employed in
polishing a copper bowl.

"Come here," said the other--"Was it at Zanzibar that we recruited Patrick
O'Donoghan?"

"Patrick O'Donoghan," repeated the young sailor, as if his remembrance of
the man was not very good. "Oh yes, I remember him. The man who fell
overboard in the Straits of Maderia. Yes, Mr. Ward, it was at Zanzibar that he


came on board."

Dr. Schwaryencrona made him describe Patrick O'Donoghan, and was
convinced that it was the same man whom he was seeking. Both these men
seemed honest and sincere. They had honest and open countenances. The
uniformity of their answers seemed a little strange, and almost preconcerted; but
after all it might be only the natural consequence of relating facts. Having known
Patrick O'Donoghan only a year at the most, they would have but little to say
about him, except the fact of his death.

Besides the "Albatross" was a yacht of such large proportions, that if she had
been furnished with some cannon she might easily have passed for a man-of-
war. The most rigorous cleanliness was observed on board. The sailors were in
good condition, well clothed, and under perfect discipline. The general
appearance of the vessel insensiby acted upon the doctor, and carried conviction
of the truth of the statement which he had just heard. He therefore declared
himself perfectly satisfied, and could not leave without inviting Mr. Tudor
Brown to dine with him. But Mr. Tudor Brown did not think it best to accept this
invitation. He declined it in these courteous terms:

"No--I can not--I never dine in town."

It now only remained for Dr. Schwaryencrona to retire. This he did without
having obtained even the slightest bow from this strange individual.

The doctor's first thought was to go and relate his adventure to Mr.
Bredejord, who listened to him without saying a word, only promising himself to
institute counter inquiries.

But he, with Erik, who had been told the whole story upon his return from
school, repaired to the vessel to see if they could elicit any further information,
but the "Albatross" had left Stockholm, without leaving word where she was
going, and they could not, therefore, obtain even the address of Mr. Tudor
Brown.

All that resulted from this affair was the possession of the document, which
legally proved the death of Patrick O'Donoghan.

Was this paper of any value? This was the question that Mr. Bredejord could
not help doubting, in spite of the evidence of the British consul at Stockholm,
whom he questioned, and who declared that the signatures and stamp were
perfectly authentic. He also caused inquiries to be made at Edinburgh, but
nobody knew Mr. Tudor Brown, which he thought looked suspicious.

But it was an undeniable fact that they obtained no further intelligence of
Patrick O'Donoghan, and all their advertisements were ineffectual.

If Patrick O'Donoghan had disappeared for good, they had no hope of
penetrating the mystery that surrounded Erik's birth. He himself saw this, and


was obliged to recognize the fact that, for the future, the inquiries would have to
be based upon some other theory. He therefore made no opposition about
commencing his medical studies the following autumn at the university at Upsal,
according to the doctor's wishes. He only desired, first, to pass his examination
as a captain, but this sufficed to show that he had not renounced his project of
traveling.

Besides, he had another trouble which lay heavy at his heart, and for which
he saw no other remedy but absence.

Erik wished to find some pretext for leaving the doctor's house as soon as his
studies were completed; but he wished to do this without exciting any suspicion.
The only pretext which he could think of was this plan of traveling. He desired
to do this because of the aversion of Kajsa, the doctor's niece. She lost no
occasion of showing her dislike; but he would not at any price have had the
excellent man suspect this state of affairs between them. His relations toward the
young girl had always been most singular. In the eyes of Erik during these seven
years as well as on the first day of his arrival at Stockholm, the pretty little fairy
had always been a model of elegance and all earthly perfections. He had
bestowed on her his unreserved admiration, and had made heroic efforts to
overcome her dislike, and become her friend.

But Kajsa could not make up her mind calmly to see this "intruder," as she
called Erik, take his place in the doctor's home, be treated as an adopted son, and
become a favorite of her uncle and his friends. The scholastic success of Erik,
his goodness and his gentleness, far from making him pleasing in her eyes, were
only new motives of jealousy.

In her heart Kajsa could not pardon the young man for being only a
fisherman and a peasant. It seemed to her that he brought discredit upon the
doctor's household and on herself, who, she liked to believe, occupied a very
high position in the social scale.

But it was worse when she learned that Erik was even less than a peasant,
only a child that had been picked up. That appeared to her monstrous and
dishonorable. She thought that such a child had a lower place in society than a
cat or a dog; she manifested these sentiments by the most disdainful looks, the
most mortifying silence, and the most cruel insults. If Erik was invited with her
to any little social gathering at the house of a friend, she would positively refuse
to dance with him. At the table she would not answer anything he said, nor pay
any attention to him. She tried on all occasions, and in every possible way, to
humiliate him.

Poor Erik had divined the cause of this uncharitable conduct, but he could
not understand how ignorance of his family, and of the land of his birth, could be


regarded by her as such a heinous crime. He tried one day to reason with Kajsa,
and to make her understand the injustice and cruelty of such a prejudice, but she
would not even deign to listen to him. Then as they both grew older, the abyss
which separated them seemed to widen. At eighteen Kajsa made her début in
society. She was flattered and noticed as the rich heiress, and this homage only
confirmed her in the opinion that she was superior to common mortals.

Erik, who was at first greatly afflicted by her disdain, ended by becoming
indignant, and vowing to triumph over it. This feeling of humiliation had a great
share in producing the passionate ardor with which he pursued his studies. He
dreamed of raising himself so high in public esteem, by the force of his own
industry, that every one would bow before him. But he also vowed that he would
go away on the first opportunity, and that he would not remain under a roof
where every day he was exposed to some secret humiliation.

Only the good doctor must be kept in ignorance of the cause of his departure.
He must attribute it solely to a passion for traveling. And Erik therefore
frequently spoke of his desire, when his studies were completed, of engaging in
some scientific expedition. While pursuing his studies at Upsal, he prepared
himself by work, and the most severe exercise, for the life of fatigue and danger
which is the lot of great travelers.


CHAPTER XI.

THE "VEGA."

In the month of December, 1878, Erik had attained the age of twenty, and
passed his first examination for his doctor's degree. The learned men of Sweden
were greatly excited about the proposed arctic expedition of the navigator
Nordenskiold, and their enthusiasm was shared by a large proportion of the
population. After preparing himself for the undertaking by several voyages to the
polar regions, and after studying the problem in all its aspects, Nordenskiold
intended to attempt once more to discover the north-east passage from the
Atlantic to the Pacific, which for three centuries had defied the efforts of all the
maritime nations.

The programme for the expedition had been defined by the Swedish
navigator, and he announced the reasons which led him to believe that the north-
east passage was practicable in summer, and the means by which he hoped to
realize this geographical desideratum. The intelligent liberality of two
Scandinavian gentlemen, and the assistance of the Swedish government, enabled
him to organize his expedition upon a plan which he believed would insure its
success.


It was on the 21st of July, 1878, that Nordenskiold quitted From-sae, on
board of the "Vega," to attempt to reach Behring's Strait by passing to the north
of Russia and Siberia. Lieutenant Palanders, of the Swedish navy, was in
command of the vessel, with the instigator of the voyage, and they had also a
staff of botanists, geologists, and astronomical doctors.

The "Vega," which had been especially prepared for the expedition under the
surveillance of Nordenskiold, was a vessel of five hundred tons, which had been
recently built at Bremen, and carried an engine of sixty-horse power. Three ships
were to accompany her to successive points on the Siberian coast, which had
been previously determined upon. They were all provisioned for a cruise of two
years, in case it might be necessary for them to winter in those arctic regions.
But Nordenskiold did not conceal his hope of being able to reach Behring's Strait
before autumn, on account of his careful arrangements, and all Sweden shared
this hope.

They started from the most northerly point of Norway, and the "Vega"
reached Nova Zembla on the 29th of July, on the 1st of August the Sea of Kara,
and on the 6th of August the mouth of the Gulf Yenisei. On the 9th of August
she doubled Cape Schelynshin, or Cape North-East, the extreme point of the
continent, which no vessel had hitherto been able to reach. On the 7th of
September she cast anchor at the mouth of the Lena, and separated from the third
of the vessels which had accompanied her thus far. On the 16th of October a
telegraphic dispatch from Irkutsk announced to the world that the expedition had
been successful up to this point.

We can imagine the impatience with which the friends of the Swedish
navigator waited for the details of the expedition. These details did not reach
them until the 1st of December. For if electricity flies over space with the
rapidity of thought, it is not the same with the Siberian post. The letters from the
"Vega," although deposited in the post-office at Irkutsk, at the same time that the
telegraphic message was dispatched, did not reach Sweden until six weeks
afterward. But they arrived at last; and on the 5th of December one of the
principal newspapers of Sweden published an account of the first part of the
expedition, which had been written by a young medical doctor attached to the
"Vega."

That same day, at breakfast, Mr. Bredejord was occupied in reading with
great interest the details of the voyage, given in four columns, when his eyes fell
upon a paragraph which almost upset him. He re-read it attentively, and then
read it again; then he arose, and seizing his hat and coat, he rushed to the house
of Dr. Schwaryencrona.

"Have you read the correspondence of the 'Vega"?" he cried, as he rushed like


a hurricane into the dining-room where the doctor and Kajsa were taking their
breakfast.

"I have just commenced it," replied the doctor, "and was intending to finish
reading it after breakfast, while I smoked my pipe."

"Then you have not seen!" exclaimed Mr. Bredejord, out of breath. "You do
not know what this correspondence contains?"

"No," replied Doctor Schwaryencrona, with perfect calmness.

"Well, listen to this," continued Mr. Bredejord, approaching the window. "It
is the journal of one of your brethren, the aid of the naturalist of the 'Vega.""

30th and 31st of July, we entered the strait of Jugor, and cast anchor before
a Samoyede village called Chabarova. We landed, and I questioned some of the
natives to discover, by Holmgren's method, the extent of their perception of
colors. I found that this sense was normally developed among them. Bought of a
Samoyede fisherman two magnificent salmon."

"Pardon me," interrupted the doctor; "but is this a charade you are reading to
me. I confess I do not see how these details can interest me."

"Ah! they do not interest you?" said Mr. Bredejord, in a triumphant tone.
"Well, wait a moment and you will see:

Bought of a Samoyede fisherman two magnificent salmon, which I have
preserved in alcohol, notwithstanding the protestations of our cook. This
fisherman fell into the water as he was quitting the ship. They pulled him out
half suffocated and stiffened by the cold, so that he resembled a bar of iron, and
he, also, had a serious cut on his head. We were just under way, and they carried
him to the infirmary of the "Vega," while still unconscious, undressed him, and
put him to bed. They then discovered that this fisherman was an European. He
had red hair; his nose had been broken by some accident, and on his chest, on a
level with his heart, these words were tattooed: "Patrick O'Donoghan--
Cynthia."""

Here Dr. Schwaryencrona uttered a cry of surprise.

"Wait! listen to the rest of it," said Mr. Bredejord; and he continued his
reading:

Being subjected to an energetic massage treatment, he was soon restored to
life. But as it was impossible for him to leave us in that condition, we were
compelled to take care of him. A fever set in and he became delirious. Our
experiment of the appreciation of colors among the Samoyedes, therefore, was
frustrated.--3d of August. The fisherman of Chabarova has recovered from the
effects of his bath. He appeared to be surprised to find himself on board the
"Vega," and en route for Cape Tahelyuskin, but soon became reconciled to his
fate. His knowledge of the Ganwyede language may be useful to, us, and we


have determined to take him with us on the coast of Siberia. He speaks English
with a nasal accent like a Yankee, but pretends to be Scotch, and calls himself
Tommy Bowles. He came from Nova Zembla with some fishermen, and he has
lived on these shores for the last twelve years. The name tattooed upon his chest
he says, ‘is that of one of the friends of his infancy who has been dead for a long
time."

"Tt is evidently our man," cried the doctor, with great emotion.

"Yes, there can be no doubt of it," answered the lawyer. "The name, the
vessel, the description, all prove it; even this choice of a pseudonym Johnny
Bowles, and his declaring that Patrick O'Donoghan was dead, these are
superabundant proofs!"

They were both silent, reflecting upon the possible consequences of this
discovery."

"How can we go so far in search of him?" said the doctor, at length.

"It will be very difficult, evidently," replied Mr. Bredejord. "But it is
something to know that he is alive, and the part of the world where he can be
found. And, besides, who can tell what the future may have in store? He may
even return to Stockholm in the 'Vega,' and explain all that we wish to find out.
If he does not do this, perhaps we may, sooner or later, find an opportunity to
communicate with him. Voyages to Nova Zembla will become more frequent, on
account of this expedition of the "Vega.' Ship-owners are already talking about
sending every year some vessels to the mouth of the Yenisei."

The discussion of this topic was inexhaustible, and the two friends were still
talking about the matter, when Erik arrived from Upsal, at two o'clock. He also
had read this great piece of news, and had taken the train for home without
losing a moment. But it was a singular fact that he was not joyful, but rather
disturbed by this new intelligence.

"Do you know what I am afraid of?" said he to the doctor and Mr. Bredejord.
"I fear that some misfortune has happened to the 'Vega.' You know it is now the
sth of December, and you know the leaders of the expedition counted upon
arriving at Behring's Strait before October. If this expectation had been realized,
we should have heard from her by this time; for she would have reached Japan,
or at least Petropaulosk, in the Aleutian Islands, or some station in the Pacific,
from which we should have received news of her. The dispatches and letters here
came by the way of Irkutsk, and are dated the 7th of September, so that for three
entire months we have heard nothing from the 'Vega.' So we must conclude that
they did not reach Behring's Strait as soon as they expected, and that she has
succumbed to the common fate of all expeditious which for the last three
centuries have attempted to discover the north-east passage. This is the


deplorable conclusion which I have been compelled to arrive at."

"The 'Vega' might have been obliged to encounter in the Polar regions a great
deal which was unforeseen, and she might have been unprovided for such a
contingency," replied Dr. Schwaryencrona.

"Evidently; but this is the most favorable hypothesis; and a winter in that
region is surrounded by so many dangers that it is equivalent to a shipwreck. In
any case, it is an indisputable fact that if we ever have any news of the 'Vega’' it
will not be possible to do so before next summer."

"Why, how is that?"

"Because, if the 'Vega' has not perished she is inclosed in the ice, and she will
not be able, at the best, to extricate herself before June or July."

"That is true," answered Mr. Bredejord.

"What conclusion do you draw from this reasoning?" asked the doctor,
disturbed by the sad tone of Erik's voice as he made the announcement.

"The conclusion that it is impossible to wait so long before solving a
question which is of such great importance to me."

"What do you want to do? We must submit to what is inevitable."

"Perhaps it only appears to be so," answered Erik. "The letters which have
reached us have come across the Arctic Ocean by the way of Irkutsk. Why could
I not follow the same route? I would keep close to the coast of Siberia. I would
endeavor to communicate with the people of that country, and find out whether
any foreign vessel had been shipwrecked, or was held prisoner among the
icebergs. Perhaps I might succeed in finding Nordenskiold, and Patrick
O'Donoghan. It is an enterprise worth undertaking."

"In the middle of winter?"

"Why not? It is the most favorable season for traveling in sleighs in that
latitude."

"Yes; but you forget that you are not there yet, and that it will be spring
before you could get there."

"That is true," said Erik, who was compelled to recognize the force of this
argument. He sat with his eyes fixed on the floor, absorbed in thought.

"No, matter," said he suddenly; "Nordenskiold must be found, and with him
Patrick O'Donoghan. They shall be, or it will not be my fault."

Erik's plan was a very simple one. He proposed to write an anonymous letter
to the leading newspapers of Stockholm, and thus proclaim his fears as to the
fate of the "Vega." Had she been shipwrecked, or was she held a prisoner by
icebergs, and he concluded his communication by representing how important it
was that some vessel should be sent to her assistance in the latter case.

The truth of his reasoning was so apparent, and the interest in the expedition


so general, that the young student of Upsal was certain that the question would
be warmly discussed in scientific circles.

But the effect of his letter was beyond his highest expectations. All the
newspapers without exception expressed their approval of his proposition while
commenting upon his communication.

Public opinion was unanimously in favor of fitting out a relief expedition.
Commercial men, manufacturers, the members of schools and colleges, the
judicial corps--in fact, all classes voluntarily contributed to the enterprise. A rich
ship-owner offered to equip a vessel at his own expense, to go to the relief of the
"Vega;" and he named it the "Nordenskiold."

The enthusiasm increased as days passed without bringing any intelligence
of the "Vega." By the end of December, the subscription had reached a
considerable sum. Dr. Sehwaryencrona and Mr. Bredejord had headed the list
with a subscription of ten thousand kroners each. They were members of the
committee who had chosen Erik for their secretary.

The latter was in fact the soul of the undertaking. His ardor, his modesty, his
evident ability with regard to all questions relative to the expedition, which he
studied untiringly, soon acquired for him a most decided influence. From the
first he did not conceal the fact that it was his dream to take part in the
enterprise, if only as a simple sailor, and that he had a supreme and personal
interest in the matter. This only gave the greater weight to the excellent
suggestions which he made to the originators of the expedition, and he
personally directed all the preparatory labors.

It was agreed that a second vessel should accompany the "Nordenskiold,"
and that it should be like the "Vega," a steamship. Nordenskiold himself had
demonstrated that the principal cause of the failure of previous attempts had
been the employment of sailing vessels. Arctic navigators, especially when on an
exploring expedition, must not be dependent upon the wind, but must be able to
force their way speedily through a difficult or perilous pass--and above all,
always be able to take the open sea, which it was often impossible to do with a
sailing vessel.

This fundamental point having been established, it was decided also to cover
the vessel with a lining of green oak, six inches thick, and to divide it into
compartments, so that it would be better able to resist a blow from the ice. They
were also desirous that she should not draw too much water, and that all her
arrangements should be so made as to enable her to carry a full supply of coal.
Among the offers which were made to the committee, was a vessel of one
hundred and forty tons, which had been recently built at Bremen, and which had
a crew of eighteen men, who could easily maneuver her. She was a schooner, but


while she carried her masts, she also was furnished with an engine of eighty
horse-power. One of her boilers was so arranged that it could burn oil or fat,
which was easily procurable in the arctic regions, in case their coal should fail.
The schooner protected by its lining of oak, was further strengthened by
transverse beams, so as to offer the greatest possible resistance to the pressure of
the ice. Lastly, the front of it was armed with a spur of steel, to enable it to break
its way through a thick field of ice. The vessel when placed on the stocks, was
named the "Alaska," on account of the direction which she was destined to take.
It had been decided that while the "Nordenskiold" should pursue the same route
which the "Vega" had followed, that the second vessel should take an opposite
direction around the world, and gain the Siberian Ocean, by the island of Alaska
and Behring's Straits. The chances of meeting the Swedish expedition, or of
discovering traces of her if she had perished would thus, they thought, be double,
for while one vessel followed on her track, the other would, as it were, precede
her.

Erik, who had been the originator of this plan, had often asked himself which
of the vessels he had better join, and he had finally concluded to attach himself
to the second.

The "Nordenskiold," he said to himself, would follow the same course as the
"Vega." It was therefore necessary that she should be equally successful in
making the first part of the voyage, and double Cape Tchelynskin, but they might
not be able to do this, since it had only been accomplished once. Besides, the last
news which they had received from the "Vega," she was only two or three
hundred leagues from Behring's Straits; therefore they would have a better
chance of meeting her. The "Nordenskiold" might follow her for many months
without overtaking her. But the other vessel could hardly fail to meet her, if she
was still in existence.

The principal thing in Erik's eyes was to reach the "Vega" as quickly as
possible, in order to meet Patrick O'Donoghan without delay.

The doctor and Mr. Bredejord warmly approved of his motives when he
explained them to them.

The work of preparing the "Alaska" was pushed on as rapidly as possible.
Her provisions, equipments, and the clothing, were all carefully chosen, for they
profited by the experience of former Arctic explorers. Her crew were all
experienced seamen, who had been inured to cold by frequent fishing voyages to
Iceland and Greenland. Lastly, the captain chosen by the committee, was an
officer of the Swedish marines, then in the employment of a maritime company,
and well known on account of his voyages to the Arctic Ocean; his name was
Lieutenant Marsilas. He chose for his first lieutenant Erik himself, who seemed


designed for the position by the energy he had displayed in the service of the
expedition, and who was also qualified by his diploma. The second and third
officers were tried seamen, Mr. Bosewitz and Mr. Kjellguist.

The "Alaska" carried some explosive material in order to break the ice, if it
should be necessary, and abundant provisions of an anti-scorbutic character, in
order to preserve the officers and crew from the common Arctic maladies. The
vessel was furnished with a heater, in order to preserve an even temperature, and
also with a portable observatory called a "raven's nest," which they could hoist to
the top of the highest mast, in those regions where they meet with floating ice, to
signal the approach of icebergs.

By Erik's proposal this observatory contained a powerful electric light, which
at night could illuminate the route of the "Alaska." Seven small boats, of which
two were whale-boats, a steam-cutter, six sledges, snow-shoes for each of the
crew, four Gatling cannons and thirty guns, with the necessary ammunition, were
stored away on board. These preparations were approaching an end, when Mr.
Hersebom and his son Otto arrived from Noroe with their large dog Kaas, and
solicited the favor of being employed as seamen on board of the "Alaska." They
knew from a letter of Erik's the strong personal interest which he had in this
voyage, and they wished to share its dangers with him.

Mr. Hersebom spoke of the value of his experience as a fisherman on the
coast of Greenland, and of the usefulness of his dog Kaas, who could be used as
a leader of the dogs which would be necessary to draw the sledges. Otto had
only his good health, his herculean strength, and his devotion to the cause to
recommend him. Thanks to the influence of the doctor and Mr. Bredejord, they
were all three engaged by the committee.

By the beginning of February, 1879, all was ready. The "Alaska" had
therefore five months before the first of June to reach Behring's Straits, which
was accounted the most favorable season for the exploration. They intended also
to take the most direct route, that is to say, through the Mediterranean, the Suez
Canal, the Indian Ocean, and the China Seas, stopping successively to take in
coal at Gibraltar, Aden, Colombo in Ceylon, Singapore, Hong Kong, Yokohama,
and Petropaulosk.


From all these stations the "Alaska" was to telegraph to Stockholm, and it
was also agreed that, if in the meantime any news was received of the "Vega,"
they should not fail to send information.

The voyage of the "Alaska," although intended primarily for an arctic
exploration, would begin by a voyage through tropical seas, and along the
continents most favored by the sun. The programme had not, however, been
arranged to give them pleasure; it was the result of an imperative necessity, since
they must reach Behring's Straits by the shortest route and remain in telegraphic
communication with Stockholm up to the last moment. But a serious difficulty
threatened to retard the expedition. They had spent so much in equipping the
vessel that the funds which were indispensable for the success of the enterprise,
began to run short. They would require considerable to purchase coal, and for
other incidental expenses.

A new appeal for money became necessary. As soon as it was issued the
committee received two letters simultaneously.

One was from Mr. Malarius, the public teacher of Noroe, and laureate of the
Botanical Society. It contained a check for one hundred kroners, and begged that
he might be attached to the expedition as the assistant naturalist of the "Alaska."

The other contained a check for twenty-five thousand kroners, with this
laconic note:

"For the voyage of the 'Alaska,' from Mr. Tudor Brown, on condition that he
is received as a passenger."


CHAPTER XII.

UNEXPECTED PASSENGERS.

The request of Mr. Malarius could only be received with gratitude by the
committee. It was therefore passed enthusiastically, and the worthy teacher,
whose reputation as a botanist was greater than he himself suspected, was
appointed assistant naturalist of the expedition.

As for the condition upon which Tudor Brown bestowed his donation of
twenty-five thousand kroners, both Dr. Schwaryencrona and Mr. Bredejord were
strongly inclined to refuse to grant it. But if called upon to give some motive for
their repugnance, they had to confess that they would not know what to say.
What sufficient reason could they give the committee if they asked them to
refuse such a large subscription? They really had no valid one. Tudor Brown had
called upon Dr. Schwaryencrona, and brought him a certified account of the
death of Patrick O'Donoghan; and now Patrick O'Donoghan appeared to be
living. But they could not prove that Tudor Brown had willfully deceived them


in this matter, and the committee would require some sufficient cause before
rejecting so large a sum. Tudor Brown could easily declare that he had been
truthful. His present attitude seemed to prove it. Perhaps he intended to go
himself, only to find out how Patrick O'Donoghan, whom he believed to have
been drowned in the Straits of Madeira, could now be living on the shores of
Siberia. But even supposing that Tudor Brown had other projects, it would be to
their interest to find them out, and keep him in their hands. For, one of two facts
was certain: either Tudor Brown had no interest in the search which had
occupied Erik's friends for so long a time, and in that case it would be useless to
treat him as an enemy; or he had some slight personal interest in the matter, and
then it would be better to watch his plans, and overthrow them.

The doctor and Mr. Bredejord therefore concluded that they would not
oppose his becoming a passenger. Then they gradually were filled with a desire
to study this singular man, and find out why he wished to take passage on the
"Alaska." But how could they do this without sailing with him. It would not be
such an absurd thing to do after all. The course which the "Alaska" was to take
was a very attractive one, at least the first part of it. To be brief, Dr.
Schwaryencrona, who was a great traveler, asked to be taken as a passenger, to
accompany the expedition as far as the China seas, by paying such a price as the
committee might judge proper.

This example immediately acted with irresistible force upon Mr. Bredejord,
who had dreamed for a long time about an excursion to the land of the Sun. He
also solicited a cabin under the same conditions.

Every one in Stockholm now believed that Mr. Hochstedt would do the
same, partly out of scientific curiosity, and partly from terror at the thought of
passing so many months without the society of his friends. But all Stockholm
was deceived. The professor was strongly tempted to go, and he reviewed all the
arguments for and against it, and found it almost impossible to arrive at any
decision, but fate ordained that he should stay at home.

The time of their departure was irrevocably fixed for the 10th of February.
On the 9th Erik went to meet Mr. Malarius, and was agreeably surprised to see
Dame Hersebom, and Vanda, who had come to bid him farewell. They were
modestly intending to go to a hotel in the town, but the doctor insisted that they
should come and stay with him, to the great displeasure of Kajsa, who did not
think that they were sufficiently distinguished.

Vanda was now a tall girl, whose beauty fulfilled its early promise. She had
passed successfully a very difficult examination at Bergen which entitled her to
take a professor's chair, in a superior school. But she preferred to remain at
Noroe with her mother, and she was going to fill Mr. Malarius' place during his


absence: always serious and gentle, she found in teaching a strange and
inexplicable charm, but it had not changed the simplicity of her home life. This
beautiful girl, in her quaint Norwegian costume, was able to give tranquilly her
opinion on the deepest scientific subjects, or seat herself at the piano, and play
with consummate skill a sonata of Beethoven. But her greatest charm was the
absence of all pretension, and her perfectly natural manners. She no more
thought of being vain of her talents, or of making any display of them, than she
did of blushing on account of her rural costume. She bloomed like some wild
flower, that, growing beside the fiord, had been transplanted by her old master,
and cultivated and cherished in his little garden behind the school.

In the evening all Erik's adopted family were assembled in the parlor of Dr.
Schwaryencrona; Mr. Bredejord and the doctor were about to play a last game of
whist with Mr. Hochstedt. They discovered that Mr. Malarius was also an
authority in this noble game, which would enable them to while away many
leisure hours on board the "Alaska." Unfortunately the worthy instructor also
told them, at the same time, that he was always a victim of seasickness, and
nearly always confined to his bed as soon as he set foot upon a vessel. Only his
affection for Erik had induced him to join the expedition, added to the ambition,
long fondly cherished, of being able to add some more varieties to his catalogue
of botanical families.

After which they had a little music: Kajsa, with a disdainful air, played a
fashionable waltz; Vanda sung an old Scandinavian melody with a sweetness
that surprised them all. The tea was served, and a large bowl of punch, which
they drunk to the success of the expedition, followed. Erik noticed that Kajsa
avoided touching his glass.

"Will you not wish me a happy voyage?" he said to her, in a low tone.

"What is the use of wishing for what we do not expect to see granted?" she
answered.

The next morning, at daybreak, every one went on board, except Tudor
Brown.

Since the receipt of his letter containing the check they had not heard a word
from him.

The time of departure had been fixed for ten o'clock. At the first stroke, the
commander, Mr. Marsilas, had the anchor hoisted, and rang the bell to warn all
visitors to leave the ship.

"Adieu, Erik!" cried Vanda, throwing her arms around his neck.

"Adieu, my son!" said Katrina, pressing the young lieutenant to her heart.

"And you, Kajsa, have you nothing to say to me?" he asked, as he walked
toward her as if to embrace her also.


"T hope that you will not get your nose frozen, and that you will discover that
you are a prince in disguise!" said she, laughing impertinently.

"If that should happen, then at least I might hope to win a little of your
affection?" he said, trying to smile, to hide his feelings, for her sarcasm had cut
him to the heart.

"Do you doubt it?" answered Kajsa, as she turned toward her uncle, to show
that her adieu to him was finished.

The time of departure had indeed come. The warning bell rang imperiously.

The crowd of visitors descended the stairs to the boats which were waiting
for them.

In the midst of this confusion every one noticed the arrival of a tardy
passenger, who mounted to the deck with his valise in his hand.

The tardy one was Tudor Brown. He presented himself to the captain, and
claimed his cabin, to which he was immediately shown.

A moment later, after two or three prolonged whistles, the engine began to
work, and a sea of foam whitening the waters behind her, the "Alaska" glided
majestically over the green waters of the Baltic, and soon left Stockholm behind
her, followed by the acclamations of the crowd who were waving their hats and
handkerchiefs.

Erik, on the bridge, directed the maneuvers of the vessel, while Mr.
Bredejord and the doctor waved a last farewell to Vanda from the deck.

Mr. Malarius, already frightfully seasick, had retired to his bed. They were
all so occupied with saying farewell that not one of them had noticed the arrival
of Tudor Brown.

Therefore the doctor could not repress a start of surprise when as he turned
around, he saw him ascending from the depths of the vessel, and marching
straight toward him, with his hands in his pockets, clothed as he had been at their
first interview, and with his hat always seemingly glued to his head.

"Fine weather!" said Tudor Brown, by way of salutation and introduction.

The doctor was stupefied by his effrontery. He waited for some moments to
see if this strange man would make any excuse, or give any explanation of his
conduct.

Seeing that he did not intend to say anything, he opened the subject himself.

"Well, sir, it appears that Patrick O'Donoghan is not dead, as we supposed!"
he said, with his customary vivacity.

"That is precisely what I want to find out, and it is on that account I have
undertaken this voyage."

After saying this, Tudor Brown tumed away, and began to walk up and down
the deck, whistling his favorite air, appearing to think that his explanation was


perfectly satisfactory.

Erik and Mr. Bredejord listened to this conversation with a natural curiosity.
They had never seen Tudor Brown before, and they studied him attentively, even
more so than Dr. Schwaryencrona. It seemed to them that the man, although he
affected indifference, cast a furtive glance at them from time to time, to see what
impression he made upon them. Perceiving this, they also immediately feigned
to take no notice of him, and did not address a word to him. But as soon as they
descended to the saloon, upon which their cabins opened, they took counsel
together.

"What could have been Tudor Brown's motive in trying to make them
believe that Patrick O'Donoghan was dead? And what was his purpose in taking
this voyage upon the ‘Alaska’? It was impossible for them to say. But it was
difficult not to believe that it had some connection with the shipwreck of the
‘Cynthia,’ and the infant tied to the buoy. The only interest which Patrick
O'Donoghan had for Erik and his friends, was the fact of his supposed
knowledge of the affair, and this was their only reason for seeking for him. Now
they had before them a man who was uninvited, and who had come to them, and
declared that Patrick O'Donoghan was dead. And this man had forced his society
upon the members of the expedition, as soon as his assertion in the most
unexpected manner had been proved to be false. They were therefore obliged to
conclude that he had some personal interest in the matter, and the fact of his
seeking out Doctor Schwaryencrona indicated the connection between his
interests, and the inquiries instituted by the doctor."

All these facts therefore seemed to indicate that Tudor Brown was in this
problem a factor quite as important as Patrick O'Donoghan himself. Who could
tell whether he was not already in possession of the secret which they were
trying to elucidate? If this was the case, was it a happy thing for them that they
had him on board, or should they rather be disturbed by his presence?

Mr. Bredejord inclined to the latter opinion, and did not consider his
appearance among them as at all reassuring. The doctor, on the other side,
argued that Tudor Brown might have acted in good faith, and also that he might
be honest at heart, notwithstanding his unattractive exterior.

"If he knows anything," said he, "we can hope that the familiarity which a
long voyage necessarily produces may induce him to speak out; in that case it
would be a stroke of good luck to have had him with us. At least we shall see
what he can have to do with O'Donoghan, if we ever find the Irishman."

As for Erik, he did not even dare to express the sentiments which the sight of
this man awakened in him. It was more than repulsion, it was positive hatred,
and an instinctive desire to rush upon him and throw him into the sea. He was


convinced that this man had had some share in the misfortune of his life, but he
would have blushed to abandon himself to such a conviction, or even to speak of
it. He contented himself with saying that he would never have allowed Tudor
Brown to come on board if he had had any voice in the matter.

How should they treat him?

On this point also they were divided. The doctor declared that it would be
politic to treat Tudor Brown with at least outward courtesy, in the hope of
inducing him to speak out. Mr. Bredejord, as well as Erik, felt a great
repugnance to act out such a comedy, and it was by no means certain that Dr.
Schwaryencrona himself would be able to conform to his own programme. They
determined to leave the matter to be decided by circumstances, and the behavior
of Tudor Brown himself.

They did not have to wait long. Precisely at midday the bell rang for dinner.
Mr. Bredejord and the doctor, went to the table of the commander. There they
found Tudor Brown already seated, with his hat on his head, and he did not
manifest the least inclination to enter into any relations with his neighbors. The
man proved to be so rude and coarse that he disarmed indignation. He seemed to
be ignorant of the simplest rules of politeness. He helped himself first, chose the
best portions, and ate and drank like an ogre. Two or three times the commander,
and Dr. Schwaryencrona addressed a few words to him. He did not even deign to
speak, but answered them by gestures.

That did not prevent him however, when he had finished his repast, and
armed himself with an enormous tooth-pick, from throwing himself back in his
seat, and saying to Mr. Marsilas:

"What day shall we reach Gibraltar?"

"About the nineteenth or twentieth I think," answered the captain.

Tudor Brown drew a book from his pocket, and examined his calendar.

"That will bring us to Malta on the twenty-second, to Alexandria on the
twenty-fifth, and to Aden at the end of the month," said he, as if speaking to
himself.

Then he got up, and going on deck again, began to pace up and down.

"A pleasant traveling companion truly," Mr. Marsilas could not help saying.

Mr. Bredejord was about to answer, when a frightful noise at the head of the
Staircase prevented him. They heard cries, and barking, and a confusion of
voices. Everybody arose and ran on deck.

The tumult had been caused by Kaas, Mr. Hersebom's Greenland dog. It
seemed that he did not approve of Mr. Tudor Brown, for after evincing his
displeasure by low growls every time he passed and repassed him, he finished by
seizing him by the legs. Tudor Brown had drawn his revolver from his pocket,


and was about to use it when Otto appeared on the scene and prevented him
from doing so, and then sent Kaas away to his kennel. A stormy discussion then
took place. Tudor Brown, white with rage and terror, insisted that the dog's
brains should be blown out. Mr. Hersebom, who had come to the rescue,
protested warmly against such a project.

The commander arriving at this moment, settled the matter by desiring Tudor
Brown to put away his revolver, and decreeing that henceforth Kaas must be
kept chained.

This ridiculous incident was the only one that varied the monotony of their
first days of voyaging. Every one became accustomed to the silence and strange
manners of Tudor Brown. At the captain's table they at length took no more
notice of him than if he had not been in existence. Everybody pursued their own
avocations.

Mr. Malarius, after passing two days in bed, was able to crawl upon deck, he
commenced to eat, and was soon able to take his place at the innumerable whist
parties of the doctor and Mr. Bredejord.

Erik, very much occupied with his business as lieutenant, spent every spare
moment in reading.

On the eleventh they passed the island of Oland, on the thirteenth they
reached Shayer Rock, passed through the sound, signaled Heligoland on the
fourteenth, and on the sixteenth they doubled Cape Hogue.

On the following night Erik was sleeping in his cabin when he was
awakened by a sudden silence, and perceived that he no longer felt the vibrations
of the engine. He was not however alarmed, for he knew that Mr. Kjellguist was
in charge of the vessel; but out of curiosity he arose and went on deck to see
what had happened.

He was told by the chief engineer that the engine had broken down, and that
they would be compelled to extinguish the fires. They could proceed, however,
under sail, with alight breeze from the southwest.

A careful inspection threw no light on the cause of the damage, and the
engineer asked permission to repair to the nearest port to repair the injury.

Commander Marsilas, after a personal examination, was of the same opinion.
They found that they were thirty miles from Brest, and the order was given to
steer for the great French port.


CHAPTER XIII.
THE SHIPWRECK.
The next day the "Alaska" entered the harbor of Brest. The damage which


she had sustained was fortunately not important. An engineer who was applied
to immediately promised that her injuries should be repaired in three days. It was
therefore not a very serious delay, and they could make up for it in a measure by
taking in coal. They would therefore not be obliged to stop at Gibraltar for this
purpose, as they had at first intended. Their next stopping-place was to be at
Malta, which they hoped to reach twenty-four hours earlier than they had at first
expected, and thus would reduce the time of their delay in reality to two days.
They therefore had nothing to worry themselves about, and everyone felt
disposed to view the accident in the most philosophical manner.

It soon became evident that their mischance was going to be turned into a
festival. In a few hours the arrival of the "Alaska" became known through the
town, and as the newspapers made known the object of the expedition, the
commander of the Swedish vessel soon found himself the recipient of the most
flattering attentions. The admiral and Mayor of Brest, the commander of the
port, and the captains of the vessels which were lying at anchor, all came to pay
an official visit to Captain Marsilas. A dinner and a ball were tendered to the
hardy explorers, who were to take part in the search for the "Nordenskiold."
Although the doctor and Mr. Malarius cared little for such gatherings, they were
obliged to take their places at the table which was prepared for them. As for Mr.
Bredejord, he was in his true element.

Among the friends invited by the admiral, was a grand-looking old man with
a refined but sad countenance. He soon attracted Erik's attention, who felt a
sympathy for him which he could hardly explain. It was Mr. Durrien, Honorary
Consul-general, and an active member of the Geographical Society, who was
well known on account of his travels and researches in Asia Minor and the
Soudan.

Erik had read his works with very great interest, and he mentioned that he
had done so, when he had been presented to the French savant, who experienced
a feeling of satisfaction as he listened to the enthusiastic young man.

It is often the fate of travelers, when their adventures make a stir in the
world, to receive the loud admiration of the crowd; but to find that their labors
are appreciated, by those who are well informed and capable of judging, does
not occur so frequently. Therefore the respectful curiosity of Erik went straight
to the heart of the old geographer, and brought a smile to his pale lips.

"T have never attached any great merit to my discoveries," he said, in reply to
a few words from Erik, regarding the fortunate excavations which had recently
been made. "I went ahead seeking, to forget my own cruel misfortunes, and not
caring so much for the results as I did for prosecuting a work which was in entire
accordance with my tastes. Chance has done the rest."


Seeing Erik and Mr. Durrien so friendly, the admiral took care to seat them
together at table, so that they could continue their conversation during dinner.

As they were taking their coffee, the young lieutenant of the "Alaska" was
accosted by a little bald-headed man, who had been introduced to him as Dr.
Kergaridec, who asked him without any preamble to what country he belonged.
A little surprised at first by the question, Erik answered that he was from
Sweden, or, to be more exact, from Norway, and that his family lived in the
province of Bergen. Then he inquired his motive for asking the question.

"My motive is a very simple one," answered his interlocutor. "For an hour I
have been studying your face across the table, while we were at dinner, and I
have never seen anywhere such a perfect type of the Celt as I behold in you! I
must tell you that I am devoted to Celtic studies, and it is the first time that I
have met with this type among the Scandinavians. Perhaps this is a precious
indication for science, and we may be able to place Norway among the regions
visited by our Gaelic ancestors?"

Erik was about to explain to the worthy savant the reasons which would
invalidate this hypothesis, when Dr. Kergaridec turned away to pay his respects
to a lady who had just entered the room, and their conversation was not resumed.

The young lieutenant of the "Alaska" would probably never have thought of
this incident again, but the next day as they were passing through a street near
the market, Dr. Schwaryencrona said suddenly to him:

"My dear child, if I have ever had a doubt as to your Celtic origin, I should
have lost it here. See how you resemble these Bretons. They have the same
brown eyes, black hair, bony neck, colored skin and general appearance.
Bredejord may say what he likes, but you are a pure-blooded Celt--you may
depend upon it." Erik then told him what old Dr. Kergaridec had said to him, and
Dr. Schwaryencrona was so delighted that he could not talk of anything else all
the day.

With the other passengers of the "Alaska," Tudor Brown had received and
accepted an invitation from the prefect. They thought up to the last moment that
he would go in his accustomed dress, for he had made his appearance in it just as
they were all going ashore to the dinner. But doubtless the necessity of removing
his precious hat appeared too hard to him, for they saw him no more that
evening.

When he returned after the ball, Erik learned from Mr. Hersebom that Tudor
Brown had returned at seven o'clock and dined alone. After that, he had entered
the captain's room to consult a marine chart; then he had returned to the town in
the same small boat which had brought him on board.

This was the last news which they received of him.


The next evening at five o'clock Tudor Brown had not made his appearance.
He knew, however, that the machinery of the "Alaska" would be repaired by that
time, and her fires kindled, after which it would be impossible to defer her
departure. The captain had been careful to notify every one. He gave the order to
hoist the anchor.

The vessel had been loosened from her moorings when a small boat was
signaled making all speed toward them. Every one believed that it carried Tudor
Brown, but they soon saw that it was only a letter which had been sent on board.
It occasion general surprise when it was discovered that this letter was directed
to Erik.

When he opened it, Erik found that it simply contained the card of Mr.
Durrien, the Honorary Consul-general, and member of the Geographical Society,
with these words written in pencil:

"A good voyage--a speedy return."

We can not explain Erik's feelings.

This attention from an amiable and distinguished savant brought tears to his
eyes. In leaving this hospitable shore where he had remained three days, it
seemed to him as if he was leaving his own country. He placed Mr. Durrien's
card in his memorandum book, and said to himself that this adieu from an old
man could not fail to bring him good luck.

It was now the 20th of February. The weather was fine. The sun had sunk
below the horizon, leaving a sky as cloudless as that of summer.

Erik had the watch during the first quarter, and he walked the quarter-deck
with a light step. It seemed to him that, with the departure of Tudor Brown, the
evil genius of the expedition had disappeared.

"Provided that he does not intend to rejoin us at Malta or Suez," he said to
himself.

It was possible--indeed, even probable--if Tudor Brown wished to spare
himself the long voyage which the "Alaska" would make before reaching Egypt.
While the vessel was going around the coasts of France and Spain, he could, if it
so pleased him, stay for a week in Paris, or at any other place, and then take the
mail packet either to Alexandria or Suez, and rejoin the "Alaska" at either of
those places; or he could even defer doing so until they reached Singapore or
Yokohama.

But this was only a possibility. The fact was that he was no longer on board,
and that he could not cast a damper upon the spirits of the company.

Their dinner, also, which they took at six o'clock, as usual, was the gayest
which they had yet sat down to. At dessert they drank to the success of the
expedition, and every one, in his heart, associated it, more or less, with the


absence of Tudor Brown. Then they went on deck and smoked their cigars.

It was a dark night, but in the distance toward the north they could see the
light of Cape Saint Matthew. They soon signaled, also, the little light on the
shore at Bec-du-Raze, which proved that they were in their right course. A good
breeze from the northeast accelerated the speed of the vessel, which rolled very
little, although the sea was quite rough.

As the dinner-party reached the deck, one of the sailors approached the
captain, and said: "Six knots and a quarter."

"In that case we shall not want any more coal until we arrive at Behring's
Straits," answered the captain. After saying these words, he left the doctor and
went down to his room. There he selected a large chart, which he spread out
before him under a brilliant light, which was suspended from the ceiling. It was a
map of the British Admiralty, and indicated all the details of the course which
the "Alaska" intended to take. The shores, the islands, the sand-banks, the light-
houses, revolving lights, and the most minute details were all clearly marked out.
With such a chart and a compass it seemed as if even a child might be able to
guide the largest ship through these perilous passes; and yet, a distinguished
officer of the French Navy, Lieutenant Mage, who had explored the Niger, had
been lost in these waters, with all his companions, and his vessel, the
"Magician."

It had happened that Captain Marsilas had never before navigated in these
waters. In fact, it was only the necessity of stopping at Brest which had brought
him here now, otherwise he would have passed a long distance from shore.
Therefore he was careful to study his chart attentively, in order to keep his
proper course. It seemed a very easy matter, keeping on his left the Pointe-du-
Van, the Bec-du-Raze, and the Island of Sein, the legendary abode of the nine
Druidesses, and which was nearly always veiled by the spray of the roaring
waters; he had only to run straight to the west and to the south to reach the open
sea. The light on the island indicated clearly his position, and according to the
chart, the island ended in rocky heights, bordered by the open sea, whose depth
reached one hundred meters. The light on the island was a useful guide on a dark
night, and he resolved to keep closer to it than he would have done in broad
daylight. He therefore ascended to the deck, and told Erik to sail twenty-five
degrees toward the southwest.

This order appeared to surprise the young lieutenant.

"To the southwest, did you say?" he asked in a respectful manner, believing
that he had been mistaken.

"Yes, I said to the southwest!" repeated the commander, dryly: "Do you not
like this route?"


"Since you ask me the question, captain, I must confess that I do not. I
should have preferred running west for some time."

"To what purpose? we should only lose another night."

The commander spoke in a tone that did not permit of any contradiction, and
Erik gave the order which he had received. After all the captain was an
experienced seaman in whom they might have perfect confidence.

Slight as was the change in her course, it sufficed to modify sensibly the
sailing of the vessel. The "Alaska" commenced to roll a great deal, and to dip her
prow in the waves. The log indicated fourteen knots, and as the wind was
increasing, Erik thought it prudent to take a couple of reefs.

The doctor and Mr. Bredejord both became a prey to seasickness, and
descended to their cabins. The captain, who had for some time been pacing up
and down the deck, soon followed their example.

He had hardly entered his own apartment when Erik stood before him.

"Captain," said the young man, "I have heard suspicious noises, like waves
breaking over rocks. I feel conscientiously bound to tell you that in my opinion
we are following a dangerous route."

"Certainly, sir, you are gifted with tenaciousness," cried the captain. "What
danger can you fear when we have this light at least three good miles, if not four,
distant from us?"

And he impatiently with his finger pointed out their position upon the chart,
which he had kept spread out upon his table.

Erik followed the direction of his finger, and he saw clearly that the island
was surrounded by very deep waters. Nothing could be more decisive and
reassuring, in the eyes of a mariner. But still he felt sure that it was not an
illusion, those noises which he had heard, and which certainly were made by
waves breaking upon a rocky shore very close to them.

It was a strange case, and Erik hardly liked to acknowledge it to himself, but
it did not seem to him that he could recognize in this profile of the coast which
lay spread out before his eyes the dangerous spot which he remembered in the
same geographical studies which he had pursued. But could he venture to oppose
his dim impressions and vague remembrances against a chart of the British
Admiralty? Erik dared not do it. These charts are made expressly to guard
navigators against errors or any illusions of their memory. He therefore bowed
respectfully to his chief and returned to his position on deck.

He had scarcely reached it when he heard this cry resounding through the
vessel, "Breakers on the starboard!" followed almost immediately by a second
shout of "Breakers on the larboard!"

There was a loud whistle and a clattering of many feet followed by a series


of effective maneuvers. The "Alaska" slackened her course, and tried to back
out. The captain made a rush up the stairs.

At this moment he heard a grating noise, then suddenly a terrible shock
which shook the vessel from prow to stern. Then all was silent, and the "Alaska"
remained motionless.

She was wedged in between two submarine rocks.

Commander Marsilas, his head bleeding from a fall, mounted the deck,
where the greatest confusion reigned. The dismayed sailors made a rush for the
boats. The waves dashed furiously over the rocks upon which the vessel had
been shipwrecked. The distant light-houses, with their fixed lights, seemed to
reproach the "Alaska" for having thrown herself into the dangers which it was
their duty to point out. Erik tried vainly to penetrate through the gloom and
discover the extent of the damage which the vessel had sustained.

"What is the matter?" cried the captain, still half-stunned by his fall.

"By sailing southwest, sir, according to your orders, we have run upon
breakers," replied Erik.

Commander Marsilas did not say a word. What could he answer? He turned
on his heel, and walked toward the staircase again.

Their situation was a tragical one, although they did not appear to be in any
immediate peril. The vessel remained motionless between the rocks which
seemed to hold her firmly, and their adventure appeared to be more sad than
frightful. Erik had only one thought--the expedition was brought to a full stop--
his hope of finding Patrick O'Donoghan was lost.

He had scarcely made his somewhat hasty reply to the captain, which had
been dictated by this bitter disappointment, than he regretted having done so. He
therefore left the deck to go in search of his superior officer with the generous
intention of comforting him, if it were possible to do so. But the captain had
disappeared, and three minutes had not elapsed when a detonation was heard.

Erik ran to his room. The door was fastened on the inside. He forced it open
with a blow of his fist.

Commander Marsilas lay stretched out upon the carpet, with a revolver in his
right hand, and a bullet wound in his forehead.

Seeing that the vessel was shipwrecked by his fault, he had blown his brains
out. Death had been instantaneous. The doctor and Mr. Bredejord, who had run
in after the young lieutenant, could only verify the sad fact.

But there was no time for vain regrets. Erik left to his two friends the care of
lifting the body and laying it upon the couch. His duty compelled him to return
to the deck, and attend to the safety of the crew and passengers.

As he passed the door of Mr. Malarius, the excellent man, who had been


awakened by the stopping of the vessel, and also by the report of the pistol,
opened his door and put out his white head, covered by his black silk night-cap.
He had been sleeping ever since they left Brest, and was therefore ignorant of all
that had occurred.

"Ah, well, what is it? Has anything happened?" he asked quietly.

"What has happened?" replied Erik. "My dear master, the 'Alaska' has been
cast upon breakers, and the captain has killed himself!"

"Oh!" said Mr. Malarius, overcome with surprise. "Then, my dear child,
adieu to our expedition!"

"That is another affair," said Erik. "I am not dead, and as long as a spark of
life remains in me, I shall say, 'Go forward!"


CHAPTER XIV.

ON THE ROCKS.

The "Alaska" had been thrown upon the rocks with such violence that she
remained perfectly motionless, and the situation did not appear to be
immediately dangerous for her crew and passengers. The waves, encountering
this unusual obstacle, beat over the deck, and covered everything with their
spray; but the sea was not rough enough to make this state of affairs dangerous.
If the weather did not change, day would break without any further disaster. Erik
saw this at a glance. He had naturally taken command of the vessel, as he was
the first officer. Having given orders to close the port-holes and scuttles
carefully, and to throw tarred cloths over all openings, in case the sea should
become rougher, he descended to the bottom of the hold, in company with the
master carpenter. There he saw with great satisfaction that no water had entered.
The exterior covering of the "Alaska" had protected her, and the precaution
which they had taken against polar icebergs had proved very efficacious against
the rocky coast; in fact the engine had stopped at once, being disarranged by the
frightful shock, but it had produced no explosion, and they had, therefore, no
vital damage to deplore. Erik resolved to wait for daybreak, and then disembark
his passengers if it should prove necessary.

He, therefore, contented himself with firing a cannon to ask aid from the
inhabitants of the Island of Sein, and with dispatching his small steam launch to
L'Orient.

He said to himself, that at no place would they find the means of repairing
their damages so promptly and well as at this great maritime arsenal of Western
France.

Thus in this glooming hour when every one on board believed that their


chances were irretrievably lost, he already began to feel hopeful, or rather he
was one of those courageous souls who know no discouragement and never
confess themselves vanquished.

"If we can only get the 'Alaska' off these rocks, everything may yet go well
with us," he said.

But he was careful not to express this hope to the others, who would
doubtless have considered it chimerical. He only told them when he returned
from his visit to the hold that they were in no danger at present, and that there
was plenty of time for them to receive aid.

Then he ordered a distribution of tea and rum to all the crew.

This sufficed to put these children of a larger growth in a good humor, and
their little steam-boat was speedily launched.

Some rockets from the light-house of Sein soon announced that aid was
coming to the assistance of the shipwrecked vessel. Red lights now became
visible, and voices hailed them. They answered that they had been shipwrecked
upon the rocks surrounding Sein.

It was a full hour before the boat could reach them. The breakers were so
strong that the attempt was perilous. But at length six men succeeded in seizing a
small cable, and hoisting themselves on board of the "Alaska."

They were six rude fishermen of Sein--strong, intrepid fellows--and it was
not the first time they had gone to the assistance of shipwrecked mariners. They
fully approved of the idea of sending to L'Orient for assistance, for their little
port could not offer the necessary resources. It was agreed that two of them
should depart in the little steamer with Mr. Hersebom and Otto, as soon as the
moon arose above the horizon. While they were waiting for it to do so, they gave
some account of the place where they were shipwrecked.

The rocks extend in a westerly direction for nine miles beyond the Island of
Sein. They are divided into two parts, which are called the Pont du Sein and the
Basse Froid.

The Pont du Sein is about four miles long, and a mile and a half wide. It is
composed of a succession of high rocks, which form a chain above the waters.
The Basse Froid extends beyond the Pont du Sein for five miles, and is two
thirds of a mile wide; it consist of a great number of rocks of about an equal
height, which can be seen at a great distance. The principal rocks are the
Cornengen, Schomeur, Cornoc-ar-Goulet-Bas-ven, Madiou and Ar-men. These
are the least dangerous, because they can be seen. The number and irregularity
of their points under the water are not fully known, for the sea beats over them
with extreme violence, the force of the current is very strong, and they are the
scene of many shipwrecks. Light-houses have been erected on the Island of Sein


and at Bec-du-Raze, so that these rocks can be seen and avoided by vessels
coming from the west, but they are very dangerous for vessels coming from the
south. Unfortunately there is no rock or small island at the extreme end where a
signal could be placed, and the turbulence of the waters will not permit a floating
one to be placed there. Therefore it was resolved to build a light-house on the
rock Ar-men, which is three miles from the extreme point. This work is so
extremely difficult that although it was commenced in 1867, twelve years later,
in 1879, it was only half built. They say that during the latter year it was only
possible to work for eight hours, although the workmen were always ready to
seize a favorable moment. The light-house therefore was not yet completed at
the time when the "Alaska" met with her disaster. But this did not suffice to
explain how, after leaving Brest, they had been run into such peril. Erik
promised himself that he would solve this difficulty as soon as the little steam-
boat had been dispatched for aid. This departure was easily effected, the moon
having soon made its appearance. The young captain then appointed the night
watch, and sent the rest of the crew to bed, then he descended to the captain's
room.

Mr. Bredejord, Mr. Malarius, and the doctor were keeping watch beside the
corpse. They arose as soon as they saw Erik.

"My poor child, what is the cause of this sad state of things? How did it
happen?" asked the doctor.

"It is inexplicable," answered the young man, looking at the chart which lay
open upon the table. "I felt instinctively that we were out of our route, and I said
so; but in my estimation we are at least three miles from the light-house; and all
the seamen agree with me," he added, designating a spot with his finger on the
map--and you see no danger is indicated--no sand-banks or rocks. This coloring
indicates deep water. It is inconceivable how the mistake can have occurred. We
can not suppose that a chart of the British Admiralty can be at fault, for it is a
region well known to mariners, as it has been minutely explored for centuries!"

"Is it not possible to make a mistake as to our position? Could not one light
be mistaken for another?" asked Mr. Bredejord.

"That is scarcely possible in a voyage as short as ours has been since we left
Brest," said Erik. "Remember that we have not lost, sight of land for a moment,
and that we have been passing from one point to another. We can only suppose
that one of the lights indicated on the chart has not been lighted or that some
supplementary light has been added--in a word, we must imagine what is highly
improbable. Our course has been so regular, the soundings have been so
carefully made, that it seems impossible that we could have mistaken our route,
and yet the fact remains that we are on the rocks, when we ought to have been


some distance out to sea."

"But how is it going to end? That is what I want to know," cried the doctor.

"We shall soon see," answered Erik, "if the maritime authorities show any
eagerness to come to our assistance. For the present the best thing that every one
can do is to go quietly to bed, since we are as secure as if we were at anchor in
some quiet bay."

The young commander did not add that it was his intention to keep watch
while his friends slept.

Nevertheless this is what he did for the remainder of the night, sometimes
promenading the deck and encouraging the men, sometimes descending for a
few minutes to the saloon.

As day commenced to dawn he had the satisfaction of perceiving that the
waves visibly receded, and if they continued to do so the "Alaska" would be left
almost on dry rocks. This gave him hope of being able speedily to determine the
extent of the damage which the vessel had received, and, in fact, toward seven
o'clock they were able to proceed with this examination.

They found that three points of the rocks had pierced the "Alaska," and held
her firmly on her rocky bed. The direction in which she lay, slightly inclined to
the north, which was contrary to her course, showed that the commands given by
Erik to back the vessel had saved her, and also rendered the shock, when she
struck, less severe. The engine had been reversed some seconds before she
touched, and she had been carried on the reef by the remainder of her previous
speed, and by the force of the current. Doubtless but for this she would have
gone to pieces. Besides, the waves having continued to break against her all
night in the same direction, had helped to keep her in her place instead of fixing
her more firmly on the rocks, which would have happened if the wind had
changed. So, after all, there was a favorable view to take of the disaster. The
question now was how to get the vessel off before the wind should change, and
reverse these favorable conditions.

Erik resolved not to lose a moment. Immediately after breakfast he set all his
men to work. He hoped that when the tow-boat should arrive, which he had sent
for from L'Orient, it might be possible at high tide to disengage the "Alaska."

We can therefore imagine that the young captain waited impatiently for the
first trace of smoke upon the horizon.

All turned out as he desired. The water remained calm and peaceful. Toward
noon the boat arrived.

Erik, with his staff, received the mariners with due honors.

"But explain to me," said the captain of the tow-boat, "how you came to cast
your vessel on these rocks after leaving Brest?"


"This chart will explain it," said Erik. "It does not point out any such
danger."

The French officer examined the chart with curiosity at first, and then he
looked stupefied.

"In fact the Basse-Froide is not marked down, nor the point of Sein," he
cried. "What unparalleled negligence. Why, even the position of the light-house
is not correctly marked. I am more and more surprised. This is a chart of the
British Admiralty. I should say that some one has taken pleasure in making it as
deceitful and perfidious as possible. Navigators of olden times frequently played
such tricks upon their rivals. I should never have believed such traditions would
be imitated in England."

"Are you sure that this is an English chart?" asked Mr. Bredejord. "For
myself I suspect that the chart is the work of a rascal, and has been placed with
criminal intentions among the charts of the 'Alaska.""

"By Tudor Brown!" cried Erik, impetuously. "That evening when we dined
with the authorities at Brest he entered the captain's room upon the pretense of
examining the charts. Oh, the infamous wretch! This then is the reason that he
did not come on board again!"

"It appears to be only too evident that he is the culprit," said Dr.
Schwaryencrona. "But such a dastardly action betrays such an abyss of iniquity.
What motive could he have for committing such a crime?"

"What was his motive in coming to Stockholm, expressly to tell you that
Patrick O'Donoghan was dead?" answered Mr. Bredejord. "For what purpose did
he subscribe twenty thousand kroners for the voyage of the 'Alaska,' when it was
doubtful if she would ever make the journey? Why did he embark with us to
leave us at Brest? I think we must be blind indeed if we do not see in these facts
a chain of evidence as logical as it is frightful. What interest has Tudor Brown in
all this? I do not know. But this interest must be very strong, very powerful, to
induce him to have recourse to such means to prevent our journey; for I am
convinced now that it was he who caused the accident which detained us at
Brest, and it was he who led us upon these rocks, where he expected we would
all lose our lives."

"It seems difficult, however, to believe that he could have foreseen the route
that Captain Marsilas would choose!" objected Mr. Malarias. "Why did he not
indicate this route by altering the chart? After delaying us for three days, he felt
certain that the captain would take the shortest way. The latter, believing that the
waters were safe around Sein, was thrown upon the rocks."

"It is true," said Erik; "but the proof that the result of his maneuvers was
uncertain lies in the fact that I insisted, before Captain Marsilas, that we ought


still to keep to the west."

"But who knows whether he has not prepared other charts to lead us astray,
in case this one failed to do so?" said Mr. Bredejord.

"That is easily determined," answered Erik, who went and brought all the
charts and maps that were in the case.

The first one which they opened was that of Corunna, and at a glance the
French officer pointed out two or three grave errors. The second was that of
Cape Vincent. It was the same.

The third was that of Gibraltar. Here the errors were apparent to every eye. A
more thorough examination would have been superfluous, as it was impossible
to doubt any longer. If the "Alaska" had not been shipwrecked on the Island of
Sein, this fate would surely have awaited her before she could have reached
Malta.

A careful examination of the charts revealed the means which had been
employed to effect these changes. They were undoubtedly English charts, but
they had been partly effaced by some chemical process, and then retouched so as
to indicate false routes among the true ones. They had been recolored so
skillfully that only a very slight difference in the tints could be perceived after
the most careful scrutiny.

But there was one circumstance which betrayed the criminal intentions with
which they had been placed on board the "Alaska." All the charts belonging to
the vessel bore the seal of the secretary of the Swedish navy. The forger had
foreseen that they would not be examined too minutely, and had hoped that by
following them they would all come to a watery grave.

These successive discoveries had produced consternation in the breasts of all
who were present.

Erik was the first to break the silence which had succeeded the conversation.

"Poor Captain Marsilas!" he said, in a trembling voice, "he has suffered for
us all. But since we have escaped almost by a miracle the fate which was
prepared for us, let us run no more risks. The tide is rising, and it may be
possible to draw the 'Alaska' off the rocks. If you are willing, gentlemen, we will
go and commence operations without delay."

He spoke with simple authority and a modest dignity, with which the feeling
of responsibility had already inspired him.

To see a young man of his age invested with the command of a ship under
such circumstances, and for such a hazardous expedition, was certainly an
unforeseen occurrence. But he felt that he was equal to the performance of all his
duties. He knew that he could rely upon himself and upon his crew, and these
thoughts transfigured him. The youth of yesterday was a man to-day. The spirit


of a hero burned in his eyes. He rose superior to the calamity which had befallen
them. His ability impressed all who approached him. Even the doctor and Mr.
Bredejord submitted to him like the others.

The operation of preparing for their morning's work proved easier than they
had hoped.

Lifted by the rising waters, the vessel only required a slight force to take her
off the rocks. A few hours of hard work were sufficient to accomplish this, and
the "Alaska" was once more afloat, strained indeed, and weighed down by the
water which made its way into some of her compartments, and with her engine
silent, but manageable.

All the crew, who were assembled on the deck, watched anxiously the result
of these efforts, and a loud hurrah greeted the deliverance of the "Alaska."

The Frenchmen replied to this joyful cry with similar acclamations. It was
now three o'clock in the afternoon. Above the horizon the beautiful February sun
inundated the calm sparkling sea with floods of sunshine, which fell also on the
rocks of the Basse-Froide, as if to efface all remembrance of the drama which
had been enacted there the previous night.

That same evening the "Alaska" had been safely towed into the harbor of
L'Orient.

The next day the French maritime authorities, with the utmost courtesy,
authorized the necessary repairs to be made without delay. The damage which
the vessel had sustained was not serious, but that of the machinery was more
complicated, although not irremediable. Necessarily it would take some time to
render her seaworthy, but nowhere in the world, as Erik had foreseen, could this
be accomplished so speedily as at this port, which possessed such immense
resources for naval construction. The house of Gainard, Norris & Co., undertook
to make the repairs in three weeks. It was now the 23d of February; on the 16th
of March they would be able to resume their voyage, and this time with good
charts.

That would leave three months and a half for them to reach Behring's Strait
by the end of June. It was not impossible to do this, although the time was very
limited. Erik would not hear of abandoning the enterprise. He feared only one
thing, and that was being compelled to do so. Therefore he refused to send to
Stockholm a report of the shipwreck, and he would not make a formal complaint
against the presumed author of the attempt to shipwreck them for fear of being
delayed by legal proceedings, yet he had his fears that this might encourage
Tudor Brown to throw some new obstacle in the way of the "Alaska." This is
what Dr. Schwaryencrona and Mr. Bredejord asked each other as they were
playing at whist with Mr. Malarius, in the little sitting-room of the hotel to which


they had gone after arriving at L'Orient.

As for Mr. Bredejord, he had no doubts about the matter.

A rascal like Tudor Brown, if he knew of the failure of his scheme--and how
could any one doubt that he was acquainted with this fact?--would not hesitate to
renew the attempt.

To believe that they would ever succeed in reaching Behring's Strait was
therefore more than self-delusion--it was foolishness. Mr. Bredejord did not
know what steps Tudor Brown would take to prevent this, but he felt certain that
he would find some means of doing so. Dr. Schwaryencrona was inclined to the
same opinion, and even Mr. Malarius could not think of anything very reassuring
to say. The games of whist were therefore not very lively, and the long strolls
that the three friends took were not very gay.

Their principal occupation was to watch the erection of the mausoleum
which they were building for poor Captain Marsilas, whose funeral obsequies
had been attended by the entire population of L'Orient.

The sight of this funeral monument was not calculated to raise the spirits of
the survivors of the "Alaska."

But when they joined Erik again their hopes revived. His resolution was
unshakable, his activity untiring, he was so bent upon overcoming all obstacles,
so certain of success, that it was impossible for them to express, or even to
preserve, less heroic sentiments.

They had a new proof of the malignity of Tudor Brown, and that he still was
pursuing them.

On the 14th of March, Erik saw that the work upon the machinery was
almost finished. They only had to adjust the pumps, and that was to be done the
next day.

But in the night, between the 14th and 15th, the body of the pump
disappeared from the workshop of the Messrs. Gainard, Norris & Co.

It was impossible to find it.

How had it been taken away--who had done it?

After investigation they were unable to discover.

However, it would take ten days more to replace it, and that would make it
the 25th of March before the "Alaska" could leave L'Orient.

It was a singular fact, but this incident affected Erik's spirits more than the
shipwreck had done. He saw in it a sure sign of a persistent desire to prevent the
voyage of the "Alaska."

But these efforts only redoubled his ardor, and he determined that nothing
should be wanting on his part to bring the expedition to a successful termination.

These ten days of delay were almost exclusively occupied by him in


considering the question in all its aspects. The more he studied, the more he
became convinced that he could not reach Behring's Straits in three months, for
they had suffered a detention of forty days since they had left Stockholm, and to
persist would only be to court failure and perhaps some irremediable disaster.

This conclusion did not stop him, but it only led him to think that some
modification of their original plans was indispensable.

He took care, however, to say nothing, rightly judging that secrecy was the
first condition of victory. He contented himself with watching more closely than
ever the work of repairing the vessel.

But his companions thought that they perceived that he was less eager to set
out.

They therefore concluded that he saw that the enterprise was impracticable,
which they had also believed for some time.

But they were mistaken.

On the 25th of March, at midday, the repairs of the "Alaska" were
completed, and she was once more afloat in the harbor of L'Orient.


CHAPTER XV.

THE SHORTEST ROUTE.

Night was closing in when Erik summoned his three friends and counselors
to hold a serious consultation.

"I have reflected a great deal," he said to them, "upon the circumstances
which have made our voyage memorable since we left Stockholm. I have been
forced to arrive at one conclusion, which is that we must expect to meet with
obstacles or accidents during our voyage. Perhaps they may befall us at Gibraltar
or at Malta. If we are not destroyed, it appears to me certain that we shall be
delayed. In that case we can not reach Behring's Straits during the summer,
which is the only season when it is practicable to navigate the polar sea!"

"That is also the conclusion which I formed some time ago," declared Mr.
Bredejord: "but I kept it to myself, as I did not wish to dampen your hopes, my
dear boy. But I am sure that we must give up the idea of reaching Behring's
Strait in three months!"

"That is also my opinion," said the doctor.

Mr. Malarius on his part indicated by a motion of his head that he agreed
with them all.

"Well!" said Erik, "having settled that point, what line of conduct now
remains for us to adopt?"

"There is one right course which it is our duty to take," answered Mr.


Bredejord, "it is to renounce an enterprise which we see clearly is impracticable
and return to Stockholm. You understand this fact, my child, and I congratulate
you upon being able to look the situation calmly in the face!"

"You pay me a compliment which I can not accept," said Erik smiling, "for I
do not merit it. No--I have no thoughts of abandoning the expedition, for I am
far from regarding it as impracticable. I only think that it is best for us all to
baffle the machinations of that scoundrel who is lying in wait for us, and the first
thing to do is to change our route."

"Such a change would only complicate our difficulties," replied the doctor,
"since we have adopted the shortest one. If it would be difficult to reach
Behring's Straits by the Mediterranean and the Suez Canal, it would be
impossible by the Cape of Good Hope, or Cape Horn, for either of these routes
would necessarily take five or six months."

"There is another way which would shorten our voyage, instead of
lengthening it, and where we would be sure not to meet Tudor Brown," said
Erik.

"Another way?" answered Dr. Schwaryencrona; "upon my word I do not
know of any unless you are thinking of the way of Panama. But it is not yet
practicable for vessels, and it will not be yet for several years."

"IT am not thinking of Panama, nor of Cape Horn, nor of the Cape of Good
Hope," answered the young captain of the "Alaska." "The route I propose is the
only one by which we can reach Behring's Strait in three months: it is to go by
way of the Arctic Ocean, the northwest passage."

Then seeing that his friends were stupefied by this unexpected
announcement, Erik proceeded to develop his plans.

"The northwest passage now is no longer what it was formerly, frightful to
navigators--it is intermittent, since it is only open for eight or ten weeks every
year, but it is now well known, marked out upon excellent charts, and frequented
by hundreds of whaling-vessels. It is rarely taken by any vessel going from the
Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean, I must admit. Most of them who enter it from
either side only traverse it partially. It might even happen, if circumstances were
not favorable, that we might find the passage closed, or that it might not be open
at the precise time when we desired to enter it. It is a risk that one must take. But
I think there are many reasons to make us hopeful of success if we take this
route, whilst as far as I can see there is none, if we take any of the others. This
being the state of affairs, I think it is our duty--a duty which we owe to those
who have fitted out the expedition--to take the shortest way of reaching
Behring's Strait. An ordinary vessel equipped for navigating tropical waters
might hesitate before deciding upon such a course, but with a vessel like the


‘Alaska’ fitted out especially for polar navigation, we need not hesitate. For my
part I declare that I will not return to Stockholm before having attempted to find
Nordenskiold."

Erik's reasoning was so sound that nobody tried to contradict it.

What objections could the doctor, Mr. Bredejord, and Mr. Malarius raise?

They saw the difficulties which beset the new plan. But it was possible that
these difficulties might not prove insurmountable, whilst, if they pursued any
other course, they must abandon all hopes of success. Besides, they did not
hesitate to agree with Erik that it would be more glorious, in any case, to make
the attempt, than to return to Stockholm and acknowledge themselves
conquered.

"I see but one serious objection, for my part," said Dr. Schwaryencrona, after
he had remained for a few moments lost in reflection. "It is the difficulty of
procuring coal in the arctic regions. For without coal, adieu to the possibility of
making the northwest passage, and of profiting by the time, often very short,
during which it is practicable."

"I have foreseen this difficulty, which is in fact the only one," answered Erik,
"and I do not think it is insurmountable. In place of going to Malta or Gibraltar,
where we might doubtless expect new machinations on the part of Tudor Brown,
I propose that we go to London; from there I can send, by transatlantic cable, a
dispatch to a house in Montreal, to send without delay a boat loaded with coal to
wait for us in Baffin's Bay, and to a house in San Francisco to send to Behring's
Strait. We have the necessary funds at our disposal, and, besides, we will not
require as much as we would have done if we had gone by the way of Asia, for
our new route is a much shorter one. It is useless for us to reach Baffin's Bay
before the end of May, and we can not hope to reach Behring's Strait before the
end of June. Our correspondents in Montreal and San Francisco will therefore
have plenty of time to execute our orders, which will be covered by funds
deposited with bankers in London. This accomplished, we shall only have to find
out whether the northwest passage is practicable, and that evidently depends
upon ourselves. But, if we find the passage closed, at least we shall have the
consolation of knowing that we have neglected nothing that could have insured
our success."

"Tt is evident!" said Mr. Malarius, "that your arguments are unanswerable!"

"Gently, gently," said Mr. Bredejord. "Do not let us go too fast. I have
another objection. Do you think, my dear Erik, that the 'Alaska’ can pass
unnoticed through these waters? No, it is not possible. The newspapers would
mention our arrival. The telegraph companies would make it known. Tudor
Brown would know it. He would know that we had changed our plans. What


would prevent him from altering his? Do you think, for example, that it would be
very difficult to prevent our boat with coals from reaching us?--and without it we
could do nothing!"

"That is true," answered Erik, "and it proves that we must think of
everything. We must not go to London. We must put into Lisbon as if we were
en route to Gibraltar and Suez. Then one of us must go incognito to Madrid, and
without explaining why, or for whom it is intended, must open telegraphic
communications with Montreal and San Francisco, to order the supply of coal.
The crews of these boats must not know for whom the coal is destined, but
remain at designated points at the disposition of a captain who will carry an
order to them previously agreed upon!"

"A perfect arrangement. It will be almost impossible for Tudor Brown to
track us."

"You mean to track me, for I hope that you do not think of accompanying me
to these arctic regions," said Erik.

"Indeed that is my intention!" answered the doctor. "It shall not be said that
that rascal, Tudor Brown, made me turn back!"

"Nor me either," cried Mr. Bredejord and Mr. Malarius together.

The young captain tried to combat this resolution, and explained to his
friends the dangers and monotony of the voyage which they proposed to take
with him. But he could not alter their decision. The perils which they had already
encountered, made them feel it a duty to keep together; for the only way of
rendering such a voyage acceptable to them all was not to separate. Every
precaution had been taken to protect the persons on board the "Alaska" from
suffering unduly from cold; and neither Swedes nor Norwegians fear frost.

Erik was obliged to yield to their wishes, only stipulating that their change of
route should not be made known to the crew of the vessel.

The first part of their voyage was quickly accomplished.

On the 2d of April the "Alaska" reached Lisbon. Before the newspapers had
given notice of their arrival, Mr. Bredejord had gone to Madrid, and by means of
a banking-house opened communications with two large firms, one in Montreal
and one in San Francisco.

He had arranged to have two boat-loads of coal sent to two designated
points, and had given the sign by which Erik was to make himself known.

This sign was the words found upon him when he was discovered floating,
tied to the buoy of the "Cynthia," "Semper idem."

Finally these arrangements having all been happily concluded, on the 9th of
April Mr. Bredejord returned to Lisbon, and the "Alaska" resumed her voyage.

On the twenty-fifth of the same month, having crossed the Atlantic and


reached Montreal, where they took in coal, and Erik was assured that his orders
had been punctually fulfilled, they left the waters of the St. Lawrence and Straits
of Belle Isle, which separate Labrador from Newfoundland. On the 10th of May
they reached the coast of Greenland and found the vessel with their coal, it
having arrived before them.

Erik knew very well that at this early date it would be useless to attempt to
force his way through the Arctic Ocean, which was still firmly frozen over the
largest part of his route. But he counted upon obtaining on these shores, which
were much frequented by whaling-vessels, precise information as to the best
charts, and he was not mistaken. He was also able to buy, although at a high
price, a dozen dogs, who with Kaas could draw their sledges if necessary.

Among the Danish stations on the coast of Greenland, he found Godhaven,
which is only a poor village, and is used as a depot by dealers in oil and the furs
of the country. At this time of the year the cold is not more severe than at
Stockholm or Noroe. But Erik and his friends beheld with surprise the great
difference between the two countries, both situated at the same distance from the
pole. Godhaven is in precisely the same latitude as Bergen. But whilst the
southern port of Norway is in April covered with green forests and fruit trees,
and even cultivated vines trained upon trellises above green meadows,
Greenland is still in May covered with ice and snow, without a tree to enliven the
monotony. The shape of the Norwegian coast, deeply indented by forests and
sheltered by chains of islands, which contribute almost as much as the warmth of
the Gulf Stream to raise the temperature of the country. Greenland, on the
contrary, has a low regular coast and receives the full shock of the cold blasts
from the pole, consequently she is enveloped almost to the middle of the island
by fields of ice several feet in thickness.

They spent fifteen days in the harbor and then the "Alaska" mounted Davis'
Straits, and keeping along the coast of Greenland, gained the polar sea.

On the 28th of May for the first time they encountered floating ice in 70 15'
of north latitude, with a temperature two degrees below zero. These first
icebergs, it is true, were in a crumbling condition, rapidly breaking up into small
fragments. But soon they became more dense, and frequently they had to break
their way through them. Navigation, although difficult, was not as yet dangerous.
By a thousand signs they perceived, however, that they were in a new world. All
objects at a little distance appeared to be colorless, and almost without form; the
eye could find no place to repose in this perpetually changing horizon, which
every minute assumed a new aspect.

"Who can describe," says an eye-witness, "these melancholy surroundings,
the roaring of the waves beating beneath the floating ice, the singular noise made


by the snow as it falls suddenly into the abyss of waters? Who can imagine the
beauty of the cascades which gush out on all sides, the sea of foam produced by
their fall, the fright of the sea-birds who, having fallen asleep on a pyramid of
ice, suddenly find their resting-place overturned and themselves obliged to fly to
some other spot? And in the morning, when the sun bursts through the fog, at
first only a little of the blue sky is visible, but it gradually widens, until the view
is only limited by the horizon."

These spectacles, presented by the polar sea, Erik and his friends were able
to contemplate at their leisure as they left the coast of Greenland, to which they
had kept close until they had reached Uppernavik. Then they sailed westward
across Baffin's Bay. Here navigation became more difficult, for this sea is the
ordinary course of the polar icebergs which are drawn in by the innumerable
currents which traverse it. Sometimes they found their course checked by
insurmountable barriers of ice, which it was impossible to break, and therefore
they were compelled to turn aside. The "Alaska" was obliged continually to
break her way through immense fields of ice. Sometimes a tempest of snow
assailed them which covered the deck and the masts with a thick coat.
Sometimes they were assailed by ice dashed over them by the wind, which
threatened to sink the vessel by its weight. Sometimes they found themselves in
a sort of lake, surrounded on all sides by fields of ice apparently firm and
impassable, and from which they had great difficulty to extricate themselves and
gain the open sea. Then they had to exercise great vigilance to escape some
enormous iceberg sailing down from the north with incredible swiftness, a
frightful mass, which could have crushed the "Alaska" like a walnut. But a
greater danger still was the submarine ice, which could injure her and act like a
battering-ram.

The "Alaska" lost her two large boats. One must experience the dangers
which polar navigation presents at every moment to have any just appreciation
of them.

After one or two weeks of such experience the most intrepid crew become
exhausted, and repose is necessary for them.

Sometimes, although surrounded by all these dangers, they made rapid
progress; at others they made scarcely any; but at length, on the 11th of June,
they came in sight of land again, and cast anchor at the entrance to Lancaster
Sound.

Erik had expected to be obliged to wait some days before being able to enter
the sound; but, to his surprise and joy, he found it open, at least at the entrance.
He entered resolutely, but only to find the next day his passage impeded by ice,
which held them prisoners for three days; but, thanks to the violent currents


which sweep through this Arctic canal, he at last was able to free his vessel and
continue his route as the whalers of Godhaven had told him he would be able to
do.

On the seventeenth he arrived at Barrow's Straits, and made all the speed he
could; but on the nineteenth, as he was about to enter Melville Sound, he was
again blocked in by the ice.

At first he patiently accepted the situation, waiting for it to break up; but day
succeeded to day and still this did not happen.

There were, however, many sources of amusement open to the voyagers.
They were near the coast and supplied with everything that could render their
life comfortable in that latitude. They could take sleigh-rides and see in the
distance the whales enjoying their diversions. The summer solstice was
approaching. Since the fifteenth the occupants of the "Alaska" had beheld a new
and astonishing spectacle, even for Norwegians and the natives of southern
Sweden; it was the sun at midnight touching the horizon without disappearing
and then mounting again in the sky. In these high latitudes and desolate coasts
the star of day describes in twenty-four hours a complete circle in space. The
light, it is true, is pale and languishing, objects lose their perfect shape, and all
nature has a shadowy appearance. One realizes profoundly how far he is
removed from the world, and how near he is to the pole. The cold, however, was
not extreme. The temperature did not fall more than four or five degrees below
zero, and the air was sometimes so mild that they could hardly believe that they
were in the center of the arctic zone.

But those novel surrounding were not sufficient to satisfy Erik, or make him
lose sight of the supreme object which had brought them there. He had not come
to herbalize like Mr. Malarius, who returned every evening more and more
delighted with his explorations, both of the country and of its unknown plants,
which he added to his collection; nor to enjoy with Dr. Schwaryencrona and Mr.
Bredejord the novelty of the sights which nature offered to them in these polar
regions. He wanted to find Nordenskiold and Patrick O'Donoghan--to fulfill a
sacred duty while he discovered, perhaps, the secret of his birth. This was why
he sought untiringly to break the circle of ice which hemmed them in. He made
excursions with his sleigh and on his snow-shoes, reconnoitered in every
direction for ten days, but it was all in vain. At the west, as well as the north and
east, the banks of ice remained firm.

It was the 20th of June, and they were still far from the Siberian Sea.

Must he confess himself vanquished? Erik could not make up his mind to do
this. Repeated soundings had revealed that under the ice there was a swift
current running toward Franklin's Strait, that is to say toward the south; he told


himself that some effort might suffice to break up the ice, and he resolved to
attempt it.

For the length of seven marine miles he had hollowed in the ice a series of
chambers, and in each of them was placed a kilogramme of dynamite. These
were connected by a copper wire inclosed in gutta percha.

On the 30th of June, at eight o'clock in the morning, Erik from the deck of
the "Alaska" pressed the button of the electrical machine, and a formidable
explosion took place. The field of ice shook and trembled, and clouds of
frightened sea-birds hovered around uttering discordant cries. When silence was
restored, a long black train cut into innumerable fissures met their anxious gaze.
The explosion of the terrible agent had broken up the ice field. There was, so to
speak, a moment of hesitation, and then the ice acted as if it had only been
waiting for some signal to move. Cracking in all parts it yielded to the action of
the current, and they beheld here and there whole continents, as it were,
gradually moving away from them. Some portions, however, were more slow to
move; they seemed to be protesting against such violence. The next day the
passage was clear, and the "Alaska" rekindled her fires.

Erik and his dynamite had done what it would probably have taken the pale
arctic sun a month longer to accomplish.

On the 2d of July, the expedition arrived at Banks' Straits; on the fourth, she
issued from the Arctic Sea properly speaking. From this time the route was open
notwithstanding icebergs, fogs, and snow-storms. On the twelfth, the "Alaska"
doubled Ice Cape; on the thirteenth, Cape Lisburne, and on the fourteenth she
entered the Gulf of Kotzebue to the north of Behring's Straits and found there,
according to instructions, the boat loaded with coal which had been sent from
San Francisco.

Thus in two months and sixteen days they had accomplished the programme
arranged by Erik before they left the coast of France.

The "Alaska" had hardly ceased to move, when Erik rushed into a small boat
and hurried off to accost the officer who had charge of the boat loaded with coal.

"Semper idem!" said he, as he approached.

"Lisbon!" answered the Yankee.

"How long have you been waiting here for me?"

"Five weeks--we left San Francisco one month after the arrival of your
dispatch."

"Have you heard any news of Nordenskiold?"

"At San Francisco they had not received any reliable information about him.
But since I have been here I have spoken to several captains of whaling-vessels,
who said that they had heard from the natives of Serdze-Kamen that an


European vessel had been frozen in by the ice for nine or ten months; they
thought it was the 'Vega.""

"Indeed!" said Erik, with a joy which we can easily understand. "And do you
believe that it has not yet succeeded in getting through the straits?"

"I am sure of it--not a vessel has passed us for the last five weeks, which I
have not seen and spoken to."

"God be praised--our troubles will not be without recompense, if we succeed
in finding Nordenskiold."

"You will not be the first who has done so!" said the Yankee, with an ironical
smile--"an American yacht has preceded you. It passed here three days ago, and
like you was inquiring for Nordenskiold."

"An American yacht?" repeated Erik, half stupefied.

"Yes--the ‘Albatross,’ Captain Tudor Brown, from Vancouver's Island. I told
him what I had heard, and he immediately started for Cape Serdze-Kamen."


CHAPTER XVI.

FROM SERDZE-KAMEN TO LJAKOW.

Tudor Brown had evidently heard of the change in the route of the "Alaska."
He had reached Behring's Straits before them. But by what means? It seemed
almost supernatural, but still the fact remained that he had done so.

Erik was greatly depressed by this information, but he concealed his feelings
from his friends. He hurried on the work of transporting the coal, and set out
again without losing a moment.

Serdze-Kamen is a long Asiatic-promontory situated nearly a hundred miles
to the west of Behring's Straits, and whaling-vessels from the Pacific visit it
every year.

The "Alaska" reached there after a voyage of twenty-four hours, and soon in
the bay of Koljutschin behind a wall of ice, they discovered the masts of the
"Vega," which had been frozen in for nine months.

The barrier which held Nordenskiold captive was not more than ten
kilometers in size. After passing around it, the "Alaska" came to anchor in a little
creek, where she would be sheltered from the northerly winds. Then Erik with
his three friends made their way overland to the establishment which the "Vega"
had made upon the Siberian coast to pass this long winter, and which a column
of smoke pointed out to them.

This coast of the Bay of Koljutschin consists of a low and slightly undulating
plain. There are no trees, only some dwarf willows, marine grasses and lichens.
Summer had already brought forth some plants, which Mr. Malarius recognized


as a species which was very common in Norway.

The encampment of the "Vega" consisted of a large store-house for their
eatables, which had been made by the orders of Nordenskiold, in case the
pressure of the ice should destroy his ship, which so frequently happens on these
dangerous coasts. It was a touching fact that the poor population, although
always half starved, and to whom this depot represented incalculable wealth in
the shape of food, had respected it, although it was but poorly guarded. The huts
of skin of these Tschoutskes were grouped here and there around the station. The
most imposing structure was the "Tintinjaranga," or ice-house, which they had
especially arranged to use for a magnetic observatory, and where all the
necessary apparatus had been placed. It had been built of blocks of ice delicately
tinted and cemented together with snow; the roof of planks was covered with
cloth.

The voyagers of the "Alaska" were cordially welcomed by the young
astronomer, whom they found at the time of their arrival holding a consultation
with the man in charge of the store-house. He offered with hearty goodwill to
take them on board the "Vega" by the path which had been cut in the ice in order
to keep open the means of communication between the vessel and the land, and a
rope attached to stones served as a guide on dark nights. As they walked, he
related to them their adventures since they had been unable to send home any
dispatches.

After leaving the mouth of the Lena, Nordenskiold had directed his course
toward the islands of New Siberia, which he wished to explore, but finding it
almost impossible to approach them, on account of the ice which surrounded
them, and the shallowness of the water in that vicinity, he abandoned the idea,
and resumed his course toward the east. The "Vega" encountered no great
difficulties until the 10th of September, but about that time a continuance of
fogs, and freezing nights, compelled her to slacken her speed, besides the
darkness necessitated frequented stoppages. It was therefore the 27th of
September before she reached Cape Serdze-Kamen. They cast her anchor on a
bank of ice, hoping to be able the next day to make the few miles which
separated her from Behring's Straits and the free waters of the Pacific. But a
north wind set in during the night, and heaped around the vessel great masses of
ice. The "Vega" found herself a prisoner for the winter at the time when she had
almost accomplished her work.

"It was a great disappointment to us, as you can imagine!" said the young
astronomer, "but we soon rallied our forces, and determined to profit by the
delay as much as possible, by making scientific investigations. We made the
acquaintance of the "Ischoutskes' of the neighborhood, whom no traveler has


hitherto known well, and we have made a vocabulary of their language, and also
gathered together a collection of their arms and utensils. The naturalists of the
‘Vega’ have also been diligent, and added many new arctic plants to their
collection. Lastly, the end of the expedition has been accomplished, since we
have doubled Cape Tchelynskin, and traversed the distance between it and the
mouth of the Yenisei and of the Lena. Henceforth the northeast passage must
become a recognized fact. It would have been more agreeable for us, if we could
have effected it in two months, as we so nearly succeeded in doing. But provided
we are not blocked in much longer, as the present indications lead us to hope, we
will not have much to complain of, and we shall be able to return with the
satisfaction of knowing that we have accomplished a useful work."

While listening to their guide with deep interest, the travelers were pursuing
their way. They were now near enough to the "Vega" to see that her deck was
covered over with a large canvas, and that her sides were protected by lofty
masses of snow, and that her smoke-stacks had been carefully preserved from
contact with the ice.

The immediate approach to the vessel was still more strange; she was not, as
one would have expected, completely incrusted in a bed of ice, but she was
suspended, as it were, in a labyrinth of lakes, islands, and canals, between which
they had been obliged to throw bridges formed of planks.

"The explanation is very simple," said the young astronomer, in reply to a
question from Erik. "All vessels that pass some months surrounded by ice form
around them a bed of refuse, consisting principally of coal ashes. This is heavier
than snow, and when a thaw begins, the bed around the vessel assumes the
aspect which you behold."

The crew of the "Vega," in arctic clothing, with two or three officers, had
already seen the visitors whom the astronomer was bringing with him. Their joy
was great when they saluted them in Swedish, and when they beheld among
them the well-known and popular physiognomy of Dr. Schwaryencrona.

Neither Nordenskiold nor Captain Palender were on board. They had gone
upon a geological excursion into the interior of the country, and expected to be
absent five or six days. This was a disappointment to the travelers, who had
naturally hoped when they found the "Vega" to present their congratulations to
the great explorer.

But this was not their only disappointment.[1]

[Footnote 1: They returned sooner, for on the 18th of July the ice broke up,
and after 264 days of captivity the "Vega" resumed her voyage. On the 20th of
July she issued from Behring's Straits and set out for Yokohama. ]

They had hardly entered the officer's room, when Erik and his friends were


informed that three days before the "Vega" had been visited by an American
yacht, or rather by its owner, Mr. Tudor Brown. This gentleman had brought
them news of the world beyond their settlement, which was very acceptable,
they being confined to the limited neighborhood of the Bay of Koljutschin. He
told them what had happened in Europe since their departure--the anxiety that
Sweden and indeed all civilized nations felt about their fate, and that the
"Alaska" had been sent to search for them. Mr. Tudor Brown came from
Vancouver's Island, in the Pacific, and his yacht had been waiting there for him
for three months.

"But," exclaimed a young doctor, attached to the expedition, "he told us that
he had at first embarked with you, and only left you at Brest, because he doubted
whether you would be able to bring the enterprise to a successful termination!"

"He had excellent reasons for doubting it," replied Erik, coolly, but not
without a secret tremor.

"His yacht was at Valparaiso and he telegraphed for her to wait for him at
Victoria, on the coast of Vancouver," continued the doctor; "then he took the
steamer from Liverpool to New York, and the railroad to the Pacific. This
explains how he was able to reach here before you."

"Did he tell you why he came?" asked Mr. Bredejord.

"He came to help us, if we stood in need of assistance, and also to inquire
about a strange enough personage, whom I had incidentally mentioned in my
correspondence, and in whom Mr. Tudor Brown seemed to take a great interest."

The four visitors exchanged glances.

"Patrick O'Donoghan--was not that the name?" asked Erik.

"Precisely--or at least it is the name which is tattooed on his body, although
he pretends it is not his own, but that of a friend. He calls himself Johnny
Bowles."

"May I ask if this man is still here?"

"He left us ten months ago. We had at first believed that he might prove
useful to us by acting as interpreter between us and the natives of this coast, on
account of his apparent knowledge of their language; but we soon discovered
that his acquaintance with it was very superficial--confined, in fact, to a few
words. Besides, until we came here, we were unable to hold any
communications with the natives. This Johnny Bowles, or Patrick O'Donoghan,
was lazy, drunken, and undisciplined. His presence on board would only have
occasioned trouble for us. We therefore acceded without regret to his request to
be landed on the large Island of Ljakow, as we were following the southern
coast."

"What! did he go there? But this island is uninhabited!" cried Erik.


"Entirely; but what attracted the man appeared to be the fact that its shores
are literally covered by bones, and consequently by fossil ivory. He had
conceived the plan of establishing himself there, and of collecting, during the
summer months, all the ivory that he could find; then when, in winter, the arm of
the sea which connects Ljakow with the continent should be frozen over, to
transport in a sleigh this treasure to the Siberian coast, in order to sell it to the
Russian traders, who come every year in search of the products of the country."

"Did you tell these facts to Mr. Tudor Brown?" asked Erik.

"Assuredly, he came far enough to seek for them," replied the young doctor,
unaware of the deep personal interest that the commander of the "Alaska" took
in the answers to the questions which he addressed to him.

The conversation then became more general. They spoke of the comparative
facility with which Nordenskiold had carried out his programme. He had not met
with any serious difficulties, and consequently the discovery of the new route
would be an advantage to the commerce of the world. "Not," said the officer of
the "Vega," "that this path was ever destined to be much frequented, but the
voyage of the 'Vega' would prove to the maritime nations of the Atlantic and
Pacific that it was possible to hold direct communication with Siberia by water.
And nowhere would these nations, notwithstanding the vulgar opinions, find a
field as vast and rich."

"Is it not strange," observed Mr. Bredejord, "that they have failed completely
during the last three centuries in this attempt that you have now accomplished
without difficulty?"

"The singularity is only apparent," answered one of the officers. "We have
profited by the experience of our predecessors, an experience often only
acquired at the cost of their lives. Professor Nordenskiold has been preparing
himself for this supreme effort during the last twenty years, in which he has
made eight arctic expeditions. He has patiently studied the problem in all its
aspects, and finally succeeded in solving it. Then we have had what our
predecessors lacked, a steam vessel especially equipped for this voyage. This has
enabled us to accomplish in two months a voyage that it would have taken a
sailing vessel two years to do. We have also constantly been able not only to
choose, but also to seek out, the most accessible route. We have fled from
floating ice and been able to profit by the winds and tides. And still we have
been overtaken by winter. How much more difficult it would have been for a
mariner who was compelled to wait for favorable winds, and see the summer
passing in the meantime."

In such conversation they passed the afternoon, and after accepting their
invitation and dining on board the "Vega," they carried back with them to supper


on board the "Alaska" all the officers who could be spared from duty. They
mutually gave each other all the information and news in their power. Erik took
care to inform himself exactly of the route followed by the "Vega," in order to
utilize it for his own profit. After exchanging many good wishes and with the
heartfelt desire that they would all soon return in safety to their country, they
separated.

The next day at dawn Erik had the "Alaska" steering for the island of
Ljakow. As for the "Vega" she had to wait until the breaking up of the ice would
permit her to reach the Pacific.

The first part of Erik's task was now accomplished. He had found
Nordenskiold. The second still remained to be fulfilled: to find Patrick
O'Donoghan, and see if he could persuade him to disclose his secret. That this
secret was an important one they were now all willing to admit, or Tudor Brown
would never have committed such a dastardly crime to prevent them from
becoming acquainted with it.

Would they be able to reach the Island of Ljakow before him?

It was hardly probable, for he was three days in advance of them: never
mind--he would make the attempt.

The "Albatross" might lose her way, or meet with some unforeseen obstacles.
As long as there was even a probability of success Erik determined to take the
chances.

The weather was now mild and agreeable. Light fogs indicated an open sea,
and a speedy breaking of the ice along the Siberian coast where the "Vega" had
been held prisoner so long. Summer was advancing, and the "Alaska" could
reasonably count upon at least ten weeks of favorable weather. The experience
which they had acquired amongst the American ice had its value and would
render this new enterprise comparatively easy. Lastly the northeast passage was
the most direct way to return to Sweden, and besides the deep personal interest
which induced Erik to take it, he had a truly scientific desire to accomplish in a
reverse route the task which Nordenskiold had fulfilled. If he had succeeded,
why should he not be able to do so?--this would be proving practically the
experiment of the great navigator.

The wind favored the "Alaska." For ten days it blew almost constantly from
the south-east, and enabled them to make from nine to ten knots at least without
burning any coal. This was a precious advantage, and besides the wind drove the
floating ice toward the north and rendered navigation much less difficult. During
these ten days they met with very little floating ice.

On the eleventh day, it is true they had a tempestuous snow storm followed
by dense fogs which sensibly retarded the progress of the "Alaska." But on the


29th of July the sun appeared in all its brilliancy, and on the morning of the 2d of
August they came in sight of the Island of Ljakow.

Erik gave orders immediately to sail around it in order to see if the
"Albatross" was not hidden in some of its creeks. Having done this they cast
anchor in a sandy bottom about three miles from the southern shore. Then he
embarked in his boat accompanied by his three friends and six of his sailors.
Half an hour later they had reached the island.

Erik had not chosen the southern coast of the island to anchor his vessel
without a reason. He had said to himself that Patrick O'Donoghan might have
told the truth when he had stated that his object was to collect ivory; but if it was
his intention to leave the island at the first opportunity which afforded, he would
be sure to establish himself upon a spot where he would have a good view of the
sea. He would undoubtedly choose some elevated place, and one as near as
possible to the Siberian coast. Besides the necessity of sheltering himself against
the polar winds would lead him to establish himself upon the southern coast of
the island.

Erik did not pretend that his conclusions were necessarily incontrovertible,
but he thought that, in any case, they would suffer no inconvenience from
adopting them as the basis of a systematic exploration of the place. The results
fully justified his expectations. The travelers had not walked along the shore for
an hour, when they perceived on a height, perfectly sheltered by a chain of hills,
facing the south, an object which could only be a human habitation. To their
extreme surprise this little cottage, which was of a cubical form, was perfectly
white, as if it had been covered with plaster. It only lacked green shutters to
perfectly resemble a country home near Marseilles, or an American cottage.

After they had climbed the height and approached near to it, they discovered
a solution of the mystery. The cottage was not plastered, it was simply built of
enormous bones skillfully arranged, which gave it its white color. Strange as the
materials were, they were forced to admit that the idea of utilizing them was a
natural one; besides there was nothing else available on the island where
vegetation was most meagre; but the whole place, even the neighboring hills
were covered with bones, which Dr. Schwaryencrona recognized as the remains
of wild beasts.


CHAPTER XVII.

AT LAST.

The door of the cottage was open. The visitors entered, and saw at a glance
that the single room of which it consisted was empty, although it had been


recently occupied. Upon the hearth, which was built of three large stones, lay
some extinguished embers upon which the light ashes still lingered, although the
lightest breeze would have been sufficient to carry them away. The bed,
consisting of a wooden frame, from which was suspended a sailor's hammock,
still bore the impress of a human figure.

This hammock, that Erik examined immediately, bore the stamp of the
"Vega." On a sort of table formed from the shoulder-blade of some animal and
supported by four thigh bones, lay some crumbs of ship's biscuit, a pewter
goblet, and a wooden spoon of Swedish workmanship.

They could not doubt that they were in the dwelling-place of Patrick
O'Donoghan, and according to all appearances he had only left it a short time
ago. Had he quitted the island, or had he only gone to take a walk? The only
thing they could do was to make a thorough exploration of the island.

Around the habitation excavations bore witness to the fact that a great
amount of hard work had been done; on a sort of plateau that formed the summit
of the hill, a great quantity of ivory had been piled up, and indicated the nature
of the work. The voyagers perceived that all the skeletons of elephants and other
animals had been despoiled of their ivory, and they arrived at the conclusion that
the natives of the Siberian coast had been aware, long before the visit of Patrick
O'Donoghan, of the treasure which was to be found upon the island, and had
come and carried off large quantities of it. The Irishman, therefore, had not
found the quantity of ivory upon the surface of the ground which he had
expected, and had been compelled to make excavations and exhume it. The
quality of this ivory, which had been buried probably for a long time, appeared
to the travelers to be of a very inferior quality.

Now the young doctor of the "Vega" had told them, as had the proprietor of
the Red Anchor, in Brooklyn, that laziness was one of the distinguishing
characteristics of Patrick O'Donoghan. It therefore seemed to them very
improbable that he would be resigned to follow such a laborious and
unremunerative life. They therefore felt sure that he would embrace the first
opportunity to leave the Island of Ljakow. The only hope that still remained of
finding him there was that which the examination of his cabin had furnished
them.

A path descended to the shore, opposite to that by which our explorers had
climbed up. They followed it, and soon reached the bottom, where the melting
snows had formed a sort of little lake, separated from the sea by a wall of rocks.
The path followed the shores of this quiet water, and going around the cliff they
found a natural harbor.

They saw a sleigh abandoned on the land, and also traces of a recent fire;


Erik examined the shore carefully, but could find no traces of any recent
embarkation. He was returning to his companions, when he perceived at the foot
of a shrub a red object, which he picked up immediately. It was one of those tin
boxes painted outside with carmine which had contained that preserved beef
commonly called "endaubage," and which all vessels carry among their
provisions. It was not so great a prize, since the captain of the "Vega" had
supplied Patrick O'Donoghan with food. But what struck Erik as significant, was
the fact that there was printed on the empty box the name of Martinez Domingo,
Valparaiso.

"Tudor Brown has been here," he cried. "They told us on board the 'Vega'
that his vessel was at Valparaiso when he telegraphed them to wait for him at
Vancouver. Besides, this box from Chili could not have been brought here by the
'Vega,' for it is evidently quite fresh. It can not be three days, perhaps not twenty-
four hours since it has been opened!"

Dr. Schwaryencrona and Mr. Bredejord shook their heads, as if they hesitated
to accept Erik's conclusions, when turning the box in his hands, he descried
written in pencil the word "Albatross," which had doubtless been done by the
person who had furnished the vessel with the beef. He pointed it out to his
friends.

"Tudor Brown has been here," he repeated, "and why should he come except
to carry off Patrick O'Donoghan. Let us go, it is evident they embarked at this
creek. His men, while they were waiting for him, have taken breakfast around
this fire. He has carried off the Irishman, either willingly or unwillingly. I am as
certain of it as if I saw them embark."

Notwithstanding this firm belief, Erik carefully explored the neighborhood,
to assure himself that Patrick O'Donoghan was no longer there. An hour's walk
convinced him that the island was uninhabited. There was no trace of a path, nor
the least vestige of a human being. On all sides valleys extended as far as his
sight could reach, without even a bird to animate its solitude. And above all, the
gigantic bones which they beheld lying around in every direction, gave them a
feeling of disgust; it seemed as if an army of animals had taken refuge in this
solitary island only to die there.

"Let us go!" said Dr. Schwaryencrona. "There is no use in making a more
complete search of the island; we have seen sufficient to assure us that Patrick
O'Donoghan would not require much urging to induce him to leave this place!"

Four hours later they were again on board of the "Alaska," and continuing
their journey.

Erik did not hide the fact that his hopes had received a severe check. Tudor
Brown had been ahead of him, he had succeeded in reaching the island first, and


doubtless had carried off Patrick O'Donoghan. It was therefore hardly probable
that they would succeed in finding him again. A man capable of displaying such
ability in his fiendish attack upon the "Alaska," and who could adopt such
energetic measures to carry off the Irishman from such a place, would assuredly
exert himself to the utmost to prevent them from ever coming in contact with
him. The world is large, and its waters were open to the "Albatross." Who could
tell to what point of the compass Patrick O'Donoghan and his secret would be
carried?

This is what the captain of the "Alaska" said to himself, as he walked the
deck of his vessel, after giving orders to steer to the westward. And to these
doleful thoughts was added a feeling of remorse that he had permitted his friends
to share the dangers and fatigue of his useless expedition. It was doubly useless,
since Tudor Brown had found Nordenskiold before the "Alaska," and also
preceded them to the Island of Ljakow. They must then return to Stockholm, if
they ever succeeded in reaching it, without having accomplished one of the
objects of the expedition. It was indeed a great disappointment. But at least their
returning in a contrary direction to the "Vega" would prove the feasibility of the
northeast passage. At any risk he must reach Cape Tchelynskin, and double it
from east to west. At any risk he must return to Sweden by way of the Sea of
Kara. It was this redoubtable Cape Tchelynskin, formerly considered impassable,
that the "Alaska" crowded on steam to reach. They did not follow the exact route
of the "Vega," for Erik had no occasion to descend the Siberian coast.

Leaving to starboard the islands of Stolbovvi and Semenoffski, which they
sighted on the 4th of August, they sailed due west, following closely the 76th
degree of latitude, and made such good speed that in eight days they had made
35 degrees of longitude, from the 140th to the 105th degree east of Greenwich. It
is true that they had to burn a great deal of coal to accomplish this, for the
"Alaska" had had contrary winds almost all the time. But Erik thought rightly
that everything was subordinate to the necessity of making their way out of these
dangerous passes as speedily as possible. If they could once reach the mouth of
the Yenisei, they could always procure the necessary fuel.

On the 14th of August, at midday they were unable to make a solar
observation on account of a thick fog, which covered the whole sky. But they
knew that they were approaching a great Asiatic promontory, therefore Erik
advanced with extreme caution, while at the same time he had the speed of the
vessel slackened.

Toward night he gave orders to have the vessel stopped. These precautions
were not useless. The following morning at daylight they made soundings and
found that they were in only thirty fathoms of water, and an hour afterward they


came in sight of land; and the "Alaska" soon reached a bay in which she could
cast anchor. They resolved to wait until the fog dispersed before going on land,
but as the 15th and 16th of August passed without bringing about this desired
result, Erik determined to start accompanied by Mr. Bredejord, Mr. Malarius,
and the doctor. A short examination showed them that the "Alaska" was at the
extreme north of the two points of Cape Tchelynskin; on two sides the land lay
low toward the sea, but it rose gradually toward the south, and they perceived
that it was about two or three hundred feet in height. No snow or ice was to be
seen in any direction, except along the borders of the sea where there was a little
band, such as is commonly seen in all arctic regions. The clayey soil was
covered with abundant vegetation, consisting of mossy grasses and lichens. The
coast was enlivened by great numbers of wild geese and walruses. A white bear
displayed himself on top of a rock. If it had not been for the fog which cast a
gray mantle over everything, the general aspect of this famous Cape Tchelynskin
was not particularly disagreeable; certainly there was nothing to justify the name
of Cape Severe, which it had borne for three centuries.

As they advanced to the extreme point at the west of the bay, the travelers
perceived a sort of monument that crowned a height, and naturally pressed
forward to visit it. They saw, as they approached, that it was a sort of "cairn," or
mass of stones supporting a wooden column made out of a post. This column
bore two inscriptions; the first read as follows:

"On the 19th of August, 1878, the 'Vega' left the Atlantic to double Cape
Tchelynskin, en route for Behring's Straits."

The second read:

"On the 12th of August, 1879, the 'Albatross,’ coming from Behring's Straits,
doubled Cape Tchelynskin, en route for the Atlantic."

Once again Tudor Brown had preceded the "Alaska." It was now the 16th of
August.

He had written this inscription only four days previously.

In Erik's eyes it appeared cruel and ironical; it seemed to him to say: "I will
defeat you at every turn. All your efforts will be useless. Nordenskiold has
solved the problem. Tudor Brown, the counter proof."

As for himself he would return humiliated and ashamed, without having
demonstrated, found or proved anything. He was going without adding a single
word to the inscriptions on the column. But Dr. Schwaryencrona would not listen
to him, and taking out his knife from his pocket he wrote on the bottom of the
post these words:

"On the 16th of August, 1879, the ‘Alaska’ left Stockholm, and came here
across the Atlantic and the Siberian Sea, and has doubled Cape Tchelynskin, en


route to accomplish the first circumpolar periplus."

There is a strange power in words. This simple phrase recalled to Erik what a
geographical feat he was in hopes of accomplishing, and without his being
conscious of it restored him to good humor. It was true, after all, that the
"Alaska" would be the first vessel to accomplish this voyage. Other navigators
before him had sailed through the arctic-American seas, and accomplished the
northwest passage. Nordenskiold and Tudor Brown had doubled Cape
Tchelynskin; but no person had as yet gone from one to the other, completely
around the pole, completing the three hundred and sixty degrees.

This prospect restored every one's ardor, and they were eager to depart. Erik
thought it best, however, to wait until the next day and see if the fog would lift;
but fogs appeared to be the chronic malady of Cape Tchelynskin, and when next
morning the sun rose without dissipating it, he gave orders to hoist the anchor.

Leaving to the south the Gulf of Taymis--which is also the name of the great
Siberian peninsula of which Cape Tchelynskin forms the extreme point--the
"Alaska," directing her course westward, sailed uninterruptedly during the day
and night of the 17th of August.

On the eighteenth, at daybreak, the fog disappeared at last and the
atmosphere was pure and enlivened by the sunshine. By midday they had
rounded the point, and immediately descried a distant sail to the southwest.

The presence of a sailing-vessel in these unfrequented seas was too
extraordinary a phenomenon not to attract special attention. Erik, with his glass
in his hand, ascended to the lookout and examined the vessel carefully for a long
time. It appeared to lie low in the water, was rigged like a schooner and had a
smoke-stack, although he could not perceive any smoke. When he descended
from the bridge the young captain said to the doctor:

"It looks exactly like the 'Albatross!"' Then he gave orders to put on all steam
possible. In less than a quarter of an hour he saw that they were gaining on the
vessel, whose appointments they were now able to discern with the naked eye.
They could see that the breeze had slackened, and that her course was at right
angles with that of the "Alaska."

But suddenly a change took place in the distant vessel; Clouds of smoke
issued from her smoke-stack, and formed behind her a long black cloud. She was
now going by steam and in the same direction as the "Alaska."

"There is now no doubt of it. It is the 'Albatross,'" said Erik.

He gave orders to the engineer to increase the speed of the "Alaska," if
possible. They were then making fourteen knots, and in a quarter of an hour they
were making sixteen knots. The vessel that they were pursuing had not been able
to attain a like rate of speed, for the "Alaska" continued to gain upon her. In


thirty minutes they were near enough to her to distinguish all her men who were
maneuvering her. At last they could see the moldings and letters forming her
name, "Albatross."

Erik gave orders to hoist the Swedish flag. The "Albatross" immediately
hoisted the stars and stripes of the United States of America.

In a few minutes the two vessels were only separated by a few hundred
yards. Then the captain of the "Alaska" took his speaking-trumpet and hailed the
vessel in English:

"Ship ahoy! I wish to speak with your captain!"

In a few moments some one made his appearance on the bridge of the
"Albatross." It was Tudor Brown.

"I am the proprietor and captain of this yacht," he said. "What do you want?"

"I wish to know whether Patrick O'Donoghan is on board!"

"Patrick O'Donoghan is on board and can speak for himself," answered
Tudor Brown.

He made a sign, and a man joined him on the bridge.

"This is Patrick O'Donoghan," said Tudor Brown. "What do you want with
him?"

Erik was desirous of this interview so long, he had come so far in search of
this man, that when he found himself unexpectedly in his presence and
recognized him by his red hair and broken nose, he was at first taken aback and
scarcely knew what to say to him. But gathering his ideas together, he at last
made an attempt.

"I have been wishing to talk to you confidentially for several years," he said.
"I have been seeking for you, and it was to find you that I came into these seas.
Will you come on board of my vessel?"

"I do not know you, and I am very well satisfied to stay where I am,"
answered the man.

"But I know you. I have heard through Mr. Bowles that you were on board
when the 'Cynthia' was wrecked, and that you had spoken to him about the infant
who was tied to a buoy. I am that infant, and it is about this matter that I wish
you to give me all the information in your power."

"You must question somebody else, for I am not in the humor to give any."

"Do you wish me to suppose that the information is not to your credit?"

"You can think what you like; it is a matter of perfect indifference to me,"
said the man.

Erik resolved to betray no irritation.

"It would be better for you to tell me what I wish to know of your own free
will than to be compelled to do so before a court of justice," he said, coolly.


"A court of justice! They will have to catch me first," answered the other,
mockingly.

Here Tudor Brown interposed.

"You see it is not my fault if you have not obtained the information that you
desired," said he to Erik. "The best thing is now for us both to resume our course
and go where we desire."

"Why should we each go our way?" answered the young captain. "Would it
not be better for us to keep together until we reach some civilized country where
we can settle these matters."

"T have no business with you, and do not want any one's company," answered
Tudor Brown, moving as if he was about to leave the bridge.

Erik stopped him by a sign.

"Proprietor of the 'Albatross,"" he said, "I bear a regular commission from my
government, and am besides an officer of the maritime police. I therefore ask
you to show me your papers immediately!"

Tudor Brown did not make the slightest answer, but descended the bridge
with the man whom he had called. Erik waited a couple of minutes, and then he
spoke again:

"Commander of the ‘Albatross,’ I accuse you of having attempted to
shipwreck my vessel on the rocks of Sein, and I now summon you to come and
answer this accusation before a marine tribunal. If you refuse to answer this
summons it will be my duty to compel you to do so!"

"Try it if you like," cried Tudor Brown, and gave orders to resume his
journey.

During this colloquy his vessel had insensibly tacked, and now stood at right
angles with the "Alaska." Suddenly the wheel commenced to revolve and beat
the water which boiled and foamed around it. A prolonged whistle was heard,
and the "Albatross" carrying all the steam she could raise sped over the waters in
the direction of the North Pole.

Two minutes later, the "Alaska" was rushing after her.


CHAPTER XVIII.

CANNON-BALLS.

At the same time that he gave orders to pursue the "Albatross," Erik also
desired his men to get the cannon in readiness. The operation took some time,
and when they had everything in order the enemy was beyond their reach.
Doubtless they had taken advantage of the time occupied by their stoppage to
increase their fires, and they were two or three miles ahead. This was not too


great a distance for a Gatling gun to carry, but the rolling and speed of the two
vessels made it probable that they would miss her; and they thought it better to
wait, hoping that the "Alaska" would gain upon the enemy. It soon became
evident, however, that the two vessels were equally matched, for the distance
between them remained about the same for several hours.

They were obliged to burn an enormous amount of coal--an article which
was becoming very scarce on board the "Alaska"--and this would be a heavy loss
if they could not succeed in overtaking the "Albatross" before night set in. Erik
did not think it right to do this without consulting his crew. He therefore
mounted the bridge, and frankly explained to them the position in which he was
placed.

"My friends," he said, "you know that I am anxious to seize and deliver up to
justice this rascal who attempted to shipwreck our vessel on the rocks of Sein.
But we have hardly coal enough left to last us for six days. Any deviation from
our route will compel us to finish our voyage under sail, which may make it very
long and toilsome for all of us, and may even cause us to fail in our undertaking.
On the other hand, the 'Albatross' counts upon being able to get away from us
during the night. To prevent this we must not slacken our speed for a moment,
and we must keep her within the range of our electric light. I feel sure, however,
that we will eventually overtake her, but it may take us some time to do so. I did
not feel willing to continue this pursuit without laying the facts plainly before
you, and asking you if you were willing to risk the dangers which may arise for
us."

The men consulted together in a low tone, and then commissioned Mr.
Hersebom to speak for them:

"We are of opinion that it is the duty of the ‘Alaska’ to capture this rascal at
any sacrifice!" he said, quietly.

"Very well, then, we will do our best to accomplish it," answered Erik.

When he found that he had the confidence of his crew, he did not spare fuel,
and in spite of the desperate efforts of Tudor Brown, he could not increase the
distance between them. The sun had scarcely set when the electric light of the
"Alaska" was brought to bear unpityingly upon the "Albatross," and continued in
this position during the night. At daybreak the distance between them was still
the same, and they were flying toward the pole. At midday they made a solar
observation, and found that they were in 78, 21', 14" of latitude north, by 90 of
longitude east.

Floating ice, which they had not encountered for ten or fifteen days, now
became very frequent. It was necessary to ward it off, as they had been
compelled to do in Baffin's Bay. Erik, feeling sure that they would soon reach


fields of ice, was careful to steer obliquely to the right of the "Albatross" so as to
bar the way toward the east if she should attempt to change her course, finding
her path toward the north obstructed. His foresight was soon rewarded, for in
two hours a lofty barrier of ice casts its profile on the horizon. The American
yacht immediately steered toward the west, leaving the ice two or three miles on
its starboard. The "Alaska" immediately imitated this maneuver, but so obliquely
to the left of the "Albatross" as to cut her off if she attempted to sail to the south.

The chase became very exciting. Feeling sure of the course which the
"Albatross" would be compelled to take, the "Alaska" tried to push her more
toward the ice. The yacht's course becomes more and more wavering, every
moment they made some change, at one time steering north at another west.
Erik, mounted aloft, watched every movement she made, and thwarted her
attempts to escape by appropriate maneuvers. Suddenly she stopped short,
swung round and faced the "Alaska." A long white line which was apparent
extending westward told the reason of this change. The "Albatross" found
herself so close to the ice-banks that she had no recourse but to turn and face
them.

The young captain of the "Alaska" had scarcely time to descend, before some
missile whistled past his head. The "Albatross" was armed, and relied upon
being able to defend herself.

"I prefer that it should be so, and that he should fire the first shot," said Erik,
as he gave orders to return it.

His first attack was not more successful than that of Tudor Brown--for it fell
short two or three hundred yards. But the combat was now begun, and the firing
became regular. An American projectile cut the large sail yards of the "Alaska,"
and it fell upon the deck killing two men. A small bomb from the Swedish vessel
fell upon the bridge of the "Albatross," and must have made great havoc. Then
other projectiles skillfully thrown lodged in various parts of the vessel.

They had been constantly approaching each other, when suddenly a distant
rumbling mingled with the roar of artillery, and the crews raising their heads saw
that the sky was very black in the east.

Was a storm with its accompanying fog and blinding snow, coming to
interpose between the "Albatross" and the "Alaska," to permit Tudor Brown to
escape?

This Erik wished to prevent at any price. He resolved to attempt to board her.
Arming his men with sabers, cutlasses, and hatchets, he crowded on all the steam
the vessel could carry and rushed toward the "Albatross."

Tudor Brown tried to prevent this. He retreated toward the banks of ice,
firing a shot from his cannon every five minutes. But his field of action had now


become too limited; between the ice and the "Alaska" he saw that he was lost
unless he made a bold attempt to regain the open sea. He attempted this after a
few feigned maneuvers to deceive his adversary.

Erik let him do it. Then at the precise moment when the "Albatross" tried to
pass the "Alaska," she made a gaping hole in the side of the yacht which stopped
her instantly, and rendered her almost unmanageable; then she fell quickly
behind and prepared to renew the assault. But the weather, which had become
more and more menacing, did not give him time to do this.

The tempest was upon them. A fierce wind from the south-east, accompanied
by blinding clouds of snow, which not only raised the waves to a prodigious
height, but dashed against the two vessels immense masses of floating ice. It
seemed as if they were attacked at all points at once. Erik realized his situation,
and saw that he had not a minute to lose in escaping, unless he wished to be
hemmed in perhaps permanently. He steered due east, struggling against the
wind, the snow, and the dashing ice.

But he was soon obliged to confess that his efforts were fruitless. The
tempest raged with such violence that neither the engine of the "Alaska" nor her
steel buttress were of much use. Not only did the vessel advance very slowly, but
at times she seemed to be fairly driven backward. The snow was so thick that it
obscured the sky, blinded the crew, and covered the bridge a foot in depth. The
ice driven against the "Alaska" by the fierce wind increased and barred their
progress, so that at length they were glad to retreat toward the banks, in the hope
of finding some little haven where they could remain until the storm passed over.

The American yacht had disappeared, and after the blow it had received from
the "Alaska" they almost doubted if it would be able to resist the tornado.

Their own situation was so perilous that they could only think of their own
safety, for every moment it grew worse.

There is nothing more frightful than those arctic tempests, in which all the
primitive forces of nature seem to be awakened in order to give the navigator a
specimen of the cataclysms of the glacial period. The darkness was profound
although it was only five o'clock in the afternoon. The engine had stopped, and
they were unable to light their electric light. To the raging of the storm was
added the roars of thunder and the tumult made by the floating blocks of ice
dashing against each other. The ice-banks were continually breaking with a noise
like the roar of a cannon.

The "Alaska" was soon surrounded by ice. The little harbor in which she had
taken refuge was soon completely filled with it, and it commenced to press upon
and dash against her sides until she began to crack, and they feared every
moment that she would go to pieces.


Erik resolved not to succumb to the storm without a combat with it, and he
set the crew to work arranging heavy beams around the vessel so as to weaken
the pressure as much as possible, and distribute it over a wider surface. But,
although this protected the vessel, it led to an unforeseen result which threatened
to be fatal.

The vessel, instead of being suddenly crushed, was lifted out of the water by
every movement of the ice, and then fell back again on it with the force of a trip-
hammer. At any moment after one of these frightful falls they might be broken
up, crushed, buried. To ward off this danger there was only one resource, and
this was to re-enforce their barrier by heaping up the drift ice and snow around
the vessel to protect her as well as they could.

Everybody set to work with ardor. It was a touching spectacle to see this
little handful of men taxing their pygmy muscles to resist the forces of nature--
trying with anchors, chains, and planks to fill up the fissures made in the ice and
to cover them with snow, so that there might be a uniformity of motion among
the mass. After four or five hours of almost superhuman exertions, and when
their strength was exhausted, they were in no less danger, for the storm had
increased.

Erik held a consultation with his officers, and it was decided that they should
make a depot on the ice-field for their food and ammunition in case the "Alaska"
should be unable to resist the powerful shocks to which she was being subjected.
At the first moment of danger every man had received provisions enough for
eight days, with precise instructions in case of disaster, besides being ordered to
keep his gun in his belt even while he was working. The operation of
transporting twenty tons of provisions was not easy of accomplishment, but at
last it was done and the food was placed about two hundred yards from the ship
under a covering of tarred canvas, which was soon covered by the snow with a
thick white mantle.

This precaution, having been taken, everybody felt more comfortable as to
the result of a shipwreck, and the crew assembled to recruit their strength with a
supper supplemented with tea and rum.

Suddenly, in the midst of supper, a more violent shock than any that had as
yet agitated the vessel, split the bed of ice and snow around the "Alaska." She
was lifted up in the stern with a terrible noise, and then it appeared as if she were
plunging head-foremost into an abyss. There was a panic, and every one rushed
on deck. Some of the men thought that the moment had come to take refuge on
the ice, and without waiting for the signal of the officers they commenced
clambering over the bulwarks.

Four or five of these unfortunate ones managed to leap on a snow-bank. Two


others were caught between the masses of floating ice and the beams of the
starboard, as the "Alaska" righted herself.

Their cries of pain and the noise of their crushed bones were lost in the
storm. There was a lull, and the vessel remained motionless. The lesson which
the sailors had been taught was a tragical one. Erik made use of it to enforce on
the crew the necessity of each man's retaining his presence of mind, and of
waiting for positive orders on all occasions.

"You must understand,” he said to his men, "that to leave the ship is a
supreme measure, to which we must have recourse only at the last extremity. All
our efforts ought to be directed toward saving the 'Alaska.' Deprived of her, our
situation will be a very precarious one on the ice. It is only in case of our vessel
becoming uninhabitable that we must desert it. In any case such a movement
should be made in an orderly manner to avoid disasters. I therefore expect that
you will return quietly to your supper, and leave to your superior officers the
task of determining what is best to do!"

The firmness with which he spoke had the effect of reassuring the most
timid, and they all descended again. Erik then called Mr. Hersebom and asked
him to untie his good dog Kaas, and follow him without making any noise.

"We will go on the field of ice," he said, "and seek for the fugitives and make
them return to their duty, which will be better for them than wandering about."

The poor devils were huddled together on the ice, ashamed of their escapade,
and at the first summons were only too glad to take the path toward the
"Alaska."

Erik and Mr. Hersebom having seen them safely on board, walked as far as
their depot of provisions, thinking that another sailor might have taken refuge
there. They went all around it but saw no one.

"I have been asking myself the last few moments," said Erik, "if it would not
be better to prevent another panic by landing part of the crew?"

"It might be better perhaps," answered the fisherman. "But would not the
men who remained on board feel jealous and become demoralized by this
measure?"

"That is true," said Erik. "It would be wiser to occupy them up to the last
moment in struggling against the tempest, and it is in fact the only chance we
have of saving the ship. But since we are on the ice we may as well take
advantage of it, and explore it a little. I confess all these crackings and
detonations inspire me with some doubt as to its solidity!"

Erik and his adopted father had not gone more than three hundred feet from
their depot of provisions before they were stopped short by a gigantic crevasse
which lay open at their feet. To cross it would have required long poles, with


which they had neglected to supply themselves. They were therefore compelled
to walk beside it obliquely toward the west, in order to see how far it reached.

They found that this crevasse extended for a long distance, so long that after
they had walked for half an hour they could not see the end of it. Feeling more
secure about the extent of this field of ice upon which they had established their
depot of provisions, they turned to retreat their steps.

After they had walked over about half of the distance a new vibration
occurred, followed by detonations and tumultuous heavings of ice. They were
not greatly disturbed by this, but increased their speed, being anxious to discover
whether this shock had had done the "Alaska" any mischief.

The depot was soon reached, then the little haven that sheltered the vessel.

Erik and Mr. Hersebom rubbed their eyes, and asked each other whether they
were dreaming, for the "Alaska" was no longer there.

Their first thought was that she had been swallowed up by the waters. It was
only too natural that they should think this after such an evening as they had just
passed.

But immediately they were struck by the fact that no débris was visible, and
that the little harbor had assumed a new aspect since their departure. The drift
ice which the tempest had piled up around the "Alaska" had been broken up, and
much of it had drifted away. At the same time Mr. Hersebom mentioned a fact
which had not struck him while they were hurrying along, and this was that the
wind had changed and was now blowing from the west.

Was it not possible that the storm had carried away the floating ice in which
the "Alaska" had become embedded. Yes, evidently it was possible; but it
remained for them to discover whether this supposition was true. Without
delaying a moment, Erik proceeded to reconnoiter, followed by Mr. Hersebom.

They walked for a long time. Everywhere the drift was floating freely, the
waves came and went, but the whole aspect of things around them looked
strange and different.

At length Erik stopped. Now he understood what had befallen them. He took
Mr. Hersebom's hand and pressed it with both his own.

"Father," said he, in a grave voice, "you are one of those to whom I can only
speak the truth. Well, the fact is that this ice-field has split; it has broken away
from that which surrounded the 'Alaska,' and we are on an island of ice hundreds
of yards long, and carried along by the waters, and at the mercy of the storm."


CHAPTER XIX.
GUNSHOTS.


About two o'clock in the morning Erik and Mr. Hersebom, exhausted with
fatigue, laid down side by side between two casks, under the canvas that
protected their provisions. Kaas, also, was close to them and kept them warm
with his thick fur. They were not long in falling asleep. When they awoke the
sun was already high in the heavens, the sky was blue and the sea calm. The
immense bank of ice upon which they were floating appeared to be motionless,
its movement was so gentle and regular. But along the two edges of it which
were nearest to them enormous icebergs were being carried along with frightful
rapidity. These gigantic crystals reflected like a prism the solar rays, and they
were the most marvelous that Erik had ever beheld.

Mr. Hersebom also, although but little inclined in general, and especially in
his present situation, to admire the splendor of Nature in the arctic regions, could
not help being impressed with them.

"How beautiful this would look were we on a good ship!" he said, sighing.

"Bah!" answered Erik, with his usual good humor. "On board a ship one
must be thinking only how to avoid the icebergs so as not to be crushed to
pieces, whilst on this island of ice we have none of these miseries to worry us."

As this was evidently the view of an optimist, Mr. Hersebom answered with
a sad smile. But Erik was determined to take a cheerful view of things.

"Is it not an extraordinary piece of good luck that we have this depot of
provisions?" he said. "Our case would, indeed, be a desperate one if we were
deprived of everything; but, with twenty casks of biscuits, preserved meats, and,
above all, our guns and cartridges, what have we to fear? At the most, we will
only have to remain some weeks without seeing any land that we can reach. You
see, dear father, that we have happened upon this adventure in the same manner
as the crew of the 'Hansa.""

"Of the 'Hansa'?"” asked Mr. Hersebom, with curiosity.

"Yes, a vessel that set out in 1869 for the arctic seas. Part of her crew were
left, as we are, on a floating field of ice, while they were occupied in
transporting some provisions and coal. The brave men accommodated
themselves as well as they could to this new life, and after floating for six
mouths and a half over a distance of several thousand leagues, ended by landing
in the arctic regions of North America."

"May we be as fortunate!" said Mr. Hersebom, with a sigh. "But it would be
well I think for us to eat something."

"That is also my opinion!" said Erik. "A biscuit and a slice of beef would be
very acceptable."

Mr. Hersebom opened two casks to take out what they required for their
breakfast, and as soon as his arrangements were completed they did ample


justice to the provisions.

"Was the raft of the crew of the ‘Hansa’ as large as ours?" asked the old
fisherman, after ten minutes conscientiously devoted to repairing his strength.

"I think not--ours is considerably larger. The 'Hansa's' became gradually
much smaller, so that the unfortunate shipwrecked men were at last compelled to
abandon it, for the waves began to dash over them. Fortunately they had a large
boat which enabled them, when their island was no longer habitable, to reach
another. They did this several times before they at last reached the main-land."


"Ah, I see!" said Mr. Hersebom, "they had a boat--but we have not. Unless
we embark in an empty hogshead I do not see how we can ever leave this island
of ice."

"We shall see about it when the time comes!" answered Erik. "At the present
moment I think the best thing that we can do is to make a thorough exploration
of our domain."

He arose, as did Mr. Hersebom, and they commenced climbing a hill of ice
and snow--a hummock is the technical name--in order to obtain a general idea of
their island.

They found it from one end to the other lying and floating insensibly upon
the polar ocean. But it was very difficult to form a correct estimate either of its
size or shape; for a great number of hummocks intercepted their view on all
sides. They resolved, however, to walk to the extremity of it. As far as they
could judge from the position of the sun, that end of the island which extended
toward the west had been detached from the mass of which it had formerly been
a part, and was now turning to the north. They therefore supposed that their ice
raft was being carried toward the south by the influence of the tide and breeze,
and the fact that they no longer saw any trace of the long barriers of ice, which
are very extensive in the 78, fully corroborated this hypothesis.

Their island was entirely covered with snow, and upon this snow they saw
distinctly here and there at a distance some black spots, which Mr. Hersebom
immediately recognized as "ongionks," that is to say, a species of walrus of great
size. These walruses doubtless inhabited the caverns and crevasses in the ice,
and believing themselves perfectly secure from any attack, were basking in the
sunshine.

It took Erik and Mr. Hersebom more than an hour to walk to the extreme end
of their island. They had followed closely the eastern side, because that
permitted them to explore at the same time both their raft and the sea. Suddenly
Kaas, who ran ahead of them, put to flight some of the walruses which they had
seen in the distance. They ran toward the border of the field of ice in order to
throw themselves into the water. Nothing would have been more easy than to
have killed a number of them. But what would have been the use of their doing
so, since they could not make a fire to roast their delicate flesh? Erik was
occupied about other matters. He carefully examined the ice-field, and found
that it was far from being homogeneous. Numerous crevasses and fissures,
which seemed to extend in many cases for a long distance, made him fear that a
slight shock might divide it into several fragments. It was true that these
fragments might in all probability be of considerable size; but the possibility of
such an accident made them realize the necessity of keeping as close as possible


to their depot of provisions, unless they wished to be deprived of them. Erik
resolved to examine carefully their whole domain, and to make his abode on the
most massive portion; the one that seemed capable of offering the greatest
resistance. He also determined to transport to this spot their depot of provisions.

It was with this resolve that Mr. Hersebom and Erik continued their
exploration of the western coast, after resting a few minutes at the northerly
point. They were now following that portion of the ice-field where they had
attacked the American yacht.

Kaas ran on before them, seeming to enjoy the freshness of the air, and being
in his true element on this carpet of snow, which doubtless reminded him of the
plains of Greenland.

Suddenly Erik saw him sniff the air and then dart forward like an arrow, and
stop barking beside some dark object, which was partially hidden by a mass of
ice.

"Another walrus, I suppose!" he said, hurrying forward.

It was not a walrus which lay extended on the snow, and which had so
excited Kaas. It was a man, insensible, and covered with blood, whose clothing
of skins was assuredly not the dress worn by any seamen of the "Alaska." It
reminded Erik of the clothing worn by the man who had passed the winter on the
"Vega." He raised the head of the man; it was covered with thick red hair, and it
was remarkable that his nose was crushed in like that of a negro.

Erik asked himself whether he was the sport of some illusion.

He opened the man's waistcoat, and bared his chest. It was perhaps as much
to ascertain whether his heart still beat as to seek for his name.

He found his name tattooed in blue, on a rudely designed escutcheon.
"Patrick O'Donoghan, ‘Cynthia, and his heart still beat. The man was not dead.
He had a large wound in his head, another in his shoulder, and on his chest a
contusion, which greatly interfered with his respiration.

"He must be carried to our place of shelter, and restored to life," said Erik, to
Mr. Hersebom.

And then he added in a low tone as if he was afraid of being overheard.

"It is he, father, whom we have been seeking for such a long time without
being able to find him--Patrick O'Donoghan--and see he is almost unable to
breathe."

The thought that the secret of his life was known to this bloody object upon
which death already appeared to have set his seal, kindled a gloomy flame in
Erik's eyes. His adopted father divined his thoughts, and could not help
shrugging his shoulders--he seemed to say:

"Of what use would it be to discover it now. The knowledge of all the secrets


in the world would be useless to us."

He, however, took the body by the limbs, while Erik lifted him under the
arms, and loaded with this burden they resumed their walk.

The motion made the wounded man open his eyes. Soon the pain caused by
his wounds was so great that he began to moan and utter confused cries, among
which they distinguished the English word "drink!"

They were still some distance from their depot of provisions. Erik, however,
stopped and propped the unfortunate man against a hummock, and then put his
leathern bottle to his lips.

It was nearly empty, but the mouthful of strong liquor that Patrick
O'Donoghan swallowed seemed to restore him to life. He looked around him,
heaved a deep sigh and then said:

"Where is Mr. Jones?"

"We found you alone on the ice," answered Erik. "Had you been there long?"

"I do not know!" answered the wounded man, with difficulty. "Give me
something more to drink." He swallowed a second mouthful and then he
recovered sufficiently to be able to speak.

"When the tempest overtook us the yacht sunk,” he explained. "Some of the
crew had time to throw themselves into the boats, the rest perished. At the first
moment of peril Mr. Jones made a sign for me to go with him into a life-boat,
which was suspended in the stern of the yacht and that every one else disdained
on account of its small dimensions, but which proved to be safe, as it was
impossible to sink it. It is the only one which reached the ice island--all the
others were upset before they reached it. We were terribly wounded by the drift
ice which the waves threw into our boat, but at length we were able to draw
ourselves beyond their reach and wait for the dawn of day. This morning Mr.
Jones left me to go and see if he could kill a walrus, or some sea-bird, in order
that we might have something to eat. I have not seen him since!"

"Is Mr. Jones one of the officers of the 'Albatross"?" asked Erik.

"He is the owner and captain of her!" answered O'Donoghan, in a tone which
seemed to express surprise at the question.

"Then Mr. Tudor Brown is not the captain of the 'Albatross'?"

"I don't know," said the wounded man, hesitatingly, seeming to ask himself
whether he had been too confidential in speaking as freely as he had done.

Erik did not think it wise to insist on this point. He had too many other
questions to ask.

"You see," he said to the Irishman, as he seated himself on the snow beside
him, "you refused the other day to come on board of my ship and talk with me,
and your refusal has occasioned many disasters. But now that we have met


again, let us profit by this opportunity to talk seriously and like rational men.
You see you are here on a floating ice-bank, without food, and seriously
wounded, incapable by your own efforts of escaping the most cruel death. My
adopted father and myself have all that you need, food, fire-arms, and brandy.
We will share with you, and take care of you until you are well again. In return
for our care, we only ask you to treat us with a little confidence!"

The Irishman gave Erik an irresolute look in which gratitude seemed to
mingle with fear--a look of fearful indecision.

"That depends on the kind of confidence that you ask for?" he said,
evasively.

"Oh, you know very well," answered Erik, making an effort to smile, and
taking in his hands those of the wounded man. "I told you the other day; you
know what I want to find out and what I have come so far to discover. Now,
Patrick O'Donoghan, make a little effort and disclose to me this secret which is
of so much importance to me, tell me what you know about the infant tied to the
buoy. Give me the faintest indication of who I am, so that I may find my family.
What do you fear? What danger do you run in satisfying me?"

O'Donoghan did not answer, but seemed to be turning over in his obtuse
brain the arguments that Erik had used.

"But," he said at last, with an effort, "if we succeed in getting away from
here, and we reach some country where there are judges and courts, you could
do me some harm?"

"No, I swear that I would not. I swear it by all that is sacred," said Erik,
hotly. "Whatever may be the injuries you have inflicted upon me or upon others,
I guarantee that you shall not suffer for them in any way. Besides, there is one
fact of which you seem to be ignorant, it is that there is a limit to such matters.
When such events have taken place more than twenty years ago, human justice
has no longer the right to demand an accounting for them."

"Is that true?" asked Patrick O'Donoghan, distrustfully. "Mr. Jones told me
that the 'Alaska' had been sent by the police, and you yourself spoke of a
tribunal."

"That was about recent events--an accident that happened to us at the
beginning of our journey. You may be sure that Mr. Jones was mocking you,
Patrick. Doubtless he has some interest of his own for wishing you not to tell."

"You may be sure of that," said the Irishman, earnestly. "But how did you
discover that I was acquainted with this secret?"

"Through Mr. and Mrs. Bowles of the Red Anchor in Brooklyn, who had
often heard you speak of the infant tied to the buoy."

"That is true," said the Irishman. He reflected again. "Then you are sure that


you were not sent by the police?" he said, at length.

"No--what an absurd idea. I came of my own accord on account of my ardent
desire, my thirst, to discover the land of my birth and to find out who my parents
were, that is all."

O'Donoghan smiled, proudly:

"Ah, that is what you want to know," he said. "Well, it is true that I can tell
you. It is true that I know."

"Tell me--tell me!" cried Erik, seeing that he hesitated. "Tell me and I
promise you pardon for all the evil that you have done, and my everlasting
gratitude if I am ever in a position to show it!"

The Irishman gave a covetous look at the leathern bottle.

"It makes my throat dry to talk so much," he said, in a faint tone. "I will
drink a little more if you are willing to give it to me."

"There is no more here, but we can get some at our depot of provisions. We
have two large cases of brandy there," answered Erik, handing the bottle to Mr.
Hersebom.

The latter immediately walked away, followed by Kaas.

"They will not be gone long," said the young man, turning toward his
companion. "Now, my brave fellow, do not make merchandise of your
confidence. Put yourself in my place. Suppose that during all your life you had
been ignorant of the name of your country, and that of your mother, and that at
last you found yourself in the presence of a man who knew all about it, and who
refused the information which was of such inestimable value to you, and that at
the very time when you had saved him, restored him to consciousness and life. I
do not ask you to do anything impossible. I do not ask you to criminate yourself
if you have anything to reproach yourself with. Give me only an indication, the
very slightest. Put me on the track, so that I can find my family; and that is all
that I shall ask of you."

"By my faith, I will do you this favor!" said Patrick, evidently moved. "You
know that I was a cabin-boy on board the 'Cynthia'?"

He stopped short.

Erik hung upon his words. Was he at last going to find out the truth? Was he
going to solve this enigma and discover the name of his family, the land of his
birth? Truly the scene appeared to him almost chimerical. He fastened his eyes
upon the wounded man, ready to drink in his words with avidity. For nothing in
the world would he have interfered with his recital, neither by interruption nor
gesture. He did not even observe that a shadow had appeared behind him. It was
the sight of this shadow which had stopped the story of Patrick O'Donoghan.

"Mr. Jones!" he said, in the tone of a school-boy detected in some flagrant


mischief.

Erik turned and saw Tudor Brown coming around a neighboring hummock,
where until this moment he had been hidden from their sight.

The exclamation of the Irishman confirmed the suspicion which during the
last hour had presented itself to his mind.

Mr. Jones and Tudor Brown were one and the same person.

He had hardly time to make this reflection before two shots were heard.

Tudor Brown raised his gun and shot Patrick O'Donoghan through the heart,
who fell backward.

Then before he had time to lower his rifle, Tudor Brown received a bullet in
his forehead, and fell forward on his face.

"IT did well to come back when I saw suspicious footprints in the snow," said
Mr. Hersebom, coming forward, his gun still smoking in his hands.


CHAPTER XX.

THE END OF THE VOYAGE.

Erik gave a cry and threw himself on his knees beside Patrick O'Donoghan,
seeking for some sign of life, a ray of hope. But the Irishman was certainly dead
this time, and that without revealing his secret.

As for Tudor Brown, one convulsion shook his body, his gun fell from his
hands, in which he had tightly held it at the moment of his fall, and he expired
without a word.

"Father, what have you done?" cried Erik, bitterly. "Why have you deprived
me of the last chance that was left to me of discovering the secret of my birth?
Would it not have been better for us to throw ourselves upon this man and take
him prisoner?"

"And do you believe that he would have allowed us to do so?" answered Mr.
Hersebom. "His second shot was intended for you, you may be sure. I have
avenged the murder of this unfortunate man, punished the criminal who
attempted to shipwreck us, and who is guilty perhaps of other crimes. Whatever
may be the result, I do not regret having done so. Besides of what consequence
is the mystery surrounding your birth, my child, to men in our situation? The
secret of your birth before long, without doubt, will be revealed to us by God."

He had hardly finished speaking, when the firing of a cannon was heard, and
it was re-echoed by the icebergs. It seemed like a reply to the discouraging
words of the old fisherman. It was doubtless a response to the two gunshots
which had been fired on their island of ice.

"The cannon of the 'Alaska!' We are saved!" cried Erik, jumping up and


climbing a hummock to get a better view of the sea that surrounded them.

He saw nothing at first but the icebergs, driven by the wind and sparkling in
the sunshine. But Mr. Hersebom, who had immediately reloaded his gun, fired
into the air, and a second discharge from the cannon answered him almost
immediately.

Then Erik discovered a thin streak of black smoke toward the west, clearly
defined against the blue sky. Gunshots, answered by the cannon, were repeated
at intervals of a few minutes, and soon the "Alaska" steamed around an iceberg
and made all speed toward the north of the island.

Erik and Mr. Hersebom, weeping for joy, threw themselves into each other's
arms. They waved their handkerchiefs and threw their caps into the air, seeking
by all means to attract the attention of their friends.

At length the "Alaska" stopped, a boat was lowered, and in twenty minutes it
reached their island.

Who can describe the unbounded joy of Dr. Schwaryencrona, Mr. Bredejord,
Mr. Malarius, and Otto when they found them well and safe; for through the long
hours of that sad night they had mourned them as lost.

They related all that had befallen them--their fears and despair during the
night, their vain appeals, their useless anger. The "Alaska" had been found in the
morming to be almost entirely clear of the ice, and they had dislodged what
remained with the assistance of their gunpowder. Mr. Bosewitz had taken
command, being the second-officer, and had immediately started in search of the
floating island, taking the direction in which the wind would carry it. This
navigation amidst floating icebergs was the most perilous which the "Alaska"
had as yet attempted; but thanks to the excellent training to which the young
captain had accustomed his crew, and to the experience which they had acquired
in maneuvering the vessel, they passed safely among these moving masses of ice
without being crushed by them. The "Alaska" had had the advantage of being
able to travel more swiftly than the icebergs, and she had been able to benefit by
this circumstance. Kind Providence had willed that her search should not prove
fruitless. At nine o'clock in the morning the island had been sighted. They
recognized it by its shape, and then the two shots from the guns made them
hopeful of finding their two shipwrecked friends.

All their other troubles now appeared to them as insignificant. They had a
long and dangerous voyage before them, which they must accomplish under sail,
for their coal was exhausted.

"No," said Erik, "we will not make it under sail. I have another plan. We will
permit the ice island to tow us along, as long as she goes toward the south or
west. That will spare us incessantly fighting with the icebergs, for our island will


chase them ahead of her. Then we can collect here all the combustibles that we
will require in order to finish the voyage, when we are ready to resume it."

"What are you talking about?" asked the doctor, laughing. "Is there an oil-
well on this island?"

"Not exactly an oil-well," answered Erik, "but what will answer our purpose
nearly as well, multitudes of fat walruses. I wish to try an experiment, since we
have one furnace especially adapted for burning oil."

They began their labors by performing the last rites of the two dead men.
They tied weights to their feet and lowered them into the sea. Then the "Alaska"
made fast to the ice bank in such a manner as to follow its movements without
sustaining any injury to herself. They were able, with care, to carry on board
again the provisions which they had landed, and which it was important for them
not to lose. That operation accomplished, they devoted all their energies to the
pursuit of the walrus.

Two or three times a day, parties armed with guns and harpoons and
accompanied by all their Greenland dogs landed on the ice bank, and surrounded
the sleeping monsters at the mouth of their holes. They killed them by firing a
ball into their ears, then they cut them up, and placed the lard with which they
were filled in their sleighs, and the dogs drew it to the "Alaska." Their hunting
was so easy and so productive, that in eight days they had all the lard that they
could carry. The "Alaska," still towed by the floating island, was now in the
seventy-fourth degree; that is to say, she had passed Nova Zembla.

The ice island was now reduced at least one-half, and cracked by the sun was
full of fissures, more or less extensive, evidently ready to go to pieces. Erik
resolved not to wait until this happened, and ordering their anchor to be lifted, he
sailed away westward.

The lard was immediately utilized in the fire of the "Alaska," and proved an
excellent combustible. The only fault was that it choked up the chimney, which
necessitated a daily cleaning. As for its odor, that would doubtless have been
very disagreeable to southern passengers, but to a crew composed of Swedes and
Norwegians, it was only a secondary inconvenience.

Thanks to this supply, the "Alaska" was able to keep up steam during the
whole of the remainder of her voyage. She proceeded rapidly, in spite of contrary
winds, and arrived on the 5th of September in sight of Cape North or Norway.
They pursued their route with all possible speed, turned the Scandinavian
Peninsula, repassed Skager-Rack, and reached the spot from which they had
taken their departure.

On the 14th of September they cast anchor before Stockholm, which they
had left on the tenth of the preceding February.


Thus, in seven months and four days, the first circumpolar periplus had been
accomplished by a navigator of only twenty-two years of age.

This geographical feat, which so promptly completed the great expedition of
Nordenskiold, would soon make a prodigious commotion in the world. But the
journals and reviews had not as yet had time to expatiate upon it. The uninitiated
were hardly prepared to understand it, and one person, at least, reviewed it with
suspicion--this was Kajsa. The supercilious smile with which she listened to the
story of their adventures was indescribable.

"Was it sensible to expose yourself to such dangers?" was her only comment.

But the first opportunity that presented itself she did not fail to say to Erik:

"I suppose that now you will do nothing more about this tiresome matter,
since the Irishman is dead."

What a difference there was between these cold criticisms and the letters full
of sympathy and tenderness that Erik soon received from Noroe.

Vanda told him in what a state of anxiety she and her mother had passed
these long months, how the travelers had been ever present in their thoughts, and
how happy they were when they heard of their safe return. If the expedition had
not accomplished all that Erik hoped, they begged him not to worry himself too
much about it. He must know that if he never succeeded in finding his own
family he had one in the poor Norwegian village, where he would be tenderly
cared for like one of themselves. Would he not soon come and see them, could
he not stay with them one little month. It was the sincere desire of his adopted
mother and of his little sister Vanda, etc., etc.

The envelope also contained three pretty flowers, gathered on the borders of
the fiord, and their perfume seemed to bring back vividly to Erik his gay and
careless childhood. Ah, how sweet these loving words were to his poor
disappointed heart, and they enabled him to fulfill more easily the concluding
duties appertaining to the expedition. He hoped soon to be able to go and tell
them all he felt. The voyage of the "Alaska" had equaled in grandeur that of the
"Vega." The name of Erik was everywhere associated with the glorious name of
Nordenskiold. The journals had a great deal to say about the new periplus. The
ships of all nations anchored at Stockholm united in doing honor to this national
victor. The learned societies came in a body to congratulate the commander and
crew of the "Alaska." The public authorities proposed a national recompense for
them.

All these praises were painful to Erik. His conscience told him that the
principal motive of this expedition on his part had been purely a personal one,
and he felt scrupulous about accepting honors which appeared to him greatly
exaggerated. He therefore availed himself of the first opportunity to state frankly


that he had gone to the polar seas to discover if possible the secret of his birth,
and of the shipwreck of the "Cynthia," that he had been unsuccessful in doing so.

The occasion was offered by a reporter of one of the principal newspapers of
Stockholm, who presented himself on board of the "Alaska" and solicited the
favor of a private interview with the young captain. The object of this intelligent
gazeteer, let us state briefly, was to extract from his victim the outlines of a
biography which would cover one hundred lines. He could not have fallen on a
subject more willing to submit to vivisection. Erik had been eager to tell the
truth, and to proclaim to the world that he did not deserve to be regarded as a
second Christopher Columbus. He therefore related unreservedly his story,
explaining how he had been picked up at sea by a poor fisherman of Noroe,
educated by Mr. Malarius, taken to Stockholm by Dr. Schwaryencrona; how they
had found out that Patrick O'Donoghan probably held the key to the mystery that
surrounded him. They discovered that he was on board of the "Vega;" they had
gone in search of him. He related the accident which had induced them to
change their route. Erik told all this to convince the world that he was no hero.
He told it because he felt ashamed of being so overwhelmed with praises for a
performance that only seemed to him natural and right.

During this time the pen of the delighted reporter, Mr. Squirrelius, flew over
the paper with stenographic rapidity. The dates, the names, the least details were
noted with avidity. Mr. Squirrelius told himself with a beating heart that he had
obtained matter not only for one hundred lines, but that he could make five or six
hundred out of it. And what a story it would be--more interesting than a novel!

The next day Erik's revelations filled the columns of the most largely
circulated newspaper in Stockholm, and indeed in all Sweden. As is usually the
case, Erik's sincerity, instead of diminishing his popularity, only increased it, on
account of his modesty, and the romantic interest attached to his history. The
press and the public seized upon it with avidity. These biographical details were
soon translated into all languages, and made the tour of Europe. In this way they
reached Paris, and penetrated in the form of a French newspaper into a modest
drawing-room on Varennes Street.

There were two persons in this room. One was a lady dressed in black, with
white hair, although she still appeared to be young, but her whole appearance
betrayed profound sorrow. Seated under a lighted lamp she worked mechanically
at some embroidery, which at times fell from her thin fingers, while her eyes,
fixed on vacancy, seemed to be thinking of some overwhelming calamity.

On the other side of the table sat a fine-looking old gentleman, who took the
newspaper abstractedly which his servant brought in.

It was Mr. Durrien, the honorary consul-general of the geographical society,


the same person who had been at Brest when the "Alaska" reached that place.

This was doubtless the reason why Erik's name attracted his notice, but while
reading the article carefully which contained the biography or the young
Swedish navigator, he was startled. Then he read it again carefully, and little by
little an intense pallor spread over his face, which was always pale. His hands
trembled nervously, and his uneasiness became so evident that his companion
noticed it.

"Father, are you suffering?" she asked with solicitude.

"I believe it is too warm here--I will go to the library and get some fresh air.
It is nothing; it will pass off," answered Mr. Durrien, rising and walking into the
adjoining room.

As if by accident, he carried the paper with him.

If his daughter could have read his thoughts, she would have known that
amidst the tumults of hopes and fears that so agitated him was also a
determination not to let her eyes rest upon that paper.

A moment later she thought of following him into the library, but she
imagined that he wished to be alone, and discreetly yielded to his desire. Besides
she was soon reassured by hearing him moving about and opening and closing
the window.

At the end of an hour, she decided to look in, and see what Mr. Durrien was
doing. She found that he was seated before his desk writing a letter. But she did
not see that us he wrote his eyes filled with tears.


CHAPTER XXI.

A LETTER FROM PARIS.

Since his return to Stockholm, Erik had received every day from all parts of
Europe a voluminous correspondence. Some learned society wished for
information on some point, or wrote to congratulate him; foreign governments
wished to bestow upon him some honor or recompense; shipowners, or traders,
solicited some favor which would serve their interests.

Therefore he was not surprised when he received one morning two letters
bearing the Paris postmark.

The first that he opened was an invitation from the Geographical Society of
France, asking him and his companions to come and receive a handsome medal,
which had been voted in a solemn conclave "to the navigators of the first
circumpolar periplus of the arctic seas."

The second envelope made Erik start, he looked at it. On the box which
closed it was a medallion upon which the letters "E.D." were engraved,


surrounded by the motto "Semper idem."

These initials and devices were also stamped in the corner of the letter
enclosed in the envelope, which was that from Mr. Durrien.

The letter read as follows:

"My dear child,--Let me call you this in any case. I have just read in a French
newspaper a biography translated from the Swedish language, which has
overcome me more than I can tell you. It was your account of yourself. You state
that you were picked up at sea about twenty-two years ago by a Norwegian
fisherman in the neighborhood of Bergen; that you were tied to a buoy, bearing
the name of 'Cynthia;' that the especial motive of your arctic voyage was to find
a survivor of the vessel of that name--ship wrecked in October, 1858; and then
you state that you have returned from the voyage without having been able to
gain any information about the matter.

"Tf all this is true (oh, what would I not give if it is true!), I ask you not to
lose a moment in running to the telegraph office and letting me know it. In that
case, my child, you can understand my impatience, my anxiety, and my joy. In
that case you are my grandson, for whom I have mourned so many years, whom
I believed lost to me forever, as did also my daughter, my poor daughter, who,
broken-hearted at the tragedy of the 'Cynthia,' still mourns every day for her only
child--the joy and consolation at first of her widowhood, but afterward the cause
of her despair.

"But we shall see you again alive, covered with glory. Such happiness is too
great, too wonderful. I dare not believe it until a word from you authorizes me to
do so. But now it seems so probable, the details and dates agree so perfectly,
your countenance and manners recall so vividly those of my unfortunate son-in-
law. Upon the only occasion when chance led me into your society, I felt myself
mysteriously drawn toward you by a deep and sudden sympathy. It seems
impossible that there should be no reason for this.

"One word, telegraph me one word. I do not know how to exist until I hear
from you. Will it be the response that I wait for so impatiently? Can you bring
such happiness to my poor daughter and myself as will cause us to forget our
past years of tears and mourning?

"E. DURRIEN, Honorary Consul-general,

"104 Rue de Varennes, Paris."

To this letter was added one of explanation, that Erik devoured eagerly. It
was also in Mr. Durrien's handwriting, and read as follows:

"I was the French consul at New Orleans when my only daughter, Catherine,
married a young Frenchman, Mr. George Durrien, a distant connection, and, like
ourselves, of Breton origin. Mr. George Durrien was a mining engineer. He had


come to the United States to explore the recently discovered mines of petroleum
and intended to remain several years. I received him into my family--he being
the son of a dear friend--and when he asked for my daughter's hand, I gave her to
him with joy. Shortly after their marriage I was appointed consul to Riga; and
my son-in-law being detained by business interests in the United States, I was
obliged to leave my daughter. She became a mother, and to her son was given
my Christian name, united to that of his father--Emile Henry Georges.

"Six months afterward my son-in-law was killed by an accident in the mines.
As soon as she could settle up his affairs, my poor daughter, only twenty years of
age, embarked at New York on the 'Cynthia' for Hamburg, to join me by the
most direct route.

"On the 7th of October, 1858, the 'Cynthia' was shipwrecked off the Faroe
Islands. The circumstances of the shipwreck were suspicious, and have never
been explained.

"At the moment of the disaster, when the passengers were taking their places
one by one in the boat, my little grandson, seven months old--whom his mother
had tied to a buoy for safety--slipped or was pushed into the sea, and was carried
away by the storm and disappeared. His mother, crazed by this frightful
spectacle, tried to throw herself into the sea. She was prevented by main force
and placed in a fainting condition in one of the boats, in which were three other
persons, and who had alone escaped from the shipwrecked vessel. In forty-nine
hours this boat reached one of the Faroe Islands. From there my daughter
returned to me after a dangerous illness which lasted seven weeks, thanks to the
devoted attentions of the sailor who saved her and who brought her to me. This
brave man, John Denman, died in my service in Asia Minor.

"We had but little hope that the baby had survived the shipwreck. I, however,
sought for him among the Faroe and Shetland Islands, and upon the Norwegian
coast north of Bergen. The idea of his cradle floating any further seemed
impossible, but I did not give up my search for three years; and Noroe must be a
very retired spot, or surely some inquiries would have been made there. When I
had given up all hope I devoted myself exclusively to my daughter, whose
physical and moral health required great attention. I succeeded in being sent to
the Orient, and I sought, by traveling and scientific enterprises, to draw off her
thoughts from her affliction. She has been my inseparable companion sharing all
my labors, but I have never been able to lighten her incurable grief. We returned
to France, and we now live in Paris in an old house which I own.

"Will it be my happiness to receive there my grandson, for whom we have
mourned so many years? This hope fills me with too much joy, and I dare not
speak of it to my daughter, until I am assured of its truth; for, if it should prove


false, the disappointment would be too cruel.

"To-day is Monday: they tell me at the post-office that by next Saturday I can
receive your answer."

Erik had hardly been able to read this, for the tears would obscure his sight.
He also felt afraid to yield too quickly to the hope which had been so suddenly
restored to him. He told himself that every detail coincided--the dates agreed; all
the events down to the most minute particulars. He hardly dared to believe,
however, that it could be true. It was too much happiness to recover in a moment
his family, his own mother, his country. And such a country--the one that he
could have chosen above all because she possessed the grandeur, the graces, the
supreme gifts of humanity--because she had fostered genius, and the civilization
of antiquity, and the discoveries and inventions of modern times.

He was afraid that he was only dreaming. His hopes had been so often
disappointed. Perhaps the doctor would say something to dispel his illusions.
Before he did anything he would submit these facts to his cooler judgment.

The doctor read the documents attentively which he carried to him, but not
without exclamations of joy and surprise.

"You need not feel the slightest doubt!" he said, when he had finished. "All
the details agree perfectly, even those that your correspondent omits to mention,
the initials on the linen, the device engraved on the locket, which are the same as
those on the letter. My dear child, you have found your family this time. You
must telegraph immediately to your grandfather!"

"But what shall I tell him?" asked Erik, pale with joy.

"Tell him that to-morrow you will set out by express, to go and embrace him
and your mother!"

The young captain only took time to press the hands of this excellent man,
and he ran and jumped into a cab to hasten to the telegraph office.

He left Stockholm that same day, took the railroad to Malmo on the north-
west coast of Sweden, crossed the strait in twenty minutes, reached Copenhagen,
took the express train through to Holland and Belgium, and at Brussels the train
for Paris.

On Saturday, at seven o'clock in the evening, exactly six days after Mr.
Durrien had posted his letter, he had the joy of waiting for his grandson at the
depot.

As soon as the train stopped they fell into each other's arms. They had
thought so much about each other during these last few days that they both felt
already well acquainted.

"My mother?" asked Erik.

"T have not dared to tell her, much as I was tempted to do so!" answered Mr.


Durrien.

"And she knows nothing yet?"

"She suspects something, she fears, she hopes. Since your dispatch I have
done my best to prepare her for the unheard-of joy that awaits her. I told her of a
track upon which I had been placed by a young Swedish officer, the one whom I
had met at Brest, and of whom I had often spoken to her. She does not know, she
hesitates to hope for any good news, but this morning at breakfast I could see her
watching me, and two or three times I felt afraid that she was going to question
me. One can not tell, something might have happened to you, some other
misfortune, some sudden mischance. So I did not dine with her to-night, I made
an excuse to escape from a situation intolerable to me."

Without waiting for his baggage, they departed in the coup that Mr. Durrien
had brought.

Mme. Durrien, alone in the parlor in Varennes Street, awaited impatiently the
return of her father. She had had her suspicions aroused, and was only waiting
until the dinner hour arrived to ask for an explanation.

For several days she had been disturbed by his strange behavior, by the
dispatches which were continually arriving, and by the double meaning which
she thought she detected beneath all he said. Accustomed to talk with him about
his lightest thoughts and impressions, she could not understand why he should
seek to conceal anything from her. Several times she had been on the point of
demanding a solution of the enigma, but she had kept silence, out of respect for
the evident wishes of her father.

"He is trying to prepare me for some surprise, doubtless," she said to herself.
"He is sure to tell me if anything pleasant has occurred."

But for the last two or three days, especially that morning, she had been
impressed with a sort of eagerness which Mr. Durrien displayed in all his
manner, as well as the happy air with which he regarded her, insisting in hearing
over and over again from her lips, all the details of the disaster of the "Cynthia,"
which he had avoided speaking of for a long time. As she mused over his strange
behavior a sort of revelation came to her. She felt sure that her father must have
received some favorable intelligence which had revived the hope of finding her
child. But without the least idea that he had already done so, she determined not
to retire that night until she had questioned him closely.

Mme. Durrien had never definitely renounced the idea that her son was
living. She had never seen him dead before her eyes, and she clung mother-like
to the hope that he was not altogether lost to her. She said that the proofs were
insufficient, and she nourished the possibility of his sudden return. She might be
said to pass her days waiting for him. Thousands of women, mothers of soldiers


and sailors, pass their lives under this touching delusion. Mrs. Durrien had a
greater right than they had to preserve her faith in his existence. In truth the
tragical scene enacted twenty-two years ago was always before her eyes. She
beheld the "Cynthia" filling with water and ready to sink. She saw herself tying
her infant to a large buoy while the passengers and sailors were rushing for the
boats. They left her behind, she saw herself imploring, beseeching that they
would at least take her baby. A man took her precious burden, and threw it into
one of the boats, a heavy sea dashed over it, and to her horror she saw the buoy
floating away on the crest of the waves. She gave a dispairing cry and tried to
jump after him, then came unconsciousness. When she awoke she was a prey to
despair, to fever, to delirium. To this succeeded increasing grief. Yes, the poor
woman recalled all this. Her whole being had in fact received a shock from
which she had never recovered. It was now nearly a quarter of a century since
this had happened, and Mrs. Durrien still wept for her son as on the first day. Her
maternal heart so full of grief was slowly consuming her life. She sometimes
pictured to herself her son passing through the successive phases of infancy,
youth, and manhood. From year to year she represented to herself how he would
have looked, how he was looking, for she obstinately clung to her belief of the
possibility of his return.

This vain hope nothing had as yet had the power to shake--neither travels,
nor useless researches, nor the passage of time.

This is why this evening she awaited her father with the firm resolution of
knowing all that he had to tell.

Mr. Darrien entered. He was followed by a young gentleman, whom he
presented to her in the following words:

"My daughter, this is Mr. Erik Hersebom, of whom I have often spoken to
you, and who has just arrived at Paris. The Geographical Society wish to bestow
upon him a grand medal, and he has done me the honor to accept our
hospitality."

She had arisen from her arm-chair, and was looking kindly at him. Suddenly
her eyes dilated, her lips trembled, and she stretched out her hands toward him.

"My son! you are my son!" she cried.

Then she advanced a step toward Erik.

"Yes, you are my child," she said. "Your father lives over again in you!"

When Erik, bursting into tears, fell on his knees before her, the poor woman
took his head in her hands, and fainted from joy and happiness as she tried to
press a kiss on his forehead.


CHAPTER XXII.

AT VAL-FERAY.

A month later at Val-Féray, an old homestead of the family, situated half a
league from Brest, Erik's adopted family were assembled, together with his
mother and grandfather. Mrs. Durrien had, with the delicacy of feeling habitual
to her, desired that the good, simple-hearted beings who had saved her son's life
should share her profound and inexpressible joy. She had insisted that Dame
Katrina, and Vanda, Mr. Hersebom, and Otto should accompany Doctor
Schwaryencrona, Kajsa, Mr. Bredejord, and Mr. Malarius, and they held a great
festival together.

Amidst the rugged natural scenery of Breton and near the sea, her Norwegian
guests felt more at their ease than they could have done in Varennes Street. They
took long walks in the woods together, and told each other all they knew about
Erik's still somewhat obscure history, and little by little many hitherto
inexplicable points became clear. Their long talks and discussions cast light upon
many obscure circumstances.

The first question they asked each other was, Who was Tudor Brown? What
great interest did he have in preventing Patrick O'Donoghan from telling who
Erik's relations were? The words of that unfortunate man had established one
fact, viz., that Tudor Brown's real name was Jones, as it was the only one that the
Irishman had known him by. Now, a Mr. Noah Jones had been associated with
Erik's father in working a petroleum mine, that the young engineer had
discovered in Pennsylvania. The simple announcement of this fact gave a sinister
aspect to many events which had so long appeared mysterious: the suspicious
wreck of the "Cynthia," the fall of the infant into the sea, perhaps the death of
Erik's father. A document that Mr. Durrien found among his papers elucidated
many of these perplexing questions.

"Several months before his marriage," he said to Erik's friends, "my son-in-
law had discovered, near Harrisburg, a petroleum well. He lacked the capital
necessary to purchase it, and he saw that he was in danger of losing all the
advantages which the possession of it would secure to him. Chance made him
acquainted with Mr. Noah Jones, who represented himself as a cattle dealer from
the far West. But in reality, as he found out afterward, he was a slave-trader.

"This individual agreed to advance the sum necessary to purchase and work
the petroleum mine, which was called the Vandalia. He made my son-in-law
sign, in exchange for this assistance, an agreement which was very profitable to
himself. I was ignorant of the terms of this contract at the time of his marriage to
my daughter, and according to all appearances he thought but little of it.
Unusually gifted, and understanding chemistry and mechanics, yet he was


entirely ignorant of business matters, and already had to pay dearly for his
inexperience. No doubt he had trusted all the arrangements to Noah Jones,
according to his usual habit. Probably he signed with closed eyes the contract
which was laid before him. These are the principle articles agreed upon:

"Art. III. The Vandalia shall remain the sole property of Mr. George Durrien,
the discoverer, and Mr. Noah Jones, his silent partner.

"Art. IV. Mr. Noah Jones will take charge of moneys, and pay out what is
necessary for the exploration of the mine, he will also sell the product, take
charge of the receipts, and have a settlement with his partner every year, when
they will divide the net profits.

"Art. V. If either of the partners should wish to sell his share, the other would
have the first right to purchase it, and he should have three months in which to
make arrangements to do so. He might then become sole proprietor by paying
the capital and three per cent. on the net revenue, according to what it had been
proved to be at the last inventory.

"Art. VI. Only the children of the two partners could become inheritors of
these rights. In case one of the partners should die childless, or his children
should not live until they were twenty-one years of age, the entire property to
revert to the survivor, to the exclusion of all other heirs of the dead partner.

"N.B. The last article is on account of the different nationalities of the two
partners, and because of the complications that could not fail to arise in case of
the death of either of them without issue."

"Such," continued Mr. Durrien, "was the contract which my future son-in-
law had signed at the time, when he had no thought of marrying, and when
everybody, except, perhaps, Mr. Noah Jones, was ignorant of what immense
value the Vandalia mine would become in the course of time. They had then
hardly commenced operations, and they met with the usual discouragements
incident to all new undertakings. Perhaps Noah Jones hoped that his associate
would become disgusted with the whole business and retire, leaving him sole
proprietor. The marriage of George with my daughter, the birth of his son, and
the well becoming suddenly prodigiously fruitful, must have modified his plans
by degrees. He could no longer hope to purchase for a trifling sum this splendid
property; but before it came into the possession of Noah Jones, first George
himself, and then his only child, must disappear from the world. Two years after
his marriage and six months after the birth of my grandson, George was found
dead near one of the wells--asphyxiated, the doctors said, by gas. I had left the
United States upon my nomination as consul to Riga. The business relating to
the partnership was left to an attorney to settle. Noah Jones behaved vert well,
and agreed to all the arrangements that were made for the benefit of my


daughter. He agreed to continue the work, and pay every six months into the
Central Bank of New York that part of the net profits which belonged to the
infant. Alas! he never made the first payment. My daughter took passage in the
‘Cynthia’ in order to join me. The 'Cynthia' was lost with her crew and freight
under such suspicious circumstances that the insurance company refused to pay;
and in this shipwreck the sole heir of my son-in-law disappeared.

"Noah Jones remained the sole proprietor of the Vandalia, which has yielded
him at the least since that event an annual income of one hundred and eighty
thousand dollars a year."

"Did you never suspect that he had had some hand in these successive
catastrophies?" asked Mr. Bredejord.

"I have certainly suspected him; it was only too natural. Such an
accumulation of misfortunes, and all tending to his private enrichment, seemed
to point him out as the author only too clearly. But how could I prove my
suspicions, particularly in a court of justice? They were only vague, and I knew
too well that they would have but little weight in an international contest. And
then, besides I had my daughter to console, or at least to try and draw away her
thoughts from this tragedy, and a lawsuit would only have revived her grief.
Briefly I resigned myself to silence. Did I do wrong? Is it to be regretted?"

"T think not, for I feel convinced that it would have produced no results. You
see how difficult it is even today, after we have related all the facts in our
possession, to arrive at any definite conclusion!"

"But how can you explain the part which Patrick O'Donoghan has taken in
this matter?” asked Dr. Schwaryencrona.

"On this point, as on many others, we are reduced to conjectures, but it
seems to me that there is one which is plausible enough. This O'Donoghan was
cabin-boy on board of the 'Cynthia,' in the personal service of the captain, and
consequently in constant communication with the first-class passengers, who
always eat at the captain's table. He therefore certainly knew the name of my
daughter, and her French origin, and he could easily have found her again.

"Had he been commissioned by Noah Jones to perform some dark mission?
Had he a hand in causing the shipwreck of the 'Cynthia,' or simply in pushing the
infant into the sea? this they could never know for a certainty since he was dead.
One thing was evident, he was aware how important the knowledge of this fact
was for Noah Jones. But did this lazy drunken man know that the infant was
living? Had he any hand in saving it? Had he rescued it from the sea to leave it
floating near Noroe?

"This was a doubtful point. In any case he must have assured Noah Jones
that the infant had survived. He was doubtless proud of knowing the country


which had received him, and he had probably taken precautions to know all
about the child, so that if any misfortune happened to him--O'Donoghan--Noah
Jones would be obliged to pay him well for his silence. He was doubtless the
person from whom he received money every time he landed in New York."

"All this appears to me to be very probable," said Mr. Bredejord, "and I think
that subsequent events confirm it. The first advertisements of Doctor
Schwaryencrona disturbed Noah Jones, and he believed it to be an imperative
necessity to get rid of Patrick O'Donoghan, but he was obliged to act prudently.
He therefore contented himself with frightening the Irishman, by making him
believe that he would be brought before a criminal court. The result of this we
know from Mr. and Mrs. Bowles, of the Red Anchor, who told us of the haste
with which Patrick O'Donoghan had taken flight. He evidently believed that he
was in danger of being arrested, or he would not have gone so far, to live among
the Samoyedes, and under an assumed name, which Noah Jones had doubtless
advised him to do.

"But the announcement in the newspapers about Patrick O'Donoghan must
have been a severe blow to him. He had made a journey to Stockholm expressly
to assure us that the Irishman was dead, and doubtless to discover if possible
how far we had pushed our inquiries. The publication of the correspondence of
the 'Vega, and the departure of the 'Alaska,’ must have made Noah Jones, or
Tudor Brown, as he called himself, feel that he was in imminent peril, for his
confidence in Patrick O'Donoghan could be only very limited, and he would
have revealed his secret to any one who would have assured him that he would
not be punished. Happily as affairs have turned out, we may congratulate
ourselves upon having escaped pretty well."

"Who knows?" said the doctor, "perhaps all the danger we have encountered
has only helped to bring us to the knowledge of the truth. But for running on the
rocks of the Basse-Froide, we would probably have pursued the route through
the Suez Canal, and then we should have reached Behring's Strait too late to
meet the 'Vega.' It is at least doubtful whether we would have undertaken the
voyage to the Island of Ljakow, and more doubtful still whether we would have
been able to extract any information from Patrick O'Donoghan if we had met
him in company with Tudor Brown.

"So, although our entire voyage has been marked by tragical events, it is due
to the fact of our having accomplished the periplus in the ‘Alaska, and the
consequent celebrity which has been the result for Erik, that he has at last found
his family."

"Yes," said Mrs. Durrien, laying her hand proudly on the head of her son, "it
is his glory which has restored him to me."


And immediately she added:

"It was a crime that deprived me of you, but your own goodness which has
restored you to me!"

"And the rascality of Noah Jones has resulted in making our Erik one of the
richest men in America," cried Mr. Bredejord.

Every one looked at him with surprise.

"Doubtless," answered the eminent lawyer. "Erik is his father's heir, and has
a share in the income, derived from the Vandalia mine. Has he not been unjustly
deprived of this for the last twenty-two years?

"We have only to give proofs of his identity, and we have plenty of
witnesses, Mr. Hersebom, Dame Katrina and Mr. Malarius, besides ourselves. If
Noah Jones has left any children, they are responsible for the enormous arrears
which will probably consume all their share of the capital stock.

"If the rascal has left no children, by the terms of the contract which Mr.
Durrien has just read, Erik is the sole inheritor of the entire property; and
according to all accounts he ought to have in Pennsylvania an income of one
hundred and fifty to two hundred thousand dollars a year!"

"Ah, ah," said the doctor, laughing. "Behold the little fisherman of Noroe
become an eligible parti! Laureate of the Geographical Society, author of the
first circumpolar periplus, and afflicted with the modest income of two hundred
thousand dollars. There are not many such husbands to be met with in
Stockholm. What do you say Kajsa?"

The young girl blushed painfully at being thus addressed, but her uncle had
no suspicion that he had made a cruel speech.

Kajsa had felt that she had not acted wisely in treating Erik as she had done,
and she resolved for the future to show him more attention.

But it was a singular fact that Erik no longer cared for her, since he felt
himself elevated above her unjust disdain. Perhaps it was absence, or the lonely
hours which he had spent walking the deck at night, which had revealed to him
the poverty of Kajsa's heart; or it might be the satisfaction he felt that she could
no longer regard him as "a waif"; he only treated her now with the most perfect
courtesy, to which she was entitled as a young lady and Dr. Schwaryencrona's
niece.

All his preference now was for Vanda, who indeed grew every day more and
more charming, and was losing all her little village awkwardness under the roof
of an amiable and cultivated lady. Her exquisite goodness, her native grace, and
perfect simplicity, made her beloved by all who approached her. She had not
been eight days at Val-Fray, when Mrs. Durrien declared positively that it would
be impossible for her ever to part with her.


Erik undertook to arrange with Mr. Hersebom and Dame Katrina that they
should leave Vanda behind them, with the express condition that he would bring
her himself every year to see them. He had tried to keep all his adopted family
with him, even offering to transport from Noroe the house with all its furniture
where he had passed his infancy. But this project of emigration was generally
regarded as impracticable. Mr. Hersebom and Katrina were too old to change
their habits. They would not have been perfectly happy in a country of whose
language and habits they were ignorant. He was obliged, therefore, to permit
them to depart, but not before making such provision for them as would enable
them to spend the remainder of their days in ease and comfort, which,
notwithstanding their honest, laborious lives, they had been unable to
accomplish.

Erik would have liked to have kept Otto at least, but he preferred his fiord,
and thought that there was no life preferable to that of a fisherman. It must also
be confessed that the golden-haired and blue-eyed daughter of the overseer of
the oil-works had something to do with the attractions which Noroe had for him.
At least we must conclude so, since it was soon made known that he expected to
marry her at the next "Yule," or Christmas.

Mr. Malarius counted upon educating their children as he had educated Erik
and Vanda. He modestly resumed his position in the village school, after sharing
in the honor of the decorations bestowed by the Geographical Society of France
upon the captain of the "Alaska." He was also busily occupied in correcting the
proofs of his magnificent work on the "Flora of the Arctic Regions." As for Dr.
Schwaryencrona, he has not quite finished his "Treatise on Iconography," which
will transmit his name to posterity.

The latest legal business of Mr. Bredejord has been to establish Erik's claim
as sole proprietor of the Vandalia mine. He gained his case in the first instance,
and also on appeal, which was no small success.

Erik took advantage of this, and of the enormous fortune thus accruing to
him, to purchase the "Alaska," which he converted into a pleasure yacht. He uses
it every year to go to Noroe in company with Mme. Durrien and Vanda, to visit
his adopted family. Although his civil rights have been accorded to him, and his
legal name is Emile Durrien, he has added that of Hersebom, and among his
relatives he is still called only Erik.

The secret desire of his mother is to see him some day married to Vanda,
whom she already loves as a daughter, and, as Erik evidently shares this desire,
we may suppose that it will be realized one of these days.

Kajsa_ still remains single, with the knowledge that she has lost her
opportunity.


Dr. Schwaryencrona, Mr. Bredejord, and Professor Hochstedt still play
innumerable games of whist.

One evening the doctor, having played worse than usual, Mr. Bredejord, as
he tapped his snuff-box, had the pleasure of recalling to his mind a circumstance
which had too long been forgotten.

"When do you intend to send me your Pliny?" he asked, with a wicked gleam
in his eye. "Certainly you can no longer think that Erik is of Irish origin?"

The doctor was thunder-struck for a moment by this speech, but he soon
recovered himself.

"Bah! an ex-president of the French Republic was a direct descendant of one
of the Irish kings," he said, seriously. "I should not be at all surprised if Mr.
Durrien belongs to the same family!"

"Evidently," replied Mr. Bredejord. "In fact it is so extremely probable that
out of sport I will send you my Quintilian!"

THE END.


TICKET NO. "9672"


by


JULES VERNE


CHAPTER I.

"What time is it?" inquired Dame Hansen, shaking the ashes from her pipe,
the last curling rings from which were slowly disappearing between the stained
rafters overhead.

"Eight o'clock, mother," replied Hulda.

"It isn't likely that any travelers will come to-night. The weather is too
stormy."

"I agree with you. At all events, the rooms are in readiness, and if any one
comes, I shall be sure to hear them."

"Has your brother returned?"

"Not yet."

"Didn't he say he would be back to-night?"

"No, mother. Joel went to take a traveler to Lake Tinn, and as he didn't start
until very late, I do not think he can get back to Dal before to-morrow."

"Then he will spend the night at Moel, probably."

"Yes; unless he should take it into his head to go on to Bamble to see Farmer
Helmboe."

"And his daughter Siegfrid."

"Yes. Siegfrid, my best friend, whom I love like a sister!" replied the young
girl, smiling.

"All, well, Hulda, shut up the house, and let's go to bed."

"You are not ill, are you, mother?"

"No; but I want to be up bright and early to-morrow morning. I must go to
Moel."

"What for?"

"Why, we must be laying in our stock of provisions for the coming summer,
and--"

"And I suppose the agent from Christiania has come down with his wagon of
wines and provisions."

"Yes; Lengling, the foreman at the saw-mill, met him this afternoon, and
informed me of the fact as he passed. We have very little left in the way of ham
and smoked salmon, and I don't want to run any risk of being caught with an
empty larder. Tourists are likely to begin their excursions to the Telemark almost
any day now; especially, if the weather should become settled, and our


establishment must be in a condition to receive them. Do you realize that this is
the fifteenth of April?"

"The fifteenth of April!" repeated the young girl, thoughtfully.

"Yes, so to-morrow I must attend to these matters," continued Dame Hansen.
"IT can make all my purchases in two hours, and I will return with Joel in the
kariol."

"In case you should meet the postman, don't forget to ask him if there is a
letter for us--"

"And especially for you. That is quite likely, for it is a month since you heard
from Ole."

"Yes, a month--a whole month."

"Still, you should not worry, child. The delay is not at all surprising. Besides,
if the Moel postman has nothing for you, that which didn't come by the way of
Christiania may come by the way of Bergen, may it not?"

"Yes, mother," replied Hulda. "But how can I help worrying, when I think
how far it is from here to the Newfoundland fishing banks. The whole broad
Atlantic to cross, while the weather continues so bad. It is almost a year since
my poor Ole left me, and who can say when we shall see him again in Dal?"

"And whether we shall be here when he returns," sighed Dame Hansen, but
so softly that her daughter did not hear the words.

Hulda went to close the front door of the inn which stood on the Vesfjorddal
road; but she did not take the trouble to turn the key in the lock. In hospitable
Norway, such precautions are unnecessary. It is customary for travelers to enter
these country inns either by night or by day without calling any one to open the
door; and even the loneliest habitations are safe from the depredations of thieves
or assassins, for no criminal attempts against life or property ever disturb the
peace of this primitive land.

The mother and daughter occupied two front rooms on the second story of
the inn--two neat and airy, though plainly furnished rooms. Above them, directly
under the sloping roof, was Joel's chamber, lighted by a window incased in a
tastefully carved frame-work of pine.

From this window, the eye, after roaming over the grand mountain horizon,
returned with delight to the narrow valley through which flowed the Maan,
which is half river, half torrent.

A wooden staircase, with heavy balusters and highly polished steps, led from
the lower hall to the floors above, and nothing could be more neat and attractive
than the whole aspect of this establishment, in which the travelers found a
comfort that is rare in Norwegian inns.

Hulda and her mother were in the habit of retiring early when they were


alone, and Dame Hansen had already lighted her candle, and was on her way
upstairs, when a loud knocking at the door made them both start.

"Dame Hansen! Dame Hansen!" cried a voice.

Dame Hansen paused on the stairs.

"Who can have come so late?" she exclaimed.

"Can it be that Joel has met with an accident?" returned Hulda, quickly.

And she hastened toward the door.

She found a lad there--one of the young rascals known as skydskarls, that
make a living by clinging to the back of kariols, and taking the horse back when
the journey is ended.

"What do you want here at this hour?" asked Hulda.

"First of all to bid you good-evening," replied the boy, mischievously.

"Is that all?"

"No; that isn't all; but a boy oughtn't to forget his manners, ought he?"

"You are right. But who sent you?"

"Your brother Joel."

"And what for?" asked Dame Hansen, advancing to the door with the slow
and measured tread that is a characteristic of the inhabitants of Norway. There is
quicksilver in the veins of their soil, but little or none in the veins of their bodies.

The reply had evidently caused the mother some anxiety, however, for she
added hastily:

"Has anything happened to my son?"

"No, but the Christiania postman gave him a letter, and--"

"A letter from Drammen?" repeated Dame Hansen, in a lower tone.

"I don't know about that," replied the youth. "All I do know is, that Joel can't
get home before to-morrow, and he sent me here to deliver the letter."

"Tt is important then?"

"T should judge so."

"Hand it here," said Dame Hansen, in a tone that betrayed keen anxiety.

"Here it is, clean and not wrinkled in the least. But the letter is not for you."

Dame Hansen seemed to breathe more freely.

"Then who is it for?” she asked.

"For your daughter."

"For me!" cried Hulda. "It is a letter from Ole! I am sure it is--a letter that
came by way of Christiania. My brother did not want me to be kept waiting."

Hulda had snatched the letter from the boy's hand, and now taking it to the
table upon which her mother had deposited the candle, she examined the
address.

"Yes, it is from him. It is certainly from him! Heaven grant that he writes to


announce the speedy return of the 'Viking'!"

"Won't you come in?" said Dame Hansen, turning to the boy.

"Only for a minute. I must get back home to-night, for I am to go with a
kariol to-morrow morning."

"Very well. Tell Joel, from me, that I expect to go to Moel to-morrow, and
that he must wait for me there."

"To-morrow evening?"

"No; to-morrow morning, and he must not leave Moel until he sees me. We
will return to Dal together."

"Very well, Dame Hansen."

"Won't you take a drop of brandevin?"

"With pleasure."

The boy approached the table, and Dame Hansen handed him a glass of the
beverage which is such a powerful protection against the evening fogs. It is
needless to say that he drained the glass, then,

"God-aften!" he said.

"God-aften, my son!"

This is the Norwegian good-night. It was simply spoken, without even an
inclination of the head, and the lad instantly departed, without seeming to mind
in the least the long walk that he had before him. The sound of his footsteps soon
died away beneath the trees that border the swiftly flowing river.

Hulda still stood gazing at Ole's letter. Think of it! This frail envelope must
have crossed the broad ocean to reach her, the broad ocean in which the rivers of
western Norway lose themselves. She examined the different postmarks. Though
mailed on the 15th of March, the missive had not reached Dal until the 15th of
April. Why! a month had already elapsed since the letter was written! How many
things might have happened in a month on the shores of Newfoundland! Was it
not still winter, the dangerous season of equinoxes? Are not these fishing banks
the most dangerous in the world, swept by terrible gales from the North Pole? A
perilous and arduous vocation was this business of fishing which Ole followed!
And if he followed it was it not that she, his betrothed, whom he was to marry on
his return, might reap the benefits?

Poor Ole! What did he say in this letter? Doubtless that he loved Hulda as
faithfully and truly as Hulda loved him, that they were united in thought, in spite
of the distance that separated them, and that he longed for the day of his return to
Dal.

Yes, he said all this, Hulda was sure of it. But perhaps he might add that the
day of his return was near at hand--that the fishing cruise which had enticed the
inhabitants of Bergen so far from their native land, was nearly at an end. Perhaps


Ole would tell her that the "Viking" had finished taking aboard her cargo, that
she was about to sail, and that the last days of April would not pass without a
blissful meeting in the pleasant home at Vesfjorddal. Perhaps, too, he would
assure her, at last, that she might safely appoint the day for the pastor to come to
Moel to unite them in the little chapel whose steeple rose from a small grove not
a hundred yards from Dame Hansen's inn.

To learn all this, it might only be necessary to break the seal, draw out Ole's
letter, and read it, through the tears of joy or sorrow that its contents would be
sure to bring to Hulda's eyes, and doubtless more than one impatient girl of the
south, or even of Denmark or Holland, would already have known all! But
Hulda was in a sort of a dream, and dreams terminate only when God chooses to
end them, and how often one regrets them, so bitter is the reality.

"Is it really a letter from Ole that your brother has sent you, my daughter?"
inquired Dame Hansen.

"Yes; I recognize the handwriting."

"Well, are you going to wait until to-morrow to read it?"

Hulda took one more look at the envelope, then, after slowly breaking the
seal, she drew out the carefully written letter, which read as follows:

"Saint-Pierre-Miquelon, March 17th, 1862.

"My Dearest Hulda,--You will hear, with pleasure, that our fishing venture
has prospered, and that it will be concluded in a few days. Yes; we are nearing
the end of the season, and after a year's absence how glad I shall be to return to
Dal and find myself in the midst of the only friends I have in the world--yours
and mine.

"My share in the profits of the expedition amounts to quite a handsome sum,
which will start us in housekeeping. Messrs. Help Bros., the owners of the ship,
have been informed that the 'Viking' will probably return by the 15th or 20th of
May; so you may expect to see me at that time; that is to say, in a few weeks at
the very longest.

"My dear Hulda, I trust to find you looking even prettier than at my
departure, and in the best of health, you and your mother as well, also that hardy,
brave comrade, my cousin Joel, your brother, who asks nothing better than to
become mine.

"On receipt of this, give my very best respects to Dame Hansen--I can see
her now, sitting in her wooden arm-chair by the old stove in the big hall--and tell
her I love her with a twofold love, for she is my aunt as well as your mother.

"Above all, don't take the trouble to come to Bergen to meet me, for it is
quite possible that the 'Viking' will arrive at an earlier date than I have
mentioned. However that may be, my dear Hulda can count upon seeing me at


Dal twenty-four hours after we land. Don't be too much surprised if I should
arrive considerably ahead of time.

"We have had a pretty rough time of it, this past winter, the weather having
been more severe than any our fishermen have ever encountered; but fortunately
fish have been plenty. The ‘Viking’ brings back nearly five thousand quintals,
deliverable at Bergen, and already sold by the efforts of Help Bros. And last, but
not least, we have succeeded in selling at a handsome profit, and I, who have a
share in the venture, will realize something quite handsome from it.

"Besides, even if I should not bring a small competence home with me, I
have an idea, or rather, I have a presentiment that it is awaiting me on my return.
Yes; comparative wealth, to say nothing of happiness! In what way? That is my
secret, my dearest Hulda, and you will forgive me for having a secret from you!
It is the only one! Besides, I will tell you all about it. When? Well, as soon as an
opportunity offers--before our marriage, if it should be delayed by some
unforeseen misfortune--afterward, if I return at the appointed time, and you
become my wife within a week after my arrival, as I trust you will.

"A hundred fond kisses, my darling Hulda. Kiss Dame Hansen, and Joel, too,
for me. In fancy, I imprint another kiss upon your brow, around which the
shining crown of the brides of the Telemark will cast a saint-like halo. Once
more, farewell, dearest Hulda, farewell!

"Your devoted lover,

"OLE KAMP."


CHAPTER II.

Dal is a modest hamlet consisting of but a few houses; some on either side of
a road that is little more than a bridle-path, others scattered over the surrounding
hills. But they all face the narrow valley of Vesfjorddal, with their backs to the
line of hills to the north, at the base of which flows the Maan.

A little church erected in 1855, whose chancel is pierced by two narrow
stained-glass windows, lifts its square belfry from out a leafy grove hard by.
Here and there rustic bridges cross the rivulets that dance merrily along toward
the river. In the distance are two or three primitive saw-mills, run by water-
power, with a wheel to move the saw, as well as a wheel to move the beam or the
tree; and seen from a little distance, the chapel, saw-mills, houses, and cabins, all
seem to be enveloped in a soft olive haze that emanates from the dark-green firs
and the paler birches which either singly or in groups extend from the winding
banks of the Maan to the crests of the lofty mountains.

Such is the fresh and laughing hamlet of Dal, with its picturesque dwellings,


painted, some of them, in delicate green or pale pink tints, others in such glaring
colors as bright yellow and blood-red. The roofs of birch bark, covered with turf,
which is mown in the autumn, are crowned with natural flowers. All this is
indescribably charming, and eminently characteristic of the most picturesque
country in the world. In short, Dal is in the Telemark, the Telemark is in Norway,
and Norway is in Switzerland, with thousands of fiords that permit the sea to
kiss the feet of its mountains.

The Telemark composes the broad portion of the immense horn that Norway
forms between Bergen and Christiania.

This dependency of the prefecture of Batsberg, has the mountains and
glaciers of Switzerland, but it is not Switzerland. It has gigantic water-falls like
North America, but it is not America. The landscape is adorned with picturesque
cottages, and processions of inhabitants, clad in costumes of a former age, like
Holland, but it is not Holland. The Telemark is far better than any or all of these;
it is the Telemark, noted above all countries in the world for the beauty of its
scenery. The writer has had the pleasure of visiting it. He has explored it
thoroughly, in a kariol with relays of post-horses--when he could get them--and
he brought back with him such a vivid recollection of its manifold charms that
he would be glad to convey some idea of it to the reader of this simple narrative.

At the date of this story, 1862, Norway was not yet traversed by the railroad
that now enables one to go from Stockholm to Drontheim, by way of Christiania.
Now, an extensive network of iron rails extends entirely across these two
Scandinavian countries, which are so averse to a united existence. But
imprisoned in a railroad-carriage, the traveler, though he makes much more rapid
progress than in a kariol, misses all the originality that formerly pervaded the
routes of travel. He misses the journey through Southern Sweden on the curious
Gotha Canal, in which the steamboats, by rising from lock to lock, manage to
reach an elevation of three hundred feet. Nor does he have an opportunity to visit
the falls of Trolletann, nor Drammen, nor Kongsberg, nor any of the beauties of
the Telemark.

In those days the railroad existed only upon paper. Twenty years were to
elapse before one could traverse the Scandinavian kingdom from one shore to
the other in forty hours, and visit the North Cape on excursion tickets to
Spitzberg.

In those days Dal was, and may it long remain, the central point for foreign
or native tourists, these last being for the most part students from Christiania.
From Dal they could wander over the entire Telemark and Hardanger region,
explore the valley of Vesfjorddal between Lakes Mjos and Tinn, and visit the
wonderful cataracts of the Rjukan Tun. The hamlet boasts of but one inn, but that


is certainly the most attractive and comfortable imaginable, and one of the most
important also, for it can offer four bed-chambers for the accommodation of its
guests. In a word, it is Dame Hansen's inn.

A few benches surround the base of its pink walls, which are separated from
the ground by a substantial granite foundation. The spruce rafters and weather-
boarding have acquired such hardness and toughness with age that the sharpest
hatchet can make little or no impression upon them. Between the roughly hewn
rafters, which are placed horizontally one above the other, a mixture of clay and
turf forms a stanch roof, through which the hardest winter rains can not force
their way.

Upstairs, in the bedrooms, the ceilings are painted in dark red or black tints
to contrast with the more cheerful and delicate hues of the wood-work.

In one comer of the large hall stands a huge cylinder stove, the pipe of which
rises nearly to the ceiling, before it disappears in the kitchen chimney. In another
corner stands a tall clock which emits a sonorous tick-tack, as its carved hands
travel slowly around its enameled face. Here is a secretary, black with age, side
by side with a massive iron tripod. Upon the mantel is an immense terra-cotta
candlestick which can be transformed into a three-branched candelabrum by
turning it upside down. The handsomest furniture in the house adorns this
spacious hall--the birch-root table, with its spreading feet, the big chest with its
richly wrought brass handles, in which the Sunday and holiday clothing is kept,
the tall arm-chair, hard and uncomfortable as a church-pew, the painted wooden
chairs, and the spinning-wheel striped with green, to contrast with the scarlet
petticoat of the spinner.

Yonder stands the pot in which the butter is kept, and the paddle with which
it is worked, and here is the tobacco-box, and the grater of elaborately carved
bone.

And, finally, over the door which opens into the kitchen is a large dresser,
with long rows of brass and copper cooking-utensils and bright-colored dishes,
the little grindstone for sharpening knives, half-buried in its varnished case, and
the egg-dish, old enough to serve as a chalice.

And how wonderful and amusing are the walls, hung with linen tapestries
representing scenes from the Bible, and brilliant with all the gorgeous coloring
of the pictures of Epinal.

As for the guests’ rooms, though they are less pretentious, they are no less
comfortable, with their spotless neatness, their curtains of hanging-vines that
droop from the turf-covered roof, their huge beds, sheeted with snowy and
fragrant linen, and their hangings with verses from the Old Testament,
embroidered in yellow upon a red ground.


Nor must we forget that the floor of the main hall, and the floors of all the
rooms, both upstairs and down, are strewn with little twigs of birch, pine, and
juniper, whose leaves fill the house with their healthful and exhilarating odor.

Can one imagine a more charming posada in Italy, or a more seductive fonda
in Spain? No. And the crowd of English tourists have not yet raised the scale of
prices as in Switzerland--at least, they had not at the time of which I write. In
Dal, the current coin is not the pound sterling, the sovereign of which the
travelers’ purse is soon emptied. It is a silver coin, worth about five francs, and
its subdivisions are the mark, equal in value to about a franc, and the skilling,
which must not be confounded with the English shilling, as it is only equivalent
to a French sou.

Nor will the tourist have any opportunity to use or abuse the pretentious
bank-note in the Telemark. One-mark notes are white; five-mark notes are blue;
ten-mark notes are yellow; fifty-mark notes, green; one hundred mark notes, red.
Two more, and we should have all the colors of the rainbow.

Besides--and this is a point of very considerable importance--the food one
obtains at the Dal inn is excellent; a very unusual thing at houses of public
entertainment in this locality, for the Telemark deserves only too well its
surname of the Buttermilk Country. At Tiness, Listhus, Tinoset, and many other
places, no bread is to be had, or if there be, it is of such poor quality as to be
uneatable. One finds there only an oaten cake, known as flat brod, dry, black,
and hard as pasteboard, or a coarse loaf composed of a mixture of birch-bark,
lichens, and chopped straw. Eggs are a luxury, and a most stale and unprofitable
one; but there is any quantity of poor beer to be had, a profusion of buttermilk,
either sweet or sour, and sometimes a little coffee, so thick and muddy that it is
much more like distilled soot than the products of Mocha or Rio Nunez.

In Dame Hansen's establishment, on the contrary, cellar and larder were alike
well-stored. What more could the most exacting tourist ask than salmon, either
salt or smoked--fresh salmon that have never tasted tainted waters, fish from the
pure streams of the Telemark, fowls, neither too fat nor too lean, eggs in every
style, crisp oaten and barley cakes, fruits, more especially strawberries, bread--
unleavened bread, it is here, but of the very best quality--beer, and some old
bottles of that Saint Julien that have spread the fame of French vineyards even to
this distant land?

And this being the case, it is not strange that the inn at Dal is well and
favorably known in all the countries of Northern Europe.

One can see this, too, by glancing over the register in which many travelers
have not only recorded their names, but paid glowing tributes to Dame Hansen's
merits as an inn-keeper. The names are principally those of Swedes and


Norwegians from every part of Scandinavia; but the English make a very
respectable showing; and one of them, who had waited at least an hour for the
summit of Gousta to emerge from the morning mist that enveloped it, wrote
upon one of the pages:

"Patientia omnia vincit?"


CHAPTER III.

Without being very deeply versed in ethnography, one may be strongly
inclined to believe, in common with many savants, that a close relationship
exists between the leading families of the English aristocracy and the oldest
families of Scandinavia. Numerous proofs of this fact, indeed, are to be found in
the ancestral names which are identical in both countries. There is no aristocracy
in Norway, however; still, though the democracy everywhere rules, that does not
prevent it from being aristocratic to the highest degree. All are equals upon an
exalted plane instead of a low one. Even in the humblest hut may be found a
genealogical tree which has not degenerated in the least because it has sprung up
anew in humble soil; and the walls are adorned with the proud blazons of the
feudal lords from whom these plain peasants are descended.

So it was with the Hansens of Dal, who were unquestionably related, though
rather remotely, to the English peers created after Rollo's invasion of Normandy,
and though rank and wealth had both departed they had at least preserved the old
pride, or rather dignity, which becomes all social ranks.

It was a matter of very little consequence, however. Whether he had
ancestors of lofty lineage or not, Harald Hansen was simply a village inn-keeper.
The house had come down to him from his father and from his grandfather, who
were widely known and respected, and after his death his widow continued the
business in a way that elicited universal commendation.

Whether or not Harald had made a fortune in the business, no one was able
to say; but he had been able to rear his son Joel and his daughter Hulda in
comfort; and Ole Kamp, a son of his wife's sister, had also been brought up like
one of his own children. But for his uncle Harald, this orphan child would
doubtless have been one of those poor creatures who come into the world only to
leave it; and Ole Kamp evinced a truly filial devotion toward his parents by
adoption. Nothing would ever sever the tie that bound him to the Hansen family,
to which his marriage with Hulda was about to bind him still more closely.

Harald Hansen had died about eighteen months before, leaving his wife, in
addition to the inn, a small farm on the mountain, a piece of property which
yielded very meager returns, if any. This was especially true of late, for the


seasons had been remarkably unpropitious, and agriculture of every kind had
suffered greatly, even the pastures. There had been many of those "iron nights,"
as the Norwegian peasants call them--nights of north-easterly gales and ice that
kill the corn down to the very root--and that meant ruin to the farmers of the
Telemark and the Hardanger.

Still, whatever Dame Hansen might think of the situation of affairs, she had
never said a word to any living soul, not even to her children. Naturally cold and
reserved, she was very uncommunicative--a fact that pained Hulda and Joel not a
little. But with that respect for the head of the family innate in Northern lands,
they made no attempt to break down a reserve which was eminently distasteful
to them. Besides, Dame Hansen never asked aid or counsel, being firmly
convinced of the infallibility of her own judgment, for she was a true Norwegian
in that respect.

Dame Hansen was now about fifty years old. Advancing age had not bowed
her tall form, though it had whitened her hair; nor had it dimmed the brightness
of her dark-blue eyes, whose azure was reflected in the clear orbs of her
daughter; but her complexion had taken on the yellow hue of old parchment, and
a few wrinkles were beginning to furrow her forehead.

The madame, as they say in Scandinavia, was invariably attired in a full
black skirt, for she had never laid aside her mourning since her husband's death.
Below the shoulder-straps of a brown bodice appeared the long full sleeves of an
unbleached cotton chemise. On her shoulders she wore a small dark-colored
fichu that crossed upon her breast, which was also covered by the large bib of
her apron. She always wore as a head-dress a close-fitting black-silk cap that
covered almost her entire head, and tied behind, a kind of head-dress that is
rarely seen nowadays.

Seated stiffly erect in her wooden arm-chair, the grave hostess neglected her
spinning-wheel only to enjoy a small birchwood pipe, whose smoke enveloped
her in a faint cloud.

Really, the house would have seemed very gloomy had it not been for the
presence of the two children.

A worthy lad was Joel Hansen. Twenty-five years of age, well built, tall, like
all Norwegian mountaineers, proud in bearing, though not in the least boastful or
conceited. He had fine hair, verging upon chestnut, with blue eyes so dark as to
seem almost black. His garb displayed to admirable advantage his powerful
shoulders, his broad chest, in which his lungs had full play, and stalwart limbs
which never failed him even in the most difficult mountain ascents. His dark-
blue jacket, fitting tightly at the waist, was adorned on the shoulders with
epaulets, and in the back with designs in colored embroidery similar to those that


embellish the vests of the Breton peasantry. His yellow breeches were fastened at
the knee by large buckles. Upon his head he wore a broad-brimmed brown hat
with a red-and-black band, and his legs were usually incased either in coarse
cloth gaiters or in long stout boots without heels.

His vocation was that of a mountain guide in the district of the Telemark, and
even in the Hardanger. Always ready to start, and untiring in his exertions, he
was a worthy descendant of the Norwegian hero Rollo, the walker, celebrated in
the legends of that country. Between times he accompanied English sportsmen
who repair to that region to shoot the riper, a species of ptarmigan, larger than
that found in the Hebrides, and the jerpir, a partridge much more delicate in its
flavor than the grouse of Scotland. When winter came, the hunting of wolves
engrossed his attention, for at that season of the year these fierce animals,
emboldened by hunger, not unfrequently venture out upon the surface of the
frozen lake. Then there was bear hunting in summer, when that animal,
accompanied by her young, comes to secure its feast of fresh grass, and when
one must pursue it over plateaus at an altitude of from ten to twelve thousand
feet. More than once Joel had owed his life solely to the great strength that
enabled him to endure the embraces of these formidable animals, and to the
imperturbable coolness which enabled him to eventually dispatch them.

But when there was neither tourist nor hunter to be guided through the valley
of the Vesfjorddal, Joel devoted his attention to the soetur, the little mountain
farm where a young shepherd kept guard over half a dozen cows and about thirty
sheep--a soetur consisting exclusively of pasture land.

Joel, being naturally very pleasant and obliging, was known and loved in
every village in the Telemark; but two persons for whom he felt a boundless
affection were his cousin Ole and his sister Hulda.

When Ole Kamp left Dal to embark for the last time, how deeply Joel
regretted his inability to dower Hulda and thus avert the necessity for her lover's
departure! In fact, if he had been accustomed to the sea, he would certainly have
gone in his cousin's place. But money was needed to start them in housekeeping,
and as Dame Hansen had offered no assistance, Joel understood only too well
that she did not feel inclined to devote any portion of the estate to that purpose,
so there was nothing for Ole to do but cross the broad Atlantic.

Joel had accompanied him to the extreme end of the valley on his way to
Bergen, and there, after a long embrace, he wished him a pleasant journey and a
speedy return, and then returned to console his sister, whom he loved with an
affection which was at the same time fraternal and paternal in its character.

Hulda at that time was exactly eighteen years of age. She was not the piga,
as the servant in a Norwegian inn is called, but rather the froken, the young lady


of the house, as her mother was the madame. What a charming face was hers,
framed in a wealth of pale golden hair, under a thin linen cap projecting in the
back to give room for the long plaits of hair! What a lovely form incased in this
tightly fitting bodice of red stuff, ornamented with green shoulder-straps and
surmounted by a snowy chemisette, the sleeves of which were fastened at the
wrist by a ribbon bracelet! What grace and perfect symmetry in the waist,
encircled by a red belt with clasps of silver filigree which held in place the dark-
green skirt, below which appeared the white stocking protected by the dainty
pointed toed shoe of the Telemark!

Yes, Ole's betrothed was certainly charming, with the slightly melancholy
expression of the daughters of the North softening her smiling face; and on
seeing her one instantly thought of Hulda the Fair, whose name she bore, and
who figures as the household fairy in Scandinavian mythology.

Nor did the reserve of a chaste and modest maiden mar the grace with which
she welcomed the guests who came to the inn. She was well known to the world
of tourists; and it was not one of the smallest attractions of the inn to be greeted
by that cordial shake of the hand that Hulda bestowed on one and all. And after
having said to her, "Tack for mad" (Thanks for the meal), what could be more
delightful than to hear her reply in her fresh sonorous voice: "Wed bekomme!"
(May it do you good!)


CHAPTER IV.

Ole Kamp had been absent a year; and as he said in his letter, his winter's
experience on the fishing banks of Newfoundland had been a severe one. When
one makes money there one richly earns it. The equinoctial storms that rage
there not unfrequently destroy a whole fishing fleet in a few hours; but fish
abound, and vessels which escape find ample compensation for the toil and
dangers of this home of the tempest.

Besides, Norwegians are excellent seamen, and shrink from no danger. In the
numberless fiords that extend from Christiansand to Cape North, among the
dangerous reefs of Finland, and in the channels of the Loffoden Islands,
opportunities to familiarize themselves with the perils of ocean are not wanting;
and from time immemorial they have given abundant proofs of their courage.
Their ancestors were intrepid mariners at an epoch when the Hanse monopolized
the commerce of northern Europe. Possibly they were a trifle prone to indulge in
piracy in days gone by, but piracy was then quite common. Doubtless commerce
has reformed since then, though one may perhaps be pardoned for thinking that
there is still room for improvement.


However that may be, the Norwegians were certainly fearless seamen; they
are to-day, and so they will ever be. Ole Kamp was not the man to belie his
origin; besides, he had served his apprenticeship under his father, who was the
master of a Bergen coasting vessel. His childhood had been spent in that port,
which is one of the most frequented in Scandinavia. Before he ventured out upon
the open sea he had been an untiring fisher in the fiords, and a fearless robber of
the sea-birds' nests, and when he became old enough to serve as cabin-boy he
made a voyage across the North Sea and even to the waters of the Polar Ocean.

Soon afterward his father died, and as he had lost his mother several years
before, his uncle Harald Hansen invited him to become a member of his family,
which he did, though he continued to follow the same calling.

In the intervals between his voyages he invariably spent his time with the
friends he loved; but he made regular voyages upon large fishing vessels, and
rose to the rank of mate when he was but twenty-one. He was now twenty-three
years of age.

When he visited Dal, Joel found him a most congenial companion. He
accompanied him on his excursions to the mountains, and across the highest
table-lands of the Telemark. The young sailor seemed as much at home in the
fields as in the fiords, and never lagged behind unless it was to keep his cousin
Hulda company.

A close friendship gradually sprung up between Joel and Ole, and quite
naturally the same sentiment assumed a different form in respect to the young
girl. Joel, of course, encouraged it. Where would his sister ever find a better
fellow, a more sympathetic nature, a warmer and more devoted heart? With Ole
for a husband, Hulda's happiness was assured. So it was with the entire approval
of her mother and brother that the young girl followed the natural promptings of
her heart. Though these people of the North are undemonstrative, they must not
be accused of a want of sensibility. No! It is only their way; and perhaps their
way is as good as any other, after all.

So it came to pass that one day, when all four of them were sitting quietly
together, Ole remarked, without any preamble whatever:

"An idea occurs to me, Hulda."

"What is it?"

"Tt seems to me that we ought to marry."

"T think so too."

"And so do I," added Dame Hansen as coolly as if the matter had been under
discussion for some time.

"I agree with you," remarked Joel, "and in that case I shall naturally become
your brother-in-law."


"Yes," said Ole; "but it is probable that I shall only love you the better for it."

"That is very possible."

"We have your consent, then?"

"Upon my word! nothing would please me better," replied Joel.

"So it is decided, Hulda?" inquired Dame Hansen.

"Yes, mother,” replied the girl, quietly.

"You are really willing?" asked Ole. "I have loved you a long time, Hulda,
without saying so."

"And I you, Ole."

"How it came about, I really do not know."

"Nor [."

"But it was doubtless seeing you grow more beautiful and good day by day."

"That is saying a little too much, my dear Ole."

"No; I certainly ought to be able to say that without making you blush, for it
is only the truth. Didn't you see that I was beginning to love Hulda, Dame
Hansen?"

"I suspected as much."

"And you, Joel?"

"I was sure of it."

"Then I certainly think that you ought to have warned me," said Ole, smiling.

"But how about your voyages, Ole?" inquired Dame Hansen. "Won't they
seem intolerable to you after you are married?"

"So intolerable that I shall not follow the sea any more after my marriage."

"You will not go to sea any more?"

"No, Hulda. Do you think it would be possible for me to leave you for
months at a time?"

"So this is to be your last voyage?"

"Yes, and if we have tolerable luck, this voyage will yield me quite a snug
little sum of money, for Help Bros. have promised me a share in the profits."

"They are good men," remarked Joel.

"The best men living," replied Ole, "and well known and highly respected by
all the sailors of Bergen."

"But what do you expect to do after you cease to follow the sea, my dear
Ole?" inquired Hulda.

"[ shall go into partnership with Joel in his business, I have pretty good legs,
and if they are not good enough, I will improve them by going into regular
training. Besides, I have thought of a plan which will not prove a bad one
perhaps. Why can't we establish a messenger service between Drammen,
Kongsberg and a few other towns in the Telemark Communication now is


neither easy nor regular, and there might be money in the scheme. Besides, I
have other plans, to say nothing of--"

"Of what?"

"Never mind, now. I will tell you on my return. But I warn you that I am
firmly resolved to make my Hulda the happiest woman in the country. Yes, I
am."

"If you but knew how easy that will be!" replied Hulda, offering him her
hand. "Am I not that already, and is there a home in all Dal as pleasant as ours?"

Dame Hansen hastily averted her head.

"So the matter is settled?" asked Ole, cheerfully.

"Yes," replied Joel.

"And settled beyond recall?"

"Certainly."

"And you feel no regret, Hulda?"

"None whatever, my dear Ole."

"I think, however, that it would be better not to appoint the day for your
marriage until after your return," remarked Joel.

"Very well, but it will go hard with me if I do not return in less than a year to
lead Hulda to the church at Moel, where our friend, Pastor Andersen, will not
refuse to make his best prayer for us!"

And it was in this way that the marriage of Hulda Hansen and Ole Kamp had
been decided upon.

The young sailor was to go aboard his vessel a week later; but before they
parted the lovers were formally betrothed in accordance with the touching
custom of Scandinavian countries.

In simple and honest Norway lovers are almost invariably publicly betrothed
before marriage. Sometimes the marriage is not solemnized until two or three
years afterward, but one must not suppose that the betrothal is simply an
interchange of vows which depend only upon the honesty of the parties
interested. No, the obligation is much more sacred, and even if this act of
betrothal is not binding in the eyes of the law, it is, at least, so regarded by that
universal law called custom.

So, in this case, it was necessary to make arrangements for a ceremony over
which Pastor Andersen should preside. There was no minister in Dal, nor in any
of the neighboring hamlets. In Norway they have what they call Sunday towns,
in which the minister resides, and where the leading families of the parish
assemble for worship. They even lease apartments there, in which they take up
their abode for twenty-four hours or more--time to perform their religious duties-
-and people return from the town as from a pilgrimage.


Dal, it is true, boasted of a chapel, but the pastor came only when he was
summoned.

After all, Moel was not far off, only about eight miles distant, at the end of
Lake Tinn, and Pastor Andersen was a very obliging man, and a good walker; so
the worthy minister was invited to attend the betrothal in the twofold capacity of
minister and family friend. The acquaintance was one of long standing. He had
seen Joel and Hulda grow up, and loved them as well as he loved that young sea-
dog, Ole Kamp, so the news of the intended marriage was very pleasing to him.

So Pastor Andersen gathered together his robe, his collar, and his prayer-
book, and started off for Dal one misty, moisty morning. He arrived there in the
company of Joel, who had gone half-way to meet him, and it is needless to say
that his coming was hailed with delight at Dame Hansen's inn, that he had the
very best room in the house, and that the floor was freshly strewn with twigs of
juniper that perfumed it like a chapel.

At one o'clock on the following day the little church was thrown open, and
there, in the presence of the pastor and a few friends and neighbors, Ole and
Hulda solemnly promised to wed each other when the young sailor should return
from the last voyage he intended to make. A year is a long time to wait, but it
passes all the same, nor is it intolerable when two persons can trust each other.

And now Ole could not, without good cause, forsake her to whom he had
plighted his troth, nor could Hulda retract the promise she had given to Ole; and
if Ole had not left Norway a few days after the betrothal, he might have profited
by the incontestable right it gave him to visit the young girl whenever he
pleased, to write to her whenever he chose, walk out with her arm in arm,
unaccompanied by any member of the family, and enjoy a preference over all
others in the dances that form a part of all fétes and ceremonies.

But Ole Kamp had been obliged to return to Bergen, and one week afterward
the "Viking" set sail for the fishing banks of Newfoundland, and Hulda could
only look forward to the letters which her betrothed had promised to send her by
every mail.

And these impatiently expected letters never failed her, and always brought a
ray of happiness to the house which seemed so gloomy after the departure of one
of its inmates. The voyage was safely accomplished; the fishing proved
excellent, and the profits promised to be large. Besides, at the end of each letter,
Ole always referred to a certain secret, and of the fortune it was sure to bring
him. It was a secret that Hulda would have been glad to know, and Dame
Hansen, too, for reasons one would not have been likely to suspect.

Dame Hansen seemed to have become even more gloomy and anxious and
reticent than ever, and a circumstance which she did not see fit to mention to her


children increased her anxiety very considerably.

Three days after the arrival of Ole's last letter, as Dame Hansen was
returning alone from the saw-mill, to which place she had gone to order a bag of
shavings from the foreman, Lengling, she was accosted near her own door by a
man who was a stranger in that part of the country.

"This is Dame Hansen, is it not?" he inquired.

"Yes; but I do not know you," was the reply.

"That doesn't matter,” rejoined the man. "I arrived here only this morning
from Drammen, and am now on my way back."

"From Drammen?" repeated Dame Hansen, quickly.

"You are acquainted, I think, with a certain Monsieur Sandgoist, who lives
there?"

"Monsieur Sandgoist!" repeated Dame Hansen, whose face paled at the
name. "Yes, I know him."

"Ah, well! When Monsieur Sandgoist heard that I was coming to Dal, he
asked me to give his respects to you."

"Was that all?"

"And to say to you that it was more than probable that he would pay you a
visit next month. Good health to you, and good-evening, Dame Hansen."


CHAPTER V.

Hulda was considerably surprised at the persistency with which Ole alluded
in his letters to the fortune that was to be his on his return. Upon what did the
young man base his expectations? Hulda could not imagine, and she was very
anxious to know. Was this anxiety due solely to an idle curiosity on her part? By
no means, for the secret certainly affected her deeply. Not that she was
ambitious, this modest and honest young girl; nor did she in looking forward to
the future ever aspire to what we call wealth. Ole's affection satisfied, and would
always satisfy her. If wealth came, she would welcome it with joy. If it did not
come, she would still be content.

This is precisely what Hulda and Joel said to each other the day after Ole's
last letter reached Dal. They agreed perfectly upon this subject, as upon all
others, by the way. And then Joel added:

"No; it is impossible, little sister. You certainly must be keeping something
from me."

"Keeping something from you!"

"Yes; for I can not believe that Ole went away without giving you some clew
to his secret."


"Did he say anything to you about it?"

"No; but you and I are not one and the same person."

"Yes, we are, brother."

"T am not Ole's betrothed, at all events."

"Almost," said the young girl; "and if any misfortune should befall him, and
he should not return from this voyage, you would be as inconsolable as I would
be, and your tears would flow quite as freely as mine."

"Really, little sister. I forbid you to even speak of such a thing,” replied Joel.
"Ole not return from his last voyage to the great fishing banks! What can have
put such an idea into your head? You surely can not mean what you say, Hulda!"

"No, certainly not. And yet, I do not know. I can not drive away certain
presentiments--the result, perhaps, of bad dreams."

"Dreams are only dreams."

"True, brother, but where do they come from?"

"From ourselves, not from heaven. You are anxious, and so your fears haunt
you in your slumber. Besides, it is almost always so when one has earnestly
desired a thing and the time when one's desires are to be realized is
approaching."

"T know it, Joel."

"Really, I thought you were much more sensible, little sister. Yes, and more
energetic. Here you have just received a letter from Joel saying that the 'Viking'
will return before the end of the month, and it is now the 19th of April, and
consequently none too soon for you to begin your preparations for the wedding."

"Do you really think so, Joel?"

"Certainly I think so, Hulda. I even think that we have delayed too long
already. Think of it. We must have a wedding that will not only create a
sensation in Dal, but in all the neighboring villages. I intend it shall be the
grandest one ever known in the district, so I am going to set to work
immediately."

An affair of this kind is always a momentous occasion in all the country
districts of Norway, particularly in the Telemark, so that every day Joel had a
conversation with his mother on the subject. It was only a few moments after
Dame Hansen's meeting with the stranger, whose message had so deeply agitated
her, and though she had seated herself at her spinning-wheel as usual, it would
have been plain to a close observer that her thoughts were far away.

Even Joel noticed that his mother seemed even more despondent than usual,
but as she invariably replied that there was nothing the matter with her when she
was questioned on the subject, her son decided to speak only of Hulda's
marriage.


"Mother," he began, "you, of course, recollect that Ole announced in his last
letter that he should probably return to Dal in a few weeks."

"It is certainly to be hoped that he will," replied Dame Hansen, "and that
nothing will occur to occasion any further delay."

"Do you see any objection to our fixing upon the twenty-fifth of May as the
day of the marriage?"

"None, whatever, if Hulda is willing."

"Her consent is already given. And now I think I had better ask you, mother,
if you do not intend to do the handsome thing on that occasion?"

"What do you mean by the handsome thing?" retorted Dame Hansen, without
raising her eyes from her spinning-wheel.

"Why, I am anxious, if you approve, of course, that the wedding should
correspond with the position we hold in the neighborhood. We ought to invite all
our friends to it, and if our own house is not large enough to accommodate them,
our neighbors, I am sure, will be glad to lodge our guests."

"Who will these guests be, Joel?"

"Why, I think we ought to invite all our friends from Moel, Tiness and
Bamble. I will attend to that. I think, too, that the presence of Help Bros., the
shipowners, would be an honor to the family, and with your consent, I repeat, I
will invite them to spend a day with us at Dal. They are very fine men, and they
think a great deal of Ole, so I am almost sure that they will accept the invitation."

"Is it really necessary to make this marriage such an important event?"
inquired Dame Hansen, coldly.

"I think so, mother, if only for the sake of our inn, which I am sure has
maintained its old reputation since my father's death."

"Yes, Joel, yes."

"And it seems to me that it is our duty to at least keep it up to the standard at
which he left it; consequently, I think it would be advisable to give considerable
publicity to my sister's marriage."

"So be it, Joel."

"And do you not agree with me in thinking that it is quite time for Hulda to
begin her preparations, and what do you say to my suggestion?"

"T think that you and Hulda must do whatever you think necessary," replied
Dame Hansen.


Perhaps the reader will think that Joel was in too much of a hurry, and that it
would have been much more sensible in him to have waited until Ole's return
before appointing the wedding-day, and beginning to prepare for it, but as he
said, what was once done would not have to be done over again; besides, the
countless details connected with a ceremonial of this kind would serve to divert
Hulda's mind from these forebodings for which there seemed to be no
foundation.

The first thing to be done was to select the bride's maid of honor. That
proved an easy matter, however, for Hulda's choice was already made. The
bride-maid, of course, must be Hulda's intimate friend, Farmer Helmboe's
daughter. Her father was a prominent man, and the possessor of a very
comfortable fortune. For a long time he had fully appreciated Joel's sterling
worth, and his daughter Siegfrid's appreciation, though of a rather different
nature, was certainly no less profound; so it was quite probable that at no very
distant day after Siegfrid had served as Hulda's maid of honor, Hulda, in turn,
would act in the same capacity for her friend. This is the custom in Norway,
where these pleasant duties are generally reserved for married women, so it was
rather on Joel's account that Siegfrid Helmboe was to serve Hulda Hansen in this
Capacity.

A question of vital importance to the bride-maid as well as to the bride, is the
toilet to be worn on the day of the wedding.

Siegfrid, a pretty blonde of eighteen summers, was firmly resolved to appear
to the best possible advantage on the occasion. Warned by a short note from her
friend Hulda--Joel had kindly made himself responsible for its safe delivery--she
immediately proceeded to devote her closest attention to this important work.

In the first place, an elaborately embroidered bodice must be made to incase
Siegfrid's charming figure as if in a coat of enamel. There was also much talk
about a skirt composed of a series of jupons which should correspond in number
with the wearer's fortune, but in no way detract from her charms of person. As
for jewelry, it was no easy matter to select the design of the collar of silver
filigree, set with pearls, the heart-shaped ear-rings, the double buttons to fasten
the neck of the chemisette, the belt of red silk or woolen stuff from which
depend four rows of small chains, the finger-rings studded with tiny bangles that
tinkle musically, the bracelets of fretted silver--in short, all the wealth of country
finery in which gold appears only in the shape of the thinnest plating, silver in
the guise of tin and pearls, and diamonds in the shape of wax and crystal beads.
But what does that matter so long as the tout ensemble is pleasing to the eye?
Besides, if necessary, Siegfrid would not hesitate to go to the elegant stores of
M. Benett, in Christiania, to make her purchases. Her father would not object--


far from it! The kind-hearted man allowed his daughter full liberty in such
matters; besides, Siegfrid was sensible enough not to draw too heavily upon her
father's purse, though everything else was of secondary importance provided
Joel would see her at her very best on that particular day.

As for Hulda, her anxiety on the subject was no less serious, for fashions are
pitiless, and give, besides, not a little trouble in the selection of their wedding-
toilet.

Hulda would now be obliged to abandon the long plaits tied with bright
ribbons, which had heretofore hung from under her coquettish cap, the broad belt
with fancy buckles that kept her apron in place upon her scarlet skirt, the girdle
to which were appended several small embroidered leather cases containing a
silver tea-spoon, knife, fork, needle-case and scissors--articles which a woman
makes constant use of in the household.

No, on the fast approaching day of the nuptials, Hulda's hair would be
allowed to float down upon her shoulders, and it was so abundant that it would
not be necessary for her to have recourse to the jute switches used by Norwegian
girls less favored by nature. Indeed, for her clothing, as well as for her
omaments, Hulda would only be obliged to resort to her mother's big chest. In
fact, these articles of clothing are transmitted from marriage to marriage through
all the different generations of the same family. So one sees reappearing again
and again upon the scene the bodice embroidered in gold, the velvet sash, the
skirt of striped silk, the gold chain for the neck, and the crown--the famous
Scandinavian crown--carefully preserved in the most secure of all the chests, and
made of pasteboard covered with embossed gilt paper, and studded with stars, or
garlanded with leaves--that takes the place of the wreath of orange-blossoms
worn by brides in other European countries.

In this case the crowned betrothed, as the bride is styled, would certainly do
honor to her husband; and he would be worthy of her in his gay wedding suit: a
short jacket trimmed with silver buttons, silk-embroidered waistcoat, tight
breeches fastened at the knee with a bunch of bright ribbons, a soft felt hat,
yellow top-boots, and in his belt the Scandinavian knife--the dolknife--with
which the true Norwegian is always provided.

Consequently, there was plenty to occupy the attention of the young ladies
for some time to come. Two or three weeks would barely suffice if they wished
to have everything in readiness before Ole's return; but even if Ole should arrive
sooner than he expected, and Hulda should not be quite ready, she would not be
inconsolable, nor would he.

The last weeks of April and the first weeks of May were devoted to these
matters. Joel assumed charge of the invitations, taking advantage of the fact that


his vocation of guide gave him considerable leisure at this season of the year.
One would have supposed that he had a large number of friends in Bamble, for
he went there very often. He had already written to Help Bros., inviting them to
attend his sister's wedding, and in accordance with his prediction, these worthy
shipowners had promptly accepted the invitation.

The fifteenth of May came, and any day now they might expect Ole to alight
from his kariol, throw open the door, and shout in his hearty, cheerful voice:

"It is I! Here I am!"

A little patience was all that was needed now, for everything was in
readiness, and Siegfrid needed only a word to appear before them in all her
splendor.

The 16th and 17th passed, and still no Ole, nor did the postman bring any
letter from Newfoundland.

"There is no cause for anxiety, little sister," Joel said, again and again. "A
sailing-vessel is always subject to delays. It is a long way from St. Pierre-
Miquelon to Bergen. How I wish the 'Viking' were a steamer and I the engine.
How I would drive along against wind and tide, even if I should burst my boiler
on coming into port."

He said all this because he saw very plainly that Hulda's uneasiness was
increasing from day to day.

Just at this time, too, the weather was very bad in the Telemark. Violent gales
swept the high table-lands, and these winds, which blew from the west, came
from America.

"They ought to have hastened the arrival of the 'Viking,"" the young girl
repeated again and again.

"Yes, little sister," replied Joel; "but they are so strong that they may have
hindered its progress, and compelled it to face the gale. People can't always do as
they like upon the sea."

"So you are not uneasy, Joel?"

"No, Hulda, no. It is annoying, of course, but these delays are very common.
No; I am not uneasy, for there is really not the slightest cause for anxiety."

On the 19th a traveler arrived at the inn, and asked for a guide to conduct
him over the mountains to the Hardanger, and though Joel did not like the idea of
leaving Hulda, he could not refuse his services. He would only be absent forty-
eight hours at the longest, and he felt confident that he should find Ole at Dal on
his return, though, to tell the truth, the kind-hearted youth was beginning to feel
very uneasy. Still, he started off early the next morning, though with a heavy
heart, we must admit.

On the following day, at precisely one o'clock, a loud rap resounded at the


door of the inn.

"It is Ole!" cried Hulda.

She ran to the door.

There, in a kariol, sat a man enveloped in a traveling-cloak, a man whose
face was unknown to her.


CHAPTER VI.

"Is this Dame Hansen's inn?" he asked.

"Yes, sir," answered Hulda.

"Is Dame Hansen at home?"

"No; but she will soon return, and if you wish to speak to her--"

"I do not. There is nothing I want to say to her."

"Would you like a room?"

"Yes; the best in the house."

"Shall we prepare dinner for you?"

"As soon as possible, and see to it that everything is of the very best quality."

These remarks were exchanged between Hulda and the traveler before the
latter had alighted from the kariol, in which he had journeyed to the heart of the
Telemark across the forests, lakes, and valleys of Central Norway.

Every one who has visited Scandinavia is familiar with the kariol, the means
of locomotion so dear to the hearts of her people. Two long shafts, between
which trots a horse wearing a square wooden collar, painted yellow and striped
with black, and guided with a simple rope passed, not through his mouth, but
around his nose, two large, slender wheels, whose springless axle supports a
small gay-colored, shell-shaped wagon-body, scarcely large enough to hold one
person--no covering, no dash-board, no step--but behind, a board upon which the
skydskarl perches himself. The whole vehicle strongly reminds one of an
enormous spider between two huge cobwebs represented by the wheels of the
vehicle.

At a sign from the traveler the skydskar!l sprung to the horse's head, and the
stranger rose, straightened himself out, and finally alighted, though not without
some difficulty, judging from two or three muttered curses.

"Will they put my kariol under shelter?" he asked, curtly, pausing upon the
threshold.

"Yes, sir," replied Hulda.

"And find my horse?"

"T will have him put in the stable immediately."

"Have him well cared for."


"Certainly, sir. May I ask if you intend to remain in Dal several days?"

"T don't know yet."

The kariol and horse were taken to a small barn built under the shelter of
some trees at the foot of the mountain. It was the only stable connected with the
inn, but it sufficed for the requirements of its guests.

In a few moments the traveler was duly installed in the best chamber, where,
after removing his cloak, he proceeded to warm himself before the fire he had
ordered lighted. In the meantime, Hulda, to satisfy this exacting guest, bade the
piga (a sturdy peasant-girl, who helped in the kitchen, and did the rough work of
the inn during the summer) prepare the best dinner possible.

A strong, hardy man was this new-comer, though he had already passed his
sixtieth year. Thin, slightly round-shouldered, of medium stature, with an
angular head, smoothly shaven face, thin, pointed nose, small eyes that looked
you through and through from behind large spectacles, a forehead generally
contracted by a frown, lips too thin for a pleasant word ever to escape them, and
long, crooked fingers, he was the very personification of an avaricious usurer or
miser, and Hulda felt a presentiment that this stranger would bring no good
fortune to Dame Hansen's house.

He was a Norwegian unquestionably, but one of the very worst type. His
traveling costume consisted of a broad-brimmed, low-crowned hat, a snuff-
colored suit, the breeches fastened at the knee with a leather strap, and over all a
large brown cloak, lined with sheep-skin to protect its wearer from the chilly
night air.

Hulda did not ask him his name, but she would soon learn it, as he would
have to enter it upon the inn register.

Just then Dame Hansen returned, and her daughter announced the arrival of a
guest who demanded the best room and the best food that the inn afforded, but
who vouchsafed no information in regard to the probable length of his stay.

"And he did not give his name?" asked Dame Hansen.

"No, mother."

"Nor say whence he came?"

"No."

"If he is not a tourist, what can have brought him to Dal?" said Dame Hansen
to herself rather than to her daughter, and in a tone that indicated some
uneasiness.

But Hulda could not answer this question, as the new-comer had acquainted
her with none of his plans.

About an hour after his arrival the man came out into the main hall, from
which his door opened, but seeing Dame Hansen sitting there, he paused upon


the threshold.

Evidently he was as much of a stranger to his hostess as his hostess was to
him; but he finally walked toward her, and after a long look at her from over his
spectacles:

"You are Dame Hansen, I suppose?" he said, without even touching the hat
he had not yet removed from his head.

"Yes, sir."

In the presence of this man the widow, strange to say, experienced, like her
daughter, an uneasiness for which she could not account, but which her guest
must have noticed.

"So you are really Dame Hansen, of Dal?" he continued.

"Certainly, sir. Have you anything particular to say to me?"

"Nothing; I only wished to make your acquaintance. Am I not your guest?
And now I should like you to see that I have my dinner as soon as possible."

"Your dinner is ready," interposed Hulda, "and if you will step into the
dining-room--"

"T will."

As he spoke, the stranger directed his steps toward the door indicated, and a
moment afterward he was seated near the window in front of a small, neatly
spread table.

The dinner was certainly good. The most fastidious traveler could not have
found fault with it; nevertheless, this ill-tempered individual was not sparing in
his signs and words of dissatisfaction--especially signs, for he did not appear to
be very loquacious. One could hardly help wondering whether this fault-finding
was due to a poor digestion or a bad temper. The soup of cherries and
gooseberries did not suit him, though it was excellent, and he scarcely tasted his
salmon and salt-herring. The cold ham, broiled chicken and nicely seasoned
vegetables did not seem to please him, and his bottle of claret and his half bottle
of champagne seemed to be equally unsatisfactory, though they came from the
best cellars in France; and when the repast was concluded the guest had not even
a "tack for mad" for his hostess.

After dinner the old curmudgeon lighted his pipe and went out for a walk
along the river bank.

On reaching the stream he turned and fixed his eyes upon the inn. He seemed
to be studying it under all its varied aspects, as if trying to form a correct
estimate of its value.

He counted every door and window, and finally on his return to the inn he
stuck his knife into the horizontal beams at its base, as if to test the quality of the
wood and its state of preservation. Could it be that he was trying to find out how


much Dame Hansen's inn was really worth? Did he aspire to become the owner
of it, though it was not for sale? All this was certainly very strange, especially as
he afterward turned his attention to the little yard, the trees and shrubs of which
he counted carefully, and finally measured both sides of the inclosure with
regular strides, after which the movement of his pencil over a page of his
memorandum-book seemed to indicate that he was multiplying one by the other.

All the while Dame Hansen and her daughter were watching him from one of
the windows of the inn. What strange creature was this, and what could be the
object of his visit? It was greatly to be regretted that all this took place during
Joel's absence, especially as the eccentric individual was going to spend the
night at the inn.

"What if he is a madman?" said Hulda.

"A madman? no," replied Dame Hansen. "But he is a very eccentric person,
to say the least."

"It is always unpleasant to be ignorant of the name of the person you are
entertaining," remarked the young girl.

"Before he re-enters the house, Hulda, be sure that you carry the register into
his room. Perhaps he will conclude to write his name in it."

"Yes, mother."

Just at dusk a fine rain began to fall, so the stranger returned to the inn. He
asked for a small glass of brandy, then without saying a word, or even bidding
any one good-night, he took his wooden candlestick, and entering his room
bolted the door behind him, and nothing further was heard from him that night.

The skydskarl had taken refuge in the barn, where he was already sound
asleep in company with the sorrel horse.

Dame Hansen and her daughter rose with the sun the next morning, but no
sound came from the room of their guest, who was probably still sleeping. A
little after nine o'clock he made his appearance even more glum and ill-tempered
than the evening before, complaining that his bed had been hard, and that the
noise in the house had kept, him awake; then he opened the door and looked out
at the sky.

The prospect was not very cheering, certainly, for the wind was blowing a
gale, and the stranger concluded not to venture out. Still he did not waste his
time. With his pipe in his mouth he walked about the inn as if trying to
familiarize himself with the arrangement of the interior. He visited all the
different rooms, examined the furniture, and peered into cupboards and
sideboards with as much coolness as if he had been in his own house.

Though the man was singular in appearance, his actions were certainly even
more singular. Finally he seated himself in the big arm-chair, and proceeded to


question Dame Hansen in a curt, almost rude tone. How long had the inn been
built? Was it her husband that built it, or did he inherit it? How much land was
there around it, and what was the extent of the adjoining souter? Was the inn
well patronized, and did it pay well? How many tourists came there on an
average during the summer? Did they usually spend one or several days there?
etc., etc.

It was evident that the stranger had not looked at the register that had been
placed in his room, for that would have given him all the information he desired
upon this last point.

In fact, the book was still on the table where Hulda had placed it the evening
before, and the traveler's name was not in it.

"I do not understand how and why these matters can interest you, sir," said
Dame Hansen at last; "but if you wish to know the state of our business, nothing
could be easier. You have only to examine the register, in which you would
greatly oblige me by entering your name according to custom."

"My name? I will write my name in it, certainly. I will write it there before I
leave, which will be immediately after breakfast, as I am anxious to get back to
Drammen by to-morrow evening.”

"Drammen!" repeated Dame Hansen, hastily.

"Yes. Will you give me my breakfast as soon as possible?"

"Do you live in Drammen?"

"Yes. May I ask if there is anything astonishing about the fact that I reside in
Drammen?"

So, after spending scarcely twenty-four hours in Dal, or rather at the inn, the
traveler left without making the slightest effort to see anything of the
surrounding country, Gousta, and Rjukanfos, and the wonders of the valley of
the Vesfjorddal were entirely ignored.

It certainly could not have been for pleasure that he left Drammen, so he
must have come on business, and the sole object of his visit seemed to have been
a careful examination of Dame Hansen's establishment.

It was plain to Hulda that her mother was deeply troubled, for she seated
herself in her big arm-chair, and pushing aside her spinning-wheel, remained
there silent and motionless.

In the meantime the traveler had gone into the dining-room and seated
himself at the table. Though the breakfast was as carefully prepared as the dinner
of the evening before, it seemed to give no better satisfaction; and yet the guest
eat and drank in the same leisurely fashion. His attention seemed to be chiefly
bestowed upon the silver--a luxury highly prized among Norwegian peasants,
where the few forks and spoons which are handed down from father to son are


carefully preserved with the family jewels.

Meanwhile the skydskarl busied himself with his preparations for departure;
and by eleven o'clock the horse and kariol were standing before the door of the
inn.

The weather was still threatening; the sky was dull and overcast, and now
and then big drops of rain dashed against the window-panes; but this traveler
with his heavy cloak lined with sheep-skin was not a man to worry about the
weather.

Breakfast over, he called for one more glass of brandy, lighted his pipe, and
put on his coat, then stepping out into the hall he called for his bill.

"I will make it out immediately," replied Hulda, seating herself at a small
desk.

"Be quick about it," said the traveler. "And now," he added, "you had better
bring me your book so I can write my name in it."

Dame Hansen rose and left the room to get the register, which, on her return,
she placed upon the large table.

The stranger picked up a pen and took one more long look at Dame Hansen
over his spectacles; then he wrote his name in a large, round hand, and closed the
book.

Just at that moment Hulda handed him his bill. He took it, examined each
item separately, and then proceeded to add up the figures, grumbling all the
while.

"Hum!" he exclaimed. "This is very dear! Seven marks and a half for a
night's lodging and two meals!"

"You forget the skydskarl and the horse," remarked Hulda.

"Nevertheless, I think your charge very high. I really don't see how you can
expect to prosper if you are so exorbitant in your charges."

"You owe me nothing, sir," said Dame Hansen, in a voice that trembled so
that it was scarcely audible.

She had just opened the register and read the name inscribed upon it, and
now taking the bill and tearing it up, she repeated:

"You owe me nothing.”

"That is exactly my opinion,” replied the stranger.

And without bidding them good-bye on his departure any more than he had
bidden them good-day on his arrival, he climbed into his kariol, and the
skydskarl jumped upon the board behind him. A few seconds later he had
disappeared around a turn in the road. When Hulda opened the book she found
there only this name--

"Sandgoist, from Drammen."


CHAPTER VII.

It was on the afternoon of the following day that Joel was to return home;
and Hulda, who knew that her brother would come back by the table-lands of the
Gousta and along the left bank of the Maan, went to meet him at the ferry across
that impetuous stream. On arriving there she seated herself on the little wharf
which serves as a landing-place for the ferry-boat, and abandoned herself to her
thoughts.

To the deep uneasiness caused by the non-arrival of the "Viking" was now
added another great anxiety. This last was caused by the mysterious visit of
Sandgoist, and Dame Hansen's agitation in his presence. Why had she destroyed
the bill and declined to accept the money due her as soon as she learned her
guest's name? There must be some secret concealed under all this--and a grave
one.

Hulda was finally aroused from her reverie by the approach of Joel. She first
caught a glimpse of him as he was descending the topmost slope; soon he
reappeared in the midst of a narrow clearing between the burned and fallen trees.
Then he vanished from sight behind a clump of pines, and at last reached the
opposite bank and jumped aboard the ferry-boat. With a few vigorous strokes of
the oar he propelled the boat swiftly through the rapids, and then leaped upon the
little pier beside his sister.

"Has Ole returned?" he asked, hastily.

It was of Ole that he thought first of all; but his question remained
unanswered.

"Have you received no letter from him?"

"Not one."

And Hulda burst into tears.

"Don't cry, little sister," exclaimed Joel, "don't cry. You make me wretched. I
can not bear to see you weep. Let me see! You say you have received no letter.
The matter is beginning to look a little serious, I must admit, though there is no
reason to despair as yet. If you desire it, I will go to Bergen, and make inquiries
there. I will call on Help Bros. Possibly they may have some news from
Newfoundland. It is quite possible that the 'Viking' may have put into some port
for repairs, or on account of bad weather. The wind has been blowing a hurricane
for more than a week, and not unfrequently ships from Newfoundland take
refuge in Iceland, or at the Faroe Islands. This very thing happened to Ole two
years ago, when he was on board the 'Strenna,’ you remember. I am only saying
what I really think, little sister. Dry your eyes. If you make me lose heart what


will become of us?"

"But I can't help it, Joel."

"Hulda! Hulda! do not lose courage. I assure you that I do not despair, not by
any Means."

"Can I really believe you, Joel?"

"Yes, you can. Now, to reassure you, shall I start for Bergen to-morrow
morning, or this very evening?"

"No, no, you must not leave me! No, you must not!" sobbed Hulda, clinging
to her brother as if he was the only friend she had left in the world.

They started toward the inn. Joel sheltered his sister from the rain as well as
he could, but the wind soon became so violent that they were obliged to take
refuge in the hut of the ferryman, which stood a few hundred yards from the
bank of the Maan.

There they were obliged to remain until the wind abated a little, and Joel was
glad of an opportunity to have a longer conversation with his sister.

"How does mother seem?" he inquired.

"Even more depressed in spirits than usual," replied Hulda.

"Has any one been here during my absence?"

"Yes, one traveler, but he has gone away."

"So there is no tourist at the inn now, and no one has asked for a guide?"

"No, Joel."

"So much the better, for I would much rather not leave you. Besides, if this
unpleasant weather continues, it is not likely that many tourists will visit the
Telemark this season. But tell me, was it yesterday that your guest left Dal?"

"Yes, yesterday moming."

"Who was he?"

"A man who resides in Drammen, and whose name is Sandgoist."

"Sandgoist?"”

"Do you know him?"

"No."

Hulda had asked herself more than once if she should tell her brother all that
had occurred in his absence. When Joel heard how coolly their guest had
conducted himself, and how he seemed to have come merely to appraise the
house and its contents, what would he think? Would not he, too, fear that his
mother must have had grave reasons for acting as she had? What were these
reasons? What could there be in common between her and Sandgoist? Joel
would certainly desire to know, and would be sure to question his mother, and as
Dame Hansen, who was always so uncommunicative, would doubtless persist in
the silence she had maintained hitherto, the relations between her and her


children, which were so unnatural and constrained now, would become still more
unpleasant.

But would Hulda be able to keep anything from Joel? A secret from him!
Would it not be a violation of the close friendship that united them? No, this
friendship must never be broken! So Hulda suddenly resolved to tell him all.

"Have you ever heard any one speak of this Sandgoist when you were in
Drammen?" she asked.

"Never."

"But our mother knew him, Joel; at least by name."

"She knew Sandgoist?"

"Yes."

"T certainly never heard the name before."

"But she has, though she had never seen the man until day before yesterday."

Then Hulda related all the incidents that had marked Sandgoist's sojourn at
the inn, not neglecting to mention Dame Hansen's singular conduct at the
moment of his departure. Then she hastened to add:

"I think, Joel, it would be best not to say anything to mother about it at
present. You know her disposition, and it would only make her still more
unhappy. The future will probably reveal what has been concealed from us in the
past. Heaven grant that Ole may be restored to us, and then if any misfortune
should befall the family there will at least be three of us to share it."

Joel had listened to his sister with profound attention. Yes, it was evident that
Dame Hansen must be at this man's mercy, and it was impossible to doubt that
he had come to take an inventory of the property. And the destruction of the bill
at the time of his departure--a destruction that seemed only right and proper to
him--what could be the meaning of that?

"You are right, Hulda," said Joel. "I had better not say anything to mother
about it. Perhaps she will feel sorry by and by that she has not confided in us.
Heaven grant that it may not be too late! She must be wretched, poor woman!
How strange it is that she can not understand that her children were born to
sympathize with her."

"She will find it out some day, Joel."

"Yes; so let us wait patiently, little sister. Still, there is no reason why I
should not try to find out who the man is. Perhaps Farmer Helmboe knows him.
I will ask him the first time I go to Bamble, and if need be I will push on to
Drammen. There it will not be difficult for me to at least learn what the man
does, and what people think of him."

"They do not think well of him, I am sure," replied Hulda. "His face is very
unprepossessing, and I shall be very much surprised if there is a noble soul


concealed under such a repulsive exterior."

"Come, come, little sister, it will not do to judge people by outward
appearances,” exclaimed Joel. "Don't be so suspicious, Hulda, and cheer up. Ole
will soon be with us, and we will scold him roundly for having kept us waiting."

The rain having ceased the pair left the hut and started up the path leading to
the inn.

"By the way, I must go away again to-morrow, little sister," said Joel.

"Go away again to-morrow!" repeated Hulda.

"Yes, early in the morning. On leaving the Hardanger I was informed by a
comrade that a traveler, coming from the north by way of the Rjukanfos would
arrive to-morrow."

"Who is this traveler?"

"T don't know his name, but I must be on hand to conduct him to Dal."

"Ah, well! go, then, as there is no help for it," replied Hulda, with a sigh.

"Yes, I must start to-morrow at sunrise. Do you really feel so badly about it,
Hulda?"

"Yes, brother, I feel much more unhappy when you leave me, even if it is
only for a few hours."

"Ah, well, this time I shall not go alone."

"Why, who is to accompany you?"

"You, little sister. You need diversion, and I am going to take you with me."

"Oh, thank you, Joel, thank you!"


CHAPTER VIII.

The brother and sister left the inn at sunrise the next moming. The fifteen
mile walk from Dal to the celebrated falls of the Rjukan, and back again, was a
mere trifle for Joel, but it was necessary to economize Hulda's strength, so Joel
hired foreman Lengling's kariol. This, like all kariols, had but one seat, but the
worthy man was so large that he had been obliged to have his kariol built to
order, and this being the case the vehicle was large enough to enable Hulda and
Joel to sit side by side quite comfortably; and if the expected tourist was waiting
for them at Rjukanfos as they anticipated, he could take Joel's place and the
latter could either return afoot or mounted upon the step behind the kariol.

The road from Dal to the falls is very rough but indescribably charming. It is
really rather a footpath than a road. The bridges across the countless streams that
dance merrily along to the Maan are all constructed of unhewn logs, but the
Norwegian horse traverses them with a sure step, and though the kariol has no
springs, its long and slightly elastic shafts soften the jolting at least to some


extent.

The day was charming, and Hulda and Joel drove along at a brisk pace
through the flowery fields, bathed on the left by the clear waters of the Maan.
Clumps of birches here and there shaded the sunny road, and the dew still
glittered on the blades of grass. To the right of the torrent towered the snow-clad
summit of the Gousta, which rises to an altitude of six thousand feet.

For nearly an hour, the vehicle moved on rapidly, the ascent being
comparatively slight; but soon the valley became narrower, the gay rivulets were
transformed into foaming torrents, and though the road wound in and out it could
not avoid all the inequalities of the ground. Beyond came really dangerous
passes, through which Joel guided the vehicle with no little skill; besides, with
him Hulda feared nothing. When the road was very rough she clung to his arm,
and the freshness of the morning air brought a glow to the pretty face which had
been unusually pale for some time.

But it was necessary for them to ascend to still greater heights, for the valley
here contracted into merely a narrow channel for the passage of the river, a
channel inclosed on either side by massive walls of rock. Over the neighboring
fields were scattered a few dilapidated farm-houses, the remains of soeters,
which were now abandoned, and a few shepherd's huts almost hidden from view
by clumps of birches and oaks. Soon it became impossible for them to see the
river, though they could distinctly hear it dashing along in its rocky channel, and
the country assumed an indescribably wild and imposing aspect.

A drive of two hours brought them to a rough saw-mill perched upon the
edge of a water-fall at least fifteen hundred feet in height. Water-falls of this
height are by no means rare in the Vesfjorddal, but the volume of water is
usually small. This is not the case with the falls of the Rjukanfos however.

On reaching the saw-mill, Joel and Hulda both alighted.

"A half hour's walk will not be too much for you, will it, little sister?" asked
Joel.

"No, brother; I am not tired, and a little exercise will do me good."

"Tt will be a good deal instead of a little, for you will have some pretty hard
climbing to do."

"IT can cling to your arm, Joel."

It was evident that the kariol must be abandoned at this point, for it would be
impossible for it to make its way through the rough paths, the narrow passes, and
over the big, fantastically shaped rocks that heralded the close proximity of the
great falls.

Already, they could see in the distance a thick mist, the spray from the
seething waters of Rjukan.


Hulda and Joel took a shady path which is well known to guides, and which
leads to the end of the valley. A few moments afterward they found themselves
upon a moss-covered rock almost in front of the fall. In fact there was no chance
of getting any nearer to it on that side.

The brother and sister would have had considerable difficulty in making
themselves heard if they had wished to speak; but their thoughts were those that
could be exchanged without the agency of the lips.

The volume of the Rjukan fall is enormous, its height very considerable, and
its roar deafening. The earth makes an abrupt descent of nine hundred feet to the
bed of the Maan midway between Lake Mijos and Lake Tinn, nine hundred feet,
that is to say six times the height of Niagara, though the width of this last water-
fall from the American to the Canadian shore is three miles.

The Rjukan is so grand and unique in its aspect that any description falls far
short of the reality, and even a painting can not do justice to it. There are certain
wonders of nature that must be seen if one would form any adequate conception
of their beauty; and this water-fall, which is one of the most widely celebrated in
Europe, belongs to this category.

These were the very thoughts that were passing through the mind of a tourist
who was at that very moment sitting perched upon a rock on the right bank of
the Maan, from which spot he could command a nearer and more extended view
of the fall.

Neither Joel nor his sister had yet noticed him, though he was plainly visible
from the rock on which they were seated.

In a few minutes the traveler rose and very imprudently ventured out upon
the rocky slope that is rounded like a dome on the side next the Maan. What the
adventurous tourist wished to see was evidently the two caverns under the fall,
the one to the left, which is ever filled to the top with a mass of seething foam,
and the one to the right, which is always enshrouded in a heavy mist. Possibly he
was even trying to ascertain if there were not a third cavern midway down the
fall to account for the fact that the Rjukan at intervals projects straight outward
into space a mass of water and spray, making it appear as if the waters had
suddenly been scattered in a fine spray over the surrounding fields by some
terrific explosion in the rear of the fall.

And now the daring tourist was slowly but persistently making his way over
the rough and slippery ledge of rock, destitute alike of shrubbery or grass, know
as the Passe de Marie, or the Maristien.

It is more than probable, however, that he was ignorant of the legend that has
made this pass so widely know. One day Eystein endeavored to reach his
betrothed, the beautiful Marie of Vesfjorddal, by this dangerous path. His


sweetheart was holding out her arms to him from the other side of the gorge,
when suddenly he lost his footing, fell, slipped further and further down the
ledge of rock which is as smooth as glass, and disappeared forever in the
seething rapids of the Maan.

Was this rash traveler about to meet a similar fate?

It seemed only too probable; and in fact he soon perceived the danger of his
position, though not until it was too late. Suddenly his foot slipped, he uttered a
cry, and after rolling nearly twenty feet, he finally succeeded in securing a hold
upon a projecting rock on the very edge of the abyss.

Joel and Hulda, though they had not yet caught sight of him, heard his cry.

"What is that?" exclaimed Joel, springing to his feet.

"A cry!" replied Hulda.

"Yes, a cry of distress."

"From what direction did it come?"

"Let us listen."

Both looked first to the right, and then to the left of the fall, but they saw
nothing, though they had certainly heard the words "Help! help!" uttered during
one of the intervals between each rebound of the Rjukan.

The cry was repeated.

"Joel, some one who is in danger is calling for help," cried Hulda. "We must
go to his aid."

"Yes, sister; and he can not be far off. But in what direction? Where is he? I
see no one."

Hulda hastily climbed a little knoll behind the mossy rock upon which she
had been sitting.

"Joel!" she cried, suddenly.

"Do you see him?"

"There, there!"

As she spoke she pointed to the imprudent man whose body seemed to be
almost overhanging the abyss. If his foothold upon a tiny ledge of rock failed
him, or he was seized with dizziness, he was lost.

"We must save him!" said Hulda.

"Yes," replied Joel, "if we can keep our wits about us we shall perhaps be
able to reach him."

Joel gave a loud shout to attract the attention of the traveler, who
immediately turned his head toward the spot from which the sound proceeded;
then the worthy fellow devoted a few moments to deciding how he could best
rescue the stranger from his dangerous position.

"You are not afraid, are you, Hulda?" he asked.


"No, brother."

"You know the Maristien well, do you not?"

"T have crossed it several times."

"Then walk along the brow of the cliff, gradually getting as near the traveler
as you possibly can; then allow yourself to slide down gently toward him, and
take him by the hand, so as to prevent him from falling any further; but do not let
him try to lift himself up, because if he should be seized with vertigo he would
certainly drag you down with him, and you would both be lost."

"And you, Joel?"

"While you are traversing the brow of the cliff I will creep along the edge of
it on the river-side. I shall reach him about as soon as you do, and if you should
slip I shall perhaps be able to prevent you both from falling."

Then, taking advantage of another interval in the roaring of the torrent, Joel
shouted in stentorian tones:

"Don't move, sir. Wait; we will try to get to you!"

Hulda had already disappeared behind the trees that crowned the ledge, in
order to ascend the Maristien from the other side of the declivity, and Joel soon
caught a glimpse of the fast-receding form of the brave girl at the turn in the path
where the last trees grew.

He, in turn, at the peril of his life, had begun to creep slowly along the
shelving edge of the ledge that surrounds the Rjukan. What wonderful coolness,
what steadiness of foot and of hand were required to thus advance in safety
along the edge of an abyss whose borders were drenched with the spray of the
cataract!

In a parallel direction, but at least one hundred feet above his head, Hulda
was advancing obliquely in order to reach the traveler more easily; but the
position of the latter was such that she could not see his face, that being turned
toward the cataract.

Joel, on reaching a spot directly below the unfortunate man paused, and after
planting his foot firmly in a small crevice in the rock, called out:

"Hallo, sir!"

The traveler turned his head.

"Don't move, sir; don't move an inch, but hold fast!"

"T'll do that, my friend, never fear," replied the stranger in a tone that
reassured Joel. "If I hadn't a good grip, I should have gone to the bottom of the
Rjukan a quarter of an hour ago."

"My sister is also coming to help you," continued Joel. "She will take hold of
your hand, but don't attempt to get upon your feet until I reach you. Don't even
move."


"No more than a rock," replied the traveler.

Hulda had already begun to descend the ledge, carefully selecting the less
slippery parts of the slope with the clear head of a true daughter of the Telemark.

And she, too, now called out as Joel had done:

"Holdfast, sir."

"Yes; I am holding fast, and I assure you that I shall continue to do so as long
as I can."

"And above all don't be afraid!" added Hulda.

"T am not afraid."

"We'll save you yet!" cried Joel.

"I hope so, indeed; for by Saint Olaf I shall never succeed in getting out of
this scrape myself."

It was evident that the tourist had lost none of his presence of mind; but his
fall had probably disabled him, and all he could do now was to keep himself
upon the narrow shelf of rock that separated him from the abyss.

Meanwhile Hulda continued her descent, and in a few minutes reached the
traveler; then, bracing her foot against a projecting point in the rock, she caught
hold of his hand.

The traveler involuntarily attempted to raise himself a little.

"Don't move, sir, don't move," cried Hulda. "You will be sure to drag me
down with you, for I am not strong enough to keep you from falling! You must
wait until my brother reaches us. When he gets between us and the fall you can
then try to get up."

"That is more easily said than done I fear."

"Are you so much hurt, sir? I hope you have broken no bones."

"No; but one leg is badly cut and scratched."

Joel was about twenty yards from them, the rounded shape of the brow of the
cliff having prevented him from joining them at once. He was now obliged to
climb this rounded surface. This was, of course, the most difficult and also the
most dangerous part of his task.

"Don't make the slightest movement, Hulda!" he cried. "If you should both
slip while I am not in a position to break your fall you would both be killed."

"You need not fear that, Joel!" replied Hulda. "Think only of yourself, and
may God help you!"

Joel began to crawl slowly up the rock, dragging himself along on his belly
like a veritable reptile. Two or three times he narrowly escaped sliding down into
the abyss below, but finally he succeeded in reaching the traveler's side.

The latter proved to be an elderly but still vigorous-looking man, with a
handsome face, animated with a very genial and kindly expression.


"You have been guilty of a very imprudent act, sir," remarked Joel as soon as
he recovered his breath.

"Imprudent!" repeated the traveler. "Yes, and as absurd as it was imprudent."

"You have not only risked your life, but--"

"Made you risk yours."

"Oh! that is my business," replied Joel, lightly. Then he added, in an entirely
different tone: "The thing to be done now is to regain the brow of the cliff, but
the most difficult part of the task is already accomplished."

"The most difficult?"

"Yes, sir. That was to reach you. Now we have only to ascend a much more
gradual slope.

"Still, you had better not place much dependence upon me, my boy. I have a
leg that isn't of much use to me just now, nor will it be for some time to come I
fear."

"Try to raise yourself a little."

"I will gladly do so if you will assist me."

"Then take hold of my sister's arm. I will steady you and push you from
below."

"Very well, my friends, I will be guided entirely by you; as you have been so
kind as to come to my assistance, I can not do less than yield you implicit
obedience.”

Joel's plan was carried out in the most cautious manner, and though the
ascent was not made without considerable difficulty and danger, all three
accomplished it more easily and quickly than they had thought possible. Besides,
the injury from which the traveler was suffering was neither a sprain nor
dislocation, but simply a very bad abrasion of the skin; consequently, he could
use his limbs to much better purpose than he had supposed, and ten minutes later
he found himself safe on the other side of the Maristien.

Once there, he would have been glad to rest awhile under the pines that
border the upper field of the Rjukanfos, but Joel persuaded him to make one
more effort. This was to reach a hut hidden among the trees, a short distance
from the rock, on which the brother and sister had seated themselves on first
arriving at the fall. The traveler yielded to their solicitations, and supported on
one side by Hulda, and on the other by Joel, he finally succeeded in reaching the
door of the humble dwelling.

"Let us go in, sir," said Hulda. "You must want to rest a moment.”

"The moment will probably be prolonged to a quarter of an hour."

"Very well, sir; but afterward you must consent to accompany us to Dal."

"To Dal? Why, that is the very place I was going to!"


"Can it be that you are the tourist who was expected from the north?" asked
Joel.

"Precisely."

"Had I foreseen what was going to happen, I should have gone to the other
side of the Rjukanfos to meet you."

"That would have been a good idea, my brave fellow. You would have saved
me from a foolhardy act unpardonable at my age."

"Or at any age," replied Hulda.

The three entered the hut which was occupied by a family of peasants, a
father and two daughters, who received their unexpected guests with great
cordiality.

Joel was able to satisfy himself that the traveler had sustained no injury
beyond a severe abrasion of the skin a little below the knee; but though the
wound would necessitate a week's rest, the limb was neither broken nor
dislocated.

Some excellent milk, an abundance of strawberries, and a little black bread
were offered and accepted. Joel gave incontestable proofs of an excellent
appetite, and though Hulda eat almost nothing, the traveler proved a match for
her brother.

"My exertions have given me a famous appetite," he remarked; "but I must
admit that my attempt to traverse the Maristien was an act of the grossest folly.
To play the part of the unfortunate Eystein when one is old enough to be his
father--and even his grandfather--is absurd in the highest degree."

"So you know the legend?" said Hulda.

"Of course. My nurse used to sing me to sleep with it in the happy days when
I still had a nurse. Yes, I know the story, my brave girl, so I am all the more to
blame for my imprudence. Now, my friends, Dal seems a long way off to a
cripple like myself. How do you propose to get me there?"

"Don't worry about that, sir," replied Joel. "Our kariol is waiting for us at the
end of the road, about three hundred yards from here."

"Hum! three hundred yards!"

"But downhill all the way," added Hulda.

"Oh, in that case, I shall do very well if you will kindly lend me an arm."

"Why not two, as we have four at your disposal?" responded Joel.

"We will say two then. It won't cost me any more, will it?"

"Tt will cost you nothing.”

"Except my thanks; and that reminds me that I have not yet thanked you."

"For what, sir?" inquired Joel.

"Merely for saving my life at the risk of your own."


"Are you quite ready to start?" inquired Hulda, rising to escape any further
expression of gratitude.

"Certainly, certainly. I am more than willing to be guided by the wishes of
the other members of the party."

The traveler settled the modest charge made by the occupants of the cottage;
then, supported by Joel and Hulda, he began the descent of the winding path
leading to the river bank.

The descent was not effected without many exclamations of pain; but these
exclamations invariably terminated in a hearty laugh, and at last they reached the
saw-mill, where Joel immediately proceeded to harness the horse into the kariol.

Five minutes later the traveler was installed in the vehicle, with Hulda beside
him.

"But I must have taken your seat," he remarked to Joel.

"A seat I relinquish to you with the utmost willingness."

"But perhaps by a little crowding we might make room for you?"

"No, no, I have my legs, sir--a guide's legs. They are as good as any wheels."

Joel placed himself at the horse's head, and the little party started for Dal.
The return trip was a gay one, at least on the part of the traveler, who already
seemed to consider himself an old friend of the Hansen family. Before they
reached their destination they found themselves calling their companion M.
Silvius; and that gentleman unceremoniously called them Hulda and Joel, as if
their acquaintance had been one of long standing.

About four o'clock the little belfry of Dal became visible through the trees,
and a few minutes afterward the horse stopped in front of the inn. The traveler
alighted from the kariol, though not without considerable difficulty. Dame
Hansen hastened to the door to receive him, and though he did not ask for the
best room in the house, it was given to him all the same.


CHAPTER IX.

Sylvius Hogg was the name that the stranger inscribed upon the inn register,
that same evening, directly underneath the name of Sandgoist, and there was as
great a contrast between the two names as between the men that bore them.
Between them there was nothing whatever in common, either mentally, morally,
or physically. One was generous to a fault, the other was miserly and
parsimonious; one was genial and kind-hearted, in the arid soul of the other
every noble and humane sentiment seemed to have withered and died.

Sylvius Hogg was nearly sixty years of age, though he did not appear nearly
so old. Tall, erect, and well built, healthy alike in mind and in body, he pleased at


first sight with his handsome genial face, upon which he wore no beard, but
around which clustered curling locks of silvery hair; eyes which were as smiling
as his lips, a broad forehead that bore the impress of noble thoughts, and a full
chest in which the heart beat untrammeled. To all these charms were added an
inexhaustible fund of good humor, a refined and liberal nature, and a generous
and self-sacrificing disposition.

Sylvius Hogg, of Christiania--no further recommendation was needed. That
told the whole story. And he was not only known, appreciated, loved and
honored in the Norwegian capital, but throughout the entire country, though the
sentiments he inspired in the other half of the Scandinavian kingdom, that is to
say in Sweden, were of an entirely different character.

This fact can easily be explained.

Sylvius Hogg was a professor of law at Christiania. In some lands to be a
barrister, civil engineer, physician, or merchant, entitles one to a place on the
upper rounds of the social ladder. It is different in Norway, however. To be a
professor there is to be at the top of the ladder.

Though there are four distinct classes in Sweden, the nobility, the clergy, the
gentry, and the peasantry, there are but three in Norway--the nobility being
utterly wanting. No aristocracy is acknowledged, not even that of the office-
holder, for in this favored country where privileged persons are unknown, the
office-holder is only the humble servant of the public. In fact, perfect social
equality prevails without any political distinctions whatever.

Sylvius Hogg being one of the most influential men in the country, the reader
will not be surprised to learn that he was also a member of the Storthing; and in
this august body, by the well-known probity of his public and private life even
more than by his mighty intellect, he wielded a powerful influence even over the
peasant deputies elected in such large numbers in the rural districts.

Ever since the adoption of the Constitution of 1814, it may be truly said that
Norway is a republic with the King of Sweden for its president; for Norway, ever
jealous of her rights, has carefully guarded her individuality. The Storthing will
have nothing whatever to do with the Swedish parliament; hence it is only
natural that the most prominent and patriotic members of the Storthing should be
regarded with distrust on the other side of the imaginary frontier that separates
Sweden from Norway.

This was the case with Sylvius Hogg. Being extremely independent in
character, and utterly devoid of ambition, he had repeatedly declined a position
in the Cabinet; and a stanch defender of all the rights of his native land, he had
constantly and unflinchingly opposed any threatened encroachment on the part
of Sweden.


Such is the moral and political gulf between the two countries that the King
of Sweden--then Oscar XV.--after being crowned at Stockholm, was obliged to
go through a similar ceremony at Drontheim, the ancient capital of Norway.
Such too is the suspicious reserve of Norwegian men of business, that the Bank
of Christiania is unwilling to accept the notes of the Bank of Stockholm! Such
too is the clearly defined line of demarkation between the two nations that the
Swedish flag floats neither over the public buildings of Norway, nor from the
masts of Norwegian vessels. The one has its blue bunting, bearing a yellow
cross; the other a blue cross upon a crimson ground.

Sylvius Hogg was a thorough Norwegian in heart and in soul, and stoutly
defended her rights upon all occasions; so, when in 1854 the Storthing was
discussing the question of having neither a viceroy nor even a governor at the
head of the state, he was one of the most enthusiastic champions of the measure.

Consequently, though he was by no means popular in the eastern part of
Scandinavia, he was adored in the western part of it, even in the most remote
hamlets. His name was a household word throughout Norway from the dunes of
Christiansand to the bleak rocks of the North Cape, and so worthy was he of this
universal respect that no breath of calumny had ever sullied the reputation of
either the deputy or the professor. But though he was a Norwegian to the core he
was a hot-blooded man, with none of the traditional coldness and apathy of his
compatriots; but much more prompt and resolute in his thoughts and acts than
most Scandinavians, as was proved by the quickness of his movements, the ardor
of his words, and the vivacity of his gestures. Had he been born in France, one
would have unhesitatingly pronounced him a Southerner.

Sylvius Hogg's fortune had never exceeded a fair competence, for he had not
entered into politics for the purpose of making money. Naturally unselfish, he
never thought of himself, but continually of others; nor was he tormented by a
thirst for fame. To be a deputy was enough for him; he craved no further
advancement.

Just at this time Sylvius Hogg was taking advantage of a three months'
vacation to recuperate after a year of severe legislative toil. He had left
Christiania six weeks before, with the intention of traveling through the country
about Drontheim, the Hardanger, the Telemark, and the districts of Kongsberg
and Drammen. He had long been anxious to visit these provinces of which he
knew nothing; and his trip was consequently one of improvement and of
pleasure. He had already explored a part of the region, and it was on his return
from the northern districts that the idea of visiting the famous falls of the
Rjukan--one of the wonders of the Telemark--first occurred to him. So, after
surveying the route of the new railroad--which as yet existed only on paper--


between the towns of Drontheim and Christiania, he sent for a guide to conduct
him to Dal. He was to meet this guide on the left bank of the Maan; but lured on
by the beauties of the Maristien, he ventured upon the dangerous pass without
waiting for his guide. An unusual want of prudence in a man like him and one
that nearly cost him his life, for had it not been for the timely assistance rendered
by Joel and Hulda Hansen, the journey would have ended with the traveler
himself in the grim depths of the Rjukanfos.


CHAPTER X.

The people of Scandinavia are very intelligent, not only the inhabitants of the
cities, but of the most remote rural districts. Their education goes far beyond
reading, writing, and arithmetic. The peasant learns with avidity. His mental
faculties are ever on the alert. He takes a deep interest in the public welfare and
no mean part in all political and local affairs. More than half of the Storthing is
made up of members of this rank in life. Not unfrequently they attend its
sessions clad in the costume of their particular province; but they are justly noted
for their remarkable good sense, acute reasoning powers, their clear though
rather slow understanding, and above all, for their incorruptibility.

Consequently it is not at all strange that the name of Sylvius Hogg was a
household word throughout Norway, and was uttered with respect even in the
wilds of the Telemark; so Dame Hansen on receiving such a widely known and
highly esteemed guest, thought it only proper to tell him how highly honored she
felt at having him under her roof, if only for a few days.

"IT don't know that I am doing you much honor, Dame Hansen," replied
Sylvius Hogg, "but I do know that it gives me great pleasure to be here. I have
heard my pupils talk of this hospitable inn for years. Indeed, that is one reason I
intended to stop here and rest for about a week, but by Saint Olaf! I little
expected to arrive here on one leg!"

And the good man shook the hand of his hostess most cordially.

"Wouldn't you like my brother to fetch a doctor from Bamble?" inquired
Hulda.

"A doctor! my little Hulda! Why! do you want me to lose the use of both my
legs?"

"Oh, Mr. Sylvius!"

"A doctor! Why not send for my friend, the famous Doctor Bork, of
Christiania? All this ado about a mere scratch, what nonsense!"

"But even a mere scratch may become a very serious thing if not properly
attended to," remarked Joel.


"Well, Joel, will you tell me why you are so very anxious for this to become
serious?"

"Indeed, I am not, sir; God forbid!"

"Oh, well, He will preserve you and me, and all Dame Hansen's household,
especially if pretty little Hulda here will be kind enough to give me some
attention."

"Certainly, Mr. Sylvius."

"All right, my friends. I shall be as well as ever in four or five days. How
could a man help getting well in such a pretty room? Where could one hope for
better care than in this excellent inn? This comfortable bed, with its mottoes, is
worth a great deal more than all the nauseous prescriptions of the faculty. And
that quaint window overlooking the valley of the Maan! And the stream's soft,
musical murmur that penetrates to the remotest corner of my cozy nest! And the
fragrant, healthful scent of the pines that fills the whole house! And the air, this
pure exhilarating mountain air! Ah! is not that the very best of physicians? When
one needs him one has only to open the window and in he comes and makes you
well without cutting off your rations."

He said all this so gayly that it seemed as if a ray of sunshine had entered the
house with him. At least, this was the impression of the brother and sister, who
stood listening to him, hand in hand.

All this occurred in a chamber on the first floor, to which the professor had
been conducted immediately upon his arrival; and now, half reclining in a large
arm-chair, with his injured limb resting upon a stool, he gratefully accepted the
kindly attentions of Joel and Hulda. A careful bathing of the wound with cold
water was the only remedy he would use, and in fact no other was needed.

"Thanks, my friends, thanks!" he exclaimed, "this is far better than drugs.
And now do you know that but for your timely arrival upon the scene of action, I
should have become much too well acquainted with the wonders of the
Rjukanfos! I should have rolled down into the abyss like a big stone, and have
added another legend to those already associated with the Maristien. And there
was no excuse for me. My betrothed was not waiting for me upon the opposite
bank as in the case of poor Eystein!"

"And what a terrible thing it would have been to Madame Hogg!" exclaimed
Hulda. "She would never have got over it."

"Madame Hogg!" repeated the professor. "Oh! Madame Hogg wouldn't have
shed a tear--"

"Oh, Mister Sylvius."

"No, I tell you, for the very good reason that there is no Madame Hogg. Nor
can I ever imagine what Madame Hogg would be like, stout or thin, tall or


short."

"She would, of course, be amiable, intelligent and good, being your wife,"
replied Hulda, naively.

"Do you really think so, mademoiselle? Well, well, I believe you! I believe
you!"

"But on hearing of such a calamity, Mister Sylvius," remarked Joel, "your
relatives and many friends--"

"I have no relatives to speak of, but I have quite a number of friends, not
counting those I have just made in Dame Hansen's house, and you have spared
them the trouble of weeping for me. But tell me, children, you can keep me here
a few days, can you not?"

"As long as you please, Mister Sylvius," replied Hulda. "This room belongs
to you."

"You see, I intended to stop awhile at Dal as all tourists do, and radiate from
here all over the Telemark district; but now, whether I shall radiate, or I shall not
radiate, remains to be seen."

"Oh, you will be on your feet again before the end of the week, I hope,
Mister Sylvius," remarked Joel.

"So do I, my boy."

"And then I will escort you anywhere in the district that you care to go."

"We'll see about that when Richard is himself again. I still have two months
leave before me, and even if I should be obliged to spend the whole of it under
Dame Hansen's roof I should have no cause for complaint. Could I not explore
that portion of the valley of Vesfjorddal lying between the two lakes, make the
ascent of Gousta, and pay another visit to the Rjukanfos? for though I very
narrowly escaped falling head foremost into its depths I scarcely got a glimpse
of it, and am resolved to see it again."

"You shall do so, Mister Sylvius," replied Hulda.

"And we will visit it next time in company with good Dame Hansen if she
will be kind enough to go with us. And now I think of it, my friends, I must drop
a line to Kate, my old housekeeper, and Fink, my faithful old servant in
Christiania. They will be very uneasy if they do not hear from me, and I shall get
a terrible scolding. And now I have a confession to make to you. The
strawberries and milk were delicious and extremely refreshing, but they scarcely
satisfied my hunger, and as I won't submit to being put upon short allowance
may I not ask if it is not nearly your dinner hour?"

"Oh! that makes no difference whatever, Mister Sylvius."

"On the contrary, it does make a great deal of difference. Do you think that I
am going to sit in solitary grandeur at the table, and in my own room, all the


time I stay at Dal? No, I want to take my meals with you and your mother if
Dame Hansen has no objections."

Of course Dame Hansen could but assent when she was apprised of the
professor's request, especially as it would be a great honor to her and hers to
have a member of the Storthing at her table.

"Tt is settled, then, that we are to eat together in the living room," remarked
Sylvius Hogg.

"Yes, Mister Sylvius," replied Joel. "I shall only have to wheel you out in
your arm-chair when dinner is ready."

"Indeed, Mister Joel! Why don't you propose a kariol? No; with the aid of a
friendly arm, I shall be able to reach the table. I haven't had my leg amputated
yet, that I am aware of."

"As you please, Mister Sylvius," replied Hulda. "But don't be guilty of any
imprudence, I beg of you, or Joel will have to hurry off in search of a doctor."

"More threats! Oh, well, I will be as prudent and docile as possible; provided
you do not put me on short allowance, you will find me the most tractable of
patient. Can it be that you are not hungry, my friends?"

"Give us only a quarter of an hour,” replied Hulda; "and we will set before
you a nice trout from the Maan, a grouse that Joel shot in the Hardanger
yesterday, and a bottle of French wine."

"Thank you, my dear child, thank you!"

Hulda left the room to superintend the dinner and set the table, while Joel
took the kariol back to Lengling's stable. Sylvius Hogg was left alone, and his
thoughts very naturally reverted to the honest family whose guest and debtor he
was. What could he do to repay Hulda and Joel for the inestimable service they
had rendered him?

He had not much time for reflection, however, for scarcely ten minutes had
elapsed before he was seated in the place of honor at the family table. The dinner
was excellent. It corresponded with the reputation of the inn, and the professor
ate very heartily.

The rest of the evening was spent in conversation in which Sylvius Hogg
took the leading part. As Dame Hanson found it well-nigh impossible to
overcome her habitual reserve, Joel and Hulda were obliged to respond to their
genial host's advances, and the sincere liking the professor had taken to them
from the very first naturally increased.

When night came, he returned to his room with the assistance of Joel and
Hulda, gave and received a friendly good-night, and had scarcely stretched
himself out upon the big bed before he was sound asleep.

The next morning he woke with the sun, and began to review the situation.


"I really don't know how I shall get out of the scrape," he said to himself.
"One can not allow one's self to be saved from death, nursed and cured without
any other return than a mere thank you. I am under deep obligations to Hulda
and Joel, that is undeniable; but the services they have rendered me are not of a
kind that can be repaid with money. On the other hand, these worthy people
appear to be perfectly happy, and I can do nothing to add to their happiness!
Still, we shall probably have many talks together, and while we are talking,
perhaps--"

During the three or four days the professor was obliged to keep his leg upon
a stool he and the young Hansens had many pleasant chats together, but
unfortunately it was with some reserve on the brother's and sister's part. Neither
of them had much to say about their mother, whose cold and preoccupied
manner had not escaped Sylvius Hogg's notice, and from a feeling of prudence
they hesitated to reveal to their guest the uneasiness excited by Ole Kamp's
delay, for might they not impair his good humor by telling him their troubles?

"And yet we perhaps make a great mistake in not confiding in Mister
Sylvius," Joel remarked to her sister, one day. "He is a very clever man, and
through his influential acquaintances he might perhaps be able to find out
whether the Naval Department is making any effort to ascertain what has
become of the 'Viking.""

"You are right, Joel," replied Hulda. "I think we had better tell him all; but let
us wait until he has entirely recovered from his hurt."

"That will be very soon," rejoined Joel.

By the end of the week Sylvius Hogg was able to leave his room without
assistance, though he still limped a little; and he now began to spend hours on
the benches in front of the house, gazing at the snow-clad summit of Gousta,
while the Maan dashed merrily along at his feet.

People were continually passing over the road that led from Dal to the
Rjukanfos now. Most of them were tourists who stopped an hour or two at Dame
Hanson's inn either to breakfast or dine. There were also students in plenty with
knapsacks on their backs, and the little Norwegian cockade in their caps.

Many of them knew the professor, so interminable greetings were
exchanged, and cordial salutations, which showed how much Sylvius Hogg was
loved by these young people.

"What, you here, Mister Sylvius?" they would exclaim.

"Yes, my friend."

"You, who are generally supposed to be in the remotest depths of the
Hardanger!"

"People are mistaken, then. It was in the remotest depths of the Rjukanfos


that I came very near staying."

"Very well, we shall tell everybody that you are in Dal."

"Yes, in Dal, with a game leg."

"Fortunately you are at Dame Hansen's inn, where you will have the best of
food and care."

"Could one imagine a more comfortable place?"

"Most assuredly not."

"Or better people?"

"There are none in the world," responded the young travelers merrily.

Then they would all drink to the health of Hulda and Joel, who were so well
known throughout the Telemark.

And then the professor would tell them all about his adventure, frankly
admitting his unpardonable imprudence, and telling how his life had been saved,
and how grateful he felt to his preservers.

"And I shall remain here until I have paid my debt," he would add. "My
course of lectures on legislation will not be resumed for a long time, I fear, and
you can enjoy an extended holiday."

"Good! good! Mister Sylvius," cried the light-hearted band. "Oh, you can't
fool us! It is pretty Hulda that keeps you here at Dal."

"A sweet girl she is, my friends, and as pretty as a picture, besides; and by
Saint Olaf! I'm only sixty."

"Here's to the health of Mister Sylvius!"

"And to yours, my dear boys. Roam about the country, gather wisdom, and
yet be merry. Life is all sunshine at your age. But keep away from the Maristien.
Joel and Hulda may not be on hand to rescue such of you as are imprudent
enough to venture there."

Then they would resume their journey, making the whole valley ring with
their joyful God-aften.

Once or twice Joel was obliged to act as guide to some tourists who wished
to make the ascent of Gousta. Sylvius Hogg was anxious to accompany them. He
declared that he was all right again. In fact, the wound on his leg was nearly
healed; but Hulda positively forbade him to undertake a trip which would
certainly prove too fatiguing for him, and Hulda's word was law.

A wonderful mountain, though, is this Gousta, whose lofty summit traversed
by deep snow-covered ravines, rises out of a forest of pines that form a thick
green ruff about its snowy throat! And what a superb view one enjoys from its
summit. To the east lies the bailiwick of Numedal; On the west, the Hardanger
and its magnificent glaciers; down at the base of the mountain, the winding
valley of Vesfjorddal between Lakes Tinn and Mijos, Dal, and its miniature


houses, and the bright waters of the Maan leaping and dancing merrily along
through the verdant meadows to the music of its own voice.

To make the ascent Joel was obliged to leave Dal at five o'clock in the
morning. He usually returned about six o'clock in the evening, and Sylvius Hogg
and Hulda always went to meet him. As soon as the primitive ferry-boat landed
the tourists and their guide a cordial greeting ensued, and the three spent yet
another pleasant evening together. The professor still limped a little, but he did
not complain. Indeed, one might almost have fancied that he was in no haste to
be cured, or rather to leave Dame Hansen's hospitable roof.

The time certainly passed swiftly and pleasantly there. He had written to
Christiania that he should probably spend some time at Dal. The story of his
adventure at the Rjukanfos was known throughout the country. The newspapers
had got hold of it, and embellished the account after their fashion, so a host of
letters came to the inn, to say nothing of pamphlets and newspapers. All these
had to be read and answered, and the names of Joel and Hulda which were
necessarily mentioned in the correspondence, soon became known throughout
Norway.

Nevertheless, this sojourn at Dame Hansen's inn could not be prolonged
indefinitely, though Sylvius Hogg was still as much in doubt as ever, in regard to
the manner in which he should pay his debt of gratitude. Of late, however, he
had begun to suspect that this family was not as happy as he had at first
supposed. The impatience with which the brother and sister awaited the arrival
of the daily mail from Christiania and Bergen, their disappointment and even
chagrin on finding no letters for them, all this was only too significant.

It was already the ninth of June, and still no news from the "Viking!" The
vessel was now more than a fortnight overdue, and not a single line from Ole!
No news to assuage Hulda's anxiety. The poor girl was beginning to despair, and
Sylvius Hogg saw that her eyes were red with weeping when he met her in the
morning.

"What can be the matter?" he said to himself, more than once. "They seem to
be concealing some misfortunes from me. Is it a family secret, I wonder, with
which a stranger can not be allowed to meddle? But do they still regard me as a
stranger? No. Still, they must think so; but when I announce my departure they
will perhaps understand that it is a true friend who is about to leave them."

So that very day he remarked:

"My friends, the hour is fast approaching when, to my great regret, I shall be
obliged to bid you good-bye."

"So soon, Mister Sylvius, so soon?" exclaimed Joel, with a dismay he could
not conceal.


"The time has passed very quickly in your company, but it is now seventeen
days since I came to Dal."

"What! seventeen days!" repeated Hulda.

"Yes, my dear child, and the end of my vacation is approaching. I have only
a week at my disposal if I should extend my journey to Drammen and
Kongsberg. And though the Storthing is indebted to you for not being obliged to
elect another deputy in my place, the Storthing will know no better how to
compensate you than I do."

"Oh! Mister Sylvius," cried Hulda, placing her little hand upon his lips to
silence him.

"Oh, I understand, Hulda. That is a forbidden subject, at least here."

"Here and everywhere," replied the girl, gayly.

"So be it! I am not my own master, and I must obey. But you and Joel must
come and pay me a visit at Christiania."

"Pay you a visit?"

"Yes, pay me a visit; spend several weeks at my house in company with your
mother, of course."

"And if we should leave the inn who will attend to things in our absence?"
replied Joel.

"But your presence here is not necessary after the excursion season is over, I
imagine; so I have fully made up my mind to come for you late in the autumn."

"Tt will be impossible, my dear Mister Sylvius, for us to accept--"

"On the contrary, it will be perfectly possible. Don't say no. I shall not be
content with such an answer. Besides, when I get you there in the very best room
in my house, in the care of my old Kate and faithful Fink, you will be my own
children, and then you can certainly tell me what I can do for you."

"What you can do for us?" repeated Joel, with a glance at his sister.

"Brother!" exclaimed Hulda, as if divining his intention.

"Speak, my boy, speak!"

"Ah, well, Mister Sylvius, you can do us a great honor."

"How?"

"By consenting to be present at my sister Hulda's marriage, if it would not
inconvenience you too much."

"Hulda's marriage!" exclaimed Sylvius Hogg. "What! my little Hulda is
going to be married, and no one has said a word to me about it!"

"Oh, Mister Sylvius!" exclaimed the girl, her eyes filling with tears.

"And when is the marriage to take place?"

"As soon as it pleases God to bring her betrothed, Ole Kamp, back to us,"
replied the girl.


CHAPTER XI.

Joel then proceeded to relate Ole Kamp's whole history. Sylvius Hogg,
deeply moved, listened to the recital with profound attention. He knew all now.
He even read Ole's letter announcing his speedy return. But Ole had not
returned, and there had been no tidings from the missing one. What anxiety and
anguish the whole Hansen family must have suffered!

"And I thought myself an inmate of a happy home!" he said to himself.

Still, after a little reflection, it seemed to him that the brother and sister were
yielding to despair while there was still some room for hope. By counting these
May and June days over and over again their imaginations had doubled the
number, as it were.

The professor, therefore, concluded to give them his reasons for this belief,
not feigned, but really sensible and plausible reasons that would also account for
the delay of the "Viking."

Nevertheless his face had become very grave, for the poor girl's evident grief
touched him deeply.

"Listen to me, my children," said he. "Sit down here by me, and let us talk
the matter over calmly."

"Ah! what can you say to comfort us?" cried Hulda, whose heart was full to
overflowing.

"IT shall tell you only what I really and truly think," replied the professor. "I
have been thinking over all that Joel just told me, and it seems to me that you are
more anxious and despondent than you have any real cause to be. I would not
arouse any false hopes, but we must view matters as they really are."

"Alas! Mister Sylvius," replied Hulda, "my poor Ole has gone down with the
‘Viking,’ and I shall never see him again!"

"Sister, sister!" exclaimed Joel, "becalm, I beseech you, and hear what Mister
Sylvius has to say."

"Yes, be calm, my children, and let us talk the matter over quietly. It was
between the fifteenth and twentieth of May that Ole expected to return to
Bergen, was it not?"

"Yes; and it is now the ninth of June."

"So the vessel is only twenty days overdue, if we reckon from the latest date
appointed for the return of the 'Viking.' That is enough to excite anxiety, I admit;
still, we must not expect the same punctuality from a sailing-vessel as from a
steamer."

"I have told Hulda that again and again, and I tell her so yet," interrupted


Joel.

"And you are quite right, my boy. Besides, it is very possible that the 'Viking'
is an old vessel, and a slow sailer, like most Newfoundland ships, especially
when heavily laden. On the other hand, we have had a great deal of bad weather
during the past few weeks, and very possibly the vessel did not sail at the date
indicated in Ole's letter. In that case a week's delay in sailing would be sufficient
to account for the non-arrival of the 'Viking' and for your failure to receive a
letter from your lover. What I say is the result of serious reflection. Besides, how
do you know but the instructions given to the captain of the 'Viking' authorize
him to take his cargo to some other port, according to the state of the market?"

"In that case, Ole would have written," replied Hulda, who could not even be
cheered by this hope.

"What is there to prove that he did not write?" retorted the professor. "If he
did, it is not the 'Viking' that is behind time, but the American mail. Suppose, for
instance, that Ole's ship touched at some port in the United States, that would
explain why none of his letters have yet reached Europe."

"The United States, Mister Sylvius!"

"That sometimes happens, and it is only necessary to miss one mail to leave
one's friends without news for a long time. There is, at all events, one very easy
thing for us to do; that is to make inquiries of some of the Bergen shipowners.
Are you acquainted with any of them?"

"Yes," replied Joel, "Messrs. Help Bros."

"Help Bros., the sons of old Help?"

"Yes."

"Why, I know them, too; at least, the younger brother, Help, Junior, they call
him, though he is not far from my own age, and one of my particular friends. He
has often dined with me in Christiania. Ah, well, my children, I can soon learn
through him all that can be ascertained about the 'Viking.' I'll write him this very
day, and if need be I'll go and see him."

"How kind you are, Mister Sylvius!" cried Hulda and Joel in the same breath.

"No thanks, if you please; I won't allow them. Did I ever thank you for what
you did for me up there? And now I find an opportunity to do you a good turn,
and here you are all in a flutter."

"But you were just talking of returning to Christiania," remarked Joel.

"Well, I shall go to Bergen instead, if I find it necessary to go to Bergen."

"But you were about to leave us, Mister Sylvius," said Hulda.

"Well, I have changed my mind, that is all. 1am master of my own actions, I
suppose; and | sha'n't go until I see you safely out of this trouble, that is, unless
you are disposed to turn me out-of-doors--"


"What can you be thinking of, Mister Sylvius?"

"IT have decided to remain in Dal until Ole's return. I want to make the
acquaintance of my little Hulda's betrothed. He must be a brave, honest fellow,
of Joel's stamp, I am inclined to think."

"Yes, exactly like him," replied Hulda.

"I was sure of it!" exclaimed the professor, whose cheerfulness had returned,
at least apparently.

"Ole is Ole, Mister Sylvius," said Joel, "and that is equivalent to saying that
he is the best-hearted fellow in the world."

"I believe you, my dear Joel, and what you say only makes me the more
anxious to see him. I sha'n't have to wait long. Something tells me that the
'Viking' will soon come safely into port."

"God grant it!"

"And why should He not hear your prayer? Yes, I shall certainly attend
Hulda's wedding, as you have been kind enough to invite me to it. The Storthing
will have to do without me a few weeks longer, that is all. It would have been
obliged to grant me a much longer leave of absence if you had let me fall into
the Rjukanfos as I deserved."

"How kind it is in you to say this, Mister Sylvius, and how happy you make
us!"

"Not as happy as I could wish, my friends, as I owe my life to you, and I
don't know--"

"Oh! please, please say no more about that trifle."

"Yes, I shall. Come now, who drew me out of the frightful jaws of the
Maristien? Who risked their own lives to save me? Who brought me to the inn at
Dal, and cared for me, and nursed me without any assistance from the Faculty?
Oh! I am as stubborn as an old cart-horse, I assure you, and I have made up my
mind to attend the marriage of Hulda to Ole Kamp, and attend it I shall!"

Hopefulness is contagious, and how could any one resist such confidence as
Sylvius Hogg displayed? A faint smile crept over poor Hulda's face. She longed
to believe him; she only asked to hope.

"But we must recollect that the days are passing very rapidly," continued
Sylvius Hogg, "and that it is high time we began our preparations for the
wedding."

"They are already begun, Mister Sylvius," replied Hulda. "In fact, they were
begun more than three weeks ago."

"So much the better; but in that case, we must take good care not to allow
anything to interrupt them."

"Interrupt them!" repeated Joel. "Why, everything is in readiness."


"What, the wedding-dress, the bodice with its silver clasps, the belt and its
pendants?"

"Even the pendants."

"And the radiant crown that will make you look like a saint, my little
Hulda?"

"Yes"

"And the invitations are written?"

"All written," replied Joel, "even the one to which we attach most
importance, yours."

"And the bride-maid has been chosen from among the sweetest maidens of
the Telemark?"

"And the fairest, Mister Sylvius," added Joel, "for it is Mademoiselle
Siegfrid of Bamble."

"From the tone in which he uttered those words, and the way in which he
blushed as he uttered them, I judge that Mademoiselle Siegfrid Helmboe is
destined to become Madame Joel Hansen of Dal," said the professor, laughing.

"Yes, Mr. Sylvius," replied Hulda.

"Good! so there is a fair prospect of yet another wedding," exclaimed Sylvius
Hogg. "And as I feel sure that I shall be honored with an invitation, I can do no
less than accept it here and now. It certainly looks as if I should be obliged to
resign my seat in the Storthing, for I really don't see how I am to find time to
attend its sessions. But never mind, I will be your best man, Joel, after first
serving in that capacity at your sister's wedding. You certainly are making me do
just what you like, or rather what I like. Kiss me, little Hulda! Give me your
hand, my boy, and now let me write to my friend Help, Junior, of Bergen."

The brother and sister left the apartment of which the professor had
threatened to take permanent possession, and returned to their daily tasks with
rather more hopeful hearts.

Sylvius Hogg was left alone.

"Poor child! poor child!" he murmured. "Yes, I have made her forget her
sorrow for a few moments. But the delay has been a long one; and the sea is very
rough at this season of the year. What if the 'Viking' has indeed gone down, and
Ole should never return!"

A moment afterward the professor was busily engaged in writing to his
Bergen friend. He asked for the fullest possible particulars in regard to
everything connected with the "Viking" and her cruise, and inquired if some
event, unforeseen or otherwise, had made it necessary to send the vessel to a
different port from that for which it was originally destined. He also expressed a
strong desire to hear as soon as possible how the shipping merchants and sailors


of Bergen explained the delay. In short, he begged his friend Help to give him all
possible information in regard to the matter by return mail.

This urgent letter also explained Sylvius Hogg's interest in the mate of the
"Viking," the invaluable service rendered him by the young man's betrothed, and
the pleasure it would afford him to be able to give some encouragement to Dame
Hansen's children.

As soon as this letter was finished Joel took it to Moel so it would go on the
following day. It would reach Bergen on the eleventh, so a reply to it ought to be
received on the evening of the twelfth or the morning of the thirteenth at the very
latest.

Nearly three days of dreary waiting! How interminable they seemed! Still, by
dint of reassuring words and encouraging arguments, the professor contrived to
alleviate the painful suspense. Now he knew Hulda's secret, was there not a topic
of conversation ever ready? And what a consolation it was to Joel and his sister
to be able to talk of the absent one!

"IT am one of the family now," Sylvius Hogg repeated again and again. "Yes, I
am like an uncle that has just arrived from America or some foreign land."

And as he was one of the family, they must have no more secrets from him.

Of course he had not failed to notice the children's constrained manner
toward their mother, and he felt satisfied that the reserve the parent displayed
had its origin in something besides the uneasiness she felt on Ole Kamp's
account. He thought he might venture to question Joel; but the latter was unable
to give any satisfactory reply. The professor than ventured to sound Dame
Hansen on the subject, but she was so uncommunicative that he was obliged to
abandon all hope of obtaining any knowledge of her secret until some future day.

As Sylvius Hogg had predicted, the letter from Help, Junior, reached Dal on
the moming of the thirteenth. Joel started out before daylight to meet the
postman, and it was he who brought the letter into the large hall where the
professor was sitting with Dame Hansen and her daughter.

There was a moment's silence. Hulda, who was as pale as death, was unable
to utter a word so violent was the throbbing of her heart, but she seized the hand
of her brother, who was equally agitated, and held it tightly.

Sylvius Hogg opened the letter and read it aloud.

To his great regret the missive contained only some very vague information;
and the professor was unable to conceal his disappointment from the young
people who listened to the letter with tears in their eyes.

The "Viking" had left Saint-Pierre-Miquelon on the date mentioned in Ole
Kamp's last letter. This fact had been established by the reports received from
other vessels which had reached Bergen since the "Viking's" departure from


Newfoundland. These vessels had seen nothing of the missing ship on their
homeward voyage, but they had encountered very bad weather in the
neighborhood of Iceland. Still they had managed to weather the gales; so it was
possible that the "Viking" had been equally fortunate, and had merely been
delayed somewhere, or had put into some port for repairs. The "Viking" was a
stanch craft, very substantially built, and commanded by Captain Frikel, of
Hammersfest, a thoroughly competent officer. Still, this delay was alarming, and
if it continued much longer there would be good reason to fear that the "Viking"
had gone down with all on board.

The writer regretted that he had no better news to give the young Hansens,
and spoke of Ole Kamp in the most complimentary terms. He concluded his
letter by assuring the professor of his sincere friendship, and that of his family,
and by promising to send him without delay any intelligence that might be
received at any Norwegian port, in relation to the "Viking."

Poor Hulda sunk half fainting into a chair while Sylvius Hogg was reading
this letter, and she was sobbing violently when he concluded its perusal.

Joel, with his arms folded tightly upon his breast, listened in silence, without
daring to glance at his sister.

Dame Hansen, as soon as the reading was concluded, went up to her room.
She seemed to have been expecting the blow.

The professor beckoned Hulda and her brother to his side. He wanted to talk
with them calmly and sensibly on the subject, and he expressed a confidence that
was singular, to say the least, after Help, Junior's letter. They had no reason to
despair. Were there not countless examples of protracted delays while navigating
the seas that lie between Norway and Newfoundland? Yes, unquestionably. And
was not the "Viking" a strong craft, well officered, and manned by an excellent
crew, and consequently in a much better condition than many of the vessels that
had come safely into port? Most assuredly.

"So let us continue to hope," he added, "and wait. If the 'Viking'’ had been
wrecked between Iceland and Newfoundland the numerous vessels that follow
the same route to reach Europe would certainly have seen some trace of the
disaster. But no, not a single floating plank or spar did they meet on the whole of
this route, which is so much frequented at the conclusion of the fishing season.
Still, we must take measures to secure information of a more positive nature. If
we receive no further news of the 'Viking' during the coming week, nor any letter
from Ole, I shall return to Christiania and ask the Naval Department to make
careful inquiries, and I feel sure that the result will prove eminently satisfactory
to all concerned."

In spite of the hopeful manner assumed by the professor, Joel and Hulda both


felt that he did not speak as confidently as he had spoken before the receipt of
the letter from Bergen--a letter whose contents gave them little if any grounds
for hope. In fact, Sylvius Hogg no longer dared to venture any allusion to the
approaching marriage of Hulda and Ole Kamp, though he said to himself again
and again:

"No, no, it is impossible! Ole Kamp never cross the threshold of Dame
Hansen's house again? Ole not marry Hulda? Nothing will ever make me believe
such a misfortune possible."

He was perfectly sincere in this conviction. It was due to the energy of his
character, to a spirit of hopefulness that nothing could crush. But how could he
hope to convince others, especially those whom the fate of the "Viking" affected
so directly?

A few days were allowed to elapse. Sylvius Hogg, who was now entirely
well, took a long walk every day, and persuaded Hulda and her brother to
accompany him. One day all three of them went up the valley of Vesfjorddal
half-way to the falls of the Rjukan. The next day they went to Moel and Lake
Tinn. Once they were even absent twenty-four hours. This time they prolonged
their excursion to Bamble, where the professor made the acquaintance of Farmer
Helmboe and his daughter Siegfrid. What a cordial welcome the latter gave to
her friend Hulda, and what words of tenderness she found to console her!

Here, too, Sylvius Hogg did all in his power to encourage these worthy
people. He had written to the Navy Department, and the government was
investigating the matter. Ole would certainly return at no distant day. He might
drop in upon them, indeed, at any moment. No; the wedding would not have to
be postponed more than six weeks! The good man seemed so thoroughly
convinced of all this, that his auditors were influenced rather by his firm
conviction than by his arguments.

This visit to the Helmboe family did the young Hansens good, and they
returned home much calmer than they went away.

At last the fifteenth of June came. The "Viking" was now exactly one month
overdue; and as the distance from Newfoundland to the coast of Norway is
comparatively short, this delay was beyond all reason, even for a sailing-vessel.

Hulda seemed to have abandoned all hope; and her brother could not find a
single word to say by way of encouragement. In the presence of these poor,
unhappy creatures, the professor realized the utter futility of any well-meant
attempt at consolation. Hulda and Joel crossed the threshold only to stand and
gaze in the direction of Moel, or to walk up the road leading to Rjukanfos. Ole
Kamp would probably come by the way of Bergen, but he might come by way of
Christiania if the destination of the "Viking" had been changed. The sound of an


approaching kariol, a hasty cry, the form of a man suddenly rounding a curve in
the road made their hearts beat wildly; but all for naught. The good people of
Dal were also eagerly watching. Not unfrequently they went half-way to meet
the postman. Everybody was deeply interested, for the Hansen family was
exceedingly popular in the neighborhood; and poor Ole was almost a child of the
Telemark. But no letter came from Bergen or Christiania giving news of the
absent one.

Nothing new occurred on the sixteenth. Sylvius Hogg could scarcely restrain
his restlessness. He began to understand that he must proceed to act in person, so
he announced to his friends that if no news was received on the following day he
should go to Christiania and satisfy himself that nothing had been left undone.
Of course, it was hard for him to leave Hulda and Joel, but there was no help for
it; and he would return as soon as his task was accomplished.

On the seventeenth a greater part of the most wretched day they had ever
spent together passed without bringing any new developments. It had rained
incessantly since early morning; the wind was blowing a gale, and the rain
dashed fiercely against the window on the side of the house nearest the Maan.

Seven o'clock came. They had just finished dinner, which had been eaten in
profound silence, as if in a house of mourning. Even Sylvius Hogg had been
unable to keep up the conversation. What could he say that he had not already
said a hundred times before?

"T shall start for Christiania to-morrow morning," he remarked at last. "Joel, I
wish you would procure a kariol and drive me to Moel."

"Very well, Mr. Sylvius. But wouldn't you like me to accompany you
further?"

The professor shook his head, with a meaning glance at Hulda, for he did not
want to see her separated from her brother.

Just then a sound, which was as yet scarcely audible, was heard on the road
in the direction of Moel. They all listened breathlessly. Soon all doubts vanished.
It was the sound of an approaching kariol coming swiftly toward Dal. Was the
occupant some traveler who intended to spend the night at the inn? This was
scarcely probable, as tourists rarely arrived at so late an hour.

Hulda sprung up trembling in every limb. Joel went to the door, opened it
and looked out.

The noise grew louder It was certain the clatter of horse's hoofs blended
with, the roll of kariol wheels; but the storm without was so violent that Joel was
obliged to close the door.

Sylvius Hogg tramped up and down the room in a perfect fever of
impatience. Joel and his sister held each other tightly by the hand.


The kariol could not be more than twenty yards from the house now. Would
it pause or go by?

The hearts of all three throbbed to suffocation.

The kariol stopped. They heard a voice calling; but it was not the voice of
Ole Kamp!

Almost immediately some one rapped at the door.

Joel opened it.

A man stood upon the threshold.

"Is Mr. Sylvius Hogg here?" he asked.

"I am he," replied the professor. "Who are you, my friend?"

"A messenger sent to you by the Secretary of the Navy at Christiania."

"Have you a letter for me?"

"Yes, sir; here it is."

And the messenger handed him a large envelope sealed with the Government
seal.

Hulda's limbs tottered under her, and her brother sprung forward and placed
her in a chair. Neither of them dared to ask Sylvius Hogg to open the letter.

At last he broke the seal and read the following:

"MR. PROFESSOR,--In reply to your last letter, I inclose a paper picked up
at sea on the 3d instant by a Danish vessel. Unfortunately this discovery dispels
any lingering doubt as to the fate of the 'Viking'--"

Sylvius Hogg, without taking time to read the rest of the letter, drew the
paper from the envelope. He looked at it; he turned it over.

It was a lottery ticket bearing the number 9672.

On the other side of the ticket were the following lines:

"May 3d.

"DEAREST HULDA,--The 'Viking' is going down. I have only this ticket
left of all I hoped to bring back to you. I intrust it to God's hands, hoping that it
may reach you safely; and as I shall not be there, I beseech you to be present at
the drawing. Accept the ticket with my last thought of you. Hulda, do not forget
me in your prayers. Farewell, my beloved, farewell!

"OLE KAMP."


CHAPTER XII.

So this was the young man's secret! This was the source from which he
expected to derive a fortune for his promised bride--a lottery ticket, purchased
before his departure. And as the "Viking" was going down, he inclosed the ticket
in a bottle and threw it into the sea with the last farewell for Hulda.


This time Sylvius Hogg was completely disconcerted. He looked at the letter,
then at the ticket. He was speechless with dismay. Besides, what could he say?
How could any one doubt that the "Viking" had gone down with all on board?

While Sylvius Hogg was reading the letter Hulda had nerved herself to
listen, but after the concluding words had been read, she fell back unconscious in
Joel's arms, and it became necessary to carry her to her own little chamber,
where her mother administered restoratives. After she recovered consciousness
she asked to be left alone for awhile, and she was now kneeling by her bedside,
praying for Ole Kamp's soul.

Dame Hansen returned to the hall. At first she started toward the professor,
as if with the intention of speaking to him, then suddenly turning toward the
staircase, she disappeared.

Joel, on returning from his sister's room, had hastily left the house. He
experienced a feeling of suffocation in the dwelling over which such a dense
cloud of misfortune seemed to be hanging. He longed for the outer air, the fierce
blast of the tempest, and spent a part of the night in wandering aimlessly up and
down the banks of the Maan.

Sylvius Hogg was therefore left alone. Stunned by the stroke at first, he soon
recovered his wonted energy. After tramping up and down the hall two or three
times, he paused and listened, in the hope that he might hear a summons from
the young girl, but disappointed in this, he finally seated himself at the table, and
abandoned himself to his thoughts.

"Can it be possible that Hulda is never to see her betrothed again?" he said to
himself. "No; such a misfortune is inconceivable. Everything that is within me
revolts at the thought! Even admitting that the 'Viking' has gone to the bottom of
the ocean, what conclusive proof have we of Ole's death? I can not believe it. In
all cases of shipwreck time alone can determine whether or not any one has
survived the catastrophe. Yes; I still have my doubts, and I shall continue to have
them, even if Hulda and Joel refuse to share them. If the 'Viking' really
foundered, how does it happen that no floating fragments of the wreck have been
seen at sea--at least nothing except the bottle in which poor Ole placed his last
message, and with it all he had left in the world."

Sylvius Hogg had the ticket still in his hand, and again he looked at it, and
turned it over and held it up between him and the waning light--this scrap of
paper upon which poor Ole had based his hopes of fortune.

But the professor, wishing to examine it still more carefully, rose, listened
again to satisfy himself that the poor girl upstairs was not calling her mother or
brother, and then entered his room.

The ticket proved to be a ticket in the Christiania Schools Lottery--a very


popular lottery in Norway at that time. The capital prize was one hundred
thousand marks; the total value of the other prizes, ninety thousand marks, and
the number of tickets issued, one million, all of which had been sold.

Ole Kamp's ticket bore the number 9672; but whether this number proved
lucky or unlucky, whether the young sailor had any secret reason for his
confidence in it or not, he would not be present at the drawing, which was to
take place on the fifteenth of July, that is to say, in twenty-eight days; but it was
his last request that Hulda should take his place on that occasion.

By the light of his candle, Sylvius Hogg carefully reread the lines written
upon the back of the ticket, as if with the hope of discovering some hidden
meaning.

The lines had been written with ink, and it was evident that Ole's hand had
not trembled while tracing them. This showed that the mate of the 'Viking'
retained all his presence of mind at the time of the shipwreck, and that he was
consequently in a condition to take advantage of any means of escape that might
offer, such as a floating spar or plank, in case the raging waters had not
swallowed up everything when the vessel foundered.

Very often writings of this kind that are recovered from the sea state the
locality in which the catastrophe occurred; but in this neither the latitude nor
longitude were mentioned; nor was there anything to indicate the nearest land.
Hence one must conclude that no one on board knew where the "Viking" was at
the time of the disaster. Driven on, doubtless, by a tempest of resistless power,
the vessel must have been carried far out of her course, and the clouded sky
making a solar observation impossible, there had been no way of determining
the ship's whereabouts for several days; so it was more than probable that no one
would ever know whether it was near the shores of North America or of Iceland
that the gallant crew had sunk to rise no more.

This was a circumstance calculated to destroy all hope, even in the bosoms
of the most sanguine.

With some clew, no matter how vague, a search for the missing vessel would
have been possible. A ship or steamer could be dispatched to the scene of the
catastrophe and perhaps find some trace of it. Besides, was it not quite possible
that one or more survivors had succeeded in reaching some point on the shores
of the Arctic continent, and that they were still there, homeless, and destitute,
and hopelessly exiled from their native land?

Such was the theory that gradually assumed shape in Sylvius Hogg's mind--a
theory that it would scarcely do to advance to Joel and Hulda, so painful would
the disappointment prove if it should be without foundation.

"And though the writing gives no clew to the scene of the catastrophe,” he


said to himself, "we at least know where the bottle was picked up. This letter
does not state, but they must know at the Naval Department; and is it not an
indication that might be used to advantage? By studying the direction of the
currents and of the prevailing winds at the time of the shipwreck might it not be
possible? I am certainly going to write again. Search must be made, no matter
how small the chances of success. No; I will never desert poor Hulda! And until
I have positive proofs of it I will never credit the death of her betrothed."

Sylvius Hogg reasoned thus; but at the same time he resolved to say nothing
about the measures he intended to adopt, or the search he intended to urge on
with all his influence. Hulda and her brother must know nothing about his
writing to Christiania; moreover, he resolved to postpone indefinitely the
departure which had been announced for the next day, or rather he would leave
in a few days, but only for a trip to Bergen. There, he could learn from the
Messrs. Help all the particulars concerning the "Viking," ask the opinion of the
most experienced mariners, and decide upon the way in which search could best
be made.

In the meantime, from information furnished by the Navy Department, the
press of Christiania, then that of Norway, Sweden, and finally all Europe,
gradually got hold of this story of a lottery ticket transformed into an important
legal document. There was something very touching about this gift from a
shipwrecked mariner to his betrothed.

The oldest of the Norwegian journals, the "Morgen-Blad," was the first to
relate the story of the "Viking" and Ole Kamp; and of the thirty-seven other
papers published in that country at the time, not one failed to allude to it in
touching terms. The illustrated "Nyhedsblad" published an ideal picture of the
shipwreck. There was the sinking "Viking," with tattered sails and hull partially
destroyed, about to disappear beneath the waves. Ole stood in the bow throwing
the bottle containing his last message into the sea, at the same time commending
his soul to God. In a luminous cloud in the dim distance a wave deposited the
bottle at the feet of his betrothed. The whole picture was upon an enlarged
representation of a lottery ticket bearing the number 9672 in bold relief. An
unpretending conception, unquestionably, but one that could hardly fail to be
regarded as a masterpiece in the land which still clings to legends of the Undines
and Valkyries. Then the story was republished and commented upon in France
and England, and even in the United States. The story of Hulda and Ole became
familiar to every one through the medium of pencil and pen. This young
Norwegian girl, without knowing it, held a prominent place in the sympathy and
esteem of the public. The poor child little suspected the interest she had aroused,
however; besides, nothing could have diverted her mind from the loss that


engrossed her every thought.

This being the case, no one will be surprised at the effect produced upon both
continents--an effect easily explained when we remember how prone we all are
to superstition. A lottery ticket so providentially rescued from the waves could
hardly fail to be the winning ticket. Was it not miraculously designated as the
winner of the capital prize? Was it not worth a fortune--the fortune upon which
Ole Kamp had counted?

Consequently it is not surprising that overtures for the purchase of this ticket
came from all parts of the country. At first, the prices offered were small, but
they increased from day to day; and it was evident that they would continue to
increase in proportion as the day of the drawing approached.

These offers came not only from different parts of Scandinavia, which is a
firm believer in the active intervention of supernatural powers in all mundane
matters--but also from foreign lands, and even from France.

Even the phlegmatic English grew excited over the matter, and subsequently
the Americans, who are not prone to spend their money so unpractically. A host
of letters came to Dal, and the newspapers did not fail to make mention of the
large sums offered to the Hansen family. A sort of minor stock exchange seemed
to have been established, in which values were constantly changing, but always
for the better.

Several hundred marks were, in fact, offered for this ticket, which had only
one chance in a million of winning the capital prize. This was absurd,
unquestionably, but superstitious people do not stop to reason; and as their
imaginations became more and more excited, they were likely to bid much
higher.

This proved to be the case. One week after the event the papers announced
that the amounts offered for the ticket exceeded one thousand, fifteen hundred
and even two thousand marks. A resident of Manchester, England, had even
offered one hundred pounds sterling, or two thousand five hundred marks; while
an American, and a Bostonian at that, announced his willingness to give one
thousand dollars for ticket No. 9672 of the Christiania Schools Lottery.

It is needless to say that Hulda troubled herself very little about the matter
that was exciting the public to such an extent. She would not even read the
letters that were addressed to her on the subject; but the professor insisted that
she must not be left in ignorance of these offers, as Ole Kamp had bequeathed
his right and title in this ticket to her.

Hulda refused all these offers. This ticket was the last letter of her betrothed.

No one need suppose that this refusal was due to an expectation that the
ticket would win one of the prizes in the lottery. No. She saw in it only the last


farewell of her shipwrecked lover--a memento she wished to reverently preserve.
She cared nothing for a fortune that Ole could not share with her. What could be
more touching than this worship of a souvenir?

On apprising her of these different offers, however, neither Sylvius Hogg nor
Joel made any attempt to influence Hulda. She was to be guided entirely by her
own wishes in the matter. They knew now what her wishes were.

Joel, moreover, approved his sister's decision unreservedly. Ole Kamp's
ticket must not be sold to any person at any price.

Sylvius Hogg went even further. He not only approved Hulda's decision, but
he congratulated her upon it. Think of seeing this ticket sold and resold, passing
from hand to hand, transformed, as it were, into a piece of merchandise, until the
time appointed for the drawing arrived, when it would very probably become a
worthless scrap of paper?

And Sylvius Hogg went even further. Was it, perhaps, because he was
slightly superstitious? No. Still, if Ole Kamp had been there, the professor would
probably have said to him:

"Keep your ticket, my boy, keep it! First, your ticket, and then you, yourself,
were saved from the wreck. You had better wait and see what will come of it.
One never knows; no, one never knows!"

And when Sylvius Hogg, professor of law, and; a member of the Storthing,
felt in this way, one can hardly wonder at the infatuation of the public, nor that
No. 9672 could be sold at an enormous premium.

So in Dame Hansen's household there was no one who protested against the
young girl's decision--at least no one except the mother.

She was often heard to censure it, especially in Hulda's absence, a fact that
caused poor Joel not a little mortification and chagrin, for he was very much
afraid that she would not always confine herself to covert censure, and that she
would urge Hulda to accept one of the offers she had received.

"Five thousand marks for the ticket!" she repeated again and again. "They
offer five thousand marks for it!"

It was evident that Dame Hansen saw nothing either pathetic or
commendable in her daughter's refusal. She was thinking only of this large sum
of five thousand marks. A single word from Hulda would bring it into the family.
She had no faith either in the extraordinary value of the ticket, Norwegian
though she was; and to sacrifice fire thousand marks for a millionth chance of
winning one hundred thousand was an idea too absurd to be entertained far a
moment by her cool and practical mind.

All superstition aside, it is undeniable that the sacrifice of a certainty, under
such conditions, was not an act of worldly wisdom; but as we said before, the


ticket was not a lottery ticket in Hulda's eyes; it was Ole's last farewell, and it
would have broken her heart to part with it.

Nevertheless, Dame Hansen certainly disapproved her daughter's resolve. It
was evident, too, that her dissatisfaction was constantly increasing, and it
seemed more than likely that at no very distant day she would endeavor to make
Hulda change her decision. Indeed, she had already intimated as much to Joel,
who had promptly taken his sister's part.

Sylvius Hogg was, of course, kept informed of what was going on. Such an
attempt on the mother's part would only be another trial added to those Hulda
was already obliged to endure, and he was anxious to avert it if possible. Joel
mentioned the subject to him sometimes.

"Isn't my sister right in refusing?" he asked. "And am I not justified in
upholding her in her refusal?"

"Unquestionably," replied Sylvius Hogg. "And yet, from a mathematical
point of view, your mother is a million times right. But the science of
mathematics does not govern everything in this world. Calculation has nothing
to do with the promptings of the heart."

During the next two weeks they were obliged to watch Hulda very closely,
for the state of her health was such as to excite serious anxiety. Fortunately
loving care and attention were not wanting. At Sylvius Hogg's request, the
celebrated Dr. Bock, a personal friend, came to Dal to see the young invalid. He
could only prescribe rest, and quiet of soul, if that were possible; but the only
sure means of curing her was Ole's return, and this means God only could
provide. Still, Sylvius Hogg was untiring in his efforts to console the young girl.
His words were ever words of hope, and strange as it may appear, Sylvius Hogg
did not despair.

Thirteen days had now elapsed since the arrival of the ticket forwarded by
the Navy Department. It was now the thirteenth of June. A fortnight more, and
the drawing of the lottery would take place with great pomp in the main hall of
the University of Christiania.

On the morning of the thirtieth day of June Sylvius Hogg received another
letter from the Navy Department. This letter advised him to confer with the
maritime authorities of Bergen, and authorized him to immediately organize an
expedition to search for the missing "Viking."

The professor did not want Joel or Hulda to know what he intended to do, so
he merely told them that he must leave them for a few days to attend to some
business matters.

"Pray do not desert us, Mister Sylvius," said the poor girl.

"Desert you--you, whom I regard as my own children!" replied Sylvius


Hogg.

Joel offered to accompany him, but not wishing him to know that he was
going to Bergen, the professor would only allow him to go as far as Moel.
Besides, it would not do for Hulda to be left alone with her mother. After being
confined to her bed several days, she was now beginning to sit up a little, though
she was still very weak and not able to leave her room.

At eleven o'clock the kariol was at the door of the inn, and after bidding
Hulda good-bye, the professor took his seat in the vehicle beside Joel. In another
minute they had both disappeared behind a large clump of birches at the turn in
the road.

That same evening Joel returned to Dal.

END OF FIRST HALF.


CHAPTER XIII.

Meanwhile, Sylvius Hogg was hastening toward Bergen. His tenacious
nature and energetic character, though daunted for a moment, were now
reasserting themselves. He refused to credit Ole's death, nor would he admit that
Hulda was doomed never to see her lover again. No, until the fact was
established beyond a doubt, he was determined to regard the report as false.

But had he any information which would serve as a basis for the task he was
about to undertake in Bergen? Yes, though we must admit that the clew was of a
very vague nature.

He knew merely the date on which the bottle had been cast into the sea by
Ole Kamp, and the date and locality in which it had been recovered from the
waves. He had learned those facts through the letter just received from the Naval
Department, the letter which had decided him to leave for Bergen immediately,
in order that he might consult with Help Bros., and with the most experienced
seamen of that port.

The journey was made as quickly as possible. On reaching Moel, Sylvius
Hogg sent his companion back with the kariol, and took passage upon one of the
birch-bark canoes that are used in traversing the waters of Lake Finn. Then, at
Tinoset, instead of turning his steps toward the south--that is to say, in the
direction of Bamble--he hired another kariol, and took the Hardanger route, in
order to reach the gulf of that name in the shortest possible time. From there, a
little steamer called the "Run" transported him to the mouth of the gulf, and
finally, after crossing a network of fiords and inlets, between the islands and
islets that stud the Norwegian coast, he landed at Bergen on the morning of the
second of July.


This old city, laved by the waters of both the Logne and Hardanger, is
delightfully situated in a picturesque region which would bear a striking
resemblance to Switzerland if an artificial arm of the sea should ever conduct the
waters of the blue Mediterranean to the foot of the Alps.

A magnificent avenue of ash trees leads to the town.

The houses, with their fantastic, pointed gables, are as dazzling in their
whiteness as the habitations of Arabian cities, and are all congregated in an
irregular triangle that contains a population of about thirty thousand souls. Its
churches date from the twelfth century. Its tall cathedral is visible from afar to
vessels returning from sea, and it is the capital of commercial Norway, though
situated off the regular lines of travel, and a long distance from the two cities
which rank first and second in the kingdom, politically--Christiania and
Drontheim.

Under any other circumstances the professor would have taken great pleasure
in studying this important city, which is Dutch rather than Norwegian in its
aspect and manners. It had been one of the cities included in his original route,
but since his adventure on the Maristien and his subsequent sojourn at Dal, his
plans had undergone important changes.

Sylvius Hogg was no longer the traveling deputy, anxious to ascertain the
exact condition of the country from a commercial as well as a political point of
view. He was the guest of the Hansens, the debtor of Joel and Hulda, whose
interests now outweighed all else in his estimation--a debtor who was resolved to
pay his debt of gratitude at any cost, though he felt that what he was about to
attempt for them was but a trifle.

On his arrival in Bergen, Sylvius Hogg landed at the lower end of the town,
on the wharf used as a fish-market, but he lost no time in repairing to the part of
the town known as the Tyske Bodrone quarter, where Help, Junior, of the house
of Help Bros., resided.

It was raining, of course, for rain falls in Bergen on at least three hundred
and sixty days of every year; but it would be impossible to find a house better
protected against the wind and rain than the hospitable mansion of Help, Junior,
and nowhere could Sylvius Hogg have received a warmer and more cordial
welcome. His friend took possession of him very much as if he had been some
precious bale of merchandise which had been consigned to his care, and which
would be delivered up only upon the presentation of a formal order.

Sylvius Hogg immediately made known the object of his visit to Help,
Junior. He inquired if any news had yet been received of the "Viking," and if
Bergen mariners were really of the opinion that she had gone down with all on
board. He also inquired if this probable shipwreck, which had plunged so many


homes into mourning, had not led the maritime authorities to make some search
for the missing vessel.

"But where were they to begin?” replied Help, Junior. "They do not even
know where the shipwreck occurred."

"True, my dear Help, and for that very reason they should endeavor to
ascertain."

"But how?"

"Why, though they do not know where the 'Viking' foundered, they certainly
know where the bottle was picked up by the Danish vessel. So we have one
valuable clew which it would be very wrong to ignore."

"Where was it?”

"Listen, my dear Help, and I will tell you."

Sylvius Hogg then apprised his friend of the important information which
had just been received through the Naval Department, and the full permission
given him to utilize it.

The bottle containing Ole Kamp's lottery-ticket had been picked up on the
third of June, about two hundred miles south of Iceland, by the schooner
"Christian," of Elsineur, Captain Mosselman, and the wind was blowing strong
from the south-east at the time.

The captain had immediately examined the contents of the bottle, as it was
certainly his duty to do, inasmuch as he might-have rendered very effectual aid
to the survivors of the "Viking" had he known where the catastrophe occurred;
but the lines scrawled upon the back of the lottery-ticket gave no clew, so the
"Christian" could not direct her course to the scene of the shipwreck.

This Captain Mosselman was an honest man. Very possibly some less
scrupulous person would have kept the ticket; but he had only one thought--to
transmit the ticket to the person to whom it was addressed as soon as he entered
port. Hulda Hansen, of Dal, that was enough. It was not necessary to know any
more.

But on reaching Copenhagen, Captain Mosselman said to himself that it
would perhaps be better to transmit the document through the hands of the
Danish authorities, instead of sending it straight to the person for whom it was
intended. This would be the safest, as well as the regular way. He did so, and the
Naval Department at Copenhagen promptly notified the Naval Department at
Christiania.

Sylvius Hogg's letter, asking for information in regard to the "Viking," had
already been received, and the deep interest he took in the Hansen family was
well known. It was known, too, that he intended to remain in Dal some time
longer, so it was there that the ticket found by the Danish sea-captain was sent,


to be delivered into Hulda Hansen's hands by the famous deputy.

And ever since that time the public had taken a deep interest in the affair,
which had not been forgotten, thanks to the touching details given by the
newspapers of both continents.

Sylvius Hogg stated the case briefly to his friend Help, who listened to him
with the deepest interest, and without once interrupting him. He concluded his
recital by saying:

"There is certainly one point about which there can be no possible doubt: this
is, that on the third day of June, about one month after the departure from Saint-
Pierre-Miquelon, the ticket was picked up two hundred miles south-west of
Iceland."

"And that is all you know?"

"Yes, my dear Help, but by consulting some of the most experienced
mariners of Bergen, men who are familiar with that locality, with the general
direction of its winds, and, above-all, with its currents, will it not be a
comparatively easy matter to decide upon the route followed by the bottle?
Then, by calculating its probable speed, and the time that elapsed before it was
picked up, it certainly would not be impossible to discover the spot at which it
was Cast into the sea by Ole Kamp, that is to say, the scene of the shipwreck."

Help, Junior, shook his head with a doubting air. Would not any search that
was based upon such vague indications as these be sure to prove a failure? The
shipowner, being of a decided, cool and practical turn of mind, certainly thought
so, and felt it his duty to say as much to Sylvius Hogg.

"Perhaps it may prove a failure, friend Help," was the prompt rejoinder; "but
the fact that we have been able to secure only vague information, is certainly no
reason for abandoning the undertaking. I am anxious that nothing shall be left
undone for these poor people to whom I am indebted for my life. Yes, if need be,
I would not hesitate to sacrifice all I possess to find Ole Kamp, and bring him
safely back to his betrothed, Hulda Hansen."

Then Sylvius Hogg proceeded to give a full account of his adventure on the
Rjukanfos. He related the intrepid manner in which Joel and his sister had risked
their own lives to save him, and how, but for their timely assistance, he would
not have had the pleasure of being the guest of his friend Help that day.

His friend Help, as we said before, was an eminently practical man, but he
was not opposed to useless and even impossible efforts when a question "of
humanity was involved, and he finally approved what Sylvius Hogg wished to
attempt.

"Sylvius," he said, "I will assist you by every means in my power. Yes, you
are right. However small the chance of finding some survivor of the 'Viking' may


be, and especially of finding this brave Ole whose betrothed saved your life, it
must not be neglected."

"No, Help, no," interrupted the professor; "not if it were but one chance in a
hundred thousand."

"So this very day, Sylvius, I will assemble all the most experienced seamen
of Bergen in my office. I will send for all who have navigated or who are now
navigating the ocean between Iceland and Newfoundland, and we will see what
they advise us to do."

"And what they advise us to do we will do," added Sylvius Hogg, without an
instant's hesitation. "I have the approval of the government. In fact, I am
authorized to send one of its dispatch-boats in search of the 'Viking,' and I feel
sure that no one will hesitate to take part in such a work."

"I will pay a visit to the marine bureau, and see what I can learn there,"
remarked Help, Junior.

"Would you like me to accompany you?"

"Tt is not necessary, and you must be fatigued."

"Fatigued! I--at my age?"

"Nevertheless, you had better rest until my return, my dear and ever-young
Sylvius."

That same day there was a large meeting of captains of merchant and
whaling vessels, as well as pilots, in the office of Help Bros.--an assemblage of
men who were still navigating the seas, as well as of those who had retired from
active service.

Sylvius Hogg explained the situation briefly but clearly. He told them the
date--May 3d--on which the bottle had been cast into the sea by Ole Kamp, and
the date--June 3d--on which it had been picked up by the Danish captain, two
hundred miles south-west of Iceland.

The discussion that followed was long and serious. There was not one of
these brave men who were not familiar with the currents of that locality, and
upon the direction of these currents they must, of course, chiefly depend for a
solution of the problem.

But it was an incontestable fact that at the time of the shipwreck, and during
the interval that elapsed between the sailing of the "Viking" from Saint-Pierre-
Miquelon, and the discovery of the bottle by the Danish vessel, constant gales
from the south-east had disturbed that portion of the Atlantic. In fact, it was to
one of these tempests that the catastrophe must be attributed. Probably the
"Viking," being unable to carry sail in the teeth of the tempest, had been obliged
to scud before the windy and it being at this season of the year that the ice from
the polar seas begins to make its way down into the Atlantic, it was more than


likely that a collision had taken place, and that the "Viking" had been crushed by
a floating iceberg, which it was impossible to avoid.

Still, in that case, was it not more than probable that the whole, or a part, of
the ship's crew had taken refuge upon one of these ice fields after having placed
a quantity of provisions upon it? If they had really done so, the iceberg, having
certainly been driven in a north-westerly direction by the winds which were
prevailing at the time, it was not unlikely that the survivors had been able to
reach some point on the coast of Greenland, so it was in that direction, and in
those seas, that search should be made.

This was the unanimous opinion of these experienced mariners, and there
could be no doubt that this was the only feasible plan. But would they find aught
save a few fragments of the "Viking" in case the vessel had been crushed by
some enormous iceberg? Could they hope to effect the rescue of any survivors?

This was more than doubtful, and the professor on putting the question
perceived that the more competent could not, or would not, reply. Still, this was
no cause for inaction--they were all agreed upon that point--but action must be
taken without delay.

There are always several government vessels at Bergen, and one of the three
dispatch-boats charged with the surveillance of the western coast of Norway is
attached to this port. As good luck would have it, that very boat was now riding
at anchor in the bay.

After making a note of the various suggestions advanced by the most
experienced seamen who had assembled at the office of Help, Junior, Sylvius
Hogg went aboard the dispatch-boat "Telegraph," and apprised the commander
of the special mission intrusted to him by the government.

The commander received him very cordially, and declared his willingness to
render all the assistance in his power. He had become familiar with the
navigation of the locality specified during several long and dangerous voyages
from the Loffoden Islands and Finmark to the Iceland and Newfoundland
fisheries; so he would have experience to aid him in the humane work he was
about to undertake, as he fully agreed with the seamen already consulted that it
was in the waters between Iceland and Greenland that they must look for the
survivors, or at least for some trace of the "Viking." If he did not succeed there,
he would, however, explore the neighboring shores, and perhaps the eastern part
of Baffin's Bay.

"I am all ready to start, sir," he added. "My coal and provisions are on board,
my crew has been selected, and I can set sail this very day."

"Thank you, captain,” replied the professor, "not only for your promptness,
but for the very kind reception you have given me. But one question more: Can


you tell me how long it will take you to reach the shores of Greenland?"

"My vessel makes about eleven knots an hour, and as the distance from
Bergen to Greenland is only about twenty degrees, I can count upon arriving
there in less than a week."

"Make all possible haste, captain," replied Sylvius Hogg. "If any of the
shipwrecked crew did survive the catastrophe, two months have already elapsed
since the vessel went down, and they are perhaps in a destitute and even
famishing condition upon some desert coast."

"Yes, there is no time to lose, Monsieur Hogg. I will start this very day, keep
my vessel going at the top of her speed, and as soon as I find any trace whatever
I will inform the Naval Department at Christiania by a telegram from
Newfoundland.”

"God-speed you, captain," replied Sylvius Hogg, "and may you succeed."

That same day the "Telegraph" set sail, followed by the sympathizing cheers
of the entire population of Bergen, and it was not without keen emotion that the
kind-hearted people watched the vessel make its way down the channel, and
finally disappear behind the islands of the fiord.

But Sylvius Hogg did not confine his efforts to the expedition undertaken by
the dispatch-boat "Telegraph." On the contrary, he was resolved to multiply the
chances of finding some trace of the missing "Viking." Would it not be possible
to excite a spirit of emulation in the captains of merchant vessels and fishing-
smacks that navigated the waters of Iceland and the Faroe Islands?
Unquestionably. So a reward of two thousand marks was promised in the name
of the government to any vessel that would furnish any information in regard to
the missing "Viking," and one of five thousand marks to any vessel that would
bring one of the survivors of the shipwreck back to his native land.

So, during the two days spent in Bergen Sylvius Hogg did everything in his
power to insure the success of the enterprise, and he was cheerfully seconded in
his efforts by Help, Junior, and all the maritime authorities. M. Help would have
been glad to have the worthy deputy as a guest some time longer, but though
Sylvius Hogg thanked him cordially he declined to prolong his stay. He was
anxious to rejoin Hulda and Joel, being afraid to leave them to themselves too
long, but Help, Junior, promised him that any news that might be received
should be promptly transmitted to Dal.

So, on the morning of the 4th, after taking leave of his friend Help, Sylvius
Hogg re-embarked on the "Run" to cross the fiord of the Hardanger, and if
nothing unforeseen occurred he counted on reaching the Telemark by the
evening of the 5th.


CHAPTER XIV.

The day that Sylvius Hogg left Bergen proved an eventful one at the inn.

After the professor's departure the house seemed deserted. It almost seemed
as if the kind friend of the young Hansens had taken away with him, not only the
last hope, but the life of the family, and left only a charnel-house behind him.

During the two days that followed no guests presented themselves at the inn.
Joel had no occasion to absent himself, consequently, but could remain with
Hulda, whom he was very unwilling to leave alone with her own thoughts.

Dame Hansen seemed to become more and more a prey to secret anxiety.
She seemed to feel no interest in anything connected with her children, not even
in the loss of the "Viking." She lived a life apart, remaining shut up in her own
room, and appearing only at meal-time. When she did address a word to Hulda
or Joel it was only to reproach them directly or indirectly on the subject of the
lottery-ticket, which neither of them felt willing to dispose of at any price. Offers
for the ticket continued to pour in from every comer of the globe. A positive
mania seemed to have seized certain brains. Such a ticket must certainly be
predestined to win the prize of one hundred thousand marks--there could be no
doubt of it, so said every one. A person would have supposed there was but one
ticket in the lottery, and that the number of it was 9672. The Manchester man
and the Bostonian were still at the head of the list. The Englishman had outbid
his rival by a few pounds, but he, in turn, was soon distanced by an advance of
several hundred dollars. The last bid was one of eight thousand marks--and it
could be explained only as the result of positive madness, unless it was a
question of national pride on this part of an American and an Englishman.

However this may have been Hulda refused all these offers, and her conduct
excited the bitter disapproval of Dame Hansen.

"What if I should order you to sell this ticket? Yes, order you to sell it," she
said to her daughter one day.

"I should be very sorry, mother, but I should be obliged to refuse."

"But if it should become absolutely necessary, what then?"

"But how can that be possible?" asked Joel.

Dame Hansen made no reply. She had turned very pale on hearing this
straightforward question, and now withdrew, muttering some incoherent words.

"There is certainly something wrong," remarked Joel. "There must be some
difficulty between mother and Sandgoist."

"Yes, brother, we must be prepared for some serious complications in the
future."

"Have we not suffered enough during the past few weeks, my poor Hulda?


What fresh catastrophe threatens us?"

"How long Monsieur Sylvius stays!" exclaimed Hulda, without paying any
apparent heed to the question. "When he is here I feel less despondent."

"And yet, what can he do for us?" replied Joel.

What could there have been in Dame Hansen's past that she was unwilling to
confide to her children? What foolish pride prevented her from revealing to them
the cause of her disquietude? Had she any real cause to reproach herself? And on
the other hand, why did she endeavor to influence her daughter in regard to Ole
Kamp's ticket, and the price that was to be set upon it? Why did she seem so
eager to dispose of it, or rather, to secure the money that had been offered for it?
Hulda and Joel were about to learn.

On the morning of the 4th Joel escorted his sister to the little chapel where
she went every morning to pray for the lost one. Her brother always waited for
her, and accompanied her back to the house.

That day, on returning, they both perceived Dame Hansen in the distance,
walking rapidly in the direction of the inn. She was not alone. A man was
walking beside her--a man who seemed to be talking in a loud voice, and whose
gestures were vehement and imperious.

Hulda and her brother both paused suddenly.

"Who is that man?" inquired Joel.

Hulda advanced a few steps.

"IT know him," she said at last.

"You know him?"

"Yes, it is Sandgoist."

"Sandgoist, of Drammen, who came here during my absence?"

"Yes."

"And who acted in such a lordly way that he would seem to have mother, and
us, too, perhaps, in his power?"

"The same, brother; and he has probably come to make us feel his power to-
day."

"What power? This time I will know the object of his visit."

Joel controlled himself, though not without an evident effort, and followed
his sister.

In a few moments Dame Hansen and Sandgoist reached the door of the inn.
Sandgoist crossed the threshold first; then the door closed upon Dame Hansen
and upon him, and both of them entered the large parlor.

As Joel and Hulda approached the house the threatening voice of Sandgoist
became distinctly audible. They paused and listened; Dame Hansen was
speaking now, but in entreating tones.


"Let us go in," remarked Joel.

Hulda entered with a heavy heart; Joel was trembling with suppressed anger
and impatience.

Sandgoist sat enthroned in the big arm-chair. He did not even take the trouble
to rise on the entrance of the brother and sister. He merely turned his head and
stared at them over his spectacles.

"Ah! here is the charming Hulda, if I'm not mistaken," he exclaimed in a tone
that incensed Joel even more deeply.

Dame Hansen was standing in front of the man in an humble almost cringing
attitude, but she instantly straightened herself up, and seemed greatly annoyed at
the sight of her children.

"And this is her brother, I suppose?" added Sandgoist.

"Yes, her brother," retorted Joel.

Then, advancing until within a few steps of the arm-chair, he asked,
brusquely:

"What do you want here?"

Sandgoist gave him a withering look; then, in a harsh voice, and without
rising, he replied:

"You will soon learn, young man. You happen in just at the right time. I was
anxious to see you, and if your sister is a sensible girl we shall soon come to an
understanding. But sit down, and you, too, young woman, had better do the
same."

Sandgoist seemed to be doing the honors of his own house, and Joel instantly
noted the fact.

"Ah, ha! you are displeased! What a touchy young man you seem to be!"

"I am not particularly touchy that I know of, but I don't feel inclined to
accept civilities from those who have no right to offer them."

"Joel!" cried Dame Hansen.

"Brother, brother!" exclaimed Hulda, with an imploring look.

Joel made a violent effort to control himself, and to prevent himself from
yielding to his desire to throw this coarse wretch out of the window, he retired to
a corner of the room.

"Can I speak now?" inquired Sandgoist.

An affirmative sign from Dame Hansen was all the answer he obtained, but it
seemed to be sufficient.

"What I have to say is this," he began, "and I would like all three of you to
listen attentively, for I don't fancy being obliged to repeat my words."

That he spoke like a person who had an indisputable right to his own way
was only too evident to each and every member of the party.


"I have learned through the newspapers," he continued, "of the misfortune
which has befallen a certain Ole Kamp--a young seaman of Bergen--and of a
lottery-ticket that he bequeathed to his betrothed, Hulda Hansen, just as his ship,
the 'Viking,' was going down. I have also learned that the public at large feels
convinced that this will prove the fortunate ticket by reason of the peculiar
circumstances under which it was found. I have also learned that some very
liberal offers for the purchase of this ticket have been received by Hulda
Hansen."

He was silent for a moment, then:

"Is this true?" he added.

He was obliged to wait some time for an answer to this question.

"Yes, it is true," replied Joel, at last. "And what of it, if you please?"

"These offers are, in my opinion, the result of a most absurd and senseless
superstition," continued Sandgoist, "but for all that, they will continue to be
made, and to increase in amount, as the day appointed for the drawing
approaches. Now, I am a business man myself, and I have taken it into my head
that I should like to have a hand in this little speculation myself, so I left
Drammen yesterday to come to Dal to arrange for the transfer of this ticket, and
to beg Dame Hansen to give me the preference over all other would-be
purchasers."

Hulda was about to make Sandgoist the same answer she had given to all
offers of this kind, though his remarks had not been addressed directly to her,
when Joel checked her.

"Before replying, I should like to ask Monsieur Sandgoist if he knows to
whom this ticket belongs?" he said haughtily.

"To Hulda Hansen, I suppose."

"Very well; then it is to Hulda Hansen that this application should be
addressed."

"My son!" hastily interposed Dame Hansen.

"Let me finish, mother," continued Joel. "This ticket belonged originally to
our cousin, Ole Kamp, and had not Ole Kamp a perfect right to bequeath it to his
betrothed?"

"Unquestionably," replied Sandgoist.

"Then it is to Hulda Hanson that you must apply, if you wish to purchase it."

"So be it, Master Formality," retorted Sandgoist. "I now ask Hulda to sell me
this ticket Number 9672 that Ole Kamp bequeathed to her."

"Monsieur Sandgoist," the young girl answered in firm but quiet tones, "I
have received a great many offers for this ticket, but they have been made in
vain. I shall say to you exactly what I have said to others. If my betrothed sent


me this ticket with his last farewell upon it it was because he wished me to keep
it, so I will not part with it at any price."

Having said this Hulda turned, as if to leave the room, evidently supposing
that the conversation so far as she was concerned had been terminated by her
refusal, but at a gesture from her mother she paused.

An exclamation of annoyance had escaped Dame Hansen, and Sandgoist's
knitted brows and flashing eyes showed that anger was beginning to take
possession of him.

"Yes, remain, Hulda," said he. "This is not your final answer. If I insist it is
because I certainly have a right to do so. Besides, I think I must have stated the
case badly, or rather you must have misunderstood me. It is certain that the
chances of this ticket have not increased because the hand of a shipwrecked
seaman placed it in a bottle and it was subsequently recovered; still, the public
seldom or never reasons, and there is not the slightest doubt that many persons
desire to become the owners of it. They have already offered to purchase it, and
other offers are sure to follow. It is simply a business transaction, I repeat, and I
have come to propose a good trade to you."

"You will have some difficulty in coming to an understanding with my sister,
sir," replied Joel, ironically. "When you talk business to her she replies with
sentiment."

"That is all idle talk, young man," replied Sandgoist. "When my explanation
is concluded you will see that however advantageous the transaction may be to
me it will be equally so to her. I may also add that it will be equally so to her
mother, Dame Hansen, who is personally interested in the matter."

Joel and Hulda exchanged glances. Were they about to learn the secret Dame
Hansen had so long concealed from them?

"I do not ask that this ticket shall be sold to me for what Ole Kamp paid for
it," continued Sandgoist. No! Right or wrong, it has certainly acquired an
increased financial value, and I am willing to make a sacrifice to become the
owner of it."

"You have already been told that Hulda has refused much better offers than
yours," replied Joel.

"Indeed!" exclaimed Sandgoist. "Much better offers, you say. How do you
know?"

"Whatever your offer may be, my sister refuses it, and I approve of her
decision."

"Ah! am I dealing with Joel or Hulda Hansen, pray?"

"My sister and I are one," retorted Joel. "It would be well for you to become
satisfied of this fact, as you seem to be ignorant of it."


Sandgoist shrugged his shoulders, but without being at all disconcerted, for
like a man who is sure of his arguments, he replied:

"When I spoke of the price I was willing to pay for the ticket, I ought to have
told you that I could offer inducements which Hulda Hansen can hardly reject if
she takes any interest in the welfare of her family."

"Indeed?"

"Yes, and it would be well for you, young man, to understand, in your turn,
that I did not come to Dal to beg your sister to sell me this ticket. No, a thousand
times no."

"For what, then?"

"T do not ask for it, I demand it. I will have it."

"And by what right?" exclaimed Joel, "and how dare you, a stranger, speak in
this way in my mother's house?"

"By the right every man has to speak as he pleases, and when he pleases, in
his own house," retorted Sandgoist.

"In his own house?"

Joel, in his indignation, stepped threateningly toward Sandgoist, who, though
not easily frightened, sprung hastily out of his arm-chair. But Hulda laid a
detaining hand upon her brother's arm, while Dame Hansen, burying her face in
her hands, retreated to the other end of the room.

"Brother, look at her!" whispered the young girl.

Joel paused suddenly. A glance at his mother paralyzed him. Her very
attitude revealed how entirely Dame Hansen was in this scoundrel's power.

Sandgoist, seeing Joel's hesitation, recovered his self-possession, and
resumed his former seat.

"Yes, in his own house," he continued in a still more arrogant voice. "Ever
since her husband's death, Dame Hansen has been engaging in unsuccessful
speculations. After losing the small fortune your father left at his death, she was
obliged to borrow money of a Christiania banker, offering this house as security
for a loan of fifteen thousand marks. About a year ago I purchased the mortgage,
and this house will consequently become my property--and very speedily--if I
am not paid when this mortgage becomes due."

"When is it due?" demanded Joel.

"On the 20th of July, or eighteen days from now," replied Sandgoist. "Then,
whether you like it or not, I shall be in my own house here."

"You will not be in your own house here until that date, even if you are not
paid at that time," retorted Joel, "and I forbid you to speak as you have been
doing in the presence of my mother and sister."

"He forbids me--me!" exclaimed Sandgoist. "But how about his mother--


what does she say?"

"Speak, mother!" cried Joel, approaching Dame Hansen, and endeavoring to
remove her hands from her face.

"Joel, my brother," exclaimed Hulda. "I entreat you, for my sake, to be
calm."

Dame Hansen bowed her head upon her breast, not daring to meet her son's
searching eyes. It was only too true that she had been endeavoring to increase
her fortune by rash speculations for several years past. The small sum of money
at her disposal had soon melted away, and she had been obliged to borrow at a
high rate of interest. And now the mortgage had passed into the hands of this
Sandgoist--a heartless and unprincipled man--a well-known usurer, who was
heartily despised throughout the country. Dame Hansen, however, had seen him
for the first time when he came to Dal to satisfy himself in regard to the value of
the property.

This was the secret that had weighed so heavily upon her. This, too,
explained her reserve, for she had not dared to confide in her children. This was
the secret she had sedulously kept from those whose future she had blighted.

Hulda scarcely dared to think of what she had just heard. Yes, Sandgoist was
indeed a master who had the power to enforce his will! The ticket he wished to
purchase would probably be worth nothing a fortnight hence, and if she did not
consent to relinquish it certain ruin would follow--their house would be sold
over their heads, and the Hansen family would be homeless and penniless.

Hulda dared not even glance at Joel, but Joel was too angry to pay any heed
to these threats. He could think only of Sandgoist, and if the man continued to
talk in this way the impetuous youth felt that he should not be able to control
himself much longer.

Sandgoist, seeing that he had once more become master of the situation,
grew even more arrogant and imperious in his manner.

"I want that ticket, and I intend to have it," he repeated. "In exchange for it I
offer no fixed price, but I promise to extend the mortgage for one--two, or three
years--Fix the date yourself, Hulda."

Hulda's heart was so deeply oppressed with anguish that she was unable to
reply, but her brother answered for her.

"Ole Kamp's ticket can not be sold by Hulda Hansen. My sister refuses your
offer, in spite of your threats. Now leave the house!"

"Leave the house," repeated Sandgoist. "I shall do nothing of the kind. If the
offer I have made does not satisfy you I will go even further. In exchange for the
ticket I offer you--I offer you--"

Sandgoist must certainly have felt an irresistible desire to possess this ticket-


-or at least he most have been convinced that the purchase would prove a most
advantageous one to him, for he seated himself at a table upon which lay pen,
ink, and paper, and a moment afterward he added:

"Here is what I offer."

It was a receipt for the amount of Dame Hansen's indebtedness--a receipt for
the amount of the mortgage on the Dal property.

Dame Hansen cowered in her corner, with hands outstretched, and eyes fixed
imploringly on her daughter.

"And now give me the ticket," cried Sandgoist, "I want it to-day--this very
instant. I will not leave Dal without it"

As he spoke he stepped hastily toward the poor girl as if with the intention of
searching her pockets, and wresting the ticket from her.

This was more than Joel could endure, especially when he heard Hulda's
startled cry of "Brother! brother!"

"Get out of here!" he shouted, roughly. And seeing that Sandgoist showed no
intention of obeying, the young man was about to spring upon him, when Hulda
hastily interposed.

"Here is the ticket, mother," she cried.

Dame Hansen seized it, and as she exchanged it for Sandgoist's receipt her
daughter sunk, almost fainting, into an arm-chair.

"Hulda! Hulda! Oh, what have you done?" cried Joel.

"What has she done," replied Dame Hansen. "Yes, I am guilty--for my
children's sake I wished to increase the property left by their father, but instead I
have reduced them to poverty. But Hulda has saved us all. That is what she has
done. Thank you, Hulda, thank you."

Sandgoist still lingered. Joel perceived the fact.

"You are here still," he continued, roughly. And springing upon Sandgoist he
seized him by the shoulders and hustled him out-of-doors in spite of his protests
and resistance.


CHAPTER XV.

Sylvius Hogg reached Dal on the evening of the following day. He did not
say a word about his journey, and no one knew that he had been to Bergen. As
long as the search was productive of no results he wished the Hansen family to
remain in ignorance of it. Every letter or telegram, whether from Bergen or
Christiania, was to be addressed to him, at the inn, where he intended to await
further developments. Did he still hope? Yes, though it must be admitted that he
had some misgivings.


As soon as he returned the professor became satisfied that some important
event had occurred in his absence. The altered manner of Joel and Hulda showed
conclusively that an explanation must have taken place between their mother and
themselves. Had some new misfortunes befallen the Hansen household?

All this of course troubled Sylvius Hogg greatly. He felt such a paternal
affection for the brother and sister that he could not have been more fond of
them if they had been his own children. How much he had missed them during
his short absence.

"They will tell me all by and by," he said to himself. "They will have to tell
me all. Am I not a member of the family?"

Yes; Sylvius Hogg felt now that he had an undoubted right to be consulted in
regard to everything connected with the private life of his young friends, and to
know why Joel and Hulda seemed even more unhappy than at the time of his
departure. The mystery was soon solved.

In fact both the young people were anxious to confide in the excellent man
whom they loved with a truly filial devotion, but they were waiting for him to
question them. During his absence they had felt lonely and forsaken--the more
so from the fact that Sylvius Hogg had not seen fit to tell them where he was
going. Never had the hours seemed so long. It never once occurred to them that
the journey was in any way connected with a search for the "Viking," and that
Sylvius Hogg had concealed the fact from them in order to spare them additional
disappointment in case of failure.

And now how much more necessary his presence seemed to have become to
them! How glad they were to see him, to listen to his words of counsel and hear
his kind and encouraging voice. But would they ever dare to tell him what had
passed between them and the Drammen usurer, and how Dame Hansen had
marred the prospects of her children? What would Sylvius Hogg say when he
learned that the ticket was no longer in Hulda's possession, and when he heard
that Dame Hansen had used it to free herself from her inexorable creditor?

He was sure to learn these facts, however. Whether it was Sylvius Hogg or
Hulda that first broached the subject, it would be hard to say, nor does it matter
much. This much is certain, however, the professor soon became thoroughly
acquainted with the situation of affairs. He was told of the danger that had
threatened Dame Hansen and her children, and how the usurer would have
driven them from their old home in a fortnight if the debt had not been paid by
the surrender of the ticket.

Sylvius Hogg listened attentively to this sad story.

"You should not have given up the ticket," he cried, vehemently; "no, you
should not have done it."


"How could I help it, Monsieur Sylvius?" replied the poor girl, greatly
troubled.

"You could not, of course, and yet--Ah, if I had only been here!"

And what would Professor Sylvius Hogg have done had he been there? He
did not say, however, but continued:

"Yes, my dear Hulda; yes, Joel, you did the best you could, under the
circumstances. But what enrages me almost beyond endurance is the fact that
this Sandgoist will profit greatly, no doubt, by this absurd superstition on the part
of the public. If poor Ole's ticket should really prove to be the lucky one this
unprincipled scoundrel will reap all the benefit. And yet, to suppose that this
number, 9672, will necessarily prove the lucky one, is simply ridiculous and
absurd. Still, I would not have given up the ticket, I think. After once refusing to
surrender it to Sandgoist Hulda would have done better to turn a deaf ear to her
mother's entreaties."

The brother and sister could find nothing to say in reply. In giving the ticket
to Dame Hansen, Hulda had been prompted by a filial sentiment that was
certainly to be commended rather than censured. The sacrifice she had made was
not one of more or less probable chance, but of Ole Kamp's last wishes and of
her last memento of her lover.

But it was too late to think of this now. Sandgoist had the ticket. It belonged
to him, and he would sell it to the highest bidder. A heartless usurer would thus
coin money out of the touching farewell of the shipwrecked mariner. Sylvius
Hogg could not bear the thought. It was intolerable to him.

He resolved to have a talk with Dame Hansen on the subject that very day.
This conversation could effect no change in the state of affairs, but it had
become almost necessary.

"So you think I did wrong, Monsieur Hogg?" she asked, after allowing the
professor to say all he had to say on the subject.

"Certainly, Dame Hansen."

"If you blame me for having engaged in rash speculations, and for
endangering the fortune of my children, you are perfectly right; but if you blame
me for having resorted to the means I did to free myself, you are wrong. What
have you to say in reply?"

"Nothing."

"But seriously, do you think that I ought to have refused the offer of
Sandgoist, who really offered fifteen thousand marks for a ticket that is probably
worth nothing; I ask you again, do you think I ought to have refused it?"

"Yes and no, Dame Hansen."

"It can not be both yes and no, professor; it is no. Under different


circumstances, and if the future had appeared less threatening--though that was
my own fault, I admit--I should have upheld Hulda in her refusal to part with the
ticket she had received from Ole Kamp. But when there was a certainty of being
driven in a few days from the house in which my husband died, and in which my
children first saw the light, I could not understand such a refusal, and you
yourself, Monsieur Hogg, had you been in my place, would certainly have acted
as I did."

"No, Dame Hansen, no!"

"What would you have done, then?"

"IT would have done anything rather than sacrifice a ticket my daughter had
received under such circumstances.”

"Do these circumstances, in your opinion, enhance the value of the ticket?"

"No one can say."

"On the contrary, every one does know. This ticket is simply one that has
nine hundred and ninety-nine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine chances of
losing against one of winning. Do you consider it any more valuable because it
was found in a bottle that was picked up at sea?"

Sylvius Hogg hardly knew what to say in reply to this straightforward
question, so he reverted to the sentimental side of the question by remarking:

"The situation now seems to be briefly as follows: Ole Kamp, as the ship
went down, bequeathed to Hulda the sole earthly possession left him, with the
request that she should present it on the day of the drawing, provided, of course,
that the ticket reached her; and now this ticket is no longer in Hulda's
possession."

"If Ole Kamp had been here, he would not have hesitated to surrender his
ticket to Sandgoist," replied Dame Hansen.

"That is quite possible," replied Sylvius Hogg; "but certainly no other person
had a right to do it, and what will you say to him if he has not perished and if he
should return to-morrow, or this very day?"

"Ole will never return," replied Dame Hansen, gloomily. "Ole is dead,
Monsieur Hogg, dead, beyond a doubt."

"You can not be sure of that, Dame Hansen," exclaimed the professor. "In
fact, you know nothing at all about it. Careful search is being made for some
survivor of the shipwreck. It may prove successful; yes, even before the time
appointed for the drawing of this lottery. You have no right to say that Ole Kamp
is dead, so long as we have no proof that he perished in the catastrophe. The
reason I speak with less apparent assurance before your children is that I do not
want to arouse hopes that may end in bitter disappointment. But to you, Dame
Hansen, I can say what I really think, and I can not, I will not believe that Ole


Kamp is dead! No, I will not believe it!"

Finding herself thus worsted, Dame Hansen ceased to argue the question, and
this Norwegian, being rather superstitious in her secret heart, hung her head as if
Ole Kamp was indeed about to appear before her.

"At all events, before parting with the ticket," continued Sylvius Hogg,
"there was one very simple thing that you neglected to do."

"What?"

"You should first have applied to your personal friends or the friends of your
family. They would not have refused to assist you, either by purchasing the
mortgage of Sandgoist, or by loaning you the money to pay it."

"I have no friends of whom I could ask such a favor."

"Yes, you have, Dame Hansen. I know at least one person who would have
done it without the slightest hesitation."

"And who is that, if you please?"

"Sylvius Hogg, member of the Storthing."

Dame Hansen, too deeply moved to reply in words, bowed her thanks to the
professor.

"But what's done can't be undone, unfortunately," added Sylvius Hogg, "and
I should be greatly obliged to you, Dame Hansen, if you would refrain from
saying anything to your children about this conversation."

And the two separated.

The professor had resumed his former habits, and his daily walks as well. In
company with Joel and Hulda, he spent several hours every day in visiting the
points of interest in and about Dal--not going too far, however, for fear of
wearying the young girl. Much of his time, too, was devoted to his extensive
correspondence. He wrote letter after letter to Bergen and Christiania,
stimulating the zeal all who were engaged in the good work of searching for the
"Viking." To find Ole seemed to be his sole aim in life now.

He even felt it his duty to again absent himself for twenty-four hours,
doubtless for an object in some way connected with the affair in which Dame
Hansen's family was so deeply interested; but, as before, he maintained absolute
silence in regard to what he was doing or having done in this matter.

In the meantime Hulda regained strength but slowly. The poor girl lived only
upon the recollection of Ole; and her hope of seeing him again grew fainter from
day to day. It is true, she had near her the two beings she loved best in the world;
and one of them never ceased to encourage her; but would that suffice? Was it
not necessary to divert her mind at any cost? But how was her mind to be
diverted from the gloomy thoughts that bound her, as it were, to the shipwrecked
"Viking?"


The 12th of July came. The drawing of the Christiania Schools Lottery was
to take place in four days.

It is needless to say that Sandgoist's purchase had come to the knowledge of
the public. The papers announced that the famous ticket bearing the number
9672 was now in the possession of M. Sandgoist, of Drammen, and that this
ticket would be sold to the highest bidder; so, if M. Sandgoist was now the
owner of the aforesaid ticket, he must have purchased it for a round sum of
Hulda Hansen.

Of course this announcement lowered the young girl very decidedly in public
estimation. What! Hulda Hansen had consented to sell the ticket belonging to her
lost lover? She had turned this last memento of him into money?

But a timely paragraph that appeared in the "Morgen-Blad" gave the readers
a true account of what had taken place. It described the real nature of Sandgoist's
interference, and how the ticket had come into his hands. And now it was upon
the Drammen usurer that public odium fell; upon the heartless creditor who had
not hesitated to take advantage of the misfortunes of the Hansen family, and as if
by common consent the offers which had been made while Hulda held the ticket
were not renewed. The ticket seemed to have lost its supernatural value since it
had been defiled by Sandgoist's touch, so that worthy had made but a bad
bargain, after all, and the famous ticket, No. 9672, appeared likely to be left on
his hands.

It is needless to say that neither Hulda nor Joel was aware of what had been
said, and this was fortunate, for it would have been very painful to them to
become publicly mixed up in an affair which had assumed such a purely
speculative character since it came into the hands of the usurer.

Late on the afternoon of the 12th of July, a letter arrived, addressed to
Professor Sylvius Hogg.

This missive, which came from the Naval Department, contained another
which had been mailed at Christiansand, a small town situated at the mouth of
the Gulf of Christiania. It could hardly have contained any news, however, for
Sylvius Hogg put it in his pocket and said nothing to Joel or his sister about its
contents.

But when he bade them good-night on retiring to his chamber, he remarked:

"The drawing of the lottery is to take place in three days as you are, of
course, aware, my children. You intend to be present, do you not?"

"What is the use, Monsieur Sylvius?" responded Hulda.

"But Ole wished his betrothed to witness it. In fact, he particularly requested
it in the last lines he ever wrote, and I think his wishes should be obeyed."

"But the ticket is no longer in Hulda's possession," remarked Joel, "and we


do not even know into whose hands it has passed."

"Nevertheless, I think you both ought to accompany me to Christiania to
attend the drawing," replied the professor.

"Do you really desire it, Monsieur Sylvius?" asked the young girl.

"Tt is not I, my dear Hulda, but Ole who desires it, and Ole's wishes must be
respected."

"Monsieur Sylvius is right, sister," replied Joel. "Yes; you must go. When do
you intend to start, Monsieur Sylvius?"

"To-morrow, at day-break, and may Saint Olaf protect us!"


CHAPTER XVI.

The next morning Foreman Lengling's gayly painted kariol bore away
Sylvius Hogg and Hulda, seated comfortably side by side. There was not room
for Joel, as we know already, so the brave fellow trudged along on foot at the
horse's head.

The fourteen kilometers that lay between Dal and Moel had no terrors for
this untiring walker.

Their route lay along the left bank of the Maan, down the charming valley of
the Vesfjorddal--a narrow, heavily wooded valley, watered by a thousand
dashing cataracts. At each turn in the path, too, one saw appearing or
disappearing the lofty summit of Gousta, with its two large patches of dazzling
snow.

The sky was cloudless, the weather magnificent, the air not too cool, nor the
sun too warm.

Strange to say, Sylvius Hogg's face seemed to have become more serene
since his departure from the inn, though it is not improbable that his cheerfulness
was a trifle forced, so anxious was he that this trip should divert Joel and Hulda
from their sorrowful thoughts.

It took them only about two hours and a half to reach Moel, which is situated
at the end of Lake Tinn. Here they were obliged to leave the kariol and take a
small boat, for at this point a chain of small lakes begins. The kariol paused near
the little church, at the foot of a water-fall at least five hundred feet in height.
This water-fall, which is visible for only about one fifth of its descent, loses
itself in a deep crevasse before being swallowed up by the lake.

Two boatmen were standing on the shore beside a birch-bark canoe, so
fragile and unstable that the slightest imprudence on the part of its occupants
would inevitably overturn it.

The lake was at its very best this beautiful morning. The sun had absorbed all


the mist of the previous night, and no one could not have asked for a more
superb summer's day.

"You are not tired, my good Joel?" inquired the professor, as he alighted
from the kariol.

"No, Monsieur Sylvius. You forget that I am accustomed to long tramps
through the Telemark.”

"That is true. Tell me, do you know the most direct route from Moel to
Christiania?"

"Perfectly, sir. But I fear when we reach Tinoset, at the further end of the
lake, we shall have some difficulty in procuring a kariol, as we have not warned
them of our intended arrival, as is customary in this country."

"Have no fears, my boy," replied the professor: "I attended to that. You
needn't be afraid that I have any intention of making you foot it from Dal to
Christiania."

"IT could easily do it if necessary," remarked Joel.

"But it will not be necessary, fortunately. Now suppose we go over our route
again."

"Well, once at Tinoset, Monsieur Sylvius, we for a time follow the shores of
Lake Fol, passing through Vik and Bolkesko, so as to reach Mose, and afterward
Kongsberg, Hangsund, and Drammen. If we travel both night and day it will be
possible for us to reach Christiania to-morrow afternoon."

"Very well, Joel. I see that you are familiar with the country, and the route
you propose is certainly a very pleasant one."

"It is also the shortest."

"But I am not at all particular about taking the shortest route," replied
Sylvius Hogg, laughing. "I know another and even more agreeable route that
prolongs the journey only a few hours, and you, too, are familiar with it, my boy,
though you failed to mention it."

"What route do you refer to?"

"To the one that passes through Bamble."

"Through Bamble?"

"Yes, through Bamble. Don't feign ignorance. Yes, through Bamble, where
Farmer Helmboe and his daughter Siegfrid reside."

"Monsieur Sylvius!"

"Yes, and that is the route we are going to take, following the northern shore
of Lake Fol instead of the southern, but finally reaching Kongsberg all the
same."

"Yes, quite as well, and even better," answered Joel smiling.

"I must thank you in behalf of my brother, Monsieur Sylvius," said Hulda,


archly.

"And for yourself as well, for I am sure that you too will be glad to see your
friend Siegfrid."

The boat being ready, all three seated themselves upon a pile of leaves in the
stern, and the vigorous strokes of the boatsmen soon carried the frail bark a long
way from the shore.

After passing Hackenoes, a tiny hamlet of two or three houses, built upon a
rocky promontory laved by the narrow fiord into which the Maan empties, the
lake begins to widen rapidly. At first it is walled in by tall cliffs whose real
height one can estimate accurately only when a boat passes their base, appearing
no larger than some aquatic bird in comparison; but gradually the mountains
retire into the background.

The lake is dotted here and there with small islands, some absolutely devoid
of vegetation, others covered with verdure through which peep a few fishermen's
huts. Upon the lake, too, may be seen floating countless logs not yet sold to the
saw-mills in the neighborhood.

This sight led Sylvius Hogg to jestingly remark--and he certainly must have
been in a mood for jesting:

"If our lakes are the eyes of Norway, as our poets pretend, it must be
admitted that poor Norway has more than one beam in her eye, as the Bible
says."

About four o'clock the boat reached Tinoset, one of the most primitive of
hamlets. Still that mattered little, as Sylvius Hogg had no intention of remaining
there even for an hour. As he had prophesied to Joel, a vehicle was awaiting
them on the shore, for having decided upon this journey several weeks before, he
had written to Mr. Benett, of Christiania, requesting him to provide the means of
making it with the least possible fatigue and delay, which explains the fact that a
comfortable carriage was in attendance, with its box well stocked with eatables,
thus enabling the party to dispense with the stale eggs and sour milk with which
travelers are usually regaled in the hamlets of the Telemark.

Tinoset is situated near the end of Lake Tinn, and here the Maan plunges
majestically into the valley below, where it resumes its former course.

The horses being already harnessed to the carriage, our friends immediately
started in the direction of Bamble. In those days this was the only mode of travel
in vogue throughout Central Norway, and through the Telemark in particular, and
perhaps modern railroads have already caused the tourist to think with regret of
the national kariol and Mr. Benett's comfortable carriages.

It is needless to say that Joel was well acquainted with this region, having
traversed it repeatedly on his way from Dal to Bamble.


It was eight o'clock in the evening when Sylvius Hogg and his protégées
reached the latter village. They were not expected, but Farmer Helmboe received
them none the less cordially on that account. Siegfrid tenderly embraced her
friend, and the two young girls being left alone together for a few moments, they
had an opportunity to discuss the subject that engrossed their every thought.

"Pray do not despair, my dearest Hulda," said Siegfrid; "I have not ceased to
hope, by any means. Why should you abandon all hope of seeing your poor Ole
again? We have learned, through the papers, that search is being made for the
‘Viking.’ It will prove successful, I am certain it will, and I am sure Monsieur
Sylvius has not given up all hope. Hulda, my darling, I entreat you not to
despair."

Hulda's tears were her only reply, and Siegfrid pressed her friend fondly to
her heart.

Ah! what joy would have reigned in Farmer Helmboe's household if they
could but have heard of the safe return of the absent one, and have felt that they
really had a right to be happy.

"So you are going direct to Christiania?" inquired the farmer.

"Yes, Monsieur Helmboe."

"To be present at the drawing of the great lottery?"

"Certainly."

"But what good will it do now that Ole's ticket is in the hands of that wretch,
Sandgoist?"

"It was Ole's wish, and it must be respected," replied the professor.

"T hear that the usurer has found no purchaser for the ticket for which he paid
so dearly."

"T too have heard so, friend Helmboe."

"Well, I must say that it serves the rascal right. The man is a scoundrel,
professor, a scoundrel, and it serves him right."

"Yes, friend Helmboe, it does, indeed, serve him right."

Of course they had to take supper at the farm-house. Neither Siegfrid nor her
father would allow their friends to depart without accepting the invitation, but it
would not do for them to tarry too long if they wished to make up for the time
lost by coming around by the way of Bamble, so at nine o'clock the horses were
put to the carriage.

"At my next visit I will spend six hours at the table with you, if you desire
it," said Sylvius Hogg to the farmer; "but to-day I must ask your permission to
allow a cordial shake of the hand from you and the loving kiss your charming
Siegfrid will give Hulda to take the place of the dessert."

This done they started.


In this high latitude twilight would still last several hours. The horizon, too,
is distinctly visible for a long while after sunset, the atmosphere is so pure.

It is a beautiful and varied drive from Bamble to Kongsberg. The road passes
through Hitterdal and to the south of Lake Fol, traversing the southern part of the
Telemark, and serving as an outlet to all the small towns and hamlets of that
locality.

An hour after their departure they passed the church of Hitterdal, an old and
quaint edifice, surmounted with gables and turrets rising one above the other,
without the slightest regard to anything like regularity of outline. The structure is
of wood--walls, roofs and turrets--and though it strongly resembles a motley
collection of pepper-boxes, it is really a venerable and venerated relic of the
Scandinavian architecture of the thirteenth century.

Night came on very gradually--one of those nights still impregnated with a
dim light which about one o'clock begins to blend with that of early dawn.

Joel, enthroned upon the front seat, was absorbed in his reflections. Hulda sat
silent and thoughtful in the interior of the carriage. But few words were
exchanged between Sylvius Hogg and the postilion, and these were almost
invariably requests to drive faster. No other sound was heard save the bells on
the harness, the cracking of the whip, and the rumble of wheels over the stony
road. They drove on all night, without once changing horses. It was not
necessary to stop at Listhus, a dreary station, situated in a sort of natural
amphitheater, surrounded by pine-clad mountains. They passed swiftly by
Tiness, too, a picturesque little hamlet, perched on a rocky eminence. Their
progress was rapid in spite of the rather dilapidated condition of their vehicle,
whose bolts and springs rattled and creaked dolorously, and certainly there was
no just cause of complaint against the driver, though he was half asleep most of
the time. But for all that, he urged his horses briskly on, whipping his jaded
steeds mechanically, but usually aiming his blows at the off horse, for the near
one belonged to him, while the other was the property of a neighbor.

About five o'clock in the morning Sylvius Hogg opened his eyes, stretched
out his arms, and drank in huge draughts of the pungent odor of the pines.

They had now reached Kongsberg. The carriage was crossing the bridge over
the Laagen, and soon it stopped in front of a house near the church, and not far
from the water-fall of the Larbr6.

"If agreeable to you, my friends," remarked Sylvius Hogg, "we will stop here
only to change horses, for it is still too early for breakfast. I think it would be
much better not to make a real halt until we reach Drammen. There we can
obtain a good meal, and so spare Monsieur Benett's stock of provisions."

This being decided the professor and Joel treated themselves to a tiny glass


of brandy at the Hotel des Mines, and a quarter of an hour afterward, fresh
horses being in readiness, they resumed their journey.

On leaving the city they were obliged to ascend a very steep hill. The road
was roughly hewn in the side of the mountain, and from it the tall towers at the
mouth of the silver mines of Kongsberg were distinctly visible. Then a dense
pine forest suddenly hid everything else from sight--a pine forest through which
the sun's rays never penetrate.

The town of Hangsund furnished fresh horses for the carriage. There our
friends again found themselves on smooth level roads, frequently obstructed by
turnpike gates, where they were obliged to pay a toll of five or six shillings. This
was a fertile region, abounding in trees that looked like weeping willows, so
heavily did the branches droop under their burden of fruit.

As they neared Drammen, which is situated upon an arm of Christiania Bay,
the country became more hilly. About noon they reached the city with its two
interminable streets, lined with gayly painted houses, and its wharves where the
countless rafts left but a meager space for the vessels that come here to load with
the products of the Northland.

The carriage paused in front of the Scandinavian Hotel. The proprietor, a
dignified-looking personage, with a long, white beard, and a decidedly
professional air, promptly appeared in the door-way of his establishment.

With that keenness of perception that characterizes inn-keepers in every
country on the globe, he remarked:

"IT should not wonder if these gentlemen and this young lady would like
breakfast."

"Yes," replied Sylvius Hogg, "but let us have it as soon as possible."

"Tt shall be served immediately."

The repast was soon ready, and proved a most tempting one. Mention should
especially be made of a certain fish, stuffed with a savory herb, of which the
professor partook with evident delight.

At half past one o'clock the carriage, to which fresh horses had been
harnessed, was brought to the hotel door, and our friends started down the
principal street of Drammen at a brisk trot.

As they passed a small and dingy dwelling that contrasted strongly with the
gayly painted houses around it, Joel could not repress a sudden movement of
loathing.

"There is Sandgoist?" he exclaimed.

"So that is Sandgoist," remarked Sylvius Hogg. "He certainly has a bad
face."

It was Sandgoist smoking on his door-step. Did he recognize Joel? It is


impossible to say, for the carriage passed swiftly on between the huge piles of
lumber and boards.

Next came a long stretch of level road, bordered with mountain ash-trees,
laden with coral berries, and then they entered the dense pine forest that skirts a
lovely tract of land known as Paradise Valley.

Afterward they found themselves confronted and surrounded by a host of
small hills, each of which was crowned with a villa or farm-house. As twilight
came on, and the carriage began to descend toward the sea through a series of
verdant meadows, the bright red roofs of neat farm-houses peeped out here and
there through the trees, and soon our travelers reached Christiania Bay,
surrounded by picturesque hills, and with its innumerable creeks, its tiny ports
and wooden piers, where the steamers and ferry-boats land.

At nine o'clock in the evening, and while it was still light, the old carriage
drove noisily into the city through the already deserted streets.

In obedience to orders previously given by Sylvius Hogg, the vehicle drew
up in front of the Hotel du Nord. It was there that Hulda and Joel were to stay,
rooms having been engaged for them in advance. After bidding them an
affectionate good-night the professor hastened to his own home, where his
faithful servants, Kate and Fink, were impatiently awaiting him.


CHAPTER XVII.

Christiania, though it is the largest city in Norway, would be considered a
small town in either England or France; and were it not for frequent fires, the
place would present very much the same appearance that it did in the eleventh
century. It was really rebuilt in 1624, by King Christian, however; and its name
was then changed from Opsolo, as it had been previously called, to Christiania,
in honor of its royal architect.

It is symmetrically laid out with broad, straight streets: and the houses are
generally of gray stone or red brick. In the center of a fine garden stands the
royal palace, known as the Oscarlot, a large quadrangular building, devoid of
beauty, though built in the Ionic style of architecture. There are a few churches,
in which the attention of worshipers is not distracted by any marvels of art;
several municipal and government buildings, and one immense bazaar,
constructed in the form of a rotunda, and stocked with both native and foreign
goods.

There is nothing very remarkable about all this, but one thing the traveler can
certainly admire without stint, and that is the site of the city, which is encircled
by mountains so varied in shape and aspect as to form a most superb frame for


Christiania.

Though the city is nearly flat in the new and wealthy quarter, the hilly
portions, where the poorer classes live, are covered with brick or wooden huts of
gaudy tints that astonish rather than charm the beholder.

Like all cities situated upon the water's edge, and upon fertile hills,
Christiania is extremely picturesque, and it would not be unjust to compare its
fiord to the famous Bay of Naples. Its shores, like those of Sorrento and
Castellamare, are dotted with chalets and villas, half hidden in the dark, rich
verdure of the pines, and enveloped in the light mist that imparts such a
wonderful softness to northern landscapes.

Sylvius Hogg had at last returned to Christiania, though under conditions that
he little dreamed of at the beginning of his interrupted journey. Oh, well, he
would try that again another year! He could think only of Joel and Hulda Hansen
now. Had there been time to prepare for them, he would certainly have taken
them to his own home, where old Fink and old Kate would have made them
heartily welcome; but under the circumstances, the professor had thought it
advisable to take them to the Hotel du Nord, where, as protégées of Sylvius
Hogg, they were sure of every attention, though he had carefully refrained from
giving their names, for there had been so much talk about the brother and sister,
and especially about the young girl, that it would be very embarrassing for her if
her arrival in Christiania should become known.


It had been decided that Sylvius Hogg should not see them again until
breakfast the next day, that is to say, between eleven and twelve o'clock, as he
had some business matters to attend to that would engross his attention all the
forenoon. He would then rejoin them and remain with them until three o'clock,
the hour appointed for the drawing of the lottery.

Joel, as soon as he rose the next morning, tapped at the door of his sister's
room, and being anxious to divert her thoughts, which were likely to be more
melancholy than ever on such a day, he proposed that they should walk about the
town until breakfast-time, and Hulda, to please her brother, consented.

It was Sunday, but though the streets of northern cities are usually quiet and
well-nigh deserted on that day, an air of unusual bustle and animation pervaded
the scene, for not only had the townspeople refrained from going to the country,
as usual, but people from the surrounding towns and country was pouring in in
such numbers that the Lake Miosen Railroad had been obliged to run extra
trains.

The number of disinterested persons anxious to attend the drawing of the
famous lottery was even greater than the number of ticket-holders, consequently
the streets were thronged with people. Whole families, and even whole villages,
had come to the city, in the hope that their journey would not be in vain. Only to
think of it! one million tickets had been sold, and even if they should win a prize
of only one or two hundred marks, how many good people would return home
rejoicing!

On leaving the hotel, Joel and Hulda first paid a visit to the wharves that line
the harbor. Here the crowd was not so great except about the taverns, where huge
tankards of beer were being continually called for to moisten throats that seemed
to be in a state of constant thirst.

As the brother and sister wandered about among the long rows of barrels and
boxes, the vessels which were anchored both near and far from the shore came in
for a liberal share of their attention, for might there not be some from the port of
Bergen where the "Viking" would never more be seen?

"Ole! my poor Ole!" sighed Hulda, and hearing this pathetic exclamation,
Joel led her gently away from the wharves, and up into the city proper.

There, from the crowds that filled the streets and the public squares, they
overheard more than one remark in relation to themselves.

"Yes," said one man; "I hear that ten thousand marks have been offered for
ticket 9672."

"Ten thousand!" exclaimed another. "Why, I hear that twenty thousand
marks, and even more, have been offered."

"Mr. Vanderbilt, of New York, has offered thirty thousand."


"And Messrs. Baring, of London, forty thousand."

"And the Rothschilds, sixty thousand."

So much for public exaggeration. At this rate the prices offered would soon
have exceeded the amount of the capital prize.

But if these gossips were not agreed upon the sum offered to Hulda Hansen,
they were all of one mind in regard to the usurer of Drammen.

"What an infernal scoundrel Sandgoist must be. That rascal who showed
those poor people no mercy."

"Yes; he is despised throughout the Telemark, and this is not the first time he
has been guilty of similar acts of rascality."

"They say that nobody will buy Ole Kamp's ticket of him, now he has got it."

"No; nobody wants it now."

"That is not at all surprising. In Hulda Hansen's hands the ticket was
valuable."

"And in Sandgoist's it seems worthless."

"I'm glad of it. He'll have it left on his hands, and I hope he'll lose the fifteen
thousand marks it cost him."

"But what if the scoundrel should win the grand prize?"

"He? Never!"

"He had better not come to the drawing."

"No. If he does he will be roughly handled. There is no question about that."

These and many other equally uncomplimentary remarks about the usurer
were freely bandied about.

It was evident that he did not intend to be present at the drawing, as he was at
his house in Drammen the night before; but feeling his sister's arm tremble in
his, Joel led her swiftly on, without trying to hear any more.

As for Sylvius Hogg, they had hoped to meet him in the street; but in this
they were disappointed, though an occasional remark satisfied them that the
public was already aware of the professor's return, for early in the morning he
had been seen hurrying toward the wharves, and afterward in the direction of the
Naval Department.

Of course, Joel might have asked anybody where Professor Sylvius Hogg
lived. Any one would have been only too delighted to point out the house or
even to accompany him to it; but he did not ask, for fear of being indiscreet, and
as the professor had promised to meet them at the hotel, it would be better to
wait until the appointed hour.

After a time Hulda began to feel very tired, and requested her brother to take
her back to the hotel, especially as these discussions, in which her name was
frequently mentioned, were very trying to her, and on reaching the house she


went straight up to her own room to await the arrival of Sylvius Hogg.

Joel remained in the reading-room, on the lower floor, where he spent his
time in mechanically looking over the Christiania papers. Suddenly he turned
pale, a mist obscured his vision, and the paper fell from his hands.

In the "Morgen-Blad," under the heading of Maritime Intelligence, he had
just seen the following cablegram from Newfoundland:

"The dispatch-boat "Telegraph' has reached the locality where the 'Viking' is
supposed to have been lost, but has found no trace of the wreck. The search on
the coast of Greenland has been equally unsuccessful, so it may be considered
almost certain that none of the unfortunate ship's crew survived the catastrophe."


CHAPTER XVIII.

"Good-morning, Mr. Benett. It is always a great pleasure to me when I have
an opportunity to shake hands with you."

"And for me, professor, it is a great honor."

"Honor, pleasure--pleasure, honor," laughed the professor. "One balances the
other."

"I am glad to see that your journey through Central Norway has been safely
accomplished."

"Not accomplished, only concluded, for this year."

"But tell me, pray, all about those good people you met at Dal."

"Excellent people they were, friend Benett, in every sense of the word."

"From what I can learn through the papers they are certainly very much to be
pitied."

"Unquestionably, Mr. Benett. I have never known misfortune to pursue
persons so relentlessly."

"It seems so, indeed, professor; for right after the loss of the Viking’ came
that miserable Sandgoist affair."

"True, Mr. Benett."

"Still, Mr. Hogg, I think Hulda Hansen did right to give up the ticket under
the circumstances."

"Indeed! and why, if you please?"

"Because it is better to secure fifteen thousand marks than to run a very great
risk of gaining nothing at all."

"You talk like the practical business man and merchant that you are; but if
you choose to look at the matter from another point of view, it becomes a matter
of sentiment, and money exerts very little influence in such cases."

"Of course, Mr. Hogg, but permit me to remark that it is more than likely that


your protégée has profited greatly by the exchange."

"Why do you think so?"

"But think of it. What does this ticket represent? One chance in a million of
winning.”

"Yes, one chance in a million. That is very small; it is true, Mr. Benett, very
small."

"Yes; and consequently such a reaction has followed the late madness that it
is said that this Sandgoist who purchased the ticket to speculate upon it has been
unable to find a purchaser."

"So I have heard."

"And yet, if that rascally usurer should win the grand prize, what a shame it
would be!"

"A shame, most assuredly, Mr. Benett; the word is not too strong--a shame,
unquestionably."

This conversation took place while Sylvius Hogg was walking through the
establishment of M. Benett--an establishment well known in Christiania, and
indeed throughout Norway. It is difficult to mention an article that can not be
found in this bazaar. Traveling-carriages, kariols by the dozen, canned goods,
baskets of wine, preserves of every kind, clothing and utensils for tourists, and
guides to conduct them to the remotest villages of Finmark, Lapland, or even to
the North Pole. Nor is this all. M. Benett likewise offers to lovers of natural
history specimens of the different stones and metals found in the earth, as well as
of the birds, insects, and reptiles of Norway. It is well, too, to know that one can
nowhere find a more complete assortment of the jewelry and bric-a-brac of the
country than in his show-cases.

This gentleman is consequently the good angel of all tourists desirous of
exploring the Scandinavian peninsula, and a man Christiania could scarcely do
without.

"By the way, you found the carriage you had ordered waiting for you at
Tinoset, did you not, professor?" he asked.

"Yes. Having ordered it through you, Monsieur Benett, I felt sure that it
would, be there at the appointed time."

"You are a Sad flatterer, I fear, Monsieur Hogg. But I judged from your letter
that there were to be three of you in the party."

"There were three of us, as I told you."

"And the others?"

"They arrived here safe and sound last evening, and are now waiting for me
at the Hotel du Nord, where I am soon to join them."

"And these persons are--?"


"Precisely, Monsieur Benett, precisely; but I must beg you to say nothing
about it. I don't wish their arrival to be noised abroad yet."

"Poor girl!"

"Yes, she has suffered terribly."

"And you wish her to be present at the drawing, though the ticket her
betrothed bequeathed to her is no longer in her possession?"

"It is not my wish, Monsieur Benett, but that of Ole Kamp, and I say to you
as I have said to others, Ole Kamp's last wishes would be obeyed."

"Unquestionably. What you do is not only right, but always for the best,
professor."

"You are flattering me now, dear Monsieur Benett."

"Not at all. But it was a lucky day for them when the Hansen family made
your acquaintance."

"Nonsense! it was a much more fortunate thing for me that they crossed my
path."

"T see that you have the same kind heart still."

"Well, as one is obliged to have a heart it is best to have a good one, isn't it?"
retorted the professor, with a genial smile. "But you needn't suppose that I came
here merely in search of compliments," he continued. "It was for an entirely
different object, I assure you."

"Believe me, I am quite at your service."

"You are aware, I suppose, that but for the timely intervention of Joel and
Hulda Hansen, the Rjukanfos would never have yielded me up alive, and I
should not have the pleasure of seeing you to-day?"

"Yes, yes, I know," replied Mr. Benett. "The papers have published full
accounts of your adventure, and those courageous young people really deserve to
win the capital prize."

"That is my opinion," answered Sylvius Hogg, "but as that is quite out of the
question now, I am unwilling for my friend Hulda to return to Dal without some
little gift as a sort of memento of her visit to Christiania."

"That is certainly an excellent idea, Mr. Hogg."

"So you must assist me in selecting something that would be likely to please
a young girl."

"Very willingly," responded Mr. Benett. And he forthwith invited the
professor to step into the jewelry department, for was not a Norwegian ornament
the most charming souvenir that one could take away with one from Christiania
and from Mr. Benett's wonderful establishment?

Such at least was the opinion of Sylvius Hogg when the genial merchant
exhibited the contents of his show-cases.


"As I am no connoisseur in such matters I must be guided by your taste, Mr.
Benett," he remarked.

They had before them a very large and complete assortment of native
jewelry, which is usually valuable rather by reason of the elaborateness of its
workmanship than any costliness of material.

"What is this?" inquired the professor.

"It is a ring with pendants which emit a very pleasant sound."

"It is certainly very pretty," replied Sylvius Hogg, trying the bauble on the tip
of his little finger. "Lay it aside, Mr. Benett, and let us look at something else."

"Bracelets or necklaces?"

"At a little of everything, if you please, Mr. Benett--a little of everything.
What is this?"

"A set of ornaments for the corsage. Look at that delicate tracery of copper
upon a red worsted groundwork. It is all in excellent taste, though not very
expensive."

"The effect is certainly charming, Mr. Benett. Lay the ornaments aside with
the ring."

"But I must call your attention to the fact that these ornaments are reserved
for the adornment of youthful brides on their wedding-day, and that--"

"By Saint Olaf! you are right. Mr. Benett, you are quite right. Poor Hulda!
Unfortunately it is not Ole who is making her this present, but myself, and it is
not to a blushing bride that I am going to offer it."

"True, true, Mr. Hogg."

"Let me look then at some jewelry suitable for a young girl. How about this
cross, Mr. Benett?"

"It is to be worn as a pendant, and being cut in concave facets it sparkles
brilliantly with every movement of the wearer's throat."

"It is very pretty, very pretty, indeed, and you can lay it aside with the other
articles, Mr. Benett. When we have gone through all the show-cases we will
make our selection."

"Yes, but--"

"What is the matter now?"

"This cross, too, is intended to be worn by Scandinavian brides on their
marriage-day."

"The deuce! friend Benett. I am certainly very unfortunate in my selections."

"The fact is, professor, my stock is composed principally of bridal jewelry, as
that meets with the readiest sale. You can scarcely wonder at that."

"The fact doesn't surprise me at all, Mr. Benett, though it places me in a
rather embarrassing position."


"Oh, well, you can still take the ring you asked me to put aside."

"Yes, but I should like some more showy ornament."

"Then take this necklace of silver filigree with its four rows of chains which
will have such a charming effect upon the neck of a young girl. See! it is studded
with gems of every hue, and it is certainly one of the most quaint and curious
productions of the Norwegian silversmiths."

"Yes, yes," replied Sylvius Hogg. "It is a pretty ornament, though perhaps
rather showy for my modest Hulda. Indeed, I much prefer the corsage ornaments
you showed me just now, and the pendant. Are they so especially reserved for
brides that they can not be presented to a young girl?"

"I think the Storthing has as yet passed no law to that effect," replied Mr.
Benett. "It is an unpardonable oversight, probably, but--"

"Well, well, it shall be attended to immediately, Mr. Benett. In the meantime
I will take the cross and corsage ornaments. My little Hulda may marry some
day after all. Good and charming as she is she certainly will not want for an
opportunity to utilize these ornaments, so I will buy them and take them away
with me."

"Very well, very well, professor."

"Shall we have the pleasure of seeing you at the drawing, friend Benett?"

"Certainly."

"T think it will be a very interesting affair."

"I am sure of it."

"But look here," exclaimed the professor, bending over a show-case, "here
are two very pretty rings I did not notice before."

"Oh, they wouldn't suit you, Mr. Hogg. These are the heavily chased rings
that the pastor places upon the finger of the bride and the groom during the
marriage ceremony."

"Indeed? Ah, well, I will take them all the same. And now I must bid you
good-bye, Mr. Benett, though I hope to see you again very soon."

Sylvius Hogg now left the establishment, and walked briskly in the direction
of the Hotel du Nord.

On entering the vestibule his eyes fell upon the words Fiat lux, which are
inscribed upon the hall lamp.

"Ah! these Latin words are certainly very appropriate," he said to himself,
"Yes. Fiat lux! Fiat lux!"

Hulda was still in her room, sitting by the window. The professor rapped at
the door, which was instantly opened.

"Oh. Monsieur Sylvius!" cried the girl, delightedly.

"Yes, here I am, here I am! But never mind about Monsieur Sylvius now; our


attention must be devoted to breakfast, which is ready and waiting. I'm as hungry
as a wolf. Where is Joel?"

"In the reading-room."

"Well, I will go in search of him. You, my dear child, must come right down
and join us."

Sylvius Hogg left the room and went to find Joel, who was also waiting for
him, but in a state of mind bordering upon despair. The poor fellow immediately
showed the professor the copy of the "Morgen-Blad," containing the
discouraging telegram from the commander of the "Telegraph."

"Hulda has not seen it, I hope?" inquired the professor, hastily.

"No, I thought it better to conceal from her as long as possible what she will
learn only too soon."

"You did quite right, my boy. Let us go to breakfast."

A moment afterward all three were seated at a table in a private dining-room,
and Sylvius Hogg began eating with great zest.

An excellent breakfast it was, equal in fact to any dinner, as you can judge
from the menu. Cold beer soup, salmon with egg sauce, delicious veal cutlets,
rare roast beef, a delicate salad, vanilla ice, raspberry and cherry preserver--the
whole moistened with some very fine claret.

"Excellent, excellent!" exclaimed Sylvius Hogg. "Why, we can almost
imagine ourselves in Dame Hansen's inn at Dal."

And as his mouth was otherwise occupied his eyes smiled as much as it is
possible for eyes to smile.

Joel and Hulda endeavored to reply in the same strain, but they could not,
and the poor girl tasted scarcely anything. When the repast was concluded:

"My children," said Sylvius Hogg, "you certainly failed to do justice to a
very excellent breakfast. Still, I can not compel you to eat, and if you go without
breakfast you are likely to enjoy your dinner all the more, while I very much
doubt if I shall be able to compete with you to-night. Now, it is quite time for us
to leave the table."

The professor was already upon his feet, and he was about to take the hat
Joel handed him, when Hulda checked him by saying:

"Monsieur Sylvius, do you still insist that I shall accompany you?"

"To witness the drawing? Certainly I do, my dear girl."

"But it will be a very painful ordeal for me."

"I admit it, but Ole wished you to be present at the drawing, Hulda, and Ole's
wishes must be obeyed."

This phrase was certainly becoming a sort of refrain in Sylvius Hogg's
mouth.


CHAPTER XIX.

What a crowd filled the large hall of the University of Christiana in which
the drawing of the great lottery was to take place--a crowd that overflowed into
the very court-yards, as even the immense building was not large enough to
accommodate such a throng, and even into the adjoining streets, as the court-
yards, too, proved inadequate toward the last.

On that Sunday, the 15th of July, it certainly was not by their calmness and
phlegm that one would have recognized these madly excited people as
Norwegians. Was this unwonted excitement due solely to the interest excited by
this drawing, or was it due, at least, in a measure, to the unusually high
temperature of the summer's day?

The drawing was to begin at three o'clock precisely. There were one hundred
prizes--divided into three classes: 1st, ninety prizes ranging in value from one
hundred to one thousand marks, and amounting in all to forty-five thousand
marks; 2d, nine prizes of from one thousand to nine thousand marks, and
amounting to forty-five thousand marks, and 3d, one prize of one hundred
thousand marks.

Contrary to the rule that is generally observed in lotteries of this kind, the
drawing of the grand prize was reserved for the last. It was not to the holder of
the first ticket drawn that the grand prize would be given, but to the last, that is
to say, the one hundredth. Hence, there would result a series of emotions and
heart-throbbings of constantly increasing violence, for it had been decided that
no ticket should be entitled to two prizes, but that having gained one prize, the
drawing should be considered null and void if the same number were taken from
the urns a second time.

All this was known to the public, and there was nothing for people to do but
await the appointed hour; but to while away the tedious interval of waiting they
all talked, and, chiefly, of the pathetic situation of Hulda Hansen.
Unquestionably, if she had still been the possessor of Ole Kamp's ticket each
individual present would have wished her the next best luck to himself.

Several persons having seen the dispatch published in the "Morgen-Blad,"
spoke of it to their neighbors, and the entire crowd soon became aware that the
search of the "Telegraph" had proved futile. This being the case all felt that there
was no longer any hope of finding even a vestige of the lost "Viking." Not one of
the crew could have survived the shipwreck, and Hulda would never see her
lover again.

Suddenly another report diverted the minds of the crowd. It was rumored that


Sandgoist had decided to leave Drammen, and several persons pretended that
they had seen him in the streets of Christiania. Could it be that he had ventured
into this hall? If he had the wretch would certainly meet with a most unflattering
reception. How audacious in him to think of such a thing as being present at this
drawing! It was so improbable that it could not be possible. It must certainly be a
false alarm, and nothing more.

About quarter past two quite a commotion was apparent in the crowd.

It was caused by the sudden appearance of Sylvius Hogg at the gate of the
University. Every one knew the prominent part he had taken in the whole affair,
and how, after having been received by Dame Hansen's children, he had
endeavored to repay the obligation, so the crowd instantly divided to make way
for him, and there arose from every side a flattering murmur, which Sylvius
acknowledged by a series of friendly bows, and this murmur soon changed into
hearty applause.

But the professor was not alone. When those nearest him stepped back to
make way for him they saw that he had a young girl on his arm, and that a young
man was following them.

A young man! a young girl! The discovery had very much the effect of an
electric shock. The same thought flashed through every mind like a spark from
an electric battery.

"Hulda! Hulda Hansen!"

This was the name that burst from every lip.

Yes, it was Hulda, so deeply agitated that she could hardly walk. Indeed, she
certainly would have fallen had it not been for Sylvius Hogg's supporting arm.
But it upheld her firmly--her, the modest, heart-broken little heroine of the féte
to which Ole Kamp's presence only was wanting. How greatly she would have
preferred to remain in her own little room at Dal! How she shrunk from this
curiosity on the part of those around her, sympathizing though it was! But
Sylvius Hogg had wished her to come, and she had done so.

"Room! room!" was heard on all sides.

And as Sylvius Hogg, and Hulda and Joel walked up the passage-way that
had been cleared for them, as if by magic, how many friendly hands were
outstretched to grasp theirs, how many kind and cordial words were lavished
upon them, and with what delight Sylvius Hogg listened to these expressions of
friendly feeling!

"Yes; it is she, my friends, my little Hulda, whom I have brought back with
me from Dal," said he. "And this is Joel, her noble brother; but pray, my good
friends, do not smother them!"

Though Joel returned every grasp with interest, the less vigorous hands of


the professor were fairly benumbed by such constant shaking, but his eyes
sparkled with joy, though a tear was stealing down his cheek; but--and the
phenomenon was certainly well worthy the attention of ophthalmologists--the
tear was a luminous one.

It took them fully a quarter of an hour to cross the court-yard, gain the main
hall, and reach the seats that had been reserved for the professor. When this was
at last accomplished, not without considerable difficulty, Sylvius Hogg seated
himself between Hulda and Joel.

At precisely half past two o'clock, the door at the rear of the platform
opened, and the president of the lottery appeared, calm and dignified, and with
the commanding mien befitting his exalted position. Two directors followed,
bearing themselves with equal dignity. Then came six little blue-eyed girls,
decked out in flowers and ribbons, six little girls whose innocent hands were to
draw the lottery.

Their entrance was greeted with a burst of loud applause that testified both to
the pleasure all experienced on beholding the managers of the Christiania
Lottery, and to the impatience with which the crowd was awaiting the beginning
of the drawing.

There were six little girls, as we have remarked before, and there were also
six urs upon a table that occupied the middle of the platform. Each of these urns
contained ten numbers: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0, representing the units, tens,
hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands, and hundreds of thousands of the
number one million. There was no seventh urn, for the million column, because
it had been agreed that six ciphers drawn simultaneously should represent one
million, as in this way the chances of success would be equally divided among
all the numbers.

It had also been settled that the numbers should be drawn in succession from
the urns, beginning with that to the left of the audience. The winning number
would thus be formed under the very eyes of the spectators, first by the figure in
the column of hundreds of thousands, then in the columns of tens of thousands,
and so on until the column of units was reached, and the reader can judge with
what emotion each person watched his chances of success increase with the
drawing of each figure.

As the clock struck three, the president waved his hand, and declared the
drawing begun.

The prolonged murmur that greeted the announcement lasted several
minutes, after which quiet was gradually established.

The president rose, and though evidently much excited, made a short speech
suited to the occasion, in which he expressed regret that there was not a prize for


each ticket-holder; then he ordered the drawing of the first series of prizes,
which consisted, as we have before remarked, of ninety prizes, and which would
therefore consume a considerable length of time.

The six little girls began to perform their duties with automaton-like
regularity, but the audience did not lose patience for an instant. It is true,
however, that as the value of the prizes increased with each drawing, the
excitement increased proportionately, and no one thought of leaving his seat, not
even those persons whose tickets had been already drawn, and who had
consequently nothing more to expect.

This went on for about an hour without producing any incident of particular
interest, though people noticed that number 9672 had not been drawn, which
would have taken away all chance of its winning the capital prize.

"That is a good omen for Sandgoist!" remarked one of the professor's
neighbors.

"It would certainly be an extraordinary thing if a man like that should meet
with such a piece of good luck, even though he has the famous ticket," remarked
another.

"A famous ticket, indeed!" replied Sylvius Hogg; "but don't ask me why, for
I can't possibly tell you."

Then began the drawing of the second series of prizes, nine in number. This
promised to be very interesting--the ninety-first prize being one of a thousand
marks; the ninety-second, one of two thousand marks, and so on, up to the
ninety-ninth, which was one of nine thousand. The third class, the reader must
recollect, consisted of the capital prize only.

Number 72,521 won a prize of five thousand marks. This ticket belonged to
a worthy seaman of Christiania, who was loudly cheered and who received with
great dignity the congratulations lavished upon him.

Another number, 823,752, won a prize of six thousand marks, and how great
was Sylvius Hogg's delight when he learned from Joel that it belonged to the
charming Siegfrid of Bamble.

An incident that caused no little excitement followed. When the ninety-
seventh prize was drawn, the one consisting of seven thousand marks, the
audience feared for a moment that Sandgoist was the winner of it. It was won,
however, by ticket number 9627, which was within only forty-five points of Ole
Kamp's number.

The two drawings that followed were numbers very widely removed from
each other: 775 and 76,287.

The second series was now concluded, and the great prize of one hundred
thousand marks alone remained to be drawn.


The excitement of the assemblage at that moment beggars all description.

At first there was a long murmur that extended from the large hall into the
court-yards and even into the street. In fact, several minutes elapsed before quiet
was restored. A profound silence followed, and in this calmness there was a
certain amount of stupor--the stupor one experiences on seeing a prisoner appear
upon the place of execution. But this time the still unknown victim was only
condemned to win a prize of one hundred thousand marks, not to lose his head;
that is, unless he lost it from ecstasy.

Joel sat with folded arms, gazing straight ahead of him, being the least
moved, probably, in all that large assembly. Hulda, her head bowed upon her
breast, was thinking only of her poor Ole. As for Sylvius Hogg--but any attempt
to describe the state of mind in which Sylvius Hogg found himself would be
worse than useless.

"We will now conclude with the drawing of the one hundred thousand mark
prize," announced the president.

What a voice! It seemed to proceed from the inmost depths of this solemn-
looking man, probably because he was the owner of several tickets which, not
having yet been drawn, might still win the capital prize.

The first little girl drew a number from the left urn, and exhibited it to the
audience.

"Zero!" said the president.

The zero did not create much of a sensation, however. The audience
somehow seemed to have been expecting it.

"Zero!" said the president, announcing the figure drawn by the second little
girl.

Two zeros. The chances were evidently increasing for all numbers between
one and nine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine, and every one recollected
that Ole Kamp's ticket bore the number 9672.

Strange to say, Sylvius Hogg began to move restlessly about in his chair, as if
he had suddenly been stricken with palsy.

"Nine," said the president, stating the number the third little girl had just
extracted from the third urn.

Nine! That was the first figure on Ole Kamp's ticket.

"Six!" said the president.

For the fourth little girl was timidly displaying a six to all the eyes riveted
upon her.

The chances of winning were now one out of a hundred for all the numbers
from one to ninety-nine, inclusive.

Could it be that this ticket of Ole Kamp's was to be the means of placing one


hundred thousand marks in that villainous Sandgoist's pocket. Really such a
result would almost make one doubt the justice of God!

The fifth little girl plunged her hand into the next urn, and drew out the fifth
figure.

"Seven!" said the president, in a voice that trembled so as to be scarcely
audible, even to those seated on the first row of benches.

But those who could not hear were able to see for themselves, for the five
little girls were now holding up the following figures to the gaze of the audience:

00967.

The winning number consequently must be one between 9670 and 9679, so
there was now one chance out of ten for Ole Kamp's ticket to win the prize.

The suspense was at its height.

Sylvius Hogg had risen to his feet, and seized Hulda Hansen's hand. Every
eye was riveted upon the young girl. In sacrificing this last moment of her
betrothed, had she also sacrificed the fortune Ole Kamp had coveted for her and
for himself?

The sixth little girl had some difficulty getting her hand into the urn, she was
trembling so, poor thing! but at last the figure appeared.

"Two!" exclaimed the president, sinking back in his chair, quite breathless
with emotion.

"Nine thousand six hundred and seventy two!" proclaimed one of the
directors, in a loud voice.

This was the number of Ole Kamp's ticket, now in Sandgoist's possession.
Everybody was aware of this fact, and of the manner in which the usurer had
obtained it; so there was a profound silence instead of the tumultuous applause
that would have filled the hall of the University if the ticket had still been in
Hulda Hansen's hands.

And now was this scoundrel Sandgoist about to step forward, ticket in hand,
to claim the prize?

"Number 9672 wins the prize of one hundred thousand marks!" repeated the
director. "Who claims it?"

"T do."

Was it the usurer of Drammen who answered thus?

No. It was a young man--a young man with a pale face, whose features and
whole person bore marks of prolonged suffering, but alive, really and truly alive.

On hearing this voice, Hulda sprung to her feet, uttering a cry that penetrated
every nook and commer of the large hall; then she fell back fainting.

But the young man had forced his way impetuously through the crowd, and it
was he who caught the unconscious girl in his arms.


It was Ole Kamp!


CHAPTER XX.

Yes; it was Ole Kamp! Ole Kamp, who, by a miracle, had survived the
shipwreck of the "Viking." The reason the "Telegraph" had not brought him back
to Europe can be easily explained. He was no longer in the region visited by the
dispatch-boat, for the very good reason that he was already on his way to
Christiania on board the vessel that had rescued him.

This is what Sylvius Hogg was telling. This is what he repeated to all who
would listen to him. And what a crowd of listeners he had! This is what he
related with the triumphant accents of a conqueror! Those around him repeated it
to those who were not fortunate enough to be near him, and the good news flew
from group to group until it reached the crowd that filled the court-yard and the
neighboring streets.

In a few moments, all Christiania knew that the young mate of the "Viking"
had returned, and that he had won the grand prize of the Schools Lottery.

It was a fortunate thing that Sylvius Hogg was acquainted with the whole
story, as Ole certainly could not have told it, for Joel nearly smothered him in his
embrace while Hulda was regaining consciousness.

"Hulda! dearest Hulda!" said Ole. "Yes, it is I--your betrothed--soon to be
your husband!"

"Yes, soon, my children, very soon!" exclaimed Sylvius Hogg. "We will
leave this very evening for Dal. And if such a thing was never seen before, it will
be seen now. A professor of law, and a member of the Storthing will be seen
dancing at a wedding like the wildest youth in the Telemark."

But how had Sylvius Hogg become acquainted with Ole Kamp's history?
Simply through the last letter that the Naval Department had addressed to him at
Dal. In fact this letter--the last he had received, and one whose receipt he had not
mentioned to any one--contained another letter, dated from Christiansand. This
second letter stated that the Danish brig "Genius" had just reached Christiansand,
with several survivors of the "Viking" on board, among them the young mate,
Ole Kamp, who would arrive in Christiania three days afterward.

The letter from the Naval Department added that these shipwrecked men had
suffered so much that they were still in a very weak condition, and for this
reason Sylvius Hogg had decided not to say anything to Hulda about her lover's
return. In his response he had also requested the most profound secrecy in regard
to this return--and in compliance with this request the facts had been carefully
kept from the public.


The fact that the "Telegraph" had found no traces nor survivors of the
"Viking" can also be easily explained.

During a violent tempest the vessel--which had become partially disabled--
being obliged to scud along before the wind in a north-westerly direction, finally
found herself about two hundred miles from the southern coast of Iceland.
During the nights of the third and fourth of May the worst nights of the gale--it
collided with one of those enormous icebergs that drift down from the shores of
Greenland. The shock was terrible, so terrible, indeed, that the "Viking" went to
pieces five minutes afterward.

It was then that Ole hastily penned his farewell message to his betrothed, and
after inclosing it in a bottle, cast it into the sea.

Most of the "Viking's" crew, including the captain, perished at the time of the
catastrophe, but Ole Kamp and four of his comrades succeeded in leaping upon
the iceberg, just as the vessel went down; but their death would have been none
the less certain if the terrible gale had not driven the mass of ice in a north-
westerly direction. Two days afterward, exhausted and nearly dead with hunger,
these survivors of the catastrophe were cast upon the southern coast of
Greenland--a barren and deserted region--but where they nevertheless managed
to keep themselves alive through the mercy of God.

If help had not reached them in a few days, it would have been all over with
them, however; for they had not strength to reach the fisheries, or the Danish
settlements on the other coast.

Fortunately the brig "Genius," which had been driven out of her course by
the tempest, happened to pass. The shipwrecked men made signals to her. These
signals were seen, and the men were saved.

The "Genius," delayed by head-winds, was a long time in making the
comparatively short voyage between Greenland and Norway, and did not reach
Christiansand until the 12th of July, nor Christiania until the morning of the
15th.

That very morning Sylvius Hogg went aboard the vessel. There he found
Ole, who was still very weak, and told him all that had taken place since the
arrival of his last letter, written from Saint-Pierre-Miquelon, after which he took
the young sailor home with him, though not without having requested the crew
of the "Genius" to keep the secret a few hours longer. The reader knows the rest.

It was then decided that Ole Kamp should attend the drawing of the lottery.
But would he be strong enough to do it?

Yes; his strength would be equal to the ordeal, for was not Hulda to be there?
But had he still any interest in this drawing? Yes, a hundred times, yes; both on
his own account and that of his betrothed, for Sylvius Hogg had succeeded in


getting the ticket out of Sandgoist's hands, having repurchased it from him at the
same price the usurer had given for it, for Sandgoist was only too glad to dispose
of it at that price now there were no more bidders for it.

"It was not for the sake of an improbable chance of gain that I wished to
restore it to Hulda, my brave Ole," Sylvius Hogg remarked, as he gave him the
ticket; "but because it was a last farewell you had addressed to her at the moment
when you believed all was lost."

And now it seemed almost as if Professor Sylvius Hogg had been inspired of
Heaven, certainly much more so than Sandgoist, who was strongly tempted to
dash his brains out against the wall when he learned the result of the drawing.
And now there was a fortune of one hundred thousand marks in the Hansen
family. Yes, one hundred thousand marks, for Sylvius Hogg absolutely refused to
take back the money he had paid to secure possession of Ole Kamp's ticket.

It was a dowry he was only too glad to offer little Hulda on her wedding-day.

Perhaps it will be considered rather astonishing that Ticket No. 9672, which
had attracted so much attention from the public, should have happened to be the
one that drew the grand prize.

Yes, it was astonishing, we must admit; but it was not impossible, and at all
events, such was the fact.

Sylvius Hogg, Joel, and Hulda left Christiania that same evening. They
returned to Dal by way of Bamble, as, of course, Siegfrid must be informed of
her good fortune. As they passed the little church of Hitterdal, Hulda recollected
the gloomy thoughts that beset her two days before, but the sight of Ole, seated
beside her, speedily recalled her to the blissful reality.

By Saint Olaf! how beautiful Hulda looked under her bridal crown when she
left the little chapel at Dal, four days afterward, leaning on her husband's arm.
The brilliant festivities that followed were the talk of the whole Telemark for
days and days afterward. And how happy everybody was! Siegfrid, the pretty
bride-maid, her father, Farmer Helmboe, Joel, her affianced husband, and even
Dame Hansen, who was no longer haunted by a fear of Sandgoist.

Perhaps the reader will ask whether all these friends and guests--Messrs.
Help Bros., and hosts of others--came to witness the happiness of the newly
married couple, or to see Sylvius Hogg, professor of law and a member of the
Storthing, dance. It is hard to say. At all events he did dance, and very creditably,
and after having opened the ball with his beloved Hulda, he closed it with the
charming Siegfrid.

The next day, followed by the acclamations of the whole valley of
Vesjorddal, he departed, but not without having solemnly promised to return for
Joel's marriage, which was celebrated a few weeks afterward, to the great delight


of the contracting parties.

This time the professor opened the ball with the charming Siegfrid, and
closed it with his dear Hulda; and he has never given any display of his
proficiency in the terpsichorean art since that time.

What happiness now reigned in this household which had been so cruelly
tried! It was undoubtedly due in some measure, at least, to the efforts of Sylvius
Hogg; but he would not admit it, and always declared:

"No, no; it is I who am still under obligations to Dame Hansen's children."

As for the famous ticket, it was returned to Ole Kamp after the drawing; and
now, in a neat wooden frame, it occupies the place of honor in the hall of the inn
at Dal. But what the visitor sees is not the side of the ticket upon which the
famous number 9672 is inscribed, but the last farewell that the shipwrecked
sailor, Ole Kamp, addressed to Hulda Hansen, his betrothed.


"TOPS Y-TURVY"


BY JULES VERNE


CHAPTER I.

IN WHICH THE NORTH POLAR PRACTICAL ASSOCIATION RUSHES
A DOCUMENT ACROSS TWO WORLDS

"Then Mr Maston, you pretend that a woman has never been able to make
mathematical or experimental-science progress?"

"To my extreme regret, I am obliged to, Mrs. Scorbitt," answered J.T.
Maston.

"That there have been some very remarkable women in mathematics,
especially in Russia, I fully and willingly agree with you. But, with her cerebral
conformation, she cannot become an Archimedes, much less a Newton."

"Oh, Mr. Maston, allow me to protest in the name of my sex."

"A sex, Mrs. Scorbitt, much too charming to give itself up to the higher
studies."

"Well then, according to your opinion, no woman seeing an apple fall could
have discovered the law of universal gravitation, so that it would have made her
the most illustrious scientific person of the seventeenth century?"

"In seeing an apple fall, Mrs. Scorbitt, a woman would have but the single
idea—to eat it—for example, our mother Eve."

"Pshaw, I see very well that you deny us all aptitude for high speculations."

"All aptitude? No, Mrs. Scorbitt, and in the meanwhile I would like to prove
to you that since there are inhabitants on earth, and consequently women, there
has not one feminine brain been found yet to which we owe any discoveries like
those of Aristotle, Euclid, Kepler, Laplace, etc."

"Is this a reason? And does the past always prove the future?"

"Well, a person who has done nothing in a thousand years, without a doubt,
never will do anything."

"I see now that I have to take our part, Mr. Maston, and that we are not worth
much."

"In regard to being worth something"—began Mr. Maston, with as much
politeness as he could command.

But Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt, who was perfectly willing to be satisfied,
answered promptly: "Each one has his or her lot in this world. You may remain
the extraordinary calculator which you are, give yourself up entirely to the
immense work to which your friends and yourself will devote their existence. I
will be the woman in the case and bring to it my pecuniary assistance."

"And we will owe you an eternal gratitude," answered Mr. Maston.


Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt blushed deliciously, for she felt, according to
report, a singular sympathy for J.T. Maston. Besides, is not the heart of a woman
an unfathomable gulf?

It was really an immense undertaking to which this rich American widow
had resolved to devote large sums of money.

The scheme and its expected results, briefly outlined, were as follows:

The Arctic regions, accurately expressed, include according to Maltebrun,
Roclus, Saint-Martin and other high authorities on geography:

1st. The northern Devon, including the ice-covered islands of Baffin’s Sea
and Lancaster Sound.

2d. The northern Georgia, made up of banks and numerous islands, such as
the islands of Sabine, Byam-Martin, Griffith, Cornwallis, and Bathurst.

3d. The archipelago of Baffin-Parry, including different parts of the
circumpolar continent, embracing Cumberland, Southampton, James-
Sommerset, Boothia-Felix, Melville, and other parts nearly unknown. Of this
great area, crossed by the 78th parallel, there are over 1,400,000 square miles of
land and over 700,000 square miles of water.

Within this area intrepid modern discoverers have advanced to the 84th-
degree of latitude, reaching seacoasts lost behind the high chain of icebergs
which may be called the Arctic Highlands, given names to capes, to mountains,
to gulfs, to bays, etc. But beyond this 84th degree is mystery. It is the terra
incognita of the chart-makers, and nobody knows as yet whether behind is
hidden land or water for a distance of 6 degrees over impassable heaps of ice to
the North Pole.

It was in the year 189-that the Government of the United States conceived
the idea of putting the as yet undiscovered countries around the North Pole up at
auction sale, and an American society had just been formed with the plan of
purchasing this Arctic area and has asked the concession.

For several years, it is true, the Conference at Berlin had formulated a special
plan for the guidance of such of the great powers as might wish to appropriate
rights under the claim of colonization or the opening of commercial markets.
This code was not acceptable to all, and the Polar region had remained without
inhabitants. As that which belongs to none belongs to every one, the new Society
did not wish merely to occupy it, but to purchase it outright, and so avoid further
claims.

There never is in the United States any project so bold as not to find people
to regard it as practical and back it with large amounts of money. This was well
shown a few years ago when the Gun Club of Baltimore tried to send a projectile
to the moon, hoping to obtain a direct communication with our satellite. Was it


not enterprising Americans who furnished funds for this undertaking? Large
amounts were necessary for this interesting trial and were promptly found. And,
had it been realized, would we not have to thank the members of that club who
had dared to take the risk of this superhuman experience?

Should a Lesseps propose to dig a channel across Europe to Asia, from the
banks of the Atlantic to the waters of China; should a well-sinker offer to bore
from the curb-stones to reach the beds of molten silicates, to bring a supply to
your fireplaces; should an enterprising electrician want to unite the scattered
currents over the surface of the globe into one inexhaustible spring of heat and
light; should a bold engineer conceive the idea of putting the excess of Summer
temperature into large reservoirs for use during the Winter in our then frigid
zones; should an anonymous society be founded to do any of a hundred different
similar things, there would be found Americans ready to head the subscription
lists and a regular stream of dollars would pour into the company safes as freely
as the rivers of America flow into the ocean.

It is natural to expect that opinions were very varied when the news spread
that the Arctic region was going to be sold at auction for the benefit of the
highest and final bidder, particularly when no public subscription list was started
in view of this purchase, as the capital had all been secured beforehand.

To use the Arctic region? Why, such an idea could "only be found in the
brain of a fool," was the general verdict.

Nothing, however, was more serious than this project. A prospectus was sent
to the papers of the two continents, to the European publications, to the African,
Oceanic, Asiatic, and at the same time to the American journals. The American
newspaper announcement read as follows:

To the Inhabitants of the Globe:

"The Arctic region situated within the eighty-fourth degree could not
heretofore have been sold at auction for the very excellent reason that it had not
been discovered as yet.

"The extreme points reached by navigators of different countries are the
following:

"82° 45’ , reached by the English explorer, Parry, in July, 1847, on the
twenty-eighth meridian, west, to the north of Spitzberg.

"83° 20’ 28" , reached by Markham, with the English expedition of Sir John
Georges Nares, in May, 1867, on the fiftieth meridian, west, in the north of
Grinnell Land.

"83° 35’ latitude, reached by Lockwood and Brainard, of the American
expedition under Lieut. Greely, in May, 1882, on the forty-second meridian, west
in the north of Nares Land.


"The property extending from the eighty-fourth parallel to the pole on a
surface of six degrees must be considered an undivided domain among the
different states of the globe and not liable to be transformed into private property
through a public auction sale.

"No one is compelled to live in this section, and the United States, relying on
this non-ownership, has resolved to provide for the settlement and use of the
domain. A company has been founded at Baltimore under the name of the North
Polar Practical Association, representing officially the American Union. This
Company intends to purchase the said country according to the common law,
which should then give them an absolute right of proprietorship to the continent,
islands, inlets, waters, rivers, etc.; in fact, of everything of which the Arctic
region is composed. It is well understood by the law of nations that this title of
proprietorship cannot be touched under any circumstances, no matter what shall
happen.

"These conditions having been laid before all the powers, the Arctic region is
to be sold at public auction for the benefit of the highest and last bidder. The date
of the sale is set for the 3d of December of the current year, in the Auction Hall
at Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

"Address for information Mr. W.S. Forster, Temporary Agent for the North
Polar Practical Association, 93 High Street, Baltimore."

The reader may imagine how this communication was received by the public
at large. Most people considered it as an absurd idea. Some only saw in it a
sample of characteristic American humbug. Others thought that the proposition
deserved to be fairly considered, and they pointed to the fact that the newly-
founded company did not in any way appeal to the public for pecuniary help, but
was willing to do everything with its own capital. It was with its own money that
it wanted to purchase the Arctic region. The promoters did not try to put gold,
silver, and bank-notes into their pockets and keep them for their own benefit. No,
they only asked permission to pay for the land with their own money.

Some people who claimed to know said that the Company could have gone
to work and taken possession of the country without any further ceremony, as it
was their right as first occupants. But that is just where the difficulty came in,
because until this time the Pole seemed to be forbidden ground to any one.
Therefore, in case the United States should give possession of the country, the
Company wanted a regular title to it without trouble about the matter in the
future. It was unjust to blame them in any way, as in such an affair too many
precautions cannot be taken. Besides, the circular had a paragraph which
provided for all future chances. This paragraph was capable of so many
interpretations that the exact meaning of it could not be rendered even by those


who studied it closely. It was stipulated that the right of proprietorship should
not depend upon any chances or changes in the country, no matter whether these
changes were in the position or climate of the country.

What did this phrase mean? How could there ever be any changes in the
geography or meteorology of a country like this one to be sold at auction?
"Evidently," said some shrewd ones, "there must be something behind it."

The commentators had free swing and exercised it with a will. One paper in
Philadelphia published the following pleasant notice:

"Undoubtedly the future purchasers of the Arctic region have information
that a hard stone comet will strike this world under such conditions that its blow
will produce geographic and meteorologic changes such as the purchasers of the
Arctic region will profit by."

The idea of a blow with a hard stone planet was not accepted by serious
people. In any case it was not likely that the would-be purchasers would have
been informed of such a coming event.

"Perhaps," said a New Orleans newspaper, "the new Company thinks the
precession of the equinox will in time favor the conditions likely to lead to the
utilization of this domain."

"And why not? Because this movement modifies the direction of the axis of
our spheroid," observed another correspondent.

"Really," answered the Scientific Review, of Paris. "As Adhemar has
predicted in his book on the ocean currents, the precession of the equinox,
combined with the movement of the earth’s axis, will be such as to modify in a
long period the average temperature of the different parts of the earth and in the
quantities of ice accumulated around the two poles."

"This is not certain,” replied the Edinburgh Review, "and, besides, supposing
that this would be the case, is not a lapse of 12,000 years necessary before Vega
becomes our polar star in consequence of this movement and the situation of the
Arctic territory consequently changed in regard to its climate?"

"Well," said the Copenhagen Dagblad, "in 12,000 years it will be time to
make preparations, and before that time risk nothing—not even a cent."

It was possible that the Scientific Review was right with Adhemar. It was
also very probable that the North Polar Practical Association had never counted
on this modification of climate due to the precession of the equinox. In fact,
nobody had clearly discovered what this last paragraph in the circular meant nor
what kind of change it had in view.

Perhaps to know it, it would suffice to write to the Secretary of the new
Society, or particularly its President. But the President was unknown. Unknown
as much as the Secretary and all other members of the Council. It was not even


known where the document came from. It was brought to the offices of the New
York newspapers by a certain William S. Forster, a codfish dealer of Baltimore, a
member of the house of Ardrinell & Co. Everything was so quiet and mysterious
in the matter that the best reporters could not make out what it was all about.
This North Polar Association had been so anonymous that it was impossible
even to give it a definite name.

If, however, the promoters of this speculation persisted in making their
personnel an absolute mystery, their intention was clearly indicated by the
document spread before the public of two worlds.

Really, after all, the question was the purchase of that part of the arctic
regions bounded by the 84th degree, and of which the North Pole was the central
point. Nothing very exact concerning this region was known. The modern
discoverers who had been nearest to this parallel were Parry, Markham,
Lockwood and Brainard. In regard to the other navigators of the northern seas
they stopped far short of the above-mentioned point—such as Payez, in 1874, to
82° 15’ north of the land of Francis Joseph, of New Zemble; Leout, in 1870, to
72°74’ above Siberia; De Long in the Jeanette expedition, in 1879, to 78° 45’
around the islands which bear his name. Others went around New Siberia and
Greenland to the end of the Cape Bismarck, but had not passed the 76th, 77th, or
78th degree of latitude. The North Polar Practical Association wanted then a
country which had never been touched before by mankind or discoverers, and
which was absolutely uninhabited.

The length of this portion of the globe surrounded by the 84th degree,
extending from the 84th to the 90th, making six degrees, which at sixty miles
each make a radius of 360 miles and a diameter of 720 miles. The circumference
therefore is, 2,260 miles and the surface 407 [square] miles. This is about the
tenth part of the whole of Europe. A very desirable slice of land indeed. The
document, as we have seen, also stated that these regions were not yet known
geographically, belonged to no one and therefore belonged to everyone. But it
could be foreseen that the adjoining States at least would consider these regions
as the prolongation of their own possession towards the north and would
consequently claim the right of ownership. Their pretensions would have more
justice than those of discoverers who operated upon the whole of the Arctic
countries and made explorations only for the glory of their own nation. The
Federal Government represented in the new Society intended to make their
rights valuable and to indemnify them for the price of their purchase. However it
was the partisans of the North Polar Practical Association did not announce; the
proprietorship was clear, and nobody being compelled to live there could object
to the auction sale of this vast domain.


The countries whose rights were absolutely established as much as those of
any countries could be were six in number—America, England, Russia,
Denmark, Sweden-Norway and Holland.

Other countries could claim discoveries made by their mariners and their
travellers.

France could interfere because some of her children had taken part in the
expeditions sent out to conquer the territories around the pole.

Among the others the courageous Bellot, who died in 1853, in the islands of
Beechey, during the Phoenix Expedition sent in search of Sir John Franklin. Nor
must one forget Dr. Octave Pavy, who died in 1884, near Cape Sabine, while the
Greely Mission was at Fort Conger. And the expedition which, in 1838-39, had
gone to the Sea of Spitzberg with Charles Marmier, Bravais and his courageous
companions, would it not be unfair to forget them. But despite all this France did
not care to interfere in this commercial rather than scientific matter, and she
abandoned all her rights for a share of the polar pie. The same of Germany. It
had sent since 1671 the Hamburg expedition of Frederic Martens to the
Spitsbergen, and in 1869 and ‘70 the expeditions of the Germania and of the
Hansa, commanded by Koldervey and Hegeman, which went as far as Cape
Bismarck by going along the coast of Greenland. But even if they had made so
many brilliant discoveries they did not care to add a piece of the polar empire to
that of Germany. The same was true with Austria, which was already possessor
of the land of Francis Joseph, situated north of Siberia.

In regard to Italy having no right to interfere, she did not interfere at all;
which is as strange as it is true. Then, also, there were the Esquimaux, which are
at home in those places, and the inhabitants of Greenland, of Labrador, of
Baffin’s Archipelago and of the Aleutian Islands, situated between Asia and
America, and also the tribe of Tchouktchis, who inhabited the old Russian
Alaska and who became Americans in 1867. These people, in reality the real
aborigines, had nothing at all to say about the matter. And how could these poor
wretches have said anything, as they did not even have any sum of money, no
matter how small, with which to pay for the land which the North Polar Practical
Association was going to buy. Perhaps they could have paid a small sum by
giving skins, teeth or oil, and yet the land belonged to them more than to any
others, as they were the first occupants of this domain which was going to be
sold on auction. But the Esquimaux, the Tchouktchis, the Samoyedes were not
consulted at all. So runs the world.

CHAPTER II.

IN WHICH THE DELEGATES FROM ENGLAND, HOLLAND,
SWEDEN, DENMARK AND RUSSIA ARE PRESENTED TO THE READER.


One thing was evident to the whole world at once, namely, that if the new
association should succeed in buying the Arctic regions, those regions would
become absolutely the property of America or rather of the United States, a
country which was always trying to acquire something. This was not a pleasing
prospect to rival governments, but nevertheless, as has been said, the different
States of Europe and of Asia not neighboring to these regions, refused to take
part in the proposed auction sale so long as its results seemed so problematical to
them. Only the powers whose property touched the eighty-fourth degree
resolved to make their rights valuable by the attendance of official delegates.
That was all. They did not care to buy even at a relatively moderate price land
the possession of which was only a possibility. In this as in all cases insatiable
England gave orders to its financial agents to make an imposing showing. The
cession of the polar countries did not threaten any European trouble nor any
international complication. Herr von Bismarck, the grand Iron Chancellor, who
was yet living, did not even knit his heavy brow. There remained only England,
Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Holland and Russia to be present and make their
bids to the Commissioner of Baltimore, against those of the United States.

It was a difficult matter to fix prices for this polar earth cap, the business
value of which was at least very problematic. Their main reason for presenting
themselves at the sale was that some advantage might accrue to them. Sweden
and Norway, proprietors of the North Cape, situated beyond the seventy-second
parallel, did not conceal the fact that they thought they had certain rights of
proprietorship on these vast lands which extended to Spitsbergen, and from there
to the North Pole. Denmark said that it had already in its possession islands and
fiords on the line of the polar circle where their colonies had been founded, such
as Disko Island, in the Davis Channel; the settlements of Holstein, of Proven, of
Godhaven, of Uppermavik, in the Baffin Sea, and on the west coast of Greenland.
Besides, did not the famous navigator, Behring (of Danish origin, although he
was then in the service of Russia), in the year 1728 pass over the channel which
afterwards carried his name before he started again, thirteen years later, and died
miserably with thirty of his men on a little island, which also carries his
distinguished name.

In the year 1619 did not the navigator, Jean Munk, explore the east coast of
Greenland and discover several points formerly totally unknown? Therefore,
Denmark had, she thought, undisputable rights to be proprietor of these regions.

In regard to Holland, there were her sailors Barentz and Heemskerk, who had
visited the Spitsbergen and the New Zealand about the end of the sixteenth
century. It was by one of her children too, Jean Mayen, through whose
courageous campaign against the north the island which carries his name came


in their possession. It is situated below the 72d degree of latitude. Therefore
Holland thought her past had given her rights of possession. In regard to Russia,
with Alexis Tschirikof, having Behring under his command; with Paulutski,
whose expedition advanced in 1751 beyond the limits of the ice-pack; with Capt.
Martin Spangberg, and Lieut. William Walton, who dared to go into these
unknown parts in 1739, she had taken a notable part in the search across the gulf
which separates Asia and America.

Furthermore, the position of the Siberian territories, extending over 120
degrees to the extreme limits of Kamchatka, the length of the Asiatic coast,
where the Samoyedes, Yakoutes, Tchuoktchis, and other conquered people lived,
did Russia not rule half of the Northern Ocean? And then, on the 75th parallel to
within less than nine hundred miles from the pole, did she not possess the islands
of the new Siberia, the Archipelago of Liatkow, discovered in the beginning of
the eighteenth century? And finally, since 1764, before the English, before the
Americans, before the Swedes, did not the navigator Tschitschagoff search a
passage in the North to shorten the route between the two continents? However,
notwithstanding this, it seemed that the Americans were more anxious to become
possessors of this particularly inaccessible point of the globe than anyone else.

They had often tried to obtain it by devoting themselves to the search of Sir
John Franklin, with Grinnel, with Kane, with Hayes, with Greely, with De Long,
and other courageous navigators. They could also plead the geographical
situation of their country, which develops itself below the polar circle from the
Behring Sea to Hudson’s Bay. And were not all these countries, all these islands
—Wollaston, Prince Albert, Victoria, King William, Melville, Cockburne,
Banks, Baffin, not counting the thousand small pieces of the archipelago—like a
leaf spreading to the 90th degree? And then supposing that the North Pole
should be attached by an uninterrupted line of territory to one of the large
continents of the globe, would it not be more to America than to Asia or Europe?
Therefore, nothing was more natural than the proposition to purchase this region
by the Federal Government for the benefit of an American society.

If any power had undisputable modern rights to possess the polar domain it
was certainly the United States of America. It must also be considered that the
United Kingdom of Great Britain, which possessed Canada and British
Columbia, numerous sailors of which had distinguished themselves in these
Arctic countries, urged very good reasons for annexing this part of the globe to
their vast empire. And its journals discussed the matter at great length. "Yes,
without a doubt," answered the great English geographer, Kliptringan, in an
article in a London newspaper, which made a great sensation; "yes, the Danes,
the Hollanders, the Russians, and the Americans, can be proud of their rights."


As for England, she did not wish to let this country escape her. Did not the
northern part of the continent already belong to them? Have not these lands,
these islands which composed them, been discovered and conquered by English
discoverers since Willoughby, who visited Spitsbergen and New Zealand in
1739, to McClure, whose vessel made in 1853 the passage of the northwest?
And then were not Frobisher, Davis, Hall, Weymouth, Hudson, Baffin, Cook,
Ross, Parry, Bechey, Belcher, Franklin, Mulgrave, Scoresby, MacClinton,
Kennedy, Nares, Collinson, Archer, all of Anglo-Saxon origin? And what
country could make a more just claim on the portion of these Arctic regions that
that which these navigators had been able to acquire? "Well," said a California
journal, "let us put the matter on its real point, and as there is a question of
amour-propre between the United States and England, let us ask, If the English
Markham of the Nares expedition had gone 83 degrees 20 minutes of latitude
and the Americans, Lockwood and Brainard, of the Greely expedition, went to
83 degrees 35 minutes, to whom then does the honor belong of having come
nearest to the North Pole?"

Such were the demands and explanations, but one could see that the struggle
would only be active between American dollars and English pounds sterling.
However, according to the proposition made by the North Polar Practical
Association all countries had to be consulted and given a chance at the auction.
The sale was announced to take place Dec. 3, at Baltimore. The sum realized by
the sale was to be divided among the States which were unsuccessful bidders,
and they were to accept it as indemnity and renounce all their rights in the Arctic
regions for the future.

The delegates, furnished with their letters of credit, left London. The Hague,
Stockholm, Copenhagen, and St. Petersburg, and arrived three weeks before the
day fixed for the auction sale.

Up to this time America had only been represented by Mr. W.S. Forster, of
the North Polar Practical Association.

The delegates of the European powers who had been chosen were included
in the following list:

For Holland—Jacques Jansen, formerly Counsellor of the Netherlandish
India; fifty-three years old, stout, short, well formed, small arms, small bent legs,
round and florid face, gray hair; a worthy man, only a little incredulous on the
subject of an undertaking the practical consequences of which he failed to see.

For Denmark—Eric Baldenak, ex-Sub-Governor of the Greenlandish
possessions; of medium height, a little bent over, large and round head, so short-
sighted that the point of his nose would touch his books; not willing to listen to
any claim denying the rights of his country, which he considered the legitimate


proprietor of the northern region.

For the Swedish-Norwegian peninsula—Jan Harald, Professor of
Cosmography in Christiania; a genuine Northern man, red-faced, beard and hair
blond; he regarded it as an established fact that the Polar region, being only
occupied by the Paleocristic Sea, had absolutely no value. He was, however, not
much interested in the matter and went there only as a duty.

For Russia—Col. Boris Karkof, semi-military man, semi-diplomat; a stiff,
stubby mustache, seeming uncomfortable in his citizen clothes and feeling
absent-mindedly for his sword which he was accustomed to carry; very much
puzzled to know what was hidden in the proposition of the North Polar Practical
Association, and whether it would not be the cause of international difficulties.

Finally for England—Major Donellan and his secretary, Dean Toodrink. The
last two named represented all the tastes and aspirations of the United Kingdom,
its commercial and industrial instincts, its aptitude to consider, by a law of
nature, the northern regions their own property just as any country which did not
belong to anyone else.

If there ever was an Englishman it was Major Donellan, tall, meagre, bony,
nervous, angular, with a little cough, a head a la Palmerston, on bending
shoulders; legs well formed after his sixty years; indefatigable, a quality he had
well shown when he worked on the frontiers of India. He never laughed in those
days, and perhaps never had. And why should he? Did you ever see a locomotive
or a steam-engine or an elevator laugh? On this point the Major was very much
different from his secretary, Dean Toodrink, a talkative fellow, very pleasant,
with large head, and his hair falling on his forehead, and small eyes. He became
well known on account of his happy manner and his taste for fairy tales. But,
even if he was cheerful, he did not seem any less personally conceited than
Major Donellan when he talked about Great Britain.

These two delegates were probably going to be the most desperate opponents
to the American Society. The North Pole belonged to them; it always belonged
to them. It was to them as if the Lord had given the mission to the English
people to keep up the rotation of the earth around its axis, and as if it was their
duty to prevent it passing into strange hands. It is necessary to observe here that
France did not consider it necessary to send a delegate, but an engineer, of
France, was present at the sale, just for the fun of it. We shall introduce him later
on. The delegates of the Northern European States had arrived in Baltimore on
different steamers, to give it the appearance that they had nothing at all to do
with each other. They were really rivals. Each one of them had in his pocket the
necessary means to fight against the American Society. But they could not fight
with equal force. One could dispose of a sum of money which amounted to


nearly a million, another could pass that amount. And really to purchase a piece
of our globe to reach which seemed an impossibility, this ought still appear to be
dear. In reality the best provided for was the English delegate, to whose order the
Government had opened a very large credit. Thanks to this credit Major
Donellan would not have very hard work to conquer his adversaries of Sweden,
Denmark-Holland, and Russia. In regard to America—well, that was a different
thing. It would be much more difficult to win against the fusillade of dollars. At
least it was very probable that the mysterious society must have enough money
on hand to go on in their work. Therefore, the highest bidding, which might
come to millions, was between America and England.

As soon as the European delegates had landed public opinion became more
excited. The most singular stories were printed in the newspapers. False theories
were established, based on the purchase of the North Pole. What was the Society
going to do with it? And what could they do with it? Nothing; or perhaps it was
all done to corner the iceberg market. There was even a journal in Paris, the
Figaro, which upheld this curious idea. But for this it would be necessary to pass
south of the eighty-fourth parallel.


Be it as it may, however, the delegates who had avoided each other during
their passage over the Atlantic became more and more associated after having
arrived in Baltimore. Here is the reason: Since his arrival each one had tried to
open communications with the North Polar Practical Association separately,
unknown to the other. That which they wished to know were the motives hidden
at the bottom of this affair and what profit the Society hoped to make out of the
sale. Now, until the present time nothing indicated that the Society had opened
an office at Baltimore. No office, no employees. All that could be learned was,
"For information address only William S. Forster, High Street, Baltimore." And
it did not look as though the honest consignee of codfish knew any more in this
respect than the lowest street porter of the city.

The delegates could, therefore, learn nothing from him. They were
accordingly compelled to rely upon the more or less absurd guesses of the public
at large. Was the secret of the Society going to be kept inpenetrable as long as it
did not make it known itself? This was the question. Without doubt it did not
seem inclined to give any information on the subject until the purchase had been
made. Therefore, it came that the delegates finished by seeing and meeting each
other; they made visits to each other, and finally came in close communication
with each other, perhaps with the idea of making a front against the common
enemy, or, otherwise, the American Company. And so it happened that one
evening they were all together in the Hotel Wolesley, in the suite occupied by


Major Donellan and his secretary, Dean Toodrink, holding a conference. In fact,
this tendency to a common understanding was principally due to the advice of
Col. Boris Karkof, the best diplomat known. At first the conversation was
directed to the commercial and industrial consequences which the Society
pretended to gain by purchase of the Arctic domain. Prof. Jan Harald asked if
any one had been able to gain any information on that point. All finally agreed
that they had tried to get information from Mr. William S. Forster, to whom all
letters should be addressed.

"T have failed," said Eric Baldenak.

"And I have not succeeded," added Jacques Jansen.

"In regard to myself," answered Dean Toodrink, "when I presented myself at
the stores in High Street in the name of Major Donellan I found a large man in
black clothes, wearing a high hat, with a white apron, which was short enough to
show his high boots. When I asked him for information in the matter he
informed me that the South Star had arrived with a full cargo from
Newfoundland and that he was ready to furnish me with a fresh stock of codfish
on account of Messrs. Ardronell & Co."

"And," answered the former counsellor of the Dutch Indies, always a little
sceptical, "it would be much better to buy a load of codfish than to throw one’s
money into the ice-water of the North."

"This is not at all the question," says Major Donellan, with a short and high
voice. "The question is not the codfish, but the Polar region."

"Americans ought to stand on their heads," said Dean Toodrink, laughing at
his own remark. "That will make them catch cold," finally said Col. Karkof.
"The question is not there," said Major Donellan. "One thing only is certain, that
for some reason or another America, represented by the N.P.P.A. (remark the
word ‘practical’) wants to buy a surface of 407 square miles around the North
Pole, a surface which is actually (remark the word ‘actually’) pierced by the
eighty-fourth degree of latitude."

"We know it, Major Donellan, and much more," said Jan Harald. "But what
we do not know is how the said company will make use of those countries or
waters, if they are waters, from a commercial standpoint."

"This is not the question," answered for the third time Major Donellan. "A
power wants to purchase with money a large part of the globe which, by its
geographical situation, seems to belong especially to England"—"to Russia,"
said Col. Karkof; "to Holland," said Jacques Jansen; "to Sweden-Norway," said
Jan Harald; "to Denmark," said Eric Baldenak.

The five delegates jumped to their feet, and it seemed as if the Council
would turn to harsh words, when Dean Toodrink tried to interfere the first time.


"Gentlemen," said he, in a tone of reconciliation, "this is not the question,
following the expression of my chief," of which he made such frequent use. "As
long as it has been decided that the Northern regions are going to be sold at
auction, they will naturally belong to such representative who will make the
highest bid for same. As long as Sweden, Norway, Russia, Denmark, Holland,
and England have given large credits to their delegates, would it not be best for
these nations to form a syndicate and raise a sum of money against which
America could not make a bid? The delegates looked at each other. It was
possible that Dean Toodrink had found the missing link. A syndicate—at present
it is heard everywhere. Everything is syndicate nowadays, what one drinks, what
one eats, what one reads, what one sleeps on. Nothing is more modern, in
politics as well as business, than a trust. But an objection was started, or rather
an explanation was needed, and Jacques Jansen tried to find out the sentiments
of his colleagues by saying, "and afterwards," yes, after the purchase of the
region by the syndicate, then what? "But it seems to me that England," said the
Major in a rough voice, "and Russia," said the Colonel, with nostrils terribly
dilated, "and Holland," said the Counsellor; "as God has given Denmark to the
Danish," observed Eric Baldenak—"Excuse me, there is only one country,"
interrupted Dean Toodrink, "which has been given by our Lord, and that is the
world." "And why," said the Swedish delegate? "Did not the poet say

‘Deus nobis haec otia fecit,’ "

said this merryman in translating according to his fashion the close of the
sixth verse of the first eclogue of Virgil. All began to laugh except Major
Donellan, who stopped for the second time the discussion which threatened to
finish badly. Then Dean Toodrink said, "Do not quarrel, gentlemen. What good
will it do us? Let us rather form a syndicate."

"And afterwards?" asked Jan Harald.

"Afterwards," answered Dean Toodrink, "nothing more simple, gentlemen.
After you shall have bought the polar domain it will remain undivided among us
or will be divided after a regular indemnity to one of the States which have been
purchasers. But our purpose would have already been obtained, which is to save
it from the representative of America."

This proposition did some good, at least for the present moment. As very
soon the delegates would not fail to fight with each other, and pull each other’s
hair where there was any to pull, it would be at the moment when it was
necessary to elect a final buyer of this immovable region, so much disputed and
so useless.

"In all cases," cleverly remarked Dean Toodrink, "the United States will be
entirely out of the question."


"Tt seems to me very sensible,” said Eric Baldenak.

"Very handy," said Col. Karkof.

"Right," said Jan Harald.

"Mean," said Jacques Jansen.

"Very English," said Major Donellan.

Each one had given his opinion hoping to convince his colleagues.

"Then, gentlemen, it is perfectly understood that if we form a syndicate the
rights of each State will be absolutely reserved for the future." ... It is
understood. There was only to be found out what credit the different delegates
had received from their governments. It was supposed that the whole when
added up would represent such an enormous sum that there would not be the
least doubt that the A.P.P.A. [N.P.P.A.] would fail to surpass this amount of
money. This question of funds was met by Dean Toodrink.

Complete silence. Nobody would answer, show your pocketbook. Empty
their pockets into the safes of a syndicate. Make known in advance how much
each country would bid at the sale. No haste was shown. And if there should be a
disagreement in this new-formed syndicate in the future, and circumstances
should compel each one to make his own bids? And should the diplomat Karkof
feel insulted at the trickery of Jacques Jansen, who would be insulted at the
underhand intrigues of Jan Harald, who would refuse to support the high
pretensions of Major Donellan, who, himself, would not stop to embroil each
one of his associates. And now to show their credits—that was showing their
play, when it was necessary to live up to it. There were really two ways only to
answer the proper but indiscreet suggestion of Dean Toodrink. Either to
exaggerate the credits, which would be very embarrassing, because it would then
be the question of the payment, or to diminish them to such a point that they
would be ridiculous and not to the purpose of the scheme. The ex-counsellor had
this idea first, but it must be said to his credit, he did not seriously hold it. His
colleagues, however, followed suit. "Gentlemen," said Holland, through its
mouthpiece, "I regret, but for the purpose of the Arctic regions I can only
dispose of fifty riechsthaler." "And I of thirty-five rubles," said Russia. "And I of
twenty kronors," said Norway-Sweden. "And I of fifteen cronen," said Denmark.
"Well," said Major Donellan, in a tone well befitting the disdainful attitude so
common and natural to the English character, "then it would be better that you
make the purchase, gentlemen, as England can only put up at the most one
shilling and sixpence." And with this ironical remark the conference of the
delegates of old Europe was at an end.

CHAPTER III.

IN WHICH THE ARCTIC REGIONS ARE SOLD AT AUCTION TO THE


HIGHEST BIDDER.

Why was this sale on the 3d of December going to be held in the regular
auction hall, where usually only such objects as furniture, utensils, tools,
instruments, etc., or art pieces, pictures, medals, and antique objects were sold?
Why, so long as it was a piece of realty, was it not sold before a referee or a court
of justice appointed for such sales? And why was the aid of a public auctioneer
necessary when a part of our globe was going to be sold? How could this piece
of the world be compared with any movable object when it was the most fixed
thing on the face of the earth? Really, this seemed to be quite illogical, but it was
not so, since the whole of the Arctic regions was to be sold in such a way that
the contract would be valuable. Did this not indicate that in the opinion of the
N.P.P.A. the immovable object in question contained something movable?

This singularity puzzled even the most eminently sagacious minds to be
found in the United States. On the other hand, there had been such a sale in the
past already. One portion of our planet had been sold in the auction-rooms with
the help of a public appraiser to the highest public bidder. And this case had
happened in America.

It was some years before, in San Francisco, Cal., an island of the Pacific
Ocean, Spencer Island, was sold to the rich William W. Kolderup, who bid
$500,000 in opposition to J.R. Taskinar, of Stockton. This island had cost
$4,000,000. It is true it was an island which had inhabitants, only a few miles
away from the coast, with forests, water, productive and solid, with fields and
prairies, in condition to be cultivated, and not a vague wild region of water
covered with eternal ice, defended by impenetrable icebergs, which very
probably nobody would ever live in. It was thought, therefore, that the unknown
polar region would never bring so high a price if sold at auction. Nevertheless,
on the day of the sale a great many serious and curious people assembled to
learn the end of the affair.

The sale could hardly fail to be interesting.

Ever since their arrival in Baltimore the European delegates had found
themselves very much gazed at and always surrounded by many people. Of
course they were much interviewed. In view of all this it was only natural that
the public of America should have become very much excited. One manner of
expressing the public excitement, very characteristic of Americans, was to make
bets upon the result, an example which Europe quickly began to follow. Divided
as the American citizens were into those of New England, those of the Middle
States, Western States, and Eastern States, there was only one wish, and that was
for the well-being of their country. But there was still a great deal of uncertainty.
It was neither Russia, nor Sweden, nor Norway, nor Denmark, nor Holland, the


chances of which they dreaded most. But it was England, with its territorial
ambitions, with its only too well-known tendency to swallow everything, and its
world-known Bank of England notes. Large sums of money were placed on the
result. Bets were made on America and Great Britain, the same as on race-
horses, and in almost all cases even money was put up. Some offers were made
of 12 and 13% to 1 on Denmark, Sweden, Holland and Russia, but none would
take such an offer.

The sale commenced at 12 o’clock.

Since early in the morning all business had been stopped in the street on
account of the large crowd. By telegraph the papers were informed that most of
the bets made by Americans had been taken up by the English, and Dean
Toodrink immediately posted up a notice to that effect in the auction hall. The
nearer the time came the higher grew the excitement. It was reported that the
Government of Great Britain had placed large sums of money at the disposition
of Major Donellan. "At the office of the Admiralty," observed one of the New
York papers, "the Admirals pushed the sale as much as possible, as they hoped to
figure conspicuously in the expeditions fitted out." How much truth there was in
these stories no one knew. But the most conservative people in Baltimore
thought that it was hardly possible that the amount of money at the command of
the N.P.P.A. could cover the amount which would be bid by England, and
therefore a very strong pressure was put on the Government of the United States
at Washington to protect the interests of the society. In all this excitement the
new society was represented by the single person, its agent, William S. Forster,
who did not seem to worry at all over all these rumors and seemed quite
confident of success.

As the time for the auction drew near the crowd grew larger. Three hours
before the sale it was impossible to obtain admission to the auction hall. All the
space set apart for the public was so much filled that there was danger that the
building would fall in. There was only a small space left empty, surrounded by a
railing, which had been reserved for the European delegates. They had just space
enough to follow the progress of the sale, and were not even comfortably seated.

They were Eric Baldenak, Boris Karkof Jacques Jansen, Jan Harald, Major
Donellan and his secretary, Dean Toodrink. They formed a solid group, standing
together like soldiers on a battlefield. And were they not really going to battle
for the possession of the North Pole? On the American side apparently nobody
was represented. Only the codfish dealer was present and his face had an
expression of the most supreme indifference.

He seemed little concerned and appeared to be thinking of his cargo which
was to arrive by the next steamer. Where were the capitalists represented by this


man, who, perhaps, was going to start millions of dollars rolling? This was such
a mystery as to excite public curiosity to the utmost.

No one doubted that Mr. J. T. Maston and Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt had
something to do with the matter, but what could one guess on? Both were there,
lost in the crowd, without any special place, surrounded by some members of the
Baltimore Gun Club, friends of Mr. Maston. They seemed to be the least
interested spectators in the hall. Mr. William S. Forster even did not seem to
recognize them.

The auctioneer began by saying that contrary to the general rule it was
impossible to show the article about to be sold. He could not pass from hand to
hand the North Pole. Neither could they examine it nor look at it with a
magnifying glass or touch it with their fingers to see whether the plating was real
or only artificial, or whether it was an antique, which it really was, he said. It
was as Old as stone, it was as old as the world, since it dated back to the time the
world was made.

If, however, the North Pole was not on the desk of the Public Appraiser, a
large chart, clear in view of all interested persons, indicated with marked lines
the parts which were going to be sold at auction. Seventeen degrees below the
Polar Circle was a red line, clearly seen on the 84th parallel, which marked the
section on the globe put up for sale. It appeared that there was only water in this
region covered with ice of considerable thickness. But this was the risk of the
purchaser. In any case he would not be disappointed in the nature of his
merchandise by any misrepresentation.

At 12 o’clock exactly the public auctioneer entered by a little trap-door cut in
the boards of the floor and took his place before the desk. His crier, Flint, had
already arrived, and was walking up and down as agitated as a bear in a cage.
Both were glad at the prospect, as they thought that the sale would run up to an
enormous sum and put a large and acceptable percentage in their pockets. Of
course the sale would have to be made under the regular, real American rule,
"ready cash."

The amount of money, no matter how large it would be, must be raised by
the delegates. At this moment a large bell ringing with vigor indicated that the
bidding was going to begin. What a solemn moment! Many hearts quivered in
that neighborhood. A minor riot spread among the crowd outside and reached
into the hall, and Andrew R. Gilmour, the auctioneer, had to wait until quiet was
restored. He got up and looked steadily at his assistants. Then he let his
eyeglasses fall on his breast and said in as quiet a voice as possible: "Gentlemen,
according to the plan of the Federal government, and thanks to the acquiescence
given it by the European powers, we will sell a great fixed mass, situated around


the North Pole, all that is within the limits of the 84th parallel, continents,
waters, bays, islands, icebergs, solid parts or liquid, whatever they may be."
Then, turning towards the wall, he said "Look at this chart, which has been
outlined according to the latest discoveries. You will see that the surface of this
lot contains 407,000 square miles. Therefore, to make the sale easier, it has been
decided that the bids should be made for each square mile. Each cent bid, for
instance, will be equal to 407,000 cents and each dollar 407,000 dollars on the
total purchase. A little silence, please, gentlemen."

This request was not superfluous, because the impatience of the public had
reached such a degree that the voice of a bidder would hardly be heard. After
partial silence had been established, thanks to the industry of the crier, Flint, who
roared like a foghorn, Mr. Gilmour resumed as follows: "Before beginning I will
mention only one condition of the sale. No matter what changes should happen,
either from a geographical or meteorological standpoint, this region after being
sold to the highest bidder is absolutely his own beyond any dispute, and the
other countries have no right of possession whatever as long as the territory is
not outside of the limits of the 84th degree north latitude." Again was this
singular phrase mentioned at a very important moment. Some laughed at it,
others considered it very seriously. "The bids are open," said the public
auctioneer in a loud voice, and while his little ivory hammer was rolling in his
hand he added in an undertone: "We have offers at 10 cents the square mile. Ten
cents or the tenth part of a dollar—this would make an amount of $40,700 for
the whole of this immovable property." Whether the auctioneer had had such
offers or not does not matter, because the bid was covered by Eric Baldenak in
the name of the Danish Government. "Twenty cents," said he.

"Thirty cents," said Jan Harald, for Sweden-Norway.

"Forty cents," said Col. Boris Karkof, for Russia.

This represented already a sum of $162,800 to begin with. The representative
of England had not as yet opened his mouth, not even moved his lips, which
were pressed tightly together. On the other side Wm. S. Forster kept an
impenetrable dumbness. Even at this moment he seemed absorbed in reading a
newspaper which contained the shipping arrivals and the financial reports of the
markets each day.

"Forty cents per square mile," repeated Flint, in a voice which resembled a
steam whistle, "40 cents."

The four colleagues of Major Donellan looked at each other. Had they
already exhausted the credit allowed them at the beginning of the bidding? Were
they already compelled to be silent?

"Go on, gentlemen,” said the Auctioneer Gilmour, "40 cents. Who goes


higher? Forty cents; why, the North Pole is worth much more than that, for it is
guaranteed to be made of ice."

The Danish delegate said 50 cents and the Hollandish delegate promptly
outbid him by 10 cents.

Nobody said a word. This 60 cents represented the respectable amount of
$244,200. The lift given by Holland to the sale started a murmur of satisfaction.
It seemed that the persons who had nothing in their pockets and nothing to their
names were the most interested of all in this contest of dollars.

At the moment Jacques Jansen made his offer Major Donellan looked at his
secretary, Dean Toodrink, and, with an almost imperceptible negative sign, kept
him silent. Mr. William S. Forster, seeming very much interested in his paper,
made some pencil notes. Mr. J.T. Maston, only replied to the smiles of Mrs.
Evangelina Scorbitt with a nod of the head.

"Hurry up, gentlemen; a little life. Don’t let us linger. This is very weak, very
slow," said the auctioneer. "Let me see. Nobody says more. Must I knock down
the North Pole at such a price?" and as he spoke his hammer went up and down
just like the cross in a priest’s hands when he wishes to bless his people.

"Seventy cents,” said Jan Harald, with a voice which trembled a little.

"Eighty," immediately responded Col. Boris Karkof.

"Hurry up, 80 cents," said Flint, whose eyes were burning with excitement.

A gesture of Dean Toodrink made Major Donellan jump up like a spirit.
"One hundred cents," said he with a short and sharp tone, becoming in one who
represented Great Britain. That one word made England responsible for
$407,000.

The friends of the bidders for the United Kingdom made a great hurrah,
which was repeated like an echo by the outside crowd. The bidders for America
looked at each other with disappointment; $407,000; this was already a very
large figure for such a region as the North Pole; $407,000 for ice, icebergs, and
icefields?

And the man of the N. P. P. A. did not say one word, did not even raise his
head. Would he decide to make at last one overwhelming bid? If he wanted to
wait until the Danish delegates, those of Sweden, Holland, and Russia had
exhausted their credit, it would seem that the proper moment had come. Their
faces plainly showed that before the "100 cents" of Major Donellan, they had
decided to quit the battlefield. "One hundred cents the square mile," said the
auctioneer for the second time, "One hundred, one hundred, one hundred," cried
out Flint, making a speaking-trumpet of his half-closed hand. "Nobody goes
higher?" questioned Auctioneer Gilmour. "Is it heard? Is it understood? No
regrets afterwards? We will sell it now." And he took his position and looking at


his clerk, said: "once, twice"—

"One hundred and ten," very quietly said William S. Forster, without even
raising his eyes, after having turned the page of his paper.

"Hip, hip, hip," shouted the crowd who had put most of the money on
America in the bets. Major Donellan was astonished. His long neck turned in all
directions and he shrugged his shoulders, while his lips worked with great
excitement. He tried to crush this American representative with one look, but
without success, but Mr. Forster, cool as a cucumber, did not budge.

"One hundred and forty," said Major Donellan.

"One hundred and sixty," said Forster.

"One hundred and eighty," said the Major, with great excitement.

"One hundred and ninety," said Forster.

"One hundred and ninety-nine," roared the delegate of Great Britain. With
this he crossed his arms and seemed to defy the United States of America.

One might have heard a mouse run, or a miller fly, or a worm creep. All
hearts were beating. A life seemed hanging on the lips of Major Donellan. His
head, generally restless, was still now. Dean Toodrink had sat down and was
pulling out his hairs one by one. Auctioneer Gilmour let a few moments run by.
They seemed as long as centuries. The codfish merchant continued reading his
paper and making pencil figures which had evidently nothing at all to do wth
[with] the question. Was he also at the end of his credit? Did he intend to make a
last offer? Did this amount of 199 cents for each square mile or $793,000 for the
whole of the fixture at sale seem to him to have reached the last limit of
absurdity?

"One hundred and ninety-nine cents," repeated the public auctioneer. "We
will sell it," and his hammer fell on the table before him. "One hundred and
ninety-nine," cried the helper. "Sell it! Sell it!" And every one was looking at the
representative of the N.P.P.A.

That surprising gentleman was blowing his nose on a large bandanna
handkerchief, which nearly covered his whole face. Mr. J. T. Maston was
looking at him intently, and so was Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt. It could easily be
seen by their anxious faces how much they tried to supress their violent emotion.
Why was Forster hesitating to outbid Major Donellan? As for the imperturbable
Forster, he blew his nose a second time, then a third time, with the noise of a real
foghorn. But between the second and third blow he said as quietly as possible,
with a modest and sweet voice. "Two hundred cents!"

A long shudder went through the hall. Then the American backers began to
make such a noise that the very windows trembled. Major Donellan,
overwhelmed, ruined, disappointed, had fallen into a seat by the side of Dean


Toodrink, who himself was not in a much better condition. Two thousand miles
at this price made the enormous sum of $814,000 and it was apparent that the
credit of England did not permit them to overreach it.

"Two hundred cents," repeated the auctioneer. "Two hundred cents," said
Flint. "Once, twice," said the auctioneer. "Does anybody go higher?" Major
Donellan raised himself by a strong effort and looked wistfully at the other
delegates. These only looked back their hope that by his bidding the Arctic
region would escape the American bidder and would become the property of the
European powers. But this was his last effort. The Major opened his mouth,
closed it again, and in his person England sat down on itself. "Hip, hip, hurrah
for the United States," roared the winners for victorious America. And in one
instant the news of the purchase ran all over Baltimore, and by telegraph all over
the United States, and by cable all over the Old World. Thus it was that the
N.P.P.A. through the agency of William S. Forster, became the proprietor of the
Arctic domain, including everything above the eighty-fourth parallel. The next
day when Mr. Forster went to make his deposit for his purchase the name he
gave was Impey Barbicane and the name of the house was Barbicane & Co.

CHAPTER IV.

IN WHICH OLD ACQUAINTANCES APPEAR TO OUR NEW
READERS, AND IN WHICH A WONDERFUL MAN IS DESCRIBED.

Barbicane & Co. The president of a gunning club. And really what had
gunners to do in such an operation? You will see. Is it necessary to present
formally Impey Barbicane, President of the Gun Club, of Baltimore, and Capt.
Nicholl, and J. T. Maston, and Tom Hunter with the wooden legs, and the lively
Bilsby, and Col. Bloomsberry, and the other associates? No, if these strange
persons were twenty years older than at the time when the attention of the world
was upon them they had always remained the same, always as much incomplete
personally, but equally noisy, equally courageous, equally confusing when it was
a question of some extraordinary adventure. Time did not make an impression on
these gunners; it respected them as it respects cannons no longer in use, but
which decorate museums and arsenals. If the Gun Club had 1,833 members in it
when it was founded, names rather than persons, for most of them had lost an
arm or leg, if 30,575 corresponding members were proud to owe allegiance to
the Club, these figures had not decreased. On the contrary, and even thanks to
the incredible attempt which they had made to establish direct communication
between earth and moon, its celebrity had grown in an enormous proportion. No
one can ever forget the report on this subject which was made by this Club and
which deserves a few words of mention here.

A few years after the civil war certain members of the Gun Club, tired of


their idleness, proposed to send a projectile to the moon by means of a
Columbiad monster. A cannon 900 feet long, nine feet broad at the bore, had
been especially made at Moon City and had then been charged with 400,000
pounds of gun-cotton.

From this cannon a small cylindro-conical bomb had been flung towards the
stars with a pressure of six millards pounds per square inch. After having made a
grand curve it fell back to the earth only to be swallowed up by the Pacific
Ocean at 27° 7’ of latitude and 41° 37’ of longitude, west. It was in this region
that the frigate, Susquehanna, of the American Navy, had fished it up to the
surface of the ocean, to the great comfort of its occupants. Occupants? Yes,
occupants; for two members of the Gun Club— its President, Impey Barbicane,
and Capt. Nicholl—accompanied by a Frenchman well known for his boldness
in such cases, had been in this flying-machine. All three of them came back well
and healthy from this dangerous trip. But if the two Americans were here ready
to risk any similar thing, the French Michel Ardan was not. On his return to
Europe he brought a fortune with him, although it astonished a good many
people, and now he is planting his own cabbage in his own garden, eating them
and even digesting them, if one can believe the best-informed reporters.

After this discharge of the cannon, Impey Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl had
lived on their reputation in comparative quietness. As they were always anxious
to do another thing like it, they dreamt and tried to find out something else.
Money they had in plenty. Out of five millions and a half which had been raised
for them by subscription they had nearly $200,000 left. This money was raised
in the Old and New Worlds alike. Besides, all they had to do was to exhibit
themselves in their projectile in America and they could always realize large
amounts of money. They had earned all the glory which the most ambitious
mortal would look for. Impey Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl would have been well
able to keep quiet and idle if this very idleness did not torment them. And it was
simply no doubt to do something that they had gone to work and bought this part
of the Arctic region.

But it must not be forgotten that if the purchase cost $800,000 and more, that
it was Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt who had put the necessary amount into this
affair. Thanks to this generous woman Europe had been conquered by America.
Since their return President Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl had enjoyed a supreme
celebrity. But there was another man who deserved credit in the matter. It is easy
to guess that J.T. Maston was the man of whom we speak, the temporary
Secretary of the Gun Club. Did we not owe to this brilliant calculator all the
mathematical formulae which enabled us to tell the story of the voyage to the
moon? If he did not accompany his two associates on their terrible journey it was


not fear which kept him back. No, indeed, it was only the injuries he had
received during the war. For really it would have made a bad impression on the
inhabitants on the moon to see him in his disabled condition as a representative
of our people, and the moon only our humble satellite. To his extreme regret, Mr.
Maston was compelled to stay at home. Nevertheless he had not been idle. After
having constructed an immense telescope, which was put on the mountain of
Long’s Peak, one of the highest mountains of the Rocky range, he went up there
personally, and after he had received the signal that the cannon-ball had been
fired he did not once leave his post. From his place of observation he essayed the
task of following his friends firing across the vast space. One might readily
believe that his friends would be lost to the world; that it was very easily
possible that this projectile could be compelled by the attraction of the moon to
become a sub-satellite. A deviation which one might call providential had
changed the direction of the projectile, and after having made one trip around the
moon, in place of touching it, it was carried away in a terrible fall and returned
to us with a speed of 576,000 miles a minute to the moment when it was
swallowed up by the ocean. Happy it was that the great liquid mass had
deadened the fall, and that the American frigate Susquehanna was present at the
fall. As soon as the news reached Mr. Maston, the Secretary of the Gun Club, he
rushed with all possible haste from his observation point at Long’s Peak to begin
operations to save his friends. Divers were sent to the place where the projectile
had fallen. And Mr. Maston even did not hesitate to put on a cork jacket to save
and find his friends again. It was unnecessary to go to so much trouble. The
projectile was found floating on the surface of the Pacific Ocean after having
made its beautiful fall. And President Barbicane with Capt. Nicholl and Michel
Ardan were found playing dominoes in their floating prison on the surface of the
ocean.

To return to J.T. Maston, it is proper to say that his part in the affair deserves
a good deal of credit. It is certain that he was not pretty with his metallic arm. He
was not young, fifty-eight years old, at the time we write this story. But the
originality of his character, the vivacity of his intelligence, the vigor which
animated him, the ardor which he had in all such things, had made him the ideal
of Mrs. Evangeline Scorbitt. His brain carefully hidden under his cover of gutta-
percha was yet untouched, and he would still pass as one of the most remarkable
calculators of his age.

Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt, although the least figuring gave her a headache,
had yet a great liking for mathematicians, even if she had no taste for
mathematics. She considered them a higher and more endowed race of human
beings. Heads where the X, Y, Z were mixed up like nuts in a barrel, brains


which played with signs of algebra, hands which juggled with the integral
triples, these were what she liked.

Yes, these wise people seemed to her worthy of all admiration and support.
She felt herself drawn strongly towards them. And J.T. Maston was exactly that
kind of man and one she adored, and her happiness would be complete if they
two could be made one. This was the end of her mathematics. This did not
disturb the Secretary of the Gun Club, who had never found happiness in unions
of this kind.

Mrs Evangelina Scorbitt was not young any more. She was forty-five years
old, had her hair pasted on her temples, like something which had been dyed and
re-dyed; she had a mouth full of very long teeth, with not one missing; her waist
was without shape, her walk without grace; in short, she had the appearance of
an old maid, although she had been married only a few years before she became
a widow. She was an excellent person withal, and nothing was lacking in her cup
of happiness except one thing, namely, that she wished to make her appearance
in the society of Baltimore as Mrs. J.T. Maston. Her fortune was very
considerable. She was not rich like the Goulds, Mackays, or Vanderbilts, whose
fortunes run into the millions, and who might give alms to the Rothschilds.
Neither did she possess three hundred millions like Mrs. Stewart, eighty millions
like Mrs. Crocker, and two hundred millions like Mrs. Carper. Neither was she
rich like Mrs. Hamersley, Mrs. Hetty Green, Mrs. Mafitt, Mrs. Marshall, Mrs.
Paran Stevens, Mrs. Minturn, and many others. At any rate she had a right to
take a place at that memorable feast at the Fifth Avenue Hotel in New York,
where there were only admitted as guests people who had at least five millions.
In brief, Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt had four millions of good sound dollars, or
twenty millions of francs, which came to her from John P. Scorbitt, who made
his fortune both in the business of selling dry goods and salt pork. Well, this
fortune this generous widow would have been glad to use for the profit of J. T.
Maston, to whom she would also bring a treasure of tenderness much more
inexhaustible.

Therefore when Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt had heard of the requirements of
Mr. Maston she had gladly agreed to put a few hundred thousand dollars in the
affair of the N.P.P.A. without having the least idea of what they intended to do
with it. It is true she was convinced that as long as J.T. Maston had something to
do with the affair it could not help being grand, sublime, superhuman, etc.
Thinking of the Secretary was for her future enough. One might think that after
the auction sale, when it was declared that Barbicane & Company would be the
name of the new firm, and it would be presided over by the President of the Gun
Club, she would enjoy Mr. Maston’s whole confidence. Was she not at the same


time the largest stockholder in the affair? So it came about that Mrs. Evangelina
Scorbitt found herself proprietress of this polar region, all beyond the line of the
eighty-fourth parallel. But what would she do with it? Or rather, what profit
would the Society get out of it? This was the question; and if it interested Mrs.
Evangelina Scorbitt from a financial standpoint it interested the whole world,
more on account of the general curiosity about the whole mystery. This excellent
woman, otherwise very discreet, had often tried to get some information from
Mr. Maston on this subject before putting money at the disposal of the
purchasers. Without a doubt there was a grand enterprise, which, as Jean Jacques
said, has never had its like before, and would never have any imitation, and
which would far outshine the reputation made by the Gun Club in sending a
projectile to the moon and trying to get in direct communication with our
satellite. But when she persists with her queries Mr. Maston invariably replied:
"Dear madame, have patience," And if Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt had confidence
before, what an immense joy did she feel when the triumph which the United
States of America had won over the combined European powers. "But shall I not
finally know the object?" asked she, smiling at the eminent calculator.

"You will soon know it," answered Mr. Maston, shaking heartily the hand of
his partner—the American lady.

This calmed for the moment the impatience of Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt. A
few days afterwards the Old and New World were shaken up quite enough when
the secret object of the company was announced, and for the realization of which
the N.P.P.A. made an appeal to the public for a subscription.

The Society had purchased this portion of the circumpolar region to make
use of the coal mines of the North Pole.

CHAPTER V.

IN WHICH THE POSSIBILITY THAT COAL MINES SURROUND THE
NORTH POLE IS CONSIDERED.

Are there coal mines at the North Pole? This was the first question suggested
to intelligent people. Some asked why should there be coal mines at the North
Pole? Others with equal propriety asked why should there not be? It is well
known that coal mines are spread all over the world. There are many in different
parts of Europe. America also possesses a great many, and it is probable that the
United States mines are the richest of all. There are also many in Asia, Africa,
and Australia. The more our globe becomes known the more mines are
discovered. We will not be in need of coal for at least hundreds of years to come.
England alone produces 160,000,000 tons every year, and over the whole world
it is estimated 400,000,000 tons are yearly produced. Naturally, this coal output
must grow every year in proportion with the constantly increasing industries.


Even if electricity takes the place of steam, it will still be necessary to use coal.
We are so much in need of it that the world might be called "an animal of coal,"
and therefore it is necessary to take good care of it. Coal is used not only as a
fuel, but also as a crude substance of which science makes great use. With the
transformations to which it has been submitted in the laboratory, it is possible to
paint with it, perfume with it, purify, heat, light with it, and even beautify a
diamond with it. It is as useful as iron or even more so. It is fortunate that this
last-mentioned metal will never be exhausted, as really the world is composed of
it. The world might be considered a vast mass of iron, as other metals, and even
water and stone, stand far behind it in the composition of our sphere. But if we
are sure of a continuous supply for our consumption of iron, we are not so of
coal. Far from it. People who are competent to speak, and who look into the
future for hundreds of years, always allude to this coal famine. "But," say the
opposing party—and in the United States there are many people who like to
contradict for the mere sake of argument, and who take pleasure in contradicting
—"Why should there be coal around the North Pole?"

"Why?" answered those who took the part of President Barbicane, "because,
very probably at the geological formation of the world, the sun was such that the
difference of temperature around the equator and the poles were not appreciable.
Then immense forests covered this unknown polar region a long time before
mankind appeared, and when our planet was submitted to the incessant action of
heat and humidity. This theory the journals, magazines, and reviews publish in a
thousand different articles either in a joking or serious way. And these large
forests, which disappeared with the gigantic changes of the earth before it had
taken its present form, must certainly have changed and transformed under the
lapse of time and the action of internal heat and water into coal mines. Therefore
nothing seemed more admissible than this theory, and that the North Pole would
open a large field to those who were able to mine it. These are facts, undeniable
facts. Even people who only calculated on simple probabilities could not deny
them. And these facts led many people to have great faith in them.

It was on this subject that Major Donellan and his secretary were talking
together one day in the most obscure corner of the "Two Friends" inn. "Well,"
said Dean Toodrink, "there is a possibility that this Barbicane (who I hope may
be hanged some day) is right."

"It is probable," said Major Donellan, "and I will almost admit that it is
certain. There will be fortunes made in exploring this region around the pole. If
North America possesses so many coal mines and, according to the papers, new
ones are discovered quite frequently, it is not at all improbable that there are
many yet to be discovered. I may add that Prof. Nordenskiol has found many


kinds of different stones which contain a great variety of fossil plants in his
researches in the Arctic region."

"Higher up?" asked Dean Toodrink.

"Higher up, or rather further up, in a northerly direction," answered the
Major, "the presence of coal is practically established, and it seems as if you
would only have to bend down to pick it up. Well, if coal is so plentiful on the
surface of these countries, it is right to conclude that its beds must go all through
the crust of the globe." He was right. Major Donellan knew the geological
formation around the North Pole well, and he was not a safe person to dispute
this question with. And he might have talked about it at length if other people in
the inn had not listened. But he thought it better to keep quiet after asking: "Are
you not surprised at one thing? One would expect to see engineers or at least
navigators figure in this matter, while there are only gunners at the head of it?”

It is not surprising that the newspapers of the civilized world soon began to
discuss the question of coal discoveries at the North Pole.

"And why not," asked the editor of an American paper who took the part of
President Barbicane, "when it is remembered that Capt. Nares, in 1875 and 1876,
at the eighty-second degree of latitude, discovered large flower-beds, hazel trees,
poplars, beech trees, etc.?"

"And in 1881 and 1884," added a scientific publication of New York, "during
the expedition of Lieut. Greely at Lady Franklin Bay, was not a layer of coal
discovered by our explorers a little way from Fort Conger, near Waterhouse?
And did not Dr. Pavy say that these countries are certainly full of coal, perhaps
placed there to combat at some day the terrible masses of ice which are found
there?"

Against such well-established facts brought out by American discoverers the
enemies of President Barbicane did not know what to answer. And the people
who asked why should there be coal mines began to surrender to the people who
asked why should there be none. Certainly there were some, and very
considerable ones, too. The circumpolar ice-cap conceals precious masses of
coal contained in those regions where vegetation was formerly luxuriant. But if
they could no longer dispute that there were really coal mines in this Arctic
region the enemies of the association tried to get revenge in another way. "Well,"
said Major Donellan one day after a hard discussion which had arisen in the
meeting-room of the Gun Club and during which he met President Barbicane
face to face, "all right. I admit that there are coal mines; I even affirm it, there
are mines in the region purchased by your society, but go and explore them—ha!
ha! ha!"

"That is what we are going to do," said Impey Barbicane.


"Go over the eighty-fourth degree, beyond which no explorer as yet has been
able to put his foot?"

"We will pass it—reach even the North Pole," said he. "We will reach it."
And after hearing the President of the Gun Club answer with so much coolness,
with so much assurance, to see his opinion so strongly, so perfectly affirmed,
even the strongest opponent began to hesitate. They seemed to be in the presence
of a man who had lost none of his old-time qualities, quiet, cold, and of an
eminently serious mind, exact as a clock, adventurous, but carrying his practical
ideas into the rashest enterprises.

Major Donellan had an ardent wish to strangle his adversary. But President
Barbicane was stout and well able to stand against wind and tide, and therefore
not afraid of the Major. His enemies, his friends and people who envied him
knew it only too well. But there were many jealous people, and many jokes and
funny stories went round in regard to the members of the Gun Club. Pictures and
caricatures were made in Europe and particularly in England, where people
could not get over the loss which they suffered in the matter of pounds sterling.
"Ah," said they, "this Yankee has got it in his head to reach the North Pole. He
wants to put his foot where, up to the present time, no living soul has yet been.
He wants to build palaces and houses and, perhaps, the White House of the
United States, in a part of the world which has never yet been reached, while
every other part of the world is so well known to us." And then wild caricatures
appeared in the different newspapers. In the large show-windows and news-
depots, as well in small cities of Europe as in the large cities of America, there
appeared drawings and cartoons showing President Barbicane in the funniest of
positions trying to reach the North Pole. One audacious American cut had all the
members of the Gun Club trying to make an underground tunnel beneath the
terrible mass of immovable icebergs, to the eighty-fourth degree of northern
latitude, each with an axe in his hand. In another, Impey Barbicane, accompanied
by Mr. J.T. Maston and Capt. Nicholl, had descended from a balloon on the
much-desired point, and after many unsuccessful attempts and at the peril of
their lives, had captured a piece of coal weighing about half a pound. This
fragment was all they discovered of the anticipated coal-fields. There were also
pictures made of J. T. Maston, who was as much used for such purposes as his
chief. After having tried to find the electric attraction of the North Pole, the
secretary of the Gun Club became fixed to the ground by his metallic hand.

The celebrated calculator was too quick-tempered to find any pleasure in the
drawings which referred to his personal conformation. He was exceedingly
annoyed by them, and Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt, it may be easily understood,
was not slow to share his indignation. Another drawing in the Lanterne of


Brussels represented the members of the Council and the members of the Gun
Club tending a large number of fires. The idea was to melt the large quantities of
ice by putting a whole sea of alcohol on them, which would convert the polar
basin into a large quantity of punch. But of all these caricatures, that which had
the largest success was that which was published by the French Charivari, under
the signature of its designer, "Stop." In the stomach of a whale Impey Barbicane
and J. T. Maston were seated playing checkers and waiting their arrival at a good
point. The new Jonah and his Secretary had got themselves swallowed by an
immense fish, and it was in this way, after having gone under the icebergs, that
they hoped to gain access to the North Pole. The President of this new Society
did not care much about these pictures, and let them say and write and sing
whatever they liked.

Immediately after the concession was made and the Society was absolute
master of the northern region, appeal was made for a public subscription of
$15,000,000. Shares were issued at $100, to be paid for at once, and the credit of
Barbicane & Co. was such that the money ran in as fast as possible. The most of
it came from the various States of the Union. "So much the better," said the
people on the part of the N.P.P.A. "The undertaking will be entirely American."

So strong, indeed, were the foundations upon which Barbicane & Co. were
established that the amount necessary to be subscribed was raised in a very short
time, and even thrice the amount. Everybody was interested in the matter, and
the most scientific experts did not doubt its success.

The shares were reduced one-third, and on Dec. 16 the capital of the Society
was $15,000,000 in cash. This was about three times as much as the amount
subscribed to the credit of the Gun Club when it was going to send a projectile
from the earth to the moon.

CHAPTER VI.

IN WHICH A TELEPHONE COMMUNICATION BETWEEN MRS.
SCORBITT AND J.T. MASTON IS INTERRUPTED.

President Barbicane was not only convinced that he would reach his object
when the amount which had been raised took another obstacle out of his way.
Had he not been perfectly sure of success he would not have made an application
for a public subscription. And now the time had come when the North Pole
would be conquered. It was felt certain that President Barbicane and his Council
of Administration had means to succeed where so many others had failed. They
would do what neither Franklin, nor Kane, nor De Long, nor Nares, nor Greely
had been able to accomplish. They would pass the 84th parallel, they would take
possession of the vast region purchased at an auction sale, they would make this
country the thirty-ninth star in the flag of the American Union. "Fake," was all


that the European delegates and their friends in the Old World could say.
Nothing was more true, however, and this practical, logical means of conquering
the North Pole, which was so simple that it was almost childish, was one which
J.T. Maston had suggested to them. It was that brain, where ideas were
constantly evolving, which had laid out this great geographical project in a way
which could not but succeed.

It cannot be too often repeated that the Secretary of the Gun Club was a
remarkable calculator, we might say a postgraduate calculator. But a single day
was needed by him to solve the most complicated problems in mathematical
science. He laughed at these difficulties whether in algebra or in plain
mathematics. You should have seen him handle his figures, the signs which
make up algebra, the letters in the alphabet, representing the unknown quantities,
the square or crossed lines representing the way in which quantities are to be
operated. All signs and lines, and radicals used in this complex language were
perfectly familiar to him. And how they flew around under his pen, or rather
under the piece of chalk which he attached to his iron hand, because he preferred
to work on a blackboard. And this blackboard, six feet square, this was all he
wanted, he was perfectly at home in his work. Nor was it figures alone which he
used in his calculations. His figures were fantastic, gigantic, written with a
practiced hand. His "2" and "3" were as nice and round as they could be, his 7
looked like a crutch and almost invited a person to hang on it. His 8 was as well
formed as a pair of eyeglasses; and the letters with which he established his


formulas, the first of the alphabet, a, b, c, which he used to represent given or known
quantities, and the last, x, y, z, which he used for unknown quantities to be discovered, particularly the "z,"
and those Greek letters 6, @, a. Really an Archimedes might have been well proud of them. And those other
signs, made with a clean hand and without fault, it was simply astonishing. His + showed well that this sign
meant an addition of one object to the other, his —, if it was a little smaller, was also in good shape. His =,
too, showed that Mr. Maston lived in a country where equality was not a vain expression, at least amongst
the people of the white race. Just as well were his > and his < and his ::, used in expressing proportions.
And the v , which indicated the root of a certain number or quantity, it was to him a mark of triumph, and
when he completed it with a horizontal line in this Vv , it seemed as if this outline on his blackboard
would compel the whole world to submit to his figuring.


But do not think that Mr. J.T. Maston's mathematical intelligence was
confined to elementary algebra! No; no matter what figuring he had to do, it was
alike familiar to him, and with a practised hand he made all the signs and


figures, and even did not hesitate at J which looks very simple, but behind which lays a great deal of
calculation. The same with the sign &, which represents the sum of a finished number. Also the sign , by
which the mathematicians designate the incomplete, and all those mysterious symbols which are used in
this language and which are unknown to the common people. This astonishing man was able to do anything
even in the very highest grades of mathematics. Such was J. T. Maston. And therefore it was that his
associates had such perfect confidence in him when he set out to figure the most difficult problems in his
audacious brain. This it was which led the Gun Club to trust him with the difficult problem of sending a





projectile to the moon. And this was why Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt, jealous of his fame, felt for him an
admiration which ended in love. In this present case—that is, how to solve the conquering of the North
Pole, J. T. Maston had but to begin to think and dream himself into the Arctic regions. To reach the solution
the secretary had but to undertake certain mathematical problems, very complicated, perhaps, but over
which in all cases he would come out ahead.


It was safe to trust Mr. J. T. Maston, even where the smallest and simplest
mistake would have meant a loss of millions. Never, since the time his youthful
brain began to think of mathematics had he committed a mistake—not even one
of a thousandth of an inch—if his calculations were made up on the length of an
object. If he had made a mistake of only the smallest amount he would have torn
his gutta-percha cap from his head. Now let us see him while engaged in his
calculations, and for this purpose we must go back a few weeks.

It was about a month before the publication of the circular addressed to the
inhabitants of the Old and New Worlds that Mr. Maston had undertaken to figure
out the elements of a scheme in which he had promised his associates the
greatest success. For a number of years Mr. Maston had lived at No. 179
Franklin Street, one of the most quiet streets of Baltimore, far away from the
centre of business, for which he did not care anything, far away from the noise
of the great crowd, which disgusted him. There he occupied a modest little house
known by the name of "Ballistic Cottage," having for his income only his
pension allowed to him as a retired officer of artillery and the salary which he
received as Secretary of the Gun Club. He lived alone, served by his Negro
"Fire-Fire." This Negro was not an ordinary servant; he was rather an
appreciative friend and treated his master as if he were his own brother. Mr.
Maston was a decided bachelor, having an idea that being a bachelor was the
only sensible way of living in the present world. He knew the proverb, "a
woman can draw more with one hair than four oxen at the plough," and he
disproved it. If he occupied his cottage alone it was only because he wished to
do so. We know that he only had to make the motion to change his solitude of
one to a company of two and his small income to the income of a millionaire. He
did not doubt it. Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt would have been only too happy to...
But up to this time Mr. Maston had not been happy to ... and it seemed certain
that these two beings, so well made one for the other, at least this was the
opinion of the tender widow, would never reach the transformation period. The
cottage was a very simple one. A ground-floor, with a veranda and a floor over
it; a small parlor and small dining-room, with a kitchen and another room in an
outbuilding stand at the back of the garden. Upstairs his sleeping-room and his
working-studio, looking on the garden, and where the noise of the outer world
could never penetrate. Within these walls there had been made calculations
which would have made Newton, Euclid, or Laplace jealous. How different was


the mansion of Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt, situated in the richest quarter of New
Park, with facade of balconies, finished in the finest architecture, half
Romanesque, half Gothic, with its richly-furnished apartments, its grand halls,
its picture galleries, in which French artists held the highest places; its
magnificent staircase, its great number of domestics, its stables, its coach-
houses, its garden, with the finest of flowers, statues, fountains, and the tower on
the top of the building, on which the blue and gold coat-of-arms of the Scorbitt
family was upon a glittering banner. Three miles, three long miles at least
separated the Palace at New Park from the "Ballistic Cottage." But a private
telephone wire connected there, and in answer to "Hello! hello!" a conversation
could be carried on between the mansion and cottage. If the persons could not
look at each other they could at least hear each other. It will astonish none to
hear that time upon time Mrs. Scorbitt began talking and ringing on the
telephone to Mr. Maston when he was busily engaged with his figures. Then the
calculator had to quit his work with some reluctance. He received a friendly
"How do you do?" from Mrs. Scorbitt, which he answered with a grunt, which
was sweetened into a kindly greeting by the distance over the telephone. After a
conversation he was glad to go back to his figures. It was on the 3d of December,
after a long and last conference, that Mr. Maston took leave of his friends and
members of the Club to begin to do his share of the work. It was a very
important work with which he had charged himself, for it was the question of
figure mechanical appliance which would enable him to gain access to the North
Pole, and which would allow him to make use of those large fields of snow now
covered with impenetrable ice. He estimated that he needed at least a week to
accomplish this mysterious calculation, exceedingly complicated and delicate to
handle, involving several deep and important problems. Therefore, to avoid all
unnecessary annoyance, it had been decided that the Secretary of the Gun Club
should retire to his cottage and that he should not be disturbed by any one. This
was a great disappointment for Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt, but she was compelled
to accept it. While President Barbicane, Capt. Nicholl and his associates, the
jolly Bilsby, Col. Bloomsberry, Tom Hunter, with the wooden legs, were all
saying their good-bys to him and wishing him success, Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt
appeared and made her last visit to Mr. Maston.

"You will succeed, my dear," said she at the moment of separation.

"And above all do not make a mistake," added President Barbicane. "A
mistake? He?" exclaimed Mrs. Scorbitt.

"No more than God has made a mistake in putting together this world,"
modestly answered the Secretary. Then, after shaking hands all around and after
several more sighs and wishes of success and suggestions not to make too severe


a work of it, the calculator was left alone. The door of the Ballistic cottage was
closed and Fire-Fire had orders to admit none, not even if the President of the
United States should ask admission.

During his first two days of seclusion J.T. Maston thought and thought,
without even touching the piece of chalk, upon the problem which he had taken
on himself. He consulted certain books relative to the elements, the earth—its
size, its thickness, its volume, its form, its rotation upon its axis—all elements
which he had to use as the basis of his calculations.

The principles of these elements which he used, and which we put before the
reader, were as follows:

Form of the earth: An ellipsis of revolution the longest radius of which is
6,377,398 metres; the shortest, 6,356,080 meters. The circumference of the earth
at the equator, 40,000 kilometres. Surface of the earth, approximate estimate,
510,000,000 of square kilometers. Bulk of the earth, about 1,000 millards of
cubic kilometres; that is, a cube having a metre in length, height, and thickness.
Density of the earth, about five times that of the water. Time of the earth on the
orbit around the sun, 365 days, 6 hours, 9 minutes, 10 seconds, 37 centimes. This
gives the globe a speed of 30,400 miles travelled over by the rotation of the earth
upon its axis. For a point of its surface situated at the equator, 463 meters per
second. These were the principal measures of space, time, bulk, etc., which Mr.
Maston used in his calculations.

It was the 5th of October, about 5 o’clock in the afternoon, it is important to
mention, when this remarkable work was begun, when J. T. Maston began to
work upon it. He began his calculation with a diagram representing the
circumference of the earth around one of its grand circles, say the equator. The
blackboard was there, in a corner of his study, upon a polished oak easel, with
good light shining on it, coming by one of the windows near by. Small pieces of
chalk were on the board attached to the stand. The sponge was near the hand of
the calculator. His right hand, or rather his right hook, was all ready for the
placing of figures which he was going to use. Standing up, Mr. Maston made a
large round circle, which represented the world. The equator he marked by a
straight line. Then in the right corner of the blackboard he began to put the
figures which represented the circumference of the earth:

40,000,000.

This done, he began figuring on his problem. He was so much occupied by it
that he had not observed the weather without. For an hour a storm had raved
through the country which affected all living beings. It was a terrific storm, the
rain was falling in torrents, everything seemed turned upside down in nature.
Two or three times lightning had illuminated the scene around him. But the


mathematician, more and more absorbed in his work, saw and heard nothing.
Suddenly an electric bolt, attracted by the lightning outside, sparkled in his
room, and this disturbed the calculator. "Well," said Mr. Maston, "if unwelcome
visitors cannot get in by the door they come by telephone. A nice invention for
people who wish to be left alone. I will go to work and cut off the electric wire,
so I will not be disturbed again while my figuring lasts." With this he went to the
telephone and said sternly: "Who wants to talk to me? Just make it short." The
reply came back: "Did you not recognize my voice, my dear Mr. Maston? It is I,
Mrs. Scorbitt." "Mrs. Scorbitt! She will never give me a moment’s rest," uttered
Mr. Maston to himself in a low voice that she could not hear. Then he thought he
should at least answer her in a polite manner, and said: "Oh, is that you, Mrs.
Scorbitt?"

"Yes, dear Mr. Maston."

"And what can I do for Mrs. Scorbitt?" asked Maston.

"I want to tell you that a terrible storm and lightning is destroying a large
part of our city." "Well," he replied, "I cannot help it." "But I want to ask
whether you have thought to close your windows?" Mrs. Scorbitt had hardly
finished her sentence when a terrible thunderbolt struck the town. It struck in the
neighborhood of the Ballistic cottage, and the electricity, passing along the wire
with which the telephone was provided, threw the calculator to the floor with a
terrible force. J.T. Maston made the best summersault he ever did in his life. His
metal hook had touched the live wire and he was thrown down like a
shuttlecock. The blackboard, which he had struck in his fall, was sent flying to
another part of the room. Then the electricity passed into other objects and
disappeared through the floor. The stupefied Mr. Maston got up and touched the
different parts of his body to assure himself that he was not hurt internally. This
done, he resumed his cold, calculating way. He picked everything up in his
room, put it in the same place where it had been before and put his blackboard
on the easel, picked up the small pieces of chalk and began again his work,
which had been so suddenly interrupted. He noticed that on account of the fall
the number which he had made on the right side of the blackboard was partly
erased, and he was just about to replace it when his telephone again rang with a
loud noise. "Again," said J.T, Maston, and going to the telephone he exclaimed,
"who is there?" "Mistress Scorbitt." "And what does Mrs. Scorbitt want?" "Did
not this terrible thunderbolt strike Ballistic cottage? I have good reason to think
so. Ah, great God, the thunderbolt!"

"Don’t be alarmed, Mrs. Scorbitt."

"You have not been injured, Mr. Maston?"

"Not at all," he replied.


"You are sure you have no injuries whatever," said the lady.

"I am only touched by your kindness towards me," replied Mr. Maston,
thinking it the best way to answer.

"Good evening, dear Mr. Maston."

"Good evening, dear Mrs. Scorbitt."

Returning to his work Mr. Maston said, sotto voce, "To the devil with her. If
she had not handled the telephone at such a time I would not have run the risk of
being hurt by electricity."

Mr. Maston did not wish to be interrupted in his work again and so took
down his telephone and cut the wire. Then, taking again as basis the figure
which he had written, he added different formulas of it, and finally a certain
formula which he had written on his left side, and then he began to figure in all
the language of algebra. A week later, on the 11th of October, this magnificent
calculation was finished and the Secretary of the Gun Club brought his solution
of the problem with great pride and satisfaction to the members of the Gun Club,
who were awaiting it with very natural impatience. This then was the practical
way to get to the North Pole mathematically discovered. Here was also a society,
under the name of the N.P.P.A., to which the Government of Washington had
accorded a clear title of the Arctic region in case they should buy it on auction,
and we have told of the purchase made in favor of American buyers and of the
appeal for a subscription of $15,000,000.

CHAPTER VII.

IN WHICH PRESIDENT BARBICANE SAYS NO MORE THAN SUITS
HIS PURPOSE.

On the 22nd of December the subscribers to Barbicane & Co. were
summoned to a general meeting. It is hardly necessary to say that the
headquarters of the Gun Club were selected as the place of the meeting. In
reality the whole block would not have been sufficient to give room to the large
crowd of subscribers who assembled on that day. But a meeting in the fresh air
on one of the public squares of Baltimore was not very agreeable in such cold
weather. Usually the large hall of the Gun Club was decorated with models of all
kinds lent by members of the Club. It was a real museum of artillery. Even the
furniture, chairs and tables, sofas and divans, recalled by their strange shapes
those murderous engines which had sent into a better world many brave people
whose greatest wish was to die of old age.

On this meeting day all these things were taken down and out. This was not a
meeting for the purpose of war, but a commercial and peaceful meeting over
which Impey Barbicane was going to preside. All room possible had been made
for the subscribers who arrived from all parts of the United States. In the hall as


well as in the adjoining rooms the crowds were pushing and pressing each other
without heeding the innumerable people who were standing on the adjoining
streets. The members of the Gun Club, as first subscribers to the affair, had
places reserved for them very near the desk. Among them could be found Col.
Bloomsberry, more happy than ever; Tom Hunter, with his wooden legs, and the
jolly Bilsby. Very snug in a comfortable armchair was Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt,
who should really have had a place on the right hand of the President, as she was
in reality the owner of the Arctic region. Several other ladies were in the crowd.
They could readily be seen by their large and much-decorated hats in many
different colors. The large crowd on the outside tried to push into the hall, and
one might easily have thought that all the people present were not merely
helpmates of the members of the Gun Club, but rather their personal friends. The
European delegates—Swedish, Norwegians, Danish, English, Dutch, and
Russian—occupied reserved seats, and if they had bought any stock in this
society it was only each one individually to such an extent as to justify a vote in
the proceedings. After they had been so closely united in purchasing these
regions they were united now only to annoy the purchasers. It may easily be
imagined what intense curiosity they had to hear the important communication
which the President was about to make to them. This communication
undoubtedly would throw some information on the point as to how the society
would proceed to reach the North Pole. Was this not a more difficult thing than
merely to make use of the coal mines? If there should be any objections to make
you may be assured that Major Donellan, backed up by his secretary, Dean
Toodrink, would make them, and the other delegates would not be very slow in
adding their word also. The Major had firmly decided to harass and annoy his
rival, Impey Barbicane, as much as he possibly could.


It was 8 o’clock in the evening. The hall, the parlors, and all quarters
occupied by the Gun Club blazed with lights which the Edison electroliers throw
out. As soon as the doors were thrown open for the public a terrible crowd
jammed into the hall. But everyone became silent as the ushers announced that
the Council of Administration was coming. There, on a draped platform, with a
table covered with black cloth, in full sight, President Barbicane, his Secretary,
J.T. Maston, and his associates, took their places. A triple round of cheers,
followed by hearty "tigers," rang through the hall and out to the adjoining streets.
Very solemnly Mr. Maston and Capt. Nicholl took their seats. Then the
President, who had remained standing, opened the proceedings. He put his right
hand in his trouser’s pocket and his left hand in his vest front and began as
follows:

"Lady and gentlemen subscribers, the Council of Administration has called a
meeting in these headquarters of the Gun Club to make an important
communication to you. You have learned by the circulars and through the
discussions in the papers that the object of our Club is to explore the large coal
fields situated in the Arctic regions, which we have recently purchased and to
which we hold a title from the American Government. The amount of money
raised by public subscription will be used for these purposes. The success which
will be attained by it surpasses belief and the dividends your money will bring
you will be unsurpassed in the commercial or financial history of this or any
other country." Here applause was heard for the first time and for a moment the
orator was interrupted. "You do not forget," said he, "how we have proved to you
that there must be vast coal fields in these regions, perhaps also fields of fossil
ivory. The articles published on this subject do not allow any doubt that coal
fields are there, and coal is now, you know, the basis of all our commercial
industry. Without mentioning the coal which is used every year in firing and
heating, we might think of coal used for many other purposes, of which I could
mention a hundred different ones. It is certain that coal is the most precious
substance, and will some day, on account of the large consumption of it; fail in
its supply. Before 500 years have passed the coal mines which are at present in
use will have stopped giving coal."

"Three hundred years," cried one of those present. "Two hundred years,"
answered another.

"Let us say at some time sooner or later," continued the President, calmly,
"and let us suppose, too, that we will even discover new coal fields yet, whose
coal will give out, say at the end of the nineteenth century." Here he stopped to
give his listeners a chance to grasp the idea. Then he began again: "Therefore,
we come here, subscribers, and I ask you to rise and go with me to the North


Pole immediately." Everybody present got up and seemed about to rush away
and pack their trunks, as if President Barbicane had a vessel ready to take them
direct to the North Pole. But a remark made by Major Donellan in a clear and
loud voice brought them back to reality and stopped them at once. "Before
starting” he asked, "I would like to know by what means we can reach the North
Pole?"

"Either by water, or land, or by air," quietly answered President Barbicane.

All the people present sat down, and it may readily be understood with what
a feeling of curiosity.

"In spite of all the devotion and courage of previous explorers, the eighty-
fourth parallel has thus far been the northern limit reached. And it may fairly be
supposed that this is as far north as anybody will ever get by the means
employed at the present day. Up to the present time we have only used boats and
vessels to reach the icebergs, and rafts to pass over the fields of ice. People
should not adopt such rash means and face the dangers to which they are
exposed through the low temperature. We must employ other means to reach the
North Pole."

It could be seen by the excitement which took hold of the auditors, that they
were on the point of hearing the secret which has been so vigorously searched
for by every one.

"And how will you reach it?" demanded the delegate of England.

"Before ten minutes have passed you will know it, Major Donellan," said
President Barbicane, "and I may add in addressing myself to all the stockholders,
that they should have confidence in us as the promoters of this affair, for we are
the same who have tried to send a projectile to the moon."

"Yes," cried Dean Toodrink, sarcastically, "they tried to go as far as the
moon. And we can easily see that they are here yet."

President Barbicane ignored the interruption. Shrugging his shoulders, he
said in a loud voice: "Yes, ladies and gentlemen, in ten minutes you will know
what we are going to do."

A murmur, made up of many "Ahs!" and "Ohs!" followed this remark. It
seemed to them as if the orator had said in ten minutes they would be at the
North Pole. He then continued in the following words:

"First of all, it is a continent which forms this arctic region, or it is an ocean,
and has Commander Nares been right in calling it ‘paleocrystic ocean,’ which
means an ocean of old ice? To this question I must answer that I think he was not
right."

This is not sufficient," exclaimed Eric Baldenak. "It is not the question of
supposing, it is the question of being certain."


"Well, we are certain,” came the answer to this furious inquirer. "Yes, it is a
solid continent and not an ice ocean which the N.P.P.A. has purchased and which
now belongs to the United States and which no European power has the right to
touch."

A little murmur came from the neighborhood of the delegates of the Old
World. "Bah!" they said. "It is full of water, a regular washbasin which you will
not be able to empty." Dean Toodrink as usual made most of the remarks and
met the hearty applause of his associates. "No, sir," answered President
Barbicane, quickly. "There is a regular continent, a platform which rises like the
Gobi desert in Central Asia, three or four kilometres above the surface of the
ocean. This is very easy to be seen from the observations made in the
neighboring countries, of which the polar region is only an extension.

"After their explorations have not Nordenskiold, Perry and Maaigaard stated
that Greenland gets higher and higher towards the North Pole?

"Besides, they have found birds, different products and vegetables in the
northern ice—ivory teeth also—which indicate that this region must have been
inhabited and that animals must have been there, and perhaps people as well.
There used to be large forests there, which must have been formed into coal-
fields, which we will explore. Yes, there is a continent, without a doubt, around
the North Pole—a continent free from all human beings, and on which we will
place the banner of the United States."

At this remark the auditors expressed great delight. When the noise had
finally subsided Major Donellan could be heard to remark: "Well, seven minutes
have already gone by of the ten which, as you say, would be sufficient to reach
the North Pole."

"We shall be there in three minutes," coolly answered President Barbicane.

"But, even if this be a continent, which constitutes your purchase, and if it is
a raised country, as we may have reasons to believe, it is also obstructed by
eternal ice, and in a condition which will make exploration extremely difficult,"
responded the Major. "Impossible," cried Jan Harald, who emphasized this
remark with a wave of his hand. "Impossible, all right," said Impey Barbicane.
"But it is to conquer this impossibility that we have purchased this region. We
will need neither vessels nor rafts to reach the North Pole; no, thanks to our
operations, the ice and icebergs, new or old, will melt by themselves, and it will
not cost one dollar of our capital nor one minute of our time." At this there was
absolute silence. The most important moment had come.

"Gentlemen," said the President of the Gun Club, "Archimedes only asked
for a lever to lift the world. Well, this lever we have found. We are now ina
position to remove the North Pole."


"What, remove the North Pole?" cried Eric Baldenak.

"Will you bring it to America?" asked Jan Harald. Without doubt President
Barbicane did not wish to explain himself just yet, for he continued: "In regard
to this point of leverage—" "Do not tell it! do not tell it!" cried one of his
associates, with a terrible voice.

"In regard to this lever—"

"Keep the secret! keep the secret!" cried the majority of the spectators, taking
up the cry.

"We will keep it," said President Barbicane.

Naturally, the European delegates were very much vexed at this remark. This
will be easily understood. In spite of all these exclamations the orator never had
any intention of making his plan known. He continued to say: "We obtained our
object, thanks to a mechanical device, one which has no precedent in the annals
of industrial art. We will undertake it and bring it to a successful finish by means
of our capital, and how I will inform you forthwith."

"Hear! hear!" said the others present.

"First of all, the idea of our plan comes from one of the ablest, most devoted
and illustrious calculators and one of our associates as well," said President
Barbicane. "One to whom we owe all the calculations which allows us to have
our work in such good condition. As the exploration of the North Pole is not a
piece of play the removal of the pole is a problem which could only be solved by
the highest calculations. Therefore we have called the assistance of the
honorable Secretary, Mr. J.T. Maston."

"Hip, hip, hip, hurrah, for J. T. Maston," exclaimed all the auditors,
seemingly electrified by the presence of this extraordinary calculator.

Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt was deeply touched by this recognition of the
celebrated mathematician, who had already entirely gained her heart. He
contented himself with turning his head to the right and left, bowing and
thanking his auditors.

"Already, dear subscribers," said President Barbicane, "since the great
meeting in honor of the arrival of the Frenchman, Michel Ardan, in America,
some months before our departure for the moon" (and this confident Yankee
spoke of the trip to the moon as quietly as if it were no more than a trip to New
York), "J T. Maston had already said to himself: ‘We must invent machines to
move the North Pole. We must find a point for action and put the axis of the
earth in the right direction from the object.’ Well, any or all of you who listen to
me find it if you can. I can only say the machines have been invented, the point
of leverage has been found, and now let us pay our attention to the question of
fixing, in the right way, for our end of the axis of the earth." Here he stopped


speaking, and the astonishment which was expressed on the faces of his auditors
it is impossible to describe.

"What!" cried Major Donellan, "you then have the idea of putting the axis of
the earth in another direction?"

"Yes, sir," answered President Barbicane promptly. "We have the means of
making a new one which will hereafter regulate the routine of day and night."

"You want to modify the daily rotation of the earth?" repeated Col. Karkof,
with fire in his eyes.

"Absolutely, but without affecting its duration," answered President
Barbicane. This operation will bring the pole at or about the sixty-seventh
parallel of latitude, then the earth will be similar to the planet Jupiter, whose axis
is nearly perpendicular to the plane of its orbit. Now this movement of 23
degrees 28 minutes will be sufficient to give at our North Pole such a degree of
heat that it will melt in less than no time the icebergs and field which have been
there for thousands of years."

The audience was out of breath. Nobody thought of interrupting the orator,
even to applaud him. All were taken in by this idea, so ingenious and simple, of
modifying the axis on which this earthly spheroid is rotating. And as for the
European delegates, well, they were simply stupefied, paralyzed, and crushed,
they kept their mouths shut in the last stage of astonishment. But the hurrahs
seemed to rend the hall asunder, when President Barbicane made the additional
remark: "It is the sun which will take upon himself the melting of the icebergs
and fields around the North Pole, and thus make access to the same very easy.
So, as people cannot go to the pole, the pole will come to them."

CHAPTER VIII.

YES, JUST LIKE JUPITER.

Since that memorable meeting in honor of Michel Ardan, the Hon. J.T.
Maston had talked and thought of nothing else but the "changing of the axis of
the earth." He had studied the subject as much as possible and found out all the
facts and figures about it. As the problem had been solved by this eminent
calculator a new axis was going to take the place of the old one upon which the
earth was now turning, and the world would otherwise remain the same. In the
scheme it would be possible for the climate around the North Pole to become
exactly the same as that of Trondhjem, in Norway, in the Spring. Naturally, then
the large amount of ice would melt under the ardent sun. At the same time the
climates would be distributed over our sphere like those now on the surface of
Jupiter. In other words, the new-formed society of Barbicane was going to
change everything at present on the surface of the earth. And the creation of this
new axis was possible, just as soon as the platform of which Archimedes had


dreamed and the lever imagined by J.T. Maston were at the disposal of these
courageous engineers. And as they had decided to make a secret of their
invention until a future time, people could not do anything else but make their
own figures. This was what all the papers did, calling on the most scientific
persons and learning as well something from the most ignorant persons. If there
really were people living on the surface of Jupiter, they had a good many
advantages over those on the earth, advantages which had all been narrated and
explained in the meeting which was held before the trip to the moon. All these
advantages would come to the people living on the earth if Barbicane & Co.
could accomplish what they intended to do. Twenty-four hours would then
always separate two noons from each other. Twilight and dawn would always be
as they are now. But the most curious thing of all would be the absence of the
different seasons of the year. Now there were Summer, Winter, Fall, and Spring.
The people living on Jupiter did not know these seasons at all. After this
experiment people living on this globe would not know them either. As soon as
the new axis would be in smooth working order there would be no more ice
regions, nor torrid zones, but the whole world would have an even temperature
climate.

What, after all, is the torrid zone? It is a part of the surface in which the
people can see the sun twice yearly at its zenith, and the temperate zone but a
part where the sun never goes to the zenith, and the icy region but a part of the
world which the sun forgets entirely for a long time, and around the North Pole
this extends for six months. It is simply the position of the sun which makes a
country exceedingly hot or cold. Well, these things would not appear any longer
on the surface of the world. The sun would be always over the equator: it would
go down every twelve hours just as regularly as before. "And among the
advantages of the new method," said the friends of President Barbicane, "were
these, that each person could choose a climate which was best for himself and
his health; no more rheumatism, no more colds, no more grippe; the variations of
extreme heat would not be known any more. In short, Barbicane & Co. were
going to change fixtures which had existed ever since the world was in
existence. Certainly the observer would lose a few stars and things which he
perhaps liked to look at now, and the poet would not have any longer his dreamy
nights, etc., but what a great advantage it would be for the world at large. "And,"
said certain journals, "the products of the ground can be regulated so that
agriculturists can give to each sort of plant life the temperature which suits it
most." Other newspapers asked: "Will we no more have rain, or storms, or hail—
things upon which a great deal depends in the harvest time?" "Undoubtedly,"
said the friends of Barbicane & Co., but these accidents will be more rare than


they have been, as the temperature will be more even. Yes, taken in all, it will be
a great advantage to humanity. It will be the real millennium of the earthly globe.
And Barbicane & Co. will have done a service to mankind which but for them
would have remained an impossibility." "Yes," said Michel Ardan, "our
hemisphere, the surface of which is always either too cold or too warm, will no
longer be the place for colds and rheumatism, etc." A New York paper of Dec.
27 printed the following article: "Honor to President Barbicane! His associates
and himself will not only annex a new province to our American continent, and
thereby enlarge the already vast possessions of the United States, but they will
make the whole world more productive and inhabitable. It will be possible then
to put seed in the ground as soon as the crop had grown up and been taken out;
there would be no more time lost during the Winter. And the coal mines also
would make the country richer than the value of its entire present realty.
Barbicane & Co. will change the whole world and put it in better condition.
Thanks, then, to the people who have done this greatest of benefits to humanity."

CHAPTER IX.

IN WHICH APPEARS THE FRENCH GENTLEMAN TO WHOM WE
REFERRED AT THE BEGINNING OF THIS TRUTHFUL STORY.

Such, then, were to be the profits due to the changes which were to be
wrought by President Barbicane. The earth would continue to revolve and the
course of the year would not be much altered. As the changes would concern the
whole world it was natural that they became of interest to all. In regard to the
new axis which was going to be used that was the secret which neither President
Barbicane nor Capt. Nicholl nor J.T. Maston seemed to be willing to give to the
public. Were they to reveal it before, or would none know of it until after the
change had taken place? A degree of uncertainty began to fill the American
mind. Criticisms very natural and to be expected were made in the papers. By
what mechanical means was this project to be carried out which would bring
about this change? It would necessarily demand a terrible power. One of the
greatest papers at that time commented in the following article: "If the earth was
not turning on its axis, perhaps a very feeble shock would be sufficient to give it
such a movement as might be chosen, but otherwise it would be very difficult if
not impossible to deviate it a fixed amount." Nothing seemed more correct after
having discussed the effort which the engineers of the N.P.P.A. were to make.
Discussion took on the interesting turn as to whether this result would be
reached insensibly or suddenly. And if the latter, would not terrible accidents
happen at the moment when the change took place? This troubled scientific
people as well as ignorant people. It was not agreeable to know that a blow was
to be struck and not know precisely what the after effects were to be.


It seemed as if the promoters of this undertaking had not fully considered the
consequences - that they would be so very dangerous to the earth, and that it
would not do as much good as first thought. The European delegates, more than
ever angry at the loss which they had suffered, resolved to make the most of this
question and to excite the public as much as possible upon it so as to turn feeling
against the members of the Gun Club.

It will not be forgotten that France had absolutely nothing to do with these
delegates, as it had no intentions of buying the Arctic region. However, a
Frenchman had come to Baltimore, and for his own personal benefit and
information had watched with great interest the proceedings of the Gun Club. He
was an engineer, not more than thirty-five years old. He had been first in the
polytechnic school, and came out of it with the highest honors. He was without
doubt as skilful a calculator as Mr. J.T. Maston. This engineer was a very
intelligent young man, very original, always pleasant, and with most amiable
manners. He always spoke very frankly and used plain language, no matter
whether he was speaking in earnest or in fun. He even went so far as to use
slangy expressions when they served his purpose. He could sit for hours at his
table and figure and calculate, making his figures and calculations as fast as he
could write with a pen. His greatest pleasure, next to these difficult mathematical
efforts, was in "whist," which he played apparently very indifferently, not
forgetting to figure out all his chances. His name was Alcide Pierdeux, but he
generally signed it, A. Pierd, and sometimes only A. Pie. He was very tall. His
friends remarked that his height measured about the five millionth part of the
quarter of the meridian, and they were not much mistaken. He had a small head,
at least it looked so on his broad shoulders, but with a most lively expression on
his face, and his blue eyes behind his eye-glasses twinkled merrily. This was
characteristic of him, for he had one of those faces which appear merry, even
when they are in sober earnest. He was at once the best scholar in his class and
the best tempered. But even if his head did seem a little small on his shoulders, it
is safe to say that it was filled to its highest capacity. He was a mathematician, as
all his ancestors had been, but he did not study mathematics to use them in his
profession, for which he never had any taste, as he disliked trade. No, he studied
mathematics for themselves alone, simply to find them out more and more where
there was so much unknown to man. Let us also remark that Alcide Pierdeux
was a bachelor. He was as yet single, or, as he would express it, equal to one (=
1) although his greatest wish was to get married. His friends all thought that he
would marry a very charming girl, gay and spirituelle. But, unhappily for him,
the girl’s father said that he was too smart and that he would talk to his daughter
in language which she would not be able to understand. How modest and simple


this father was, indeed. And for this reason the young engineer decided to place
between himself and his country the broad ocean. He asked permission to go
abroad for a year and obtained it. He thought that he could not make any better
use of his time than to go to Baltimore and note the actions of the N.P.P.A. And
this is how he came to be at this time in the United States. However, since he got
to Baltimore he had cared little apparently for the great undertaking of Barbicane
& Co. Whether the earth would have a change of the axis or not, what did it
matter to him? He only wanted to know, and his curiosity was at the highest
point to find out, by what means they were to move the earth. He thought again
and again how they would do it and had several plans in his head and dismissed
them only to consider the matter afresh. He concluded that they wanted probably
to substitute a new axis, but he did not clearly see where their point of operations
was to be. Then, again, he would say, "There is the daily movement. It is
impossible to surpress it; how they will do it, is a perfect conundrum to me." He
had no idea what the plans of Barbicane and Maston were. It is to be regretted
very much that their intentions were not known to him, as he would have been
able to figure out the formulae in a very short time. And so it came about that on
this 29th day of December, Alcide Pierdeux was walking with his hand at his
brow, pondering, about the streets of Baltimore.

CHAPTER X.

IN WHICH A LITTLE UNEASINESS BEGINS TO SHOW ITSELF.

A month had elapsed since the meeting of the Gun Club and the stockholders
of the new-formed society, and public opinion was getting much altered. The
advantages of the change to be wrought in the axis of the earth were forgotten
and its disadvantages began to be spoken of. It was very probable, public
opinion said, that a terrible catastrophe would happen, as the change could only
be brought about by a violent shock. What would this catastrophe exactly be? In
regard to the change of climates, was it so desirable after all? The Esquimaux
and the Laps and the Samoyeden and the Tchuktchees would benefit by it, as
they had nothing to lose. The European delegates were very energetic in their
talk against President Barbicane and his work. To begin with they sent
information to their Government. They used the cable frequently and always sent
cipher messages. They asked questions and received instructions. What, then,
were these instructions, always in cipher and very guarded? "Show energy, but
do not compromise our Government," said one. "Act very considerately, but do
not touch the ‘statu[s] quo,’" said another. Major Donellan and his associates did
not fail to predict a terrible accident. "It is very evident that the American
engineers have taken steps so as not to hurt, or at least as little as possible, the
territory of the United States," thought Col. Boris Karkof. "But how could they


do it?" asked Jan Harald. "If you shake a tree do not all its branches suffer while
you are shaking it?" "And if somebody hits you on the back does not your whole
body feel the pain?" said Jacques Jansen. "That is, then, what this strange
paragraph of the document meant," said Dean Toodrink. "That is the reason why
they mentioned certain geographical changes."

"Yes," said Eric Baldenak, "that is what we have to fear; this change will
throw the sea out of its basin, and should the ocean leave its present quarters,
would not certain inhabitants of this globe find themselves so located that they
could not readily communicate with their fellow-citizens?"

"It is very possible that they may be brought into such a density of
surrounding medium," said Jan Harald, gravely, "that they will be unable to
breathe."

"We will see London at the top of Mount Blanc," exclaimed Major Donellan.
And with his legs crossed and his head thrown back this gentleman looked
straight up as if the capital of his country was already lost in the clouds. In short,
it became a public danger and a most annoying one. True, it was only a question
of a change of 23 degrees and 28 minutes, but this change might bring about a
great movement of the oceans as the new earth flattened itself around the pole.
Protestations were heard from all over, and the Government of the United States
was asked to interfere. "It was best not to try the operation at all." "The
consequences of it might destroy this world." "God has done all things well; it
was not necessary to better his work," were the comments. And yet there were
people light-hearted enough to make merry at the whole matter. "Look at these
Yankees," they said, "they want to turn the earth on its axis. If the earth had
shown any faults in its motion it would be all right to better it, but it had gone on
for millions of years and always as regularly as clockwork."

Instead of answering such questions Engineer Alcide Pierdeux tried to find
which would be the countries and directions, figured out by Mathematician
Maston, in which the test would take place—the exact point of the globe where
the work would begin. As soon as he should know this he would be master of the
situation and know exactly the place which would be in the most danger. It has
been mentioned before that the countries of the old continent were probably
connected with those of the new across the North Pole. Was it not possible, it
was asked in Europe, that President Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl and J.T. Maston
had considered only how to save their own country from any ill consequences
which might come from the shock? He was a Yankee—it was pointed out they
were all Yankees—and particularly this man Barbicane, who had created the idea
of going to the moon. In any case, it was argued, the whole new world, from the
Arctic regions to the Gulf of Mexico, would not have to fear anything from the


shock. It is even probable on the other hand that America would profit
immensely by it and gain some territory. "Who knows what is lying in the two
oceans which wash the American coast? Was it not probable that there was some
valuable territory which they wished to take possession of?" asked people who
never saw anything but the dark side of a question. "Is it sure that there is no
danger? Suppose J.T. Maston should make a mistake in his calculations? And
could not the President have made a mistake when he came to put his apparatus
in working order? This might happen to the smartest people. They might not
always put the bullet in the target, or they might neglect to put the cannonball
into the cannon," were the comments of these nervous folk. This uneasiness was
fomented by the European delegates. Secretary Dean Toodrink published several
articles in this line, and even stronger ones were put by him in the Standard. Jan
Harald put some in the Swedish journal Aftenbladt, and Col. Boris Karkof in a
Russian journal which had a large circulation. Even in America opinions
differed. The Republicans were friends of President Barbicane, but the
Democrats declared themselves against him. A part of the American press agreed
with the European press. And as in the United States the papers had become
great powers, paying yearly for news about twenty millions of dollars, they had
great influence on the people. In vain did other journals of large circulation
speak in favor of the N.P.P.A. In vain did Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt pay as high
as $10 a line for articles showing the advantages of this invention. In vain did
this ardent widow try to demonstrate that everything was perfectly correct, and
that J.T. Maston could never commit an error in figuring. Finally America took
fright in the matter and was inclined to be governed by Europe. But neither
President Barbicane nor Secretary Maston of the Gun Club seemed to care what
was said. They did not even take the trouble to correct the different articles.
They let people say what they liked and did not try to change their minds at all.
They were too much occupied in preparations for the immense undertaking. It is
indeed strange that the public, who were at first so enthusiastic and so certain of
success, should so suddenly turn and go against this operation.

Soon, however, in spite of the money Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt spent on the
matter, the President and Secretary of the Club came to be considered dangerous
characters by the people of the two worlds. The Government of the United States
was asked officially by the European powers to interfere and examine the matter.
The originators were to openly show their ideas and by what means they hoped
to accomplish what they intended. They would have to inform the Government
which parts of the world would be most in danger and, in short, tell everything
which the public demanded to know. The Government at Washington was
compelled to do what they were asked. The uprising of public sentiment in the


Northern, Southern, and Middle States of the Union did not allow them any
other course. A commission of engineers, mechanicians, mathematicians, and
geographers were appointed—fifty in all, presided over by John Prestice—by the
act of the 19th of February, with full power to do anything which they
considered necessary in the matter. At first the President of the Society received
orders to appear before this committee. President Barbicane did not respond.
Agents went to his house in Baltimore, but the President was gone. Where was
he? No one knew. When did he depart? Six weeks ago, on the 11th of January,
he had left the city, and the State of Maryland as well, in company with Capt.
Nicholl.

Where did they both go? Nobody could tell. Evidently the two members of
the Gun Club went to that mysterious region where preparations were going on
for the great operation. But where could this place be? It was most important to
know where this place was in order to break up and destroy the plans of these
engineers before they had got too far in their work.

The consternation produced by this departure of the President and his
associate was enormous. It soon changed public opinion to hatred against the
N.P.P.A. and its managers. But there was one man who ought to know where the
President and his associate had gone. There was one man who could answer this
gigantic question, which at present excited the whole world and this man was—
J.T. Maston. He was ordered to appear before the Committee of Inquiry under
the Presidency of John Prestice. He did not appear. Had he also left Baltimore?
Had he also gone to join his associates to aid them in their work, the results of
which the whole world now expected with such immense fright? No. J.T. Maston
was living still in his Ballistic Cottage, at No. 179 Franklin Street, working all
the time and already beginning new calculations, only interrupting his work
when he wanted to spend a social evening with Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt at her
magnificent residence at New Park. An agent was sent to him by the President of
the Inquiry Committee with orders to bring him to their meeting. The agent
arrived at the cottage, knocked at the door and introduced himself. He was
harshly received by "Fire-Fire," but much worse by the proprietor of the house.
However, Mr. Maston thought it was no more than right that he should go to the
meeting, and he went with the agent. As soon as he had arrived they began to
question him.

The first question was, "Where is President Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl at
present?” He answered with a steady voice, "I know where they are, but I am not
at liberty to disclose this information." Second question: "Have he and his
associates made the necessary preparations to put this operation in working
order?" "This," said Maston, "is a part of the secret which I cannot reveal."


"Would he be land enough to let this Committee examine his own work, so they
would be able to judge if his Society would be in position to accomplish their
intentions?" "No, most certainly I shall not allow it, never; I would rather destroy
it. It is my right as a citizen of free America to refuse to communicate to any
person the result of my work."

"But," said President Prestice in a very serious voice, "if it is your right to
keep silent, it is the right of the whole United States to ask you to stop these
rumors and give an explanation of the means which will be employed by your
Company," Mr. Maston did not agree that it was his right nor that it was his duty
to answer further questions. In spite of their begging, threatening, etc., they
could obtain nothing from this man with the iron hook. Never, never, would he
say one word of it, and it was hardly possible to believe that such a strong will
was concealed under that cover of "gutta-percha." Mr. Maston went away as he
had come; he was congratulated by Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt, who was delighted
by the courageous attitude taken by him. When the results of this last meeting of
the Inquiry Committee became known public indignation really took a tur
which threatened the security and safety of the calculator. The pressure of public
opinion was so great that the Cabinet of the Government of the United States
was compelled to give the Committee full permission to do what they thought
most necessary and advisable in the matter. One evening, the 13th of March, J.T.
Maston was in his study at the Ballistic Cottage, very much interested in
different figures, when suddenly the telephone bell attracted his attention.
"Hello! hello!" said he, annoyed by this sudden interruption, "who wants me?"
"Mme. Scorbitt." "What does Mrs. Scorbitt want?" "She wants to put you on
your guard, I am informed this moment"—and she had not time to finish the
phrase when Mr. Maston heard a terrible noise at the door of his house. On the
stairs which led to his study there was an extraordinary racket. He could hear
loud voices, many angry voices. Then the noise of a whole army of men moving
towards his door. It was his servant Fire-Fire, who was trying to keep the
intruders from breaking, into the house and disturbing the "home" of the master.
A moment afterwards the door was violently opened and a policeman appeared,
followed by several others. This policeman had a warrant to make a visit to the
house and to take possession of all papers and also of J.T. Maston himself. The
angry Secretary of the Gun Club reached for his revolver, and would have
certainly defended himself had he not been suddenly disarmed. He was held by
officers, and all his papers were put in a bundle. Suddenly he made a bold effort,
freed himself, grabbed his notebook, out of which he tore the last page and
began to chew it very quickly. "Now you can take it," said he, "for it will be no
good to you." An hour afterwards he was a prisoner in the jail of Baltimore. This


was undoubtedly the best that could happen to him, as it was extremely
dangerous for him to be at liberty due to the then excited state of the public
mind.

CHAPTER XI.

WHAT WAS FOUND IN THE NOTEBOOK OF J.T. MASTON AND
WHAT IT NO LONGER CONTAINED.

The notebook, which was taken possession of by the police, had thirty pages
covered with formulae and figures, including all the calculations of J.T. Maston.
It was a work of the higher mathematics, which could only be appreciated by the
highest mathematicians. The following formula,

Equation 1

[Equation 1]

which was also to be found in the calculation of From the Earth to the Moon,
held a prominent place in these calculations. The majority of people could not
understand anything of what was written in the notebook, but it would have
given satisfaction to give out the results, which every one expected with so much
curiosity. And so it was that all the newspapers, and the Inquiry Committee as
well, tried to read the formulae of this celebrated calculator. In the work of Mr.
Maston were found some problems correctly executed, others half solved, etc.
The calculations had been made with great exactness and of course the Inquiry
Committee supposed that they were absolutely correct. If the plan was carried
out fully it was seen that without a doubt the earth’s axis would be greatly
changed and that the terrible disasters which were predicted would take place
with full force. The reports made by the Inquiry Committee to the different
newspapers ran as follows:

"The idea followed by the Administrative Council of the N.P.P.A. and the
object of which is to substitute a new axis for the old one is to be carried out by
means of the recoil of a piece of ordnance fixed at a certain point of the earth. If
the barrel of this device is immovably fixed to the ground it is not at all doubtful
that it will communicate its shock over our whole planet. The engine adopted by
the engineers of the Society is then nothing else but a monster cannon, the effect
of shooting which would be absolutely nothing if it were pointed vertically. To
produce its highest effect it is necessary to point it horizontally towards the north
or south, and it is this last direction which has been chosen by Barbicane & Co.
Under these conditions the recoil will produce a movement of the earth towards
the north, a movement similar to that of one billiard ball touched very slightly by
another."

This was really just what the clever Alcide Pierdeux had predicted. As soon
as the cannon has been fired off, the center line of the earth would be displaced


in a parallel direction to that of the recoil. This would change the direction of the
orbit somewhat, and consequently the duration of the year, but in such a mild
way that it must be considered as absolutely free from bad results. At the same
time the earth takes a new movement of rotation around an axis in the plane of
the equator, and the daily rotation will then be accomplished indefinitely upon
this new axis, as if no daily movement had existed previous to the shock. At
present this movement is made around the lines of the poles, and in combination
with the accessory force produced by the recoil there was created a new axis, the
pole of which moves from the present to the amount of a quantity called "x." In
other words, if the cannon is fired at the moment when the vernal equinox—one
of the intersections of the equator and the ecliptic—is at the nadir of the point of
shooting, and if the recoil is sufficiently strong to displace the old pole 23
degrees, 28 minutes, the new axis becomes perpendicular to the direction of the
earth’s orbit, the same as it is for the planet Jupiter.

What the consequences were expected to be we already know, as President
Barbicane had indicated them at the meeting of the 22d of December. But, given
the mass of the earth and the quantity of momentum, which she possesses, is it
possible to conceive a piece of ordnance so strong that its recoil will be able to
produce a modification in the actual direction of the real pole, and especially to
the extent of 23 degrees, 28 minutes? Yes, if a cannon or a series of cannons are
built with the dimensions required by the laws of mechanics, or, in lieu of these
dimensions, if the inventors were in possession of an explosive strong enough to
impel a projectile with the necessary velocity for such a displacement.

Now, taking as a basis model the cannon of 27 centimetres of the French
Marine Corps, which throws a projectile of 180 kilograms with an initial
velocity of 500 metres a second, by giving to this piece of ordnance an increased
dimension of 100 times—that is, a million times in volume—it would throw a
projectile of 180,000 tons: or, in other words, if the powder had strength
sufficient to give to the projectile an initial velocity 5,600 times greater than that
of the old black powder used for a cannon the desired result would be obtained.
In fact, with a velocity of 2,800 kilometres a second, a velocity sufficient to go
from Paris to St. Petersburg in one second, there was no doubt that the recoil of
the projectile, acting against the earth, would put everything again in a state of
quietude. Well, extraordinary as it may appear, J.T. Maston and his associates
had in their possession exactly this explosive, of a nearly unlimited power, and
of which the gunpowder used to throw the ball of the [CJolumbiad towards the
moon gave but a faint idea. It was Capt. Nicholl who had discovered it. The
substances which entered into its composition were only imperfectly entered in
the notebook of Mr. Maston, and he merely named it "melimelonite." All that


was known was that it was formed by the reaction of a melimelo of organic
substances and azotic acids. No matter what the explosive was, with the power
which it possessed it was more than sufficient to throw a projectile weighing
180,000 tons outside of the earth’s attraction, and it was evident that the recoil
which it would produce to the cannon would have the effect of changing the
axis, displacing the North Pole 23 degrees and 28 minutes, bringing the new axis
in the direction of the ecliptic, and, as a consequence of this, effecting all the
changes so justly dreaded by the inhabitants of the earth.

However, there was one chance for humanity to escape the consequences of
this trial, which was to provoke such revulsions in the geographical and climatic
conditions of the globe. Was it possible to build a cannon of such dimensions
that it was to be a million times greater in volume than the one of 27
centimetres? It was doubtful. That was just the point and one of the reasons for
thinking the attempt of Barbicane & Co. would not succeed. But there was the
other possibility, for it seemed that the Company had already begun to work on
their gigantic project. Now the question arose, where was their place of
operations? No one knew, and consequently it was impossible to overtake these
audacious operations. It was well known that Barbicane and Nicholl had left
Baltimore and America. They had gone away two months ago. Where were
they? Most certainly at that unknown point of the globe where the operations
were under way for their grand object. It was evident that this place was
indicated on the last page of the notebook of J.T. Maston. On this point there was
no doubt. But this last page had been torn out and eaten up by the accomplice of
Impey Barbicane, and Maston sat imprisoned in the Baltimore City Prison and
absolutely refused to speak. This was the condition of affairs. If the President
succeeded in making this monster cannon and its projectile—in a word, if the
operation was carried out under the above stated conditions—it would modify
the earth’s axis, and within six months the earth would be subject to the
consequences of this audacious attempt of Barbicane & Co. This would come on
the 22d day of September, twelve hours after the passage of the sun over the
meridian of the place "x."

The facts that were known were: 1st. That the shooting would be done with a
cannon a million times larger than the cannon of 27 centimetres. 2d. That the
cannon would be loaded with a projectile of 180,000 tons. 3d. That the projectile
would be animated with a velocity of 2,800 kilometres. 4th. That the shooting
would take place on the 22d of September, twelve hours after the passage of the
sun over the meridian of the place "x." Was it possible to deduce, under these
facts, where was the spot "x," where the operation was to take place? Evidently
not, said the Inquiry Committee. There was nothing by which to calculate where


the point "x" was, as nothing in the calculations of Mr. Maston indicated through
which point of the globe the new axis was to pass, or, in other words, on which
part of the present earth the new poles would be situated. Therefore, it would be
impossible to know which would be the elevated and submerged countries, due
to the changed surface of the ocean, or which parts of the earth would be
transformed into water, and where water would be transformed into land. It was
evident that the maximum change in the ocean surface would be 8.415 metres,
and that in certain points of the globe various areas would be lowered and raised
to this amount. All, however, depended upon the location of the point "x," or
where the shooting was to take place. In other words, "x" was the secret of the
promoter of this uncertain affair. "We have," said the Committee, "only to
mention again that the inhabitants of the world, no matter in what part of it they
are living, are directly interested in knowing this secret, as they are all directly
t[h]reatened by the actions of Barbicane & Co. Therefore all the inhabitants of
Europe, Africa, Asia, America, and Australia are advised to watch all gun
foundries, powder factories, etc., which are situated in their territory and to note
the presence of all strangers whose arrival may appear suspicious, and to advise
the Inquiry Committee at Baltimore by wire immediately. Heaven grant that this
news may arrive before the 22d of September of the present year, as that date
threatens to disturb the order established since the creation in our earthly system.

CHAPTER XII.

IN WHICH J.T. MASTON HEROICALLY CONTINUES TO BE SILENT.

According to a former story a gun was to be employed to throw the projectile
from the earth to the moon; now the gun was to be employed to change the
earth’s axis. The cannon, always the cannon; these gunners of the Gun Club had
nothing else in their heads but the cannon. They had a real craze for the cannon.
Was this brutal engine again threatening the universe? Yes, we are sorry to
confess it, it was a cannon which was uppermost in the mind of President
Barbicane and his associates. After the Columbiad of Florida, they had gone on
to the monster cannon of the place "x." We may almost hear them shout with a
loud voice: "Take aim at the moon." First act, "Fire." "Change the axis of the
earth." Second act, "Fire." And the wish which the whole world had for them
was, "To hell." Third act, "Fire." And really their scheme justified the popular
opinion.

As it was, the publication of this last report of the Committee in the
newspapers produced an effect of which one can scarcely form an ideal. The
operation to be tried by President Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl, it was very clear,
was going to bring about one of the most disastrous interruptions in the daily
routine of the earth. Everybody understood what the consequences of it would


be. Therefore the experiment of Barbicane & Co. was generally cursed,
denounced, etc. In the Old as well as in the New World the members of the
N.P.P.A. had at the time only enemies. If there were indeed a few friends left to
them among their cranky American admirers, they were very few.

Regarding only their personal security, President Barbicane and Capt.
Nicholl had acted wisely in leaving Baltimore and America. It was safe to
believe that some accident had happened to them. They could not without divine
punishment threaten fourteen hundred million inhabitants by a change wrought
in the habitability of the earth.

But how was it possible that the two leaders of the Gun Club had
disappeared without leaving any trace behind them? How could they have sent
away the material and assistants which were necessary to such an operation
without any one seeing them? A hundred railroad cars, if it was by rail, a
hundred vessels, if it was by water, would not have been more than sufficient to
transport the loads of metal of coal, and of melimelonite. It was entirely
incomprehensible how this departure could have been made incognito. However,
it was done. And still more serious it appeared when it was known after inquiry
that no orders had been sent to the gun foundries or powder factories, or the
factories which produce chemical products in either of the two continents. How
inexplicable all this was! Without doubt it would be explained some day.

At any rate, if President Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl, who had mysteriously
disappeared, were sheltered from any immediate danger, their colleague, Mr.
Maston, was under lock and key, and had to face all the public indignation.
Nothing could make him yield, however. Deep at the bottom of the cell which he
occupied in the prison of Baltimore, the Secretary of the Gun Club gave himself
up more and more to thinking of those distant associates whom he was not able
to follow. He pictured the vision of President Barbicane and his associate, Capt.
Nicholl, preparing their gigantic operation at this unknown point of the globe,
with nothing in their way. He saw them build their enormous device, combining
their melimelonite, moulding the projectile which the sun would so soon count
as one of its small satellites. This new star was to have the charming name
"Scorbetta," in gallant acknowledgment of the love and esteem felt towards the
rich capitalist widow of New Park. J.T. Maston calculated the days which would
elapse before the one on which the gun would be fired.

It was already the beginning of April. In two months and a half the meridian
Star, after having stopped on the Tropic of Cancer, would go back towards the
Tropic of Capricorn. Three months later it would traverse the equatorial line at
the Fall equinox.

And then these seasons, which have appeared annually for millions of years,


and which have changed so regularly, will be brought to an end. For the last time
in 189—the sphere would have submitted to this succession of days and nights.
Truly, this was a magnificent work, superhuman, even divine. J.T. Maston forgot
the Arctic region and the exploration of the coal mines around the pole, and he
only saw, in his mind’s eye, the cosmographic consequences of the operation.
The principal object of the association was now to make those changes and
displacements which were to remodel the face of the earth.

But that was just the point. Did the earth wish to change her face at all? Was
she not still young and charming with the one which God had given her at the
first hour of her creation?

Alone and defenseless in his prison cell, nothing could induce Mr. Maston to
speak about the matter, no matter what plan was tried. The members of the
Inquiry Committee urged him daily to speak, and visited him daily, but they
could obtain nothing. It was about this time that John Prestice had the idea of
using an influence which might possibly succeed, and this was the aid of Mrs.
Evangelina Scorbitt. Every one knew what feelings the generous widow
entertained for Mr. Maston, how devoted she was to him, and what unlimited
interest she had in this celebrated calculator. Therefore, after deliberation of the
Committee, Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt was authorized to come and go, visiting
the prisoner as much as she liked.

Was she not threatened just as well as any other person on this earth by the
recoil of this monster cannon? Would her palace at New Park be spared any
more than the smallest hut of the Indian? Was not her very existence just as
much in doubt as that of the savage living on the furthest isle of the Pacific
Ocean? That is what the President of the Inquiry Committee gave her to
understand, and for this reason she was begged to use her influence with the
mathematician. If he would consent to speak, and would say at what place
President Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl were, and how many people they had
with them to accomplish their ends, it would yet be time to go and stop them and
put an end to their project, and thus save humanity from this most dangerous
catastrophe which threatened the world.

Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt was therefore admitted to the prison whenever she
wished it. She was most desirous of seeing J.T. Maston again after he had been
taken from his comfortable study at Ballistic Cottage by those rough police
agents. If any impolite person had on the 9th of April put his ear at the door of
his cell the first time when Mrs. Scorbitt entered he would have heard the
following conversation:

"Ah, at last, my dear Maston, I see you again."

"You, Mrs. Scorbitt!"


"Yes, my dear friend, after four weeks—four long weeks of separation."

"Exactly twenty-eight days, five hours and forty-five minutes," answered J.T.
Maston, after having consulted his watch.

"Finally we are reunited."

"But how did it happen that they allowed you to penetrate as far as this cell
to see me, dear Mrs. Scorbitt?"

"Under the condition of using all my influence over you, thanks to my
affection for you, in advising you to disclose the secret of the whereabouts of
President Barbicane."

"What, Evangelina!" cried Mr. Maston, "and you have consented to give me
such advice. You have entertained the thought that I could betray my associates."

"Me, dear Maston! Do you consider me so bad? Me! To sacrifice your
security for your honor. Me! To persuade you to an act which would shame a life
consecrated entirely to the highest speculations of pure mathematics."

"Bravo, Mrs. Scorbitt! I see in you once more the generous patron of our
Society. No, I have never doubted your great heart."

"Thank you, Mr. Maston."

"In regard to myself," continued Maston, "allow me to say, before telling the
point of the earth where our great shooting will take place—sell, so to speak, the
secret which I have been able to keep so well, to allow these barbarians to fly
and pursue our friends, to interrupt their works, which will make our profit and
glory, I would rather die."

"Splendid, Mr. Maston!" cried Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt.

And these two beings, united by the same enthusiasm, crazed by it if you
will, one as well as the other, were well matched in understanding each other
perfectly.

"No, they will never know the name of the country which my calculations
have designated, and the reputation of which will become immortal,” said J.T.
Maston. "They can silence me if they like, but they will never have the secret
from me."

"And they can kill me with you," said Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt; "I will also
be mute."

"Tt is lucky, dear Evangelina, that they are ignorant of your knowledge of the
place."

"Do you believe that I would be capable of betraying it, because I am only a
woman? Betray my associates and you! No, my friend, no. If they should raise
the whole city and country against you—if the whole world would come to the
door of this cell to take you away, I shall be there, too, and we will at least have
one consolation—we will die together."


As if there could be any greater consolation and Mr. Maston could dream of
a sweeter death than dying in the arms of Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt! And so
ended the conversation every time that this excellent woman visited the prisoner.
And when the Inquiry Committee asked her what the result was, she would say:
"Nothing as yet; perhaps with time I shall be able to reach my point."

Ah, women, women! What are women? "In time," she urged. But time went
on with fast steps. Weeks went ’round like days, days like hours and hours like
minutes.

It was already May. Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt had not been able to get any
information from J.T. Maston, and where she had failed there was no hope of
any other person succeeding.

Was it, then, necessary to accept this terrible shock without interfering in any
way? No, no! Under such circumstances resignation was impossible. The
European delegates became more and more out of spirits. There was wrangling
between them every day. Even Jacques Jansen woke up out of his Dutch
placidity and annoyed his colleagues greatly by his daily charges and
countercharges. Col. Boris Karkof even had a duel with the Secretary of the
Inquiry Committee in which he only slightly injured his adversary. And Major
Donellan; well, he neither fought with firearms nor with bare fists, quite contrary
to English use, and he only looked on while his Secretary, Dean Toodrink,
exchanged a few blows according to prize-ring rules with William S. Forster, the
phlegmatic dealer in codfish, the straw man of the N.P.P.A., who really knew
absolutely nothing of the affair.

The whole world was leagued against the United States and wanted to hold
the Americans responsible for the actions of one of their number—the celebrated
Impey Barbicane. There was talk of recalling the ambassadors and the foreign
Ministers at present accredited to this most reckless Government at Washington
and of declaring war against the United States. Poor United States! It only
wished to lay its hands on Barbicane & Co. In vain did the Republic reply to the
Powers of Europe, Asia, Africa and Australia that they were at liberty to arrest
these adventurous Americans wherever they found them. Nobody would listen
patiently to such talk. And so, far away President Barbicane and his associate
were occupied in preparing their great operation. As nothing could be found of
them the foreign countries began to say: "You have their accomplice; now it is
sure that Mr. Maston knows where these people are and what they are doing.
Make him speak, this man, Mr. Maston. Why not use hot oil, melted lead, etc.?
Why not use such means as were used formerly under circumstances less grave
and for cases which only interested a few private people? But it was answered
that, while such means were justified in former times, they could not be used at


the end of a century as far advanced as the nineteenth century was. Therefore,
J.T. Maston had nothing to fear in that line; all that was left to hope was that he
would finally consider the enormity of his crime and would decide to reveal his
secret, or that some accident would reveal it for him.

CHAPTER XIII.

AT THE CLOSE OF WHICH J.T. MASTON UTTERS AN EPIGRAM.

Time went on, however, and very likely also the works of Barbicane and
Capt. Nicholl who were going on also under these very surprising conditions, no
one knew where.

How was it possible, it was asked, that an operation which required the
establishment of a considerable iron foundry, the erection of high blast furnaces,
capable of melting a mass of metal a million times as large as the marine corps
cannon of 27 centimeters, and a projectile weighing 180,000 tons, all of which
necessitated the employment of several thousand workmen, their transport, their
management, etc., —yes, how was it possible that such an operation could go on
without the interested world getting any knowledge of it. In which part of the
Old or New World had Barbicane & Co. secretly established a foothold so that
no hint was given to people living in the vicinity? Was it on a deserted island in
the Pacific Ocean or in the Indian Ocean? But there were no more deserted
islands: the English had gobbled them all up. Perhaps the new Society had
discovered one for this special purpose. Perhaps, one remarked, they might be in
some part of the arctic regions. No, this could not be, as it was simply because
they could not be reached that the N.P.P.A. was going to remove them.
Therefore, to look for President Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl on one of these
islands or in some inaccessible point was simply wasting time. Did not the
notebook taken away from J.T. Maston state that the shooting would take place
on or about the equator? And all the countries around it were inhabited by some
people. It seemed impossible for them to be so secreted in any part of the
habitable world without some one informing the committee at Baltimore.

Now, what did Alcide Pierdeux think of all this? He was dreaming of all
kinds of consequences which this operation would have. That Capt. Nicholl had
invented an explosive of such tremendous power, that he had found the
melimelonite, with an expansive force three or four thousand times stronger than
that of the most violent explosive known, and 5,600 times stronger than the good
old black gunpowder of our ancestors, this was astonishing enough—very
astonishing. But it was not impossible at all. One can hardly know what the
future will bring in these days of progress when devices exist to destroy whole
armies at very long distances. In any event, the change of the earth’s axis,
produced by the recoil of a piece of ordnance, was not sufficiently novel to


astonish the French engineer. Then, considering the plans of President
Barbicane, he said: "It is evident that the earth receives daily the recoil of all the
blows which are given on its surface. Hundreds of thousands of people amuse
themselves daily by sending thousands of projectiles weighing a few kilograms
or millions of projectiles weighing a few grammes, and even when I walk or
jump, or when I stretch out my arm, all this takes place on the surface of our
sphere and adds to or checks its motion. Is, then, your great machine of such a
nature as to produce the recoil asked for? How in the name of candor can this
recoil be sufficient to move the earth? And if the calculations of this fellow, J.T.
Maston, prove it, it is easy enough to show it. Alcide Pierdeux could not but
admire the ingenious calculations of the Secretary of the Gun Club, which were
communicated by the members of the Inquiry Committee to those wise people
who were able to understand them. And Alcide Pierdeux, who was able to read
algebra like one would read a newspaper, found in this sort of reading matter an
inexpressible charm. If these changes were to take place, what a terrible
catastrophe it would be! Towns would be turned upside down, oceans would be
thrown out of their beds, people killed by millions. It would be an earthquake of
incomparable violence. If besides, said Alcide Pierdeux, this damnable powder
of Capt. Nicholl were less strong, we might hope that the projectile would again
strike the earth after the shooting, and after having made the trip around the
globe, then everything would be replaced in a very short time and without
having caused any very great destruction. But do not worry about that. Thanks to
their melimelonite, the bullet will go its way and not return to the earth to beg
her pardon for having deranged her by putting her back again in her place.
Pierdeux finally said: "If the place of shooting were known I would soon be able
to say upon which places the movement would have the least and where the
greatest effect. The people might be informed in time to save themselves before
their cities and houses had fallen under the blow." But how were we to know it?
"T think,” he said, "the consequences of the shock may be more complicated than
can even be imagined. The volcanoes, profiting by this occasion, would vomit
like a person who is seasick. Perhaps a part of the ocean might fall into one of
their craters. It would make small difference then. It is entirely possible that we
might have explosions which would make our earth jump. Ah, this Satan
Maston, imagine him juggling with our earthly globe and playing with it as if he
were playing billiards!"

So talked and reasoned Alcide Pierdeux. Soon these terrible hypotheses were
taken up and discussed by the newspapers. The confusion which would be the
result of the scheme of Barbicane & Co. could only result in terrible accidents.
And so it happened that the nearer the day came the greater the fright which took


possession of the bravest people. It was the same as it was in the year 1000,
when all living people supposed that they would be thrown suddenly into the
jaws of death. It maybe recalled what happened at this period. According to the
Apocalypse the people were led to believe that the judgment day had come. In
the last year of the 10th century, says H. Martin, everything was interrupted—
pleasures, business, interest, all, even the public works of the country. Thinking
only of the eternity which was to begin on the morrow, provision was made only
for the most necessary articles for one or two days. All possessions, real estate,
castles, were bequeathed to the Church, so as to acquire protection in that
kingdom of heaven where all were so soon to enter. Many donations to the
churches were made with these words: "As the end of the world has come, and
its ruin is imminent." When this fatal time came, all the people ran to the
churches and places set apart for religious meetings, and waited to hear the seven
trumpets of the seven angels of the judgment day sound and call from heaven.
We know that the first day of 1,000 came and went, and nothing was changed.
But this time it was not the question of a disturbance simply based upon some
verse of the Bible. It was the question of removing the axis of the earth, and this
was founded on very reliable calculations, and was very probable.

Under these conditions the situation of J.T. Maston became each day more
and more critical. Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt trembled lest he would become the
victim of a universal cry for vengeance. Perhaps she even had in her mind the
idea of making him give up the information which he so heroically held to
himself. But she did not dare to mention it to him and she did well. It would
have been unwise for her to expose herself to the volley of rebukes he would
have given her. As we may well understand, fright had taken a strong foothold in
the city of Baltimore and the inhabitants became nearly unmanageable. The
excitement was increased by articles appearing in the daily papers. In any case,
if J.T. Maston had been found among the crowd of people, his fate would have
been soon settled. He would have been given to the wild beast. But he was
content and said: "I am ready for it." No matter what happened, J.T. Maston
refused to make known the situation of the "x," knowing very well that if he
should unveil the secret President Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl would be unable
to finish their work. It was an interesting struggle—this fight of one man against
the whole world. It only made J.T. Maston a grander and better man in the eyes
of Evangelina Scorbitt, and also in the opinion of his associates of the Gun Club.
The Secretary of the Gun Club became such a celebrated person that he began to
receive letters, as all criminals do, from people who wished to have a few lines
from the hand which was going to turn the world over. But even if this was all
very nice it became every day more and more dangerous for our Secretary. The


population hung day and night around the prison, with great noise and great
tumult. The enraged crowd wanted to lynch J.T. Maston. The police saw the
moment would come when they would be unable to defend the prison and the
prisoner J.T. Maston. Being desirous of giving satisfaction and information to
the American people, as well as to the people of other countries, the Government
at Washington decided to put J.T. Maston before a court of justice. "What other
people have not been able to accomplish the Judges will not," said Alcide
Pierdeux, who had after all a kind of a friendly feeling for the unhappy
calculator.

On the morning of the 5th September the President of the Commission went
personally to the cell of the prisoner. Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt, at her own
request, had been allowed to accompany him. Perhaps at this last attempt the
influence of this excellent lady would succeed and bring the hoped-for result.
There was nothing to be left undone. All means possible were to be used to make
this last attempt successful. If it was not—well, we will see. "Yes, we will see."
What we would see is the hanging of this brute Maston, said the people, and the
event would have come off in all its horror if the people could have it their way.
So it happened that at 11 o’clock J.T. Maston was ushered into the presence of
Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt and John Prestice, President of the Inquiry Committee.

The opening was a very simple one. The conversation consisted of the
following questions and answers, very rapid on one side and very quiet on the
other. And even under these circumstances the calm, quiet speaker was J.T.
Maston.

"For the last time will you answer?" asked John Prestice.

"Answer what?" ironically observed the Secretary of the Gun Club.

"Answer the question, where is the place in which your associate, Barbicane,
is at present."

"T have told it to you a hundred times."

"Repeat it for the one hundred and first time."

"He is where the shooting will take place."

"Where will the shooting take place?"

"Where my associate, Barbicane, is."

"Have a care, J.T. Maston."

"For what?"

"For the consequences of your refusal to answer, the result of which will be


"To prevent you from learning that which you should not know."
"What we have the right to know."
"That is not my opinion."


"We will bring you before the court."

"Go ahead."

"And the jury will condemn you."

"What care I."

"And as soon as judgment is rendered it will be executed."

"All right."

"Dear Maston," ventured Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt, whose heart nearly broke
on account of these terrible threats.

"What! You, madam?" said J.T. Maston.

She hung her head and was silent.

"And do you want to know what this judgment will be?"

"If you wish to tell it," said J.T. Maston.

"That you will suffer capital punishment, as you deserve."

"Really?"

"That you will be hanged as sure, sir, as two and two make four."

"Then, sir, I have yet a chance," said J.T. Maston, reflectingly. "If you were a
little better mathematician you would not say that two and two are four. You
simply prove that all mathematicians have been fools until to-day in affirming
that the sum of two numbers is equal to one of their parts; that is, two and two
are exactly four."

"Sir!" cried the President, absolutely puzzled.

"Well," said J.T. Maston, "if you would say, as sure as one and one are two,
all right. That is absolutely evident, because that is no longer a theorem; this is a
definition."

After this lesson in simple arithmetic the President of the Committee went
out, followed by Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt, who had so much admiration for the
calculator that she did not venture to look at him.

CHAPTER XIV.

VERY SHORT, BUT IN WHICH "X" TAKES A GEOGRAPHICAL
VALUE.

Very luckily for J.T. Maston, the Federal Government received the following
telegram sent by the American Consul stationed at Zanzibar:

"To John S. Wright, Minister of State, Washington, U.S.A.:

Zanzibar, Sept. 13, 5 A.M. (local time).—Great works are being executed in
the Wamasai, south of the chain of Kilimanjaro. For eight months President
Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl have been established there with a great number of
black help under the authority of Sultan Bali-Bali. This is brought to the
knowledge of the Government by its devoted

"RICHARD W. TRUST, Consul"


And this was how the secret of J.T. Maston became known. And therefore,
were the Secretary of the Gun Club still in prison, he could not have been
hanged.

But, after all, who knows whether he would not rather have been glad to
meet with death in the full glory of his life than to live on with all the chances of
disappointment.

CHAPTER XV.

WHICH CONTAINS A FEW INTERESTING DETAILS FOR THE
INHABITANTS OF THE EARTHLY SPHERE.

Finally the Government of Washington had found out the place where
Barbicane & Co. were operating. Should they doubt the authenticity of this
cable? No, that was not reasonable. The Consul at Zanzibar was a very reliable
person, and his information could be accepted without doubt. It was further
corroborated by later telegrams. It was really in the center of the region of
Kilimanjaro in the African Wamasai, a little under the equatorial line, where the
engineers of the N.P.P.A. were going to accomplish their gigantic works.

How could they have secretly reached this lost country, at the foot of the
celebrated mountain, discovered in 1849 by Drs. Rebviani and Krapf, ascended
by the travellers Otto Ehlers and Abbot? How were they able to establish their
workshops there, erect a foundry and bring a large number of help, or at least
enough to succeed? How had they been able to establish friendly relations with
the dangerous tribes of the country and their sover[e]igns, as cunning as they
were cruel? This we do not know. And perhaps it would never be known, as
there were only a few days left before the 22d of September would arrive. J.T.
Maston heard from Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt that the mystery of Kilimanjaro had
been unveiled by a telegram sent from Zanzibar. "Great Scott!" he exclaimed,
sawing the air with his iron hand. "Well, we do not travel by telegram yet, nor by
the telephone, and in six days the matter will be finished."

Those who saw and heard this remarkable man utter these words were
astonished at the energy in the old gunner.

J.T. Maston was right. There was no time left to send agents to Wamasai with
orders to arrest President Barbicane. They would even have been too late had
they departed from Algiers or Egypt, even from Aden, Madagascar, or Zanzibar,
as they would have met thousands of difficulties in this mountainous region, and
perhaps they would have met with an army composed of followers of the Sultan,
who was interested in the matter. Therefore all hope of preventing this operation
had to be given up. But if prevention was impossible nothing seemed more easy
than the figuring out of the terrible consequences, as the exact situation of "x"
was now known.


This problem was difficult enough, but all algebraists and mathematicians of
large reputation ought to be able to solve it. As the cable of the Consul of
Zanzibar had been sent direct to the Minister of State at Washington, the Federal
Government wanted to keep it secret at first. They wished as well that its
contents were published all over the country, so that they could indicate what the
results would be of this displacement of the axis and the uprising of the oceans,
and thus the inhabitants of the world might learn which place of refuge was open
to them according to the section of the globe in which they lived. And it is easy
to understand how anxious the people were to learn their fate.

On the 14th of September the cable dispatch was sent to the office of the
Observatory at Washington, with orders to figure out the final consequences
upon geographical locations. Two days afterwards the problem was all worked
out. The Old World was notified of the results by cable and the New World by
telegram. After this calculation had been published by thousands of papers, it
was the only thing talked of in the great cities and everywhere. What will
happen?

This was the question which everybody was asking at every point of the
globe.

The following was the notice made by the Observatory at Washington:


IMPORTANT NOTICE

The operation which is being tried by President Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl
is as follows:

The production of a recoil, on the 22d of September, at midnight, by means
of a cannon a million times larger in volume than the cannon of twenty-seven
centimetres, throwing a projectile of 180,000 tons, with a powder giving it a
velocity of 2,800 kilometres.

Now, if this shooting takes place below the equatorial line, nearly on the
thirty-fourth degree of latitude west of the meridian of Paris, at the foot of
Kilimanjaro, and if it is directed towards the south, these are the mechanical
effects which it will have on the earth’s sphere: Instantly, in consequence of the
shock acting with the daily movement a new axis will be formed and, as the old
axis will be displaced to the amount of twenty-three degrees and twenty-eight
minutes, according to the figures obtained by J.T. Maston, the new axis will be
perpendicular to the direction of the ediptic.

Which point will the new axis start from? As the point of shooting is known,
it has been easy to calculate this.

In the North the extremity of the new axis will be situated between
Greenland and Grinnelland, exactly on that part of Baffin’s Sea where it cuts the
Arctic polar circle. In the South it will be on the line of the antarctic circle, a few
degrees east of Adelialand. Under these conditions a new zero meridian, starting
from the new North Pole, will pass through Dublin in Ireland, Paris in France,
Palermo in Sicily, the Gulf of Grand Sytre on the coast of Tripoli, Obed in
Darfur, the mountain chain of Kilimanjaro, Madagascar; the Kerguelen Island, in
the Central Pacific; the new antarctic pole, the antipodes of Paris, Cook Island,
the Island of Quadra, Vancouver, on the margin of British Columbia; across
North America to Melville Island, in the neighborhood of the North Pole.

In connection with this new axis of rotation, starting from Baffins’ Bay in the
north, to Adelialand in the south, a new equator will be formed above which the
sun will travel without ever changing his daily course. The equinoctial line will
cross the Kilimanjaro, at Wamasai, the Indian Ocean, Goa and Chicacola, a little
below Calcutta in India, Mandalay in the Kingdom of Siam, Kesho in Tonquin,
Hong Kong in China, Risa Island, Marshall Island, Gaspar Rico, Walker Island
in the Pacific, the Cordilleras in the Argentine Republic, Rio de Janeiro in
Brazil, the islands of Trinity and St. Helena in the Atlantic Ocean, St. Paul de
Loando on the Congo, and finally it will meet again in the territories of
Wamasai, back of Kilimanjaro. This new equator being thus determined by the
creation of the new axis, it became possible to calculate the changes of the ocean
tides, which was so important for the security of the inhabitants of the earth. It is


just to observe that the directors of the North Polar Practical Association had
taken measure to weaken the shock as much as possible. If the shooting had been
towards the north the consequences of it would have been much more disastrous
for the more civilized parts of the earth. On the other hand, shooting towards the
south the consequences would only be felt most in parts less populated and less
civilized. The careful calculations made showed how the waters would be
distributed when thrown out of their beds by the flattening of the sphere around
the new poles. The globe would be divided by two great circles, intersecting in a
right angle at Kilimanjaro, and at its antipodes in the equinoctial ocean. This
would form four sections, two in the north and two in the south, separated by the
lines upon which the ocean upheaval would be zero.

In the northern hemisphere: The first section west of Kilimanjaro would take
in Africa from the Congo to Egypt, Europe from Turkey to Greenland, America
from English Columbia to Peru, and from Brazil as high as San Salvador, and
finally the whole northern Atlantic Ocean and the largest part of the temperate
Atlantic zone.

The second section, east of Kilimanjaro, would include the greater patt of
Europe, from the Black Sea to Sweden, European and Asiatic Russia, Arabia,
nearly the whole of India, Persia, Beloochistan, Afganistan, Turkestan, the
Celestial Empire, Mongolia, Japan, Corea, the Black Sea, the Caspian Sea, the
greater part of the Pacific Ocean, the territories of Alaska in North America, and
also the polar region which belonged to the American society, North Polar
Practical Association.

The southern hemisphere would embrace the third section east of
Kilimanjaro, which would include Madagascar, the islands of Marion,
Kerguelen, Maurice, Reunion, and all the islands of the Indian Ocean, the
Antarctic Ocean (as far as the new pole), half the island of Malacca, Java,
Sumatra, Borneo, the islands of Sonde, the Philippines, Australia, New Zealand,
New Guinea, New Caledonia, all the northern parts of the Pacific and its
numerous archipelagos, nearly up to the 160th meridian.

The fourth section, west of Kilimanjaro, would comprise the southern part of
Africa, from the Congo to the canal of Mozambique to the Cape of Good Hope,
the southern Atlantic Ocean from Pernambuco and Lima, Bolivia, Paraguay,
Uraguay, the Argentine Republic, Patagonia, the Fire Islands, the Malouine
Islands, Sandwich and Shetland Islands, and the southern part of the Pacific
Ocean east of the present 160th degree of latitude.

These would be the four sections, separated by the line of zero in calculating
the sea-level changes. Now, the question was to indicate the effects produced on
the surface of the four sections in consequence of the displacement of the


oceans.

Upon each of these sections there was a central point on which the effect
would be at a maximum, either by the oceans rising up or by the waters retiring
entirely. The calculations of J. T. Maston had established without a doubt, that at
each of these maxima points the greatest height obtained would be 8,415 metres.
It was therefore certain that the consequences would be most severe against the
security of those points through the operation carried out by Barbicane & Co.
The two effects may be considered separate in their action.

In two of the sections situated opposite each other in the northern hemisphere
and in the southern as well, the oceans would retreat and invade the two other
sections, opposing each other in each of the two hemispheres.

In the first section: The Atlantic Ocean would be nearly entirely emptied and
the maximum point of depression being nearly at the region of Bermuda, where
the ground would appear, if the depth of the ocean was inferior at that point to
8,415 metres. Consequently between Europe and America vast territories would
be discovered which the United States, England, France, Spain, and Portugal
could claim according to the geographical situation, as these powers might wish
to do. It must be observed that in consequence of the falling of the oceans the air
will also fall equally as much. Therefore the barometric pressure of Europe and
that of America will be modified to such an extent that cities, situated even 20 or
30 degrees from the maxima points would only have the quantity of air which is
now actually found in a height of one league in the atmosphere. The principal
cities, such as New York, Philadelphia, Charleston, Panama, Lisbon, Madrid,
Paris, London, Edinburgh, Dublin, Cairo, Constantinople, Dantzig, Stockholm,
on one side, and the cities corresponding in latitude on the other side, would
keep their normal position with regard to the general level of the air. In regard to
Bermuda, air would be missing there the same as it would be wanting to
aeronauts who go higher than 8,000 metres. Therefore, it would be impossible to
live there.

The same effect would obtain in the opposite section, which would contain
the Indian Ocean, Australia, and a part of the Pacific Ocean, which would be
thrown partly on the southern seacoasts of Australia.

The air into which they would be thrown would be very clear; there was no
doubt on that point, but it would not be dense enough for human wants.

These in general were a part of the modifications which would take place in
the two sections in which the oceans would be more or less emptied. There
would undoubtedly appear new islands and mountains in such parts as the water
did not entirely abandon.

But if the diminuation of the thickness of the air did not bring enough


inconveniences to those parts of the new continents raised to the high zones of
the atmosphere, what was to be the case of those parts which the erruption of
waters put below the surface? We may still breathe under the diminished
pressure of air below the atmospheric pressure. On the contrary, under a very
few inches of water we cannot breathe at all, and this was the condition in which
the other two sections found themselves. In the section northwest of Kilimanjaro
the maximum point would be at Yakoutsk, in Siberia.

From this city submerged 8,415 metres under the water, less its present
actual altitude, the liquid mass, decreasing, would extend to the neutral lines,
drowning the greater part of Asiatic Russia and of India, of China, of Japan, and
of American Alaska, to the Behring Sea. In regard to St. Petersburg and Moscow
on one side, and Calcutta, Bangkok, Saigon, Pekin, Hong Kong and Yeddo on
the other side, these cities would disappear under a cover of water sufficient to
drown all Russians, Hindoos, Siamese, Cochin Chinese, Chinese and Japanese,
if they did not have time to emigrate before the catastrophe.

In the section southeast of Kilimanjaro the disasters would be equally
marked. This section is in a great part covered by the Atlantic and Pacific
oceans, the level of which would raise 8,415 metres at the Archipelagos of the
Azores. All this vast area would disappear under this artificial deluge, among
others the angle of Southern Africa from Guinea and Kilimanjaro to the Cape of
Good Hope, and the triangle of South America formed by Peru, Central Brazil,
Chili, and the Argentine Republic, as far as Terra del Fuego and Cape Horn. The
Patagonians, high as they are located, would not escape this immersion, and
would not even have opportunity of taking refuge on that part of the Andes, as
the highest points of that range would not be visible at all in this part of the
globe.

This, then, must be the result, the lowering of the upper and raising of the
lower sections, and an entirely new surface to the oceans, produced by the
corruscations in the surface of the earth’s sphere. Such were the happenings
which would result, and against which the people of this world had no help if
they could not prompdy stop Barbicane & Co. in their criminal attempt.

CHAPTER XVI.

IN WHICH A CROWD OF DISSATISFIED PEOPLE BREAK INTO THE
CELL OF J.T. MASTON.

After this public notice there was nothing left but to wait for the coming
danger or to run away to the neutral lines, where there would be no danger. The
threatened people were, in general, divided into two classes—"the people who
would be suffocated and those who would be drowned." This communication
roused many different suggestions, which, however, all turned into the strongest


and most violent protestations against the schemer and schemers. Among those
who would suffocate were the Americans in the United States, the Europeans of
France, England, Spain, etc. Even the prospect of annexing territories now at the
bottom of the ocean was not sufficient to make them quietly accept these
changes. Paris, carried towards the new pole a distance about equal to that which
separates it now from the old one, would gain nothing by it. It would have a
continued Spring, it is true, but it would lose considerable air. And this was not
satisfactory to the Parisians, who like to have as much air as possible, and
boulevard property and cafés went begging. Among those who would be
drowned were the inhabitants of South America, of Australia, Canada, India,
Zealand, etc. Great Britain would suffer the loss of her richest colonies, which
Barbicane & Co. would take away from her through their operation. Evidently
the Gulf of Mexico would constitute a vast kingdom of the Antilles, of which the
Yankees and Mexicans could claim possession by the principles of the Monroe
doctrine. The islands of the Philippines, Celebes and the water around them
would leave vast territories of which the English and Spanish people could take
possession. It is a vain compensation. It did not at all balance the loss due to the
terrible flood.

If under the new oceans only Samoyedens, Lapons of Siberia, Feugans,
Patogonians—even Tartars, Chinese, Japanese, or a few Argentines—would
suffer and be lost, perhaps the civilized powers would have accepted this
sacrifice complacently. But too many powers took part in the great catastrophe
not to raise a torrent of protest.

And what especially concerned Europe was, that although the central part of
it would be nearly intact, it would be raised in the west and lowered in the east,
half suffocated on one side and half drowned on the other. This was not very
acceptable. The Mediterranean Sea would be almost emptied, and this would not
be very agreeable to the Frenchmen, Italians, Spaniards, Greeks, Turks, and
Egyptians, who by their situation on the coast, had indisputable rights in ocean
travel. And then, what good would be the Suez Canal, which would be saved by
its position on the neutral line? But what use could be made of this immense
work of Lesseps when there was no longer the Mediterranean on one side of the
isthmus and the Red Sea on the other, at least, within any reasonable distance of
it?

No, never, never would England consent to see Gibralter, Malta, and Cyprus
transformed into mountain-tops, lost in the clouds, so that its men-of-war could
no longer approach them. No, she would not be satisfied with the possession of
some of the territory which would be gained from the Atlantic Ocean. Major
Donellan had, however, prepared already to return to Europe to secure his rights


on this new territory in case the operation of Barbicane & Co. should succeed. It
is seen how protests came from all parts of the world, even from States where
the changes would be imperceptible, because their people were interested in
some other direction more or less.

These protestations became more and more violent after the arrival of the
cablegram from Zanzibar which indicated the point of shooting, and which it
was found necessary to publish the above report to explain. President Barbicane
and Captain Nicholl as well as J.T. Maston, were put under the ban of humanity
and declared outlaws. But what a business all this created for the newspapers.
What sales they had, and how the circulations ran up; how on many occasions
they were forced to print extra editions. It is perhaps the first time in journalistic
history that they were all united with each other, as they generally quarrel
incessantly. This was not a European or an American affair; it was an affair
which concerned the whole world. It was like a bomb falling into a powder
magazine.

In regard to Maston, it looked as if his last hour had come. A rabid crowd
rushed into his prison on the evening of Sept. 17, with the intention of lynching
him, and the jailer did not put any obstacles in their way. They rushed along the
corridor but the cell of J.T. Maston was empty. Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt had
come to his help with a heavy purse of gold, and he had made his escape. The
jailer had been bribed by an amount of money on which he could live the rest of
his life without working. He remembered that Baltimore, Washington, New
York, and many of the principal cities of America were on the line of those parts
which would be raised, and which would still have enough air for the daily
consumption of their inhabitants.

J.T. Maston had gained a quiet resting spot and a safe place from the enraged
crowd of people, and so this great man owed his life to the devotion of a loving
woman. There were only four days to wait, four days only before the gigantic
operation of Barbicane & Co. would be accomplished. The public notice had
been read far and wide and had created as much public excitement as such a
momentous document only could. If there were at the beginning a few sceptics
on the subject, there were none at present. The various governments had notified
in haste those of their provinces which would be raised into the air and those, a
much larger number, the territory of which would be overrun with water. In
consequence of this advice sent by telegraph over the five continents of the
world an emigration began such as had never been seen before. Every race was
represented, white, black, brown, yellow, etc., in one chromatic procession.
Unhappily, time was wanting for all to secure safety. The hours were now
counted. A few months notice would be required for the Chinese to leave China,


the Australians, Australia, the Siberians, Siberia. In some instances the danger
was a local one as soon as the place of the shooting was known, so the fright
became less general. Some provinces and even some States began to feel easy
again. In a word, except in the regions directly threatened, there was only felt an
apprehension of the terrible shock. And during all this time Alcide Pierdeux was
saying to himself, "How in the wide world can President Barbicane make a
cannon a million times larger than that of twenty-seven centimetre? This
Maston, I would like very much to meet him—to have with him a talk upon this
subject. This does not agree with anything sensible, it is too enormous and too
improbable."

Be this as it may, the failure of the operation was the only hope which was
left for certain parts of the world to escape more terrible destruction.

CHAPTER XVII.

WHAT HAD BEEN DONE AT KILIMANJARO DURING EIGHT MONTH
OF THIS MEMORABLE YEAR.

The country of Wamasai is situated in the eastern part of Central Africa,
between the coast of Zanzibar and the regions of the large lakes, where the
Victoria Nyanza and the Tanganiyka form a great interior ocean. The part best
known is that which has been visited by the Englishman Johnston, Count Tekeli
and the German doctor Meyer. This mountainous land is under the sovereignty
of Sultan Bali-Bali, whose people consist of 30,000 or 40,000 Negroes.

Three degrees below the Equator is situated the chain of Kilimanjaro, which
here reaches its greatest altitude. Among other peaks is the Mount of Kibo, with
an altitude of 5,704 metres. The important ruler of this region has under his
domination towards the south, north, and west the vast and fertile plains of
Wamasai, which stretch from the lake of Victoria Nyanza across the province of
Mozambique.

A few leagues below Kilimanjaro is the small village of Kisongo, the regular
residence of the Sultan. This capital is in reality only a large hamlet. It is
occupied by a very intelligent and industrious people, who work themselves as
industriously as their slaves under the iron rule which Bali-Bali imposes on
them.

This Sultan rightly ranked as one of the most remarkable rulers of those
people of Central Africa who try to escape the influence, or more correctly the
domination of England. At this capital of Kisongo, President Barbicane and
Capt. Nicholl accompanied by six men who were devoted to them, arrived in the
first week of January of the current year. On leaving the United States, whence
their departure was only known to Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt, and J. T. Maston,
they had embarked in New York for the Cape of Good Hope, whence a vessel


transported them to Zanzibar, on the island of the same name. There a bark
secretly chartered by the Sultan brought them to the port of Mombas, on the
African border on the other side of the channel. An escort sent by the Sultan
waited for them at this port, and after a hard voyage nearly a hundred leagues
across this terrible region, obstructed by forests, deep marshes, etc., they arrived
at the royal residence. After knowing the calculations of J.T. Maston, President
Barbicane had already put himself in communication with Bali-Bali through the
help of a Swedish explorer, who had passed several years in this part of Africa.
As the Sultan had become one of their most ardent admirers since their trip to
the moon, a trip whose reputation had gone as far as these countries, he had a
great friendship for these courageous Yankees. Without telling him for what
purpose it was, Impey Barbicane had easily obtained permission from the Sultan
to undertake important works at the southern foot of Kilimanjaro. In return for a
large sum, estimated at $300,000, Bali-Bali had bound himself to furnish them
all the workmen necessary. In other words, the captain and his friends were
authorized to do at Kilimanjaro whatever they liked to do. They could dispose of
the large chain of mountains according to their desires; they could tear them
down if they liked, or they could take them away if they would be able to do so.
In consequence of these arrangements, which the Sultan had made at his own
figure, the North Polar Practical Association was as much proprietor of this
country as they already were to the polar region. The reception which President
Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl received at Kisongo was very cordial. Bali-Bali
displayed an admiration amounting to adoration for these celebrated travellers
who had made this dangerous voyage to reach the country around the North
Pole.

He had in short an extraordinary sympathy for the creators of these
mysterious operations which were going to be accomplished in his kingdom. He
also promised them absolute secrecy on his part as well as on the part of his
people, whose co-operation was assured to them. Not a single Negro who
worked at their shop would be allowed to leave them for a single day under pain
of the most severe punishment. This is how this operation was veiled in mystery
so that the most active and sharpest agents of America and Europe failed to
penetrate it. If it was finally discovered it must have been that the Sultan
modified his severe rules after the accomplishment of the works and that there
were traitors and babblers even amongst the Negroes. In this way Richard W.
Trust, consul at Zanzibar, had received wind of what was going on at
Kilimanjaro. But then at that date, the 13th of September, it was too late to stop
President Barbicane in the accomplishment of his design.

And now, why had Barbicane & Co. chosen the Wamasai for the theatre of


their operations? First, because the country suited them in regard to its
geographical situation, as it was in a very little known part of Africa, and as it
was very far from the territory usually visited by travellers. Then, the mass of
Kilimanjaro offered them all the qualities of solidity and material necessary for
their work. And, moreover, on the surface of this country were found the raw
materials which they needed in a condition very easy to handle. A few months
before leaving the United States President Barbicane had learnt from the
Swedish explorer that at the foot of Kilimanjaro iron and coal were plentiful on
the ground. No mines to dig into, no fields to explore a thousand feet deep in the
earth’s shell. Iron and coal were so plentiful even for this great undertaking that
they only had to stoop down to pick it up. In other words, there existed in the
neighborhood of this mountain enormous fields of nitrate of soda and of iron
pyrites, which were necessary for the manufacture of melimelonite. President
Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl had taken with them only ten people, of whom they
were absolutely sure, and no one else. These ten men had to supervise the 10,000
Negroes put at their disposal by Bali-Bali, and to them was given the task of
manufacturing the monster cannon and its not less monster projectile. Two
weeks after the arrival of President Barbicane and his associate at Wamasai three
large workshops were established at the southern foot of Kilimanjaro, one for the
cannon foundry, the second for the manufacture of the projectile, and the third
for the manufacture of the melimelonite.

Now, first of all, how had Barbicane & Co. met the problem of
manufacturing a cannon of such colossal dimensions? We will see and
understand at the same time that the difficulty of creating such a device was not
easily comprehensible by the inhabitants of the world. In reality the making of a
cannon a million times larger than that of twenty-seven centimetres was a
superhuman work. Already great difficulties had been met in the manufacture of
pieces of forty-two centimetres long, which would throw projectiles of 780 kilos
with 274 kilograms of powder. Barbicane & Co. did not think of these
difficulties. It was not a cannon, not even a mortar, which they intended to make,
but simply a gallery bored in the massive rock of Kilimanjaro,—a shaft of a
mine, if you wish to call it so.

Evidently this shaft of a mine, this enormous elongated mine, could replace a
metal cannon the fabrication of which would have been as dear as difficult and
to which it would. be necessary to give an unwieldy thickness to avoid all risk of
an explosion. Barbicane & Co. had always entertained the idea of operating in
this manner, and if the notebook of J. T. Maston mentioned a cannon it was that
of 27 centimetres which had been used in the calculations as a_ basis.
Consequently a spot was chosen at a height of a hundred feet on the southern


slope of the chain. Nothing would be in the way of the projectile when it would
fly out of the mouth of this tunnel bored in the massive rock of Kilimanjaro. It
was with extreme precision and not without very hard work that the men could
dig this gallery. But Barbicane & Co. could readily make perforations with
simple machines put in action by means of compressed air which was secured by
using the powerful falls of water from the mountains. In the holes bored through
the headings of the shaft were placed charges of melimelonite. And nothing
more was necessary than this violent explosive to shiver the rock, extremely
hard as it was.

The thousands of workmen, led by their ten co-operators under the general
direction of Barbicane & Co., labored with a great deal of zeal and intelligence
to bring the work to a speedy end. At the end of six months the shaft measured
27 metres in diameter and the lining of it 6 metres in thickness. As it was
absolutely necessary that the projectile should glide through a bore perfectly
smooth the interior of it was covered with a casting exactly prepared. In reality
this part of the work was very similar to that of the celebrated Columbiad, of
Moon City, which had sent the projectile to the moon. But such work as this is
impossible to the ordinary engineers of this world at present.

As soon as the boring was finished the workmen pushed on with the work at
the second workshop.

At the same time that this metallic lining was being made they were also
employed at making the enormous projectile. For this operation it was necessary
to obtain a cylindrical mass which would weigh 80,000,000 kilograms, or
180,000 tons. It must be understood that there was never any idea of melting this
projectile in one single piece. It had to be manufactured in thousand-ton pieces,
which would be hoisted one after the other into the shaft and put in place over
the chamber where the melimelonite was stored. After having been jointed each
to the other, these pieces would form a compact whole, which would fit the sides
of the tubular lining. In regard to the construction of the massive furnaces to
effect the melting of the metal, there was met perhaps the greatest difficulty. Ten
furnaces of ten metres each in height were at the end of a month in working
order and able to produce each 180 tons per day. This would be 1,800 tons for
twenty-four hours—180,000 tons after 100 work-days.

In regard to the third workshop, made for the manufacture of the
melimelonite, the work was easily done, but under such secret precautions, that
the composition of this explosive it has not been possible to state perfectly.
Everything went along splendidly. It could not have been possible to have met
with more success in any factory. One would hardly expect to escape an accident
of some sort on a three-hundred-thousand franc job. It is easily understood that


the Sultan was delighted. He followed the operation with indefatigable interest.
And the presence of His Majesty helped greatly to make these Negroes work as
hard as possible. One day Bali-Bali asked what all these operations were going
on for. He received his reply from President Barbicane: "It is a work," said he,
"which will change the face of the earth—a work which will bring the greatest
glory on the greatest Sultan of all the Eastern kings."

By the 29th of August the works were entirely finished.

The shaft was bored to the wished-for point. It was provided with a smooth
bore of six metres diameter. At the bottom of the shaft were placed the 2,000
tons of melimelonite; then came the projectile 105 metres long. After deducting
the space occupied by the powder and projectile there remained still 492 metres
before the muzzle was reached, which secured all the effect possible by the
recoil produced by the expansion of the gas.

Now, the first question which might come up was, would the projectile
deviate from the trajectory assigned to it by the calculations of J.T. Maston? In
no way, for the calculations were absolutely correct. They indicated to what
extent the projectile would deviate to the east of the meridian of Kilimanjaro
because of the rotation of the earth on its axis, and what would be the form of the
curve which it would describe because of its enormous initial velocity. Secondly,
would it be visible during its course? No, because in going out of the shaft it
would be thrown in the shadow of the earth and it could not be seen, for in
consequence of its low trajectory it would have a very sharp angle of velocity
compared with the earth’s course. In fact, Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl could
well be proud of their work, which had so far succeeded in its every detail. Why
was J.T. Maston not there to watch this great operation, founded on the figuring
which he had done? And who was it that kept him so far away, so very far, when
this terrible detonation would wake the echoes as far as the furthermost horizon
of Africa?

Thinking of him, his two associates did not know that the Secretary had been
compelled to keep away from Ballistic Cottage after having got out of prison and
hidden himself in a safe place away from the savage people. They did not know
to what extent indignation had been roused against the engineer of the N. P. P. A.
They did not know that they, too, would have been burnt or hanged and tortured
to death if it had been possible to have reached them. Really, they ought to have
been glad that at the moment when the shooting would take place they would
only be saluted by the cries of this Negro people of Eastern Africa, "Well, at
last!" said Capt. Nicholl to President Barbicane, when on the 22d of September
they were standing before their finished work. "Yes, at last," said Impey
Barbicane. "What a chance it was that placed at our disposition this admirable


melimelonite!" said Capt. Nicholl. "Which will make you the most illustrious
person on the earth, Nicholl." "Without doubt, Barbicane," modestly answered
Capt. Nicholl. "But do you know how much it would have been necessary to dig
out Kilimanjaro if we only had gun-cotton equal to that which threw our
projectile to the moon?"

"How much, Nicholl?"

"One hundred and eighty galleries, Barbicane."

"Well, we would have digged them, Captain."

"And 180 projectiles of 180,000 tons."

"We would have melted them, Nicholl."

"It was useless to expect reasonable conversation between two persons of
this type. But after they made the trip to the moon, what would they not be
capable of? On the very same evening only a few hours before the minute when
the gun was to be fired, and while President Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl were
congratulating themselves, Alcide Pierdeux, closeted in his studio at Baltimore,
uttered a cry of hurrah! as if he were crazy.

Then, suddenly getting up from the table, which was covered with figures
and calculations, he cried out:

"Ah! What a fool Maston is!—what a stupid fellow! His whole problem will
go in the soup! Christopher Columbus! Why did I not see this before? If I only
knew where he was at this moment I would invite him to have supper with me
and to sip a glass of champagne at the very moment when they are going to fire
off the gun."

And after these and many exclamations which he generally used in playing
whist he said: "Oh, the old fool! Without a doubt he must have been dull when
he made his calculations for this affair of Kilimanjaro. He will find it very
necessary to make another. Oh, what a fool with his cannon!"

CHAPTER XVIII.

IN WHICH THE POPULATION OF WAMASAT ASSEMBLE TO HEAR
PRESIDENT BARBICANE SAY "FIRE" TO CAPT. NICHOLL.

It was in the evening of the 22d of September, that memorable date which
public opinion credited with an influence as unlucky as that of the 1st of January
of the year 1000. Twelve hours after the sun had passed the meridian of
Kilimanjaro, that is at midnight, Capt. Nicholl was to touch off the terrible
cannon.

Kilimanjaro being 35 degrees east of the meridian of Paris, and Baltimore 79
degrees east of said meridian, there was a difference of 114 degrees between
these two places, or 456 minutes in time, or 7 hours and 36 minutes. So the exact
moment at which the shooting would take place would be 5 hours and 24


minutes post meridian in that great city of Maryland. The weather was
magnificent. The sun had just gone down on the plains of Wamasai, behind a
horizon of perfect purity. It was impossible to wish for a prettier night, one more
calm or starry, in which to throw the projectile across space. Not a cloud would
be mixed with the artificial vapors developed by the deflagration of the
melimelonite.

Who knows, perhaps President Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl regretted that
they were not able to get into the projectile. In the first second they would have
travelled 2,800 kilometres. Sultan Bali-Bali, with the great personages of his
court, that is, his Finance Ministers and his Ministers of Public Works, together
with the Black Brigade, who had helped in the great work, were all assembled to
watch the different steps of the shooting.

But, with great precaution, they had all taken a position three kilometres
from the shaft bored in the Kilimanjaro, so that they would have nothing to fear
from the concussion of the air.

Several thousand natives, deputed from Kisongo and neighboring States in
the south of the province, by the orders of the Sultan, were present to witness
this splendid spectacle. A wire was stretched, connecting an electric battery to
the touch-hole of the shaft, ready to send the current and start the deflagration of
the melimelonite. As a preliminary an excellent meal had been served at the
table of the Sultan for his American guests and the persons of his court, all at the
expense of Bali-Bali, who did everything very grandly as long as he was
reimbursed by the members of the firm of Barbicane & Co.

It was 11 o’clock when this feast, commenced at 7:30, was finished, and at
the end of it the Sultan proposed a toast to the engineers of the N. P. P. A. and to
the success of their great enterprise. An hour yet, and the change in the
geographical and climatic conditions of the earth would be accomplished.

President Barbicane, his associate, and his ten helpers took their places
around the cannon, to the interior of which ran the wire of the electric battery.
Barbicane with his chronometer in his hand counted the minutes, and never in
his life did they seem so long to him. The minutes seemed not merely years but
centuries. At ten minutes before midnight Capt. Nicholl and Barbicane
approached the key which put the electric thread in communication with the
shaft of Kilimanjaro. The Sultan, his court and the crowd of natives formed an
immense circle around the cannon. It was important that the shooting should
take place at the exact moment indicated in the calculations of J. T. Maston—
that is, at the moment when the sun would cut that equinoctial line which it
would never leave again in its apparent orbit around the earth. Five minutes to
twelve, four minutes, three minutes, two minutes, one minute to twelve—


President Barbicane watched the hands of his chronometer, lighted by a
lantern which was held by one of his helpers, while Capt. Nicholl, his finger on
the button of the apparatus, was ready to connect the circuit of electricity.

Twenty seconds, ten seconds, five seconds, one second. Not the slightest
tremor could be noted in the hand of the impassive Nicholl. His partner and
himself were no more excited than, at the moment when they waited, sitting in
the projectile, for the Columbiad to fire them to the regions of the moon.

"Fire," ordered President Barbicane.

At this moment Capt. Nicholl pressed the button. A terrible detonation
followed, the echoes of which spread to the furthest corners of the province of
Wamasai. A sharp whistle passed the crowd, a terrible rush of air, caused by the
milliards of milliards of measures of gas, made by the instantaneous
deflagrations of the 2,000 tons of melimelonite. It might be described as one of
those meteors in which all the violence of nature is accumulated sweeping across
the earth. The effect could not have been more terrible if all the cannons of the
whole globe had been joined together with all the thunderbolts of heaven and all
had united in one grand report.

CHAPTER XIX.

IN WHICH J.T. MASTON REGRETS THAT THE CROWD DID NOT
LYNCH HIM WHEN HE WAS IN PRISON.

The capitals of two worlds, the largest cities as well as the smaller ones,
stood waiting terror-stricken. Thanks to the journals which had published the
news broadcast over the world, every one knew the precise hour at which the
shooting would take place and the local hour which corresponded with that of
Kilimanjaro, situated 35 degrees east, allowing for the difference of longitude.

A few of the principal cities, the sun travelling a degree in four minutes were
as follows:

At Paris, 9:40 P.M.

At St. Petersburg, 11:31 P.M.

At London, 9:30 P.M.

At Rome, 10:20 P.M.

At Madrid, 9:15 BM.

AtBerlin, 11:20 BM.

At Constantinople, 11:26 P.M.

At Calcutta, 3:04 A.M.

At Nanking, 5:05 A.M.

At Baltimore, it was said, twelve hours after the passage of the sun of the
meridian of Kilimanjaro, it was 5:24 P.M. It is impossible to describe the pangs
which were produced at this moment. The most powerful of modern pens would


be helpless at the task. The people of Baltimore stood fearing that they would be
swept off the surface of the earth by the terrible mass of water which would fall
on their city. They expected to see the Bay of Chesapeake empty itself upon
them. Then, besides, the city, even should the waters not come upon it, would be
terribly shaken up by the shock which would be produced. The monuments
would be destroyed; its best quarters swallowed up at the bottom of the abysses
which would open through the surface of the ground. These fears ran through the
different parts of the globe which were not scheduled for submersion by the
upheaval of the oceans.

Every human being felt the marrow in his bones creep and shake at this
fearful moment.

Yes, all trembled, all save one person, and that one was the engineer Alcide
Pierdeux. As he had not had time to make known to the public the discoveries
which he had made by means of his last calculations, he drank a bumper of
champagne to the health of both worlds in the café of one of the best known
hotels. Just as the twenty-fourth minute after 5 o’clock, corresponding with
midnight at Kilimanjaro, was reached—

At Baltimore, nothing.

At London, Paris, Constantinople, Berlin, nothing, not the least shock.

Mr. John Milne, standing in his coal mine at Shamokui with a seismometer
which he had arranged there, did not note the least abnormal movement in the
earth’s shell in this part of the globe. In Baltimore the heavens were cloudy and
it was impossible to note in the apparent movement of the stars any derangement
which would have indicated the change in the earth’s axis.

What a night J.T. Maston passed in his place of safety which was unknown
to all save Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt! He was beside himself, this visionary
engineer. He could not rest in his place of hiding. He seemed to have grown old
in one day and looked sharply out to see if the daily course of the sun was
modified. This would have been a certain proof of the success of his work. This
change could not be seen even on the morning of the 23d of September, because
at this date the star invariably rises in the east for all points of the globe. The
next day the sun travelled over the horizon the same as it had always done.

The European delegates had assembled on the platform of their hotel. They
had by their side instruments of extreme precision which would enable them to
note if the sun took a course in the direction of the equator.

Well, nothing changed. A few minutes after the rising of the sun the great
disc inclined away towards the Australian hemisphere. Nothing was changed in
its apparent course.

Major Donellan and his associates saluted the heavenly torch with


enthusiastic hurrahs, and gave it a reception like a favorite star in the theatre.
The heavens were in superb condition, the horizon free from the vapors of the
night, never did the great sun-god present a more beautiful aspect in such
splendid condition before the astonished public. "And precisely at the place
marked by the laws of astronomy," said Eric Baldenak.

"Yes by our old astronomy," said Boris Karkof, "and these fools pretended to
destroy it."

"Well, they will have their expenses to pay and ridicule to endure besides,"
added Jacques Jansen, by whose voice Holland seemed to speak all alone.

"And the Arctic regions will eternally stay under the ice as they have
discovered," said Prof. Jan Harald.

"Hurrah for the sun," said Major Donellan. "Such as it is, it has been and
always will be sufficient for our earth."

"Hurrah, hurrah," repeated in single voice the representatives of old Europe.
At this moment Dean Toodrink, who had not said anything so far, made this very
cautious remark:

But perhaps they did not shoot yet.

"Not shoot yet," said the Major. "Heaven grant that they have fired off the
cannon twice rather than once."

And that was exactly what J. T. Maston and Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt were
saying.

The wise and the ignorant were united this time by the logic of the situation.
Even Alcide Pierdeux repeated it, and added: "Even if they did shoot, what is the
difference? The earth will not stop waltzing on its old axis and turning as it used
to do."

In fact no one knew what had happened at Kilimanjaro. But at the close of
the day an answer came to the question which was engrossing the attention of
mankind.

A cablegram arrived in the United States, and here is what this dispatch, sent
by Richard W. Trust, Consul at Zanzibar, contained:

"Zanzibar, Sept. 23, 7:25 A.M." "To John S. Wright, Minister of State:

"The cannon was fired off yesterday evening at midnight exactly by the
device bored in the southern part of Kilimanjaro. Passage of the projectile was
accompanied with a powerful whirr and terrible detonation. Whole provinces
destroyed by the concussion of the air. Ocean agitated as far as the Mozambique
channel. A large number of vessels disabled and thrown on the coast. Towns and
villages destroyed. Everything else is well. RICHARD W. TRUST."

Yes, everything else went on well. Nothing had been changed in the state of
worldly affairs save the terrible disasters produced in Wamasai, which was partly


deluged by the artificial waterspout, and the shipwrecks which were produced by
the current of air. The same thing precisely happened when the Columbiad threw
its projectile to the moon. The shock to the ground of Florida, was it not felt
through a radius of 100 miles? Yes, certainly, but this time the effect should have
been a hundred times stronger.


Whatever had happened the dispatch gave two pieces of information to the
interested people of the old and new worlds.

First—That the enormous cannon had been erected in the flank of
Kilimanjaro.

Second—That the gun had been fired at the fixed hour. And now, the whole
world uttered an exclamation of intense satisfaction, followed by a great burst of
laughter.

The trial which Barbicane & Co. had made had entirely failed. The
calculations of J.T. Maston were good only for the waste basket. The N.P.P.A.
could only announce its failure. But, perhaps, it might be that the secretary of the
Gun Club had made a mistake in his calculations.

"Rather would I believe that I have been mistaken in the affection which I
feel for him," said Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt.

But beyond all, the most discontented human being was J.T. Maston. When
he saw that nothing had been changed in the movement of the earth, that the
conditions remained precisely the same as they were since the creation, he hoped
that some accident had prevented the success of Barbicane & Co., and that his
associates had met with some disaster.

But there was the cablegram from Zanzibar which stated without a doubt that
the operation had taken place.

Failed! ! And what of the formulas and calculations on which he had spent so
much time? Is it possible that a cylinder 600 metres long, 27 metres wide,
throwing a projectile of 180.000 kilograms, with the deflagration of 200 tons of
melimelonite, with an initial velocity of 2,800 kilometres, would not be
sufficient to move the earthly axis? It did not seem probable.

But why?

So J.T. Maston, in a state of violent excitement, declared that he would quit
his retreat. Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt tried in vain to prevent it. Not that she
feared for his life, as all danger of that sort had passed. But the insults which he
would have to bear, the jokes which would be cracked about him, the remarks
which would be made in regard to his work—she wanted to spare him from
these. And then, moreover, what would his associates of the Gun Club say? Did
they not have to thank this man for the want of success of their operation and for


making them ridiculous? Was he not the man who had figured out the whole
affair and on whose shoulders rested all the responsibility?

J.T. Maston would not listen to any one. He resisted the begging and tears of
Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt. He went out of the house where he had kept himself
hiding. He was recognized, and those who had trembled for fear of the
consequences of his work now took revenge by joking and laughing at him, and
this in many thousand different ways. He was forced to listen to jeering remarks,
even from the street gamins. "Ah," they shouted, "here he is who wanted to
change the axis of the earth, who wanted to discover coal mines around the
North Pole, who even wanted to remove it." In short, the Secretary of the Gun
Club was compelled to return to the mansion of Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt, who
used all her wealth of tenderness to console him. It was in vain, however. J.T.
Maston could not be consoled, as his cannon had produced upon the earth’s
sphere no more effect than a simple popgun would have done. A fortnight went
by in this way, and the world resumed its daily routine and did not even think
any longer of the projects of the N.P.P.A.

A fortnight and no news yet from President Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl.
Had they perished by the discharge in the land of Wamasai? Had they sacrificed
their lives in the most mysterious operation of modern times? No.

After the detonation both were overthrown along with the Sultan arid his
court, and a thousand natives in one grand tumble, but they all got up after a
little time strong and hearty.

"Did you succeed?" asked Bali-Bali, rubbing his shoulder.

"Do you doubt it?"

"Me doubt it?"

"But when will you know?"

"In a few days," said Barbicane.

Did he appreciate that the operation had failed? Perhaps. But he never would
have acknowledged it before the Sultan at Wamasai.

Forty-eight hours later the two partners had taken leave of Wamasai, not,
however, before having paid an enormous sum for the damage done to the
country. As this amount of money went into the private purse of the Sultan, and
as his subjects did not receive one cent of it, he had no reason to complain of the
operation.

Then the two associates, followed by their ten helpers, reached Zanzibar,
where they found a vessel to take them to Suez. From there under false names
the steamer Morris brought them to Marseilles; then they took the train to Paris,
where they arrived without having had any collision or accident, and taking the
railroad to Havre they arrived in time to go to America by the Bourgogne of the


Transatlantic line. In twenty-two days they made the trip from Wamasai to New
York, and on the 15th day of October the two knocked at the door of the mansion
of New Park, at three minutes past noon. An instant afterwards they found
themselves in the presence of Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt and J. T. Maston.

CHAPTER XX.

IN WHICH THIS STORY, AS TRUTHFUL AS IT IS IMPROBABLE, IS
FINISHED.

"Barbicane!!! Nicholl!!"

"Maston."

"You."

"We."

And in this plural pronoun, uttered simultaneously by the two associates in a
single voice, might be heard a flood of irony and reproaches.

J.T. Maston pressed his iron hook on his forehead. Then, with a voice which
seemed to stick in his throat, he said:

"Did your shaft at Kilimanjaro really have a diameter of twenty-seven
metres?"

"Yes, sir."

"Did your projectile really weigh 180,000,000 of kilograms?"

"Yes."

"And was the shooting really done with 2.000 pounds of melimelonite?"

"Yes."

This thrice-repeated "yes" fell on J. T. Maston like masses of stone on his
head.

"Then I can only conclude"—-said he.

"What?" asked President Barbicane.

"As follows," said J. T. Maston. "As the operation did not succeed, the
powder did not give to the projectile an initial velocity of 2,800 kilometres."

"Really?" said Capt. Nicholl, with a tone of sarcasm.

"Yes, your melimelonite is good only to charge pistols of straw."

Capt. Nicholl sprang up at this remark, which was an outrageous insult to
him.

"Maston!" said he.

"Nicholl!"

"You ought to be blown up with the melimelonite."

"No, gun cotton; that is more sure."

Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt had to interfere and cool these two enraged gunners
down.

"Gentlemen," said she, between associates.


"And anyhow," President Barbicane resumed, with a very calm expression,
"what is the good of criminations? It is certain that the calculations of our friend,
J. T. Maston, were correct, as it is certain that the explosive of our friend Nicholl
had sufficient power. Yes, we have only employed known quantities of science.
We lacked experience. Why did we fail? Perhaps we may never know."

"Well," said the Secretary of the Gun Club, "we will commence all over
again." "And the money then which has been spent for this operation is a dead
loss," observed Capt. Nicholl.

"But public opinion,” said Evangelina Scorbitt, "would not allow you a
second trial."

"What will become of our Arctic region?" said Capt. Nicholl." "Where will
the stock of the N.P.P.A. fall to?" said President Barbicane. Well, it had already
fallen so far that the stock was offered at the price of old paper.

This, then, was the result of the gigantic operation. This was the memorable
fiasco to which the superhuman projects of Barbicane & Co. had led.

If ever engineers, unlucky engineers were laughed at in public, if ever the
newspaper made drawings, songs, and paragraphs not at all flattering to the
people mentioned in them, this occasion exceeded them all. President Barbicane,
the Directors of the new Society and their associates of the Gun Club were
universally sneered at. In every language they were made ridiculous, and to
make it easier to the whole population of the world to read the scornful articles
were printed in "Volapuk." In Europe, especially, all the remarks and songs to
make the persons of the N.P.P.A. ridiculous were spread broadcast. The greatest
hit was made by a Frenchman, who composed a ballad which was sung in every
concert hall of France and America. But will we never know to what the failure
of this enterprise was due? Did this failure prove that the operation was
impossible of realization; that the powers at the disposal of mankind would
never be sufficient to bring about a change in the earth’s movement? Did it prove
that the country around the North Pole would never be removed to those regions
where the sun and heat would melt the ice without human help?

Information on this subject came a few days after the return of President
Barbicane and Capt. Nicholl to the United States. A very simple paragraph
appeared in the Times of the 17th of October. Here is the article:

"We all know that the result of the operation to create a new axis has been
nothing. However, the calculations of J.T. Maston, founded on established facts,
would have produced the desired result if through an unexplainable slip an error
had not been embraced in them from the beginning. When the celebrated
secretary of the Gun Club took for a basis of his calculations the circumference
of the earth’s sphere, he figured it at 40,000 metres in place of 40,000,000


metres, and to which the failing of the operation is due.

"Where could such an error come from? Who could have provoked it?...
How could such a remarkable calculator commit such an error?

"It is certain that had the problem of the modification of the earth’s axis been
correctly figured, it would have had been exactly solved. But this forgetting of
three zeros has made a change at the end of the calculation of twelve naughts.

"It is not a cannon one million times larger than that of twenty-seven
centimetres, which was necessary. A trillion of these cannons throwing a trillion
projectiles of 80,000 tons each would be necessary to displace the North Pole,
admitting that the melimelonite had the expansive power which had been
attributed to it by Capt. Nicholl.

"Therefore the whole shock under the conditions under which it was
produced has displaced the North Pole only three-thousandths of a milimeter,
and has only changed the level of the ocean at the most nine-thousandths of
three-thousandths of a milimetre. In regard to the projectile fired, it will be a
small planet, and will belong in future to the solar system, sustained by solar
attraction.

ALCIDE PIERDEUX ".

So this want of attention on the part of J.T. Maston at the beginning of his
calculations had produced such a humiliating result for his Company.

But even if his associates were very angry against him, if everybody laughed
and joked at him, it is only fair to state in his favor that this mistake which had
wrecked the operation had spared the world a terrible catastrophe.

A flood of telegrams and letters arrived from all parts of the world
congratulating J.T. Maston on his mistake of three naughts. J.T. Maston, more
downhearted and crushed than ever, would not listen to the hurrahs which the
world now uttered for him. President Barbicane, Capt. Nicholl, Tom Hunter,
with wooden legs; Col. Bloomsberry, the gay Bilsby, and his associates would
never pardon him. But Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt she could not be angry with
him, most excellent lady.

J.T. Maston had begun to do his calculations over again, refusing to admit
that he was wrong at that point.

He was, however; the Engineer Alcide Pierdeux had not made a mistake.
Having learnt his error at the last moment, when he had no time to make it
known, he had remained perfectly composed among all the fright and terror of
those about him. That was why he proposed a toast in champagne at the moment
when the shooting was taking place in the Old World. Yes, indeed, three naughts
had been forgotten in the circumference of the earth. Suddenly J.T. Maston
remembered the whole matter.


It was at the beginning of his work when he had shut himself up in the
"Ballistic Cottage," and written the number 40,000, 000 on his blackboard. At
that moment the electric bell began to ring with great force. J.T. Maston went to
the phone. He exchanged a few words with Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt. Suddenly
a terrible stroke of lightning from the storm through the telephone knocked over
his blackboard and himself. He got up, commenced to write over again the
numbers which had been half rubbed out on his blackboard. He had just written
the numbers 40,000 when the telephone rang for the second time. He went again
to listen to Mme. Scorbitt, and when he did begin his work he forgot to put on
the last three naughts of the earth’s circumference.

It was the fault of Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt. If she had not interrupted him he
would not have been thrown on the floor by the shock from the telephone. He
would not have noticed anything of lightning and thunder, and all his mass of
figures and calculations would not have ended in a mistake.

What a terrible blow it was to this unhappy lady when J.T. Maston was
compelled to tell her the circumstances which had produced the mistake! Yes,
she was the cause of the disaster. It was on her account that J.T. Maston found
himself dishonored through the long years which he bad yet to live, as nearly
every member of the Gun Club usually lived to the age of a hundred years.

After this conversation at New Park, J. T. Maston had gone away from the
mansion. He went back to his Ballistic Cottage and walked into his study
muttering to himself: "Well, now I am not good for anything any more in this
world."

"Not even good enough to get married," said a broken voice at his elbow.

It was that of Mrs. Evangelina Scorbitt. Absolutely crushed and _heart-
broken, she had followed him.

"Dear Maston"—she began.

"Well, yes," said he, "but only under one condition—that I shall never make
any mathematical calculations."

"My dear friend, I have a horror of them," answered the excellent widow.

Thus it happened that the Secretary of the Gun Club made Mrs. Evangelina
Scorbitt Mrs. J. T. Maston.

In regard to the article of Alcide Pierdeux, we might say that it brought him
into great celebrity and reputation.

It was translated into all languages, printed in every paper, and thus his name
became known all over the world. The father of his old sweetheart had refused
him his daughter’s hand, after telling him that he could not give him his
daughter, as he was too smart. But now, after having read this article and being
unable to understand it without any help, he began to feel sorry and know better.
